                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   INVESTMENT, TOBIN'S Q, AND INTEREST RATES

                                          Xioaji Lin
                                         Chong Wang
                                         Neng Wang
                                        Jinqiang Yang

                                     Working Paper 19327
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w19327


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                         August 2013, Revised November 2018




We thank Patrick Bolton, Simon Gilchrist, Steve Grenadier, Lars Hansen, Bob Hodrick, Thomas
Philippon, Tom Sargent, Lukas Schmid, Bill Schwert (Editor), Suresh Sundaresan, and seminar
participants at Columbia, and the discussants of workshops hosted by the China Young Finance
Scholars Society for helpful comments. We are very grateful to the anonymous referee for
invaluable comments which significantly improved our paper. Jinqiang Yang acknowledges the
support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (#71522008, #71472117,
#71772112, #71573033, #71532009, and #71532012), Innovative Research Team of Shanghai
University of Finance and Economics (#2016110241), and Fok Ying-Tong Education Foundation
of China (#151086). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2013 by Xioaji Lin, Chong Wang, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Investment, Tobin's q, and Interest Rates
Xioaji Lin, Chong Wang, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 19327
August 2013, Revised November 2018
JEL No. E2

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the impact of stochastic interest rates and capital illiquidity on investment and firm
value by incorporating a widely used arbitrage-free term structure model of interest rates into a
standard q theoretic framework. Our generalized q model informs us to use corporate credit-risk
information to predict investments when empirical measurement issues of Tobin’s average q are
significant (e.g., equity is much more likely to be mis-priced than debt), as in Philippon (2009).
We find, consistent with our theory, that credit spreads and bond q have significant predictive
powers on micro-level and aggregate investments corroborating the recent empirical work of
Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012). We also show that the quantitative effects of the stochastic
interest rates and capital illiquidity on investment, Tobin’s average q, the duration and user cost
of capital, and the value of growth opportunities are substantial. These findings are particularly
important in today’s low interest rate environment.

Xioaji Lin                                                 Neng Wang
University of Minnesota                                    Columbia Business School
Carlson School of Management                               3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 812
321 19th Ave S.                                            New York, NY 10027
Minneapolis, MN 55445                                      and NBER
xlin6@umn.edu                                              nw2128@columbia.edu

Chong Wang                                                 Jinqiang Yang
Naval Postgraduate School                                  Shanghai University of Finance
Graduate School of Business and Public Policy              and Economics
1 University Circle                                        Guoding Rd. 777
Monterey, CA 93943                                         Shanghai, 200433
cwang@nps.edu                                              China
                                                           yang.jinqiang@mail.sufe.edu.cn
1.      Introduction
     A widely held conventional wisdom in macroeconomics is that investment should respond
negatively to interest rates. Various macroeconomic models rely on this negative relation.
The neoclassical q theory of investment explicitly incorporates productivity shocks and
capital adjustment costs into a dynamic optimizing framework and generates predictions
between investment and interest rates.1 However, almost all q theoretic models assume
that the interest rate is constant over time, which by construction rules out the impact of
the interest rate risk and dynamics on investments. Moreover, limited empirical evidence
supports the widely used investment and interest rate relation and the q theory of investment.2
Philippon (2009) demonstrates that interest rates measured by bond yields have significant
predictive power for aggregate investment even in the Modigliani-Miller (MM) world. He
argues that the superior performance of bond prices over standard total firm value–based
measures (e.g., Tobin’s average q) for investment regressions can be plausibly attributed to
mis-pricing, in that equity being the levered claim on the firm is more likely to be mis-priced
than bonds making bond prices more informative for investment or a potential disconnect
(even in a rational model) between current capital investments and future growth options.3
     In terms of the theory, we recognize the importance of stochastic interest rates on
investment and the value of capital by incorporating a widely used term structure model
of interest rates (Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross, 1985) into a neoclassical q theoretic model of
investment (Hayashi, 1982).4 We show that investment decreases with interest rates and,
   1
     Lucas and Prescott (1971) and Abel (1979) study investment dynamics under uncertainty with convex
adjustment costs. Hayashi (1982) provides homogeneity conditions under which the firm’s marginal q is
equal to its average q.
   2
     Abel and Blanchard (1986) show that marginal q, constructed as the expected present value of marginal
profits, still leaves unexplained large and serially correlated residuals in the investment regressions.
   3
     Gilchrist, Himmelberg, and Huberman (2005) show that dispersion in investor beliefs and short-selling
constraints can give rise to mis-pricing in the stock market and a weak link between investment and the
market. A disconnect example is that when growth options differ significantly from existing operations
and near-term investment decisions are primarily driven by physical capital accumulation, bond prices are
naturally more informative for investments than the firm’s total value, as the equity value portion of the
firm’s value is mostly determined by the perceived value of growth options, which is largely uncorrelated
with the value of capital stock.
   4
     Abel and Eberly (1994) develop a unified neoclassical q theory of investment with constant interest rates.
McDonald and Siegel (1986) and Dixit and Pindyck (1994) develop the real options approach of investment
also with constant interest rates. The q theory and the real options framework are two complementary
value-maximizing approaches of modeling investment. These two approaches focus on different but closely
related real investment frictions (i.e., capital adjustment costs and irreversibility, respectively.)


                                                      1
moreover, that the term structure of interest rates has first-order and highly nonlinear effects
on investment and Tobin’s average q. Therefore, a firm ignoring the interest rate risk
and dynamics significantly distorts its investment and reduces its value. Furthermore, in
a low interest rate environment such as today’s, capital illiquidity, measured by the capital
adjustment costs as in the standard q theory, has very large effects on corporate investment,
Tobin’s q, the user cost of capital, and the value of growth opportunities. Given the wide
range of parameter estimates in the literature for capital adjustment costs, which is often
premised on the constant interest rate assumption, our analysis highlights the importance
of explicitly incorporating risk-adjusted interest rate dynamics via an arbitrage-free term
structure and reestimating capital illiquidity and adjustment cost parameters.5 As physical
capital is long lived subject to depreciation, the duration, Tobin’s q, and value of the firm’s
growth opportunities are all sensitive to capital adjustment costs, especially when interest
rates are low.
       We further generalize our q theory with stochastic interest rates to incorporate leverage
by building on Philippon (2009). This generalization is important for our empirical analyses
because it motivates us to use credit risk information to predict corporate investment and
also to avoid standard investment opportunity measures, e.g., Tobin’s q, which often have
significant measurement issues. The premise of our analysis that Tobin’s q can be poorly
measured is well recognized in the investment literature. Erickson and Whited (2000) show
that a standard neoclassic q theory without any financial imperfection, despite its simple
structure, has good explanatory power once empirical measurement error issues are properly
addressed, e.g., via method of moments.6
       We find, consistent with our theory, that the relative bond prices positively and credit
spreads negatively predict investment at both the firm and the aggregate level. Moreover,
the predictive power of credit risk–based measures for investment remains strong and robust
after controlling for well-known predictors. Our empirical findings are consistent with recent
work. For example, Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2007) report that increasing the user cost of
capital by 100 basis points is associated with a reduction of investment around 50 to 75
   5
     See Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1995), Hall (2004), Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006), and Eberly, Rebelo,
and Vincent (2012) for a wide range of estimates. We provide more detailed discussions in Section 3.
   6
     Gomes (2001) makes a related point that financial constraints are neither necessary nor sufficient in
generating investment–cash flow sensitivity by simulating a quantitative q model with financial frictions.



                                                    2
basis points and a 1% reduction in the capital stock in the long run. Philippon (2009) shows
that aggregate corporate bond yields predict aggregate investment substantially better than
the stock market–based measures, e.g., Tobin’s q. Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012) show that
their constructed corporate bond yield index has considerable predictive power for aggregate
economic variables. In summary, our aggregate and firm-level results corroborate these
existing studies and provide additional support for the q theory of investment.
     The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents our q theory of
investment with term structure of interest rates. In Section 3, we solve the model and discuss
its quantitative results. Section 4 provides the empirical evidence for the model’s predictions
for both the firm level and the aggregate data. Section 5 concludes. Appendices contain
technical details related to the main results in the paper and also a few generalizations of
our baseline model.


2.       Model
     We generalize the neoclassic q theory of investment to incorporate the effects of stochastic
interest rates and then introduce leverage in an MM setting with the objective of linking our
model’s prediction to bond data as in Philippon (2009).

2.1.      Economic environment
     First, we introduce our model setup.

2.1.1.     Stochastic interest rates

     While much work in the q theory context assumes constant interest rates, empirically,
interest rates vary substantially over time. In addition, corporate investment payoffs are
often long term and are sensitive to the expected change and volatility of interest rates.
     Researchers often analyze effects of interest rates via comparative statics (by using the
solution from a dynamic model with a constant interest rate). However, comparative static
analyses miss the expectation effect by ignoring the dynamics and the risk premium of
interest rates. By explicitly incorporating a term structure of interest rates, we analyze the
persistence, volatility, and risk premium effects of interest rates on investment and firm value
in a fully specified dynamic stochastic framework.

                                                3
    We choose the widely used Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (CIR) term structure model in which
the short rate r follows
                                   drt = µ(rt )dt + σ(rt )dBt ,      t ≥ 0,                                 (1)

where B is the standard Brownian motion under the risk-neutral measure and the risk-neutral
drift µ(r) and volatility σ(r) are, respectively, given by

                                              µ(r) = κ(ξ − r)                                               (2)

and
                                                        √
                                                σ(r) = ν r.                                                 (3)

Both the conditional mean µ(r) and the conditional variance σ 2 (r) are linear in r. The
parameter κ measures mean reversion of interest rates. The implied first-order autoregressive
coefficient in the corresponding discrete-time model is e−κ . The higher κ, the more mean-reverting
the interest rate process. The parameter ξ is the long-run mean of interest rates. The CIR
model captures the mean reversion and conditional heteroskedasticity (stochastic volatility)
of interest rates belonging to the widely used affine models of interest rates.7 In Subsection
2.3, we explicitly specify the risk premium process for the interest rate.

2.1.2.     Production and investment technology

    A firm uses its capital to produce output.8 Let K and I denote its capital stock and
gross investment rate, respectively. Capital accumulation is standard in that

                                      dKt = (It − δKt ) dt,       t ≥ 0,                                    (4)

where δ ≥ 0 is the rate of depreciation for capital stock.
    The firm’s operating revenue over time period (t, t + dt) is proportional to its capital
stock Kt and is given by Kt dXt , where dXt is the firm’s productivity shock over the same
   7
     Vasicek (1977) is the other well known one-factor model. However, this process is less desirable because it
implies conditionally homoskedastic (normally distributed) shocks and allows interest rates to be unbounded
from below. Vasicek and CIR models belong to the affine class of models. See Duffie and Kan (1996) for
multi-factor affine term structure models and Dai and Singleton (2000) for estimation of three-factor affine
models. Piazzesi (2010) provides a survey on affine term structure models.
   8
     The firm can use both capital and labor as factors of production. As a simple example, we can embed a
static labor demand problem within our dynamic optimization. We have an effective revenue function with
optimal labor demand. The remaining dynamic optimality is the same as in the standard q theory.



                                                       4
time period (t, t + dt). After incorporating the systematic risk for the firm’s productivity
shock, we can write the productivity shock dXt under the risk-neutral measure, as

                                      dXt = πdt + ǫdZt ,      t ≥ 0,                                    (5)

where Z is a standard Brownian motion.9 The productivity shock dXt specified in Eq. (5)
is independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.). The constant parameters π and ǫ > 0
give the corresponding (risk-adjusted) productivity mean and volatility per unit of time.
       The firm’s operating profit dYt over the same period (t, t + dt) is given by

                                 dYt = Kt dXt − C(It , Kt )dt, t ≥ 0,                                   (6)

where C(I, K) is the total cost of the investment including both the purchase cost of the
capital goods and the additional adjustment costs of changing capital stock. The firm
can sometimes find it optimal to divest and sell its capital, I < 0. Importantly, capital
adjustment costs make installed capital more valuable than new investment goods. The
ratio between the market value of capital and its replacement cost, often referred to as
Tobin’s q, provides a measure of rents accrued to installed capital. The capital adjustment
cost function C(I, K) plays a critical role in the neoclassical q theory of investment. In
this subsection, we assume that C(I, K) satisfies CI > 0 and CII > 0. In addition, for
simplicity, we assume that C(I, K) is homogeneous with degree one in I and K, in that
C(I, K) = c(i)K, where i = I/K. c′ (i) > 0 and c′′ (i) > 0 are implied by the monotonicity
and convexity properties of C(I, K) in I. In Appendix H, we generalize our baseline model
to allow a much richer specification for C(I, K) by incorporating asymmetric adjustment
costs, price wedge, and fixed costs.
       For simplicity, we assume that interest rate risk and the productivity shock are uncorrelated,
i.e., the correlation coefficient between the Brownian motion B driving the interest rate
process, given by Eq. (1), and the Brownian motion Z driving the productivity process,
given by Eq. (5), is zero.
   9
    The risk-neutral measure incorporates the impact of the interest rate risk on investment and firm value.
In Subsection 2.3, we explicitly state the risk premium and then infer the implied dynamics under the
physical measure.




                                                     5
2.1.3.      Liquidation option

      Capital often has an alternative use if deployed elsewhere. Empirically, significant reallocation
activities exist between firms as well as between sectors.10 We assume that the firm has an
option to liquidate its capital stock at any time. Doing so allows the firm to recover ℓ per
unit of capital, where 0 < ℓ < 1 is a constant. Let τ ℓ denote the firm’s stochastic liquidation
time. This optionality significantly influences firm investment and the value of capital.

2.2.        Tobin’s q, investment, and liquidation
      While our model features stochastic interest rates and real frictions, i.e., capital adjustment
costs, there are no financial frictions and, hence, the Modigliani-Miller theorem holds. The
firm chooses investment I and liquidation time τ ℓ to maximize its value:
                            Z τ ℓ R                  Rτ
                                                                      
                                   − 0t rv dv        − 0 ℓ rv dv
                          E       e           dYt + e            ℓKτ ℓ .                           (7)
                                      0

While the discount rate in Eq. (7) is the risk-free rate, the risk-free rate r and the cumulative
net profits Y are both under the risk-neutral measure. Therefore, the firm’s well-diversified
investors earn an expected return in excess of the risk-free rate r and the implied risk premium
can be inferred.
      Let V (K, r) denote firm value. Using the standard principle of optimality, we have the
Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation

                                                                              σ2 (r)
 rV (K, r) = max (πK − C(I, K))+(I − δK) VK (K, r)+µ(r)Vr (K, r)+                    Vrr (K, r).   (8)
                   I                                                            2
The first term on the right side of Eq. (8) gives the firm’s risk-adjusted expected cash flows.
The second term gives the effect of net investment on firm value. The last two terms give the
drift and volatility effects of interest rate changes on V (K, r). The firm optimally chooses
investment I by demanding that its risk-adjusted expected return equals r at optimality,
which implies that the two sides of Eq. (8) are equal.
      Let q(K, r) denote the marginal value of capital, which is also known as the marginal q,
q(K, r) ≡ VK (K, r). The first-order condition (FOC) for investment I is

                                     q(K, r) ≡ VK (K, r) = CI (I, K) ,                             (9)
 10
      See Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006) for equilibrium capital reallocation.


                                                       6
which equates q(K, r) with the marginal cost of investing CI (I, K). With convex adjustment
costs, the second-order condition (SOC) is satisfied and, hence, the FOC characterizes
investment optimality.
   We show that the optimal liquidation policy is described by a threshold policy with the
endogenously determined cutoff level r ∗ , in that if r ≥ r ∗ , then the firm optimally liquidates
its capital stock but otherwise continues its operations. At the moment of liquidation τ ℓ ,
V (K, r ∗) = ℓK holds as an accounting identity, that is, the firm’s value upon liquidation
equals ℓ per unit of K. In addition, the optimal liquidation policy must satisfy the smooth
pasting condition Vr (K, r ∗) = 0, which is the FOC for τ ℓ . Intuitively, as the firm’s liquidation
value ℓK is independent of r (by assumption, which can be relaxed in a more general model),
the firm’s value just before liquidation must also be insensitive to r, in that Vr (K, r ∗) = 0.
   Capital K and interest rate r are the two state variables in our model. We show that
the firm’s value is proportional to its contemporaneous capital stock K, in that

                                      V (K, r) = K · q (r) .                                   (10)

Here, q(r) is both Tobin’s average q and marginal q. The equality between the average q and
the marginal qs in our model follows from the homogeneity property as in Hayashi (1982).
   Proposition 1 summarizes the solution.

Proposition 1 In the region r < r ∗ , where r ∗ is the endogenously determined liquidation
threshold, Tobin’s average q, q(r), solves the ordinary differential equation (ODE):
                                                                  σ 2 (r) ′′
           rq(r) = π − c(i(r)) + (i(r) − δ)q(r) + µ(r)q ′ (r) +          q (r) ,   r < r∗ ,    (11)
                                                                     2
where the optimal investment i(r) is monotonically increasing in q(r), in that

                                         c′ (i(r)) = q(r) ,                                    (12)

as implied by c′′ ( · ) > 0. The firm optimally liquidates its capital stock when r ≥ r ∗ , where
the optimal threshold r ∗ satisfies the value-matching condition given by

                                             q(r ∗ ) = ℓ                                       (13)

and the smooth pasting condition given by

                                            q ′ (r ∗ ) = 0 .                                   (14)

                                                   7
2.3.        Risk premia
                                                                             √
       As in CIR, we assume that the interest rate risk premium is given by λ r, where λ is a
constant that measures the sensitivity of risk premium with respect to r. By the no-arbitrage
principle, we have the following dynamics for the interest rate under the physical measure,11

                                       drt = µP (rt )dt + σ(rt )dBPt ,                                   (15)

where BP is the standard Brownian motion under the physical measure P, the drift µP (r) is

                                µP (r) = κ (ξ − r) + νλr = κP (ξ P − r) ,                                (16)

and
                                               κP = κ − λν ,                                             (17)

and
                                                       κξ
                                              ξP =          .                                            (18)
                                                     κ − λν
The parameter κP given in Eq. (17) measures the speed of mean reversion under the physical
measure. The higher κP , the more mean-reverting. We require κP > 0 to ensure stationarity.
The parameter ξ P given in Eq. (18) measures the long-run mean of r under the physical
measure P. The volatility function under P is given by Eq. (3), which is the same as that
under the risk-neutral measure implied by the diffusion invariance theorem.12
       We now specify the risk premium associated with the productivity shock. Let ω denote
the correlation coefficient between the firm’s productivity shock and the aggregate productivity
shock. Write the firm’s productivity shock dXt under the physical measure P, as

                                           dXt = π P dt + ǫdZPt ,                                        (19)

where ZPt is a standard Brownian motion driving X under the physical measure. The drift
for X under the physical measure, π P , is linked to the risk-neutral drift π as π P = π + ωηǫ ,
where η captures the aggregate risk premium per unit of volatility.13
  11
     Using the Girsanov theorem, we relate the Brownian motion under the physical measure P, BP , to the
                                                                          √
Brownian motion under the risk-neutral measure, B, by dBt = dBPt + λ rt dt . See Duffie (2002).
  12
     Because of the square-root volatility function, the CIR interest rate process under both measures is also
referred to as a square-root process.
  13
     As for the interest rate analysis, we apply the Girsanov theorem to link the Brownian motions for the
productivity shocks under the risk-neutral and physical measures via dZt = dZPt + ωηdt.


                                                      8
2.4.        Incorporating leverage under MM
       An immediate and important empirically testable implication of Eq. (12) is that Tobin’s
average q should be the sufficient statistic for investment. However, the empirical evidence is
disappointing.14 As equity is subordinate to debt and, moreover, debt has more predictable
cash flows than equity, any potential mis-pricing of the firm’s total value implies that its
equity value as the levered claim on the firm is even more mis-priced.15 How to avoid using
equity market information but effectively use bond price information to forecast corporate
investments? By applying Black-Merton-Scholes option pricing framework to value corporate
equity and debt in a q theoretic setting, Philippon (2009) constructs an alternative measure
capturing the firm’s investment opportunities by using bond prices.
       Let Bt denote the market value of the firm’s debt outstanding at time t, and let Et denote
the market value of the firm’s all outstanding common equity. For simplicity, we assume
that the firm has only debt and common equity. Let bt = Bt /Kt and et = Et /Kt . The
accounting identity Vt = Bt + Et implies qt = bt + et . For simplicity, we assume that the MM
theorem holds. Our main argument that bond q is a better empirical proxy for investment
opportunities than Tobin’s average q remains valid even in settings where the MM theorem
does not hold due to conflicts of interest, informational frictions, or tax distortions.16
       As in Philippon (2009), we refer to bt as the bond’s q and use it to measure the firm’s
investment opportunity in a setting with a constant book-leverage policy.17 The firm continuously
issues and retires multiple units of bonds. Each unit of the newly issued bond has a principal
normalized to one. For outstanding bonds issued at any date, a fixed fraction α of them (in
terms of their principals) is continuously called back at par. The firm pays coupons at the
rate of ρ on all bonds’ outstanding principals prior to default.
       Let Ψt denote the total principal (face value) of all outstanding bonds at time t. Before
liquidation, i.e., t < τ ℓ and over (t, t+dt), its bondholders receive total cash flows (ρ+α)Ψt dt,
where ρΨt is the total coupon rate and αΨt is the total bond buyback rate. Given that the
time (t+dt) total principal on all outstanding bonds is Ψt+dt , the new issuance over (t, t+dt)
  14
     See Summers (1981) and Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988) for early contributions and Caballero
(1999) for a survey.
  15
     See Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1995) and Erickson and Whited (2000) for example.
  16
     See Appendix Section F.6, for example.
  17
     This construction is similar to the modeling of debt maturity in Leland (1994, 1998) and the subsequent
dynamic capital structure models.


                                                     9
must have a principal of Ψt+dt − (1 − αdt)Ψt . At the liquidation time τ ℓ , bonds are treated
pari passu and receive their share of liquidation proceeds proportional to their outstanding
principal. The book leverage is defined as Ψt /Kt .

Assumption 1. The firm’s book leverage is constant over time in that ψ t ≡ Ψt /Kt = ψ for
t < τ ℓ , where ψ is the target (constant) book leverage.

       Proposition 2 characterizes the debt pricing. Appendix Section F.5 provides the details.

Proposition 2 The scaled value of corporate debt, b(r), solves

                                                             σ 2 (r) ′′
                   rb(r) = ρψ + α(ψ − b(r)) + µ(r)b′ (r) +          b (r) ,   r < r∗ ,           (20)
                                                                2
subject to the boundary condition:

                                         b(r ∗ ) = min{ψ, ℓ} ,                                   (21)

where r ∗ is the the firm’s endogenous liquidation threshold given in Proposition 1.

       Let bf ree (r) denote the value of a risk-free bond that pays coupons indefinitely and has
the same call back and coupon policies as described above. For the risk-free bond, we use
the same pricing Eq. (20) for bf ree (r) but change the boundary condition Eq. (21) to
limr→∞ bf ree (r) = 0 .


3.        Solution
       We calibrate the model, provide a quantitative analysis of the effects of stochastic interest
rates on investment and firm value, and analyze the model’s predictions for firms with
leverage.

3.1.        Parameter choices
       For the interest rate process parameters, we use estimates reported in Downing, Jaffee
and Wallace (2009).18 Their annual estimates are: the persistence parameter κP = 0.1313,
  18
    They use the methodology of Pearson and Sun (1994) and daily data on constant maturity three-month
and ten-year Treasury rates for the period 1968–2006.


                                                  10
the long-run mean ξ P = 0.0574, the volatility parameter ν = 0.0604, and the risk premium
parameter λ = −1.2555. Negative interest rate premium (λ < 0) implies that the interest
rate is more persistent (κ < κP ) and is higher on average (ξ > ξ P ) after risk adjustments.
Under the risk-neutral measure, we have the persistence parameter κ = 0.0555, the long-run
mean ξ = 0.1359, and the volatility parameter ν = 0.0604. Diffusion invariance implies that
the volatility parameter remains unchanged.
       We choose the annual capital depreciation rate δ = 0.09. The annual mean and volatility
of the risk-adjusted productivity are π = 0.18 and ǫ = 0.09, respectively, which are in line
with the estimates of Eberly, Rebelo, and Vincent (2012) for large US firms. We set the
liquidation value per unit capital at ℓ = 0.9 as suggested in Hennessy and Whited (2007).
For our numerical exercise, we normalize the purchase price of capital to one and choose a
quadratic adjustment cost function:
                                                       θ
                                             c(i) = i + i2 ,                                           (22)
                                                       2
where θ is the capital adjustment cost parameter measuring the degree of capital illiquidity.
We consider three levels for the annual adjustment cost parameter, θ = 2, 5, 20, which span
the range of empirical estimates in the literature.19

3.2.        Investment and Tobin’s average q
       Panel A of Fig. 1 plots the optimal i(r) with respect to r for θ = 2, 5, 20. As one can
expect, i(r) decreases in r. Less obviously but importantly, in a low interest rate environment
such as today’s, investment is very sensitive to capital illiquidity. For example, as θ increases
from 2 to 5, near r = 0 the firm’s investment drops significantly by 79% from 0.49 to 0.10
demonstrating very strong effects of r on investment. Also, investment responds more with
respect to changes in r when capital is more liquid, i.e., a lower θ. When interest rates are
  19
    The estimates of the adjustment cost parameter vary significantly in the literature. Procedures based on
neoclassic (homogeneity-based) q theory of investment (e.g. Hayashi, 1982) and aggregate data on Tobin’s q
and investment typically give a high estimate for the adjustment cost parameter θ. Gilchrist and Himmelberg
(1995) estimate the parameter to be around 3 using unconstrained subsamples of firms with bond rating.
Hall (2004) specifies quadratic adjustment costs for both labor and capital and finds a low average (across
industries) value of θ = 1 for capital. Whited (1992) estimates the adjustment cost parameter to be 1.5 in a
q model with financial constraints. Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006) estimate a value of the adjustment cost
parameter lower than 1 in a model with fixed costs and decreasing returns to scale. Eberly, Rebelo, and
Vincent (2012) estimate a value θ around 7 for large US firms in a homogeneous stochastic framework of
Hayashi (1982) with regime-switching productivity shocks.


                                                    11
high, large discounting implies that firm value is mostly driven by its existing capital stock.
Therefore, a firm with more illiquid capital optimally chooses to divest less, ceteris paribus,
which implies the single-crossing feature of i(r) for two levels of θ.

                                   [Insert Fig. 1 near here.]

   Panel B of Fig. 1 plots Tobin’s q for θ = 2, 5, 20. The lower the capital adjustment cost
θ, the higher Tobin’s q(r). Also, q(r) is decreasing and convex in r. Importantly, in a low
interest rate environment such as today’s, firm value is very sensitive to capital illiquidity.
For example, as θ increases from 2 to 5, near r = 0 Tobin’s q drops significantly by 24%
from 1.99 to 1.51. With θ = 2, Tobin’s q at r = 0 is q(0) = 1.99, which is 71% higher than
q(ξ P ) = 1.16 at its long-run mean, ξ P = 0.0574. In summary, our analyses demonstrate that
firm value is sensitive to capital illiquidity θ and stochastic interest rates r.
   As physical capital is a long-lived asset subject to depreciation, we propose a measure
that is analogous to the concept of duration for fixed-income securities, which allows us to
quantify the interest rate sensitivity of the value of capital. We also generalize the widely used
concept of the user cost of capital developed by Jorgenson (1963) and Hall and Jorgenson
(1967) to our q theoretic setting with term structure of interest rates.

3.3.       Firm value duration and the user cost of capital
   Next, we analyze our model’s implications for firm value duration and the user cost
capital.

3.3.1.     Duration

   By analogy to bond pricing, we define duration for firm value as
                                          1     dV (K, r)    q ′ (r)
                            D(r) = −                      =−         ,                       (23)
                                       V (K, r)    dr        q(r)

where the last equality follows from the homogeneity property, V (K, r) = q(r)K. Panel A
of Fig. 2 plots duration for firm value, D(r), as a function of r for θ = 2, 5, 20. Intuitively,
the higher the interest rate, the lower the duration. In addition, in low interest rates such
as today’s environment, duration is very sensitive to the level of capital adjustment costs.
For example, as θ increases from 2 to 5, near the zero interest rate level, the firm’s duration

                                               12
is significantly reduced from 16.43 to 6.17. Overall, the quantitative effects of r on duration
are significant.

                                    [Insert Fig. 2 near here.]

3.3.2.    User cost of capital

   Jorgenson (1963) and Hall and Jorgenson (1967) introduce the user (rental) cost of capital
in their neoclassical investment framework with no adjustment costs. Abel (1990) shows how
to calculate the user cost of capital in deterministic q models with capital adjustment costs.
   We extend Abel’s approach to our setting with stochastic interest rates. Applying Ito’s
Lemma to the value of capital, q(rt ), under the risk-neutral measure gives the expected value
change of q(rt ):
                                                   σ 2 (r) ′′
                                Hq(r) = µ(r)q ′ (r) +     q (r) .                       (24)
                                                      2
Let u( · ) denote the user cost of capital. The owner of capital collects both the (imputed)
rental payment, which is equal to the user cost of capital, u(r), and the risk-adjusted expected
value appreciation, Hq(r), but has to incur the economic depreciation cost, which is given by
δq(r). Therefore, under the risk-neutral measure, the total net expected return from owning
a unit of capital is equal to (u(r) + Hq(r) − δq(r))/q(r). By no arbitrage, it must equal to
the risk-free rate r. That is, rq(r) = u(r) + Hq(r) − δq(r) holds. Rewriting this gives

                                  u(r) = (r + δ) q(r) − Hq(r) .                              (25)

Again, Hq(r) uses the risk-neutral drift µ(r), not the physical drift µP (r), in order to account
for risk premia when calculating the user cost of capital.
   By substituting the valuation Eq. (11) for Tobin’s average q and the FOC for investment
(12) into Eq. (25), we obtain

                                u(r) = π − (c(i) − c′ (i)i(r)) > π ,                         (26)

where the inequality in Eq. (26) follows from the monotonicity and convexity of the capital
adjustment cost c( · ) and c(0) = 0. We can also express u(r) = π − CK (I, K). Intuitively
speaking, the user’s marginal benefit per unit of capital equals the sum of its risk-adjusted
expected productivity π and the marginal benefit of reducing capital adjustment costs, i.e.,
                                                                                      (q(r)−1)2
−CK > 0. For a quadratic capital adjustment cost given in Eq. (22), u(r) = π +            2θ
                                                                                                  .

                                                13
   Panel B of Fig. 2 plots u(r) for θ = 2, 5, 20. u(r) is greater than the risk-adjusted
productivity, i.e., u(r) ≥ π = 18% for all r. Also, u(r) is highly nonlinear in r. In a low
interest rate environment, the user cost of capital is very sensitive to the level of capital
adjustment costs. With a moderate level of adjustment cost θ = 2, u(0) = 0.423, which
implies that the benefit of reducing capital adjustment costs, −CK (I, K) = 0.243, is the
majority part of the user cost of capital. As θ increases from 2 to 5, near the zero interest
rate level, the firm’s u(r) is significantly reduced from 0.432 to 0.206.
   While the standard Jorgensonian user cost of capital u(r) equals r+δ (with perfect capital
liquidity and constant price for the capital good), we show that the u(r) is non-monotonic
in r when capital is illiquid and subject to adjustment costs. u(r) decreases with r in
the empirically relevant range of r as in Fig. 2. To understand the intuition behind this
result, we use the formula for the user cost of capital u(r) given in Eq. (26), which implies
u′ (r) = c′′ (i)i′ (r)i(r). As capital adjustment cost is convex, i.e., c′′ (i) > 0, and investment
decreases with r, i.e., i′ (r) < 0, u(r) is decreasing in r as long as the firm’s gross investment
is positive, i.e., i(r) > 0. That is, under the normal circumstances when the firm’s gross
investment is positive, we expect that the user cost of capital u(r) decreases with the interest
rate r.
   In addition, the higher the adjustment cost θ, the less sensitive u(r) with respect to r
because the reduction of the marginal adjustment cost, −CK (I, K), is smaller. Intuitively,
with infinite adjustment costs, i.e., θ → ∞, there is no capital accumulation and, hence, u(r)
is simply equal to the risk-adjusted productivity π = 18%. Overall, the quantitative effects
of r and the capital adjustment cost θ on the user cost of capital u(r) are significant.

3.4.      Leverage
   As in Philippon (2009), we define the relative bond price, denoted by brelative (r), as the
ratio between the value of corporate bonds and the value of risk-free bonds:
                                                          b(r)
                                      brelative (r) =                ,                        (27)
                                                        bf ree (r)

where the formulas for b(r) and bf ree (r) are reported in Proposition 2. Let y(r) denote the
yield spread:
                                      bf ree (r)            1
                             y(r) =              − 1 = relative     − 1.                      (28)
                                        b(r)          b         (r)

                                                 14
     The firm’s average q can be expressed as

                            b(r)    bf ree (r) relative       bf ree (r) 1
                    q(r) =        =           b         (r) =                 ,              (29)
                           Lev(r)   Lev(r)                    Lev(r) 1 + y(r)

where y(r) is the credit spread given in Eq. (28) and Lev is the market leverage:

                                                b(r)       b(r)
                                  Lev(r) =               =      .                            (30)
                                             b(r) + e(r)   q(r)

In Section 4, we use the implications of Eq. (29) to conduct our empirical analyses. Unlike
Philippon (2009), we focus on the interest rate shocks.
     Fig. 3 plots b(r), the model-implied bond q. The bond q decreases almost linearly in r
suggesting that the inverse of b(r) is a good approximation of r, which motivates us to use
the bond q to construct proxies for interest rates. As r increases, the firm eventually gets
liquidated and b(r) approaches to the book leverage ψ.

                                    [Insert Fig. 3 near here.]

     Fig. 4 shows that the relative bond price brelative (r) and yield spreads y(r) positively and
negatively predict investments in Panels A and B, respectively. This figure generates testable
implications and motivates our empirical design in Section 4. We use bond value–based
measure for investment opportunities as they are more reliable and less subject to measurement
issues, as pointed out by Philippon (2009). The predictive relations are not necessarily driven
by the time-varying premium in the stock market and can be solely driven by the time-varying
interest rates.

                                    [Insert Fig. 4 near here.]


4.      Empirical analyses
     Our model implies that Tobin’s q is a sufficient statistic to predict investment and that
the interest rate negatively predicts investment via its impact on Tobin’s q. However, the
empirical predictive power of Tobin’s q for investment is weak. Also, the empirical relation
between interest rates and investment in the literature is ambiguous. These empirical results
seem to challenge the validity of the standard q theory of investment. However, some recent
empirical work yields more promising results.

                                                15
       In this section, we first use our theory to guide the construction of our empirical proxies
and then test our model’s predictions. Using the first-order approximation of Tobin’s average
q around unity, we obtain the following approximate relations for the Tobin’s average q:

                     q − 1 ≈ ln[1 + (q − 1)] = ln bf ree − ln Lev + ln brelative ,                   (31)
                                                      = ln bf ree − ln Lev − ln (1 + y) ,            (32)

where the two equalities follow from the identities given in Eq. (29). That is, after controlling
for the risk-free rate information embedded in the logarithmic risk-free bond price ln bf ree
and firm leverage measured by ln Lev, the logarithmic relative bond price ln brelative or the
corporate credit spread ln (1 + y) can be used to effectively back out Tobin’s average q.
Empirically, this is highly desirable as Tobin’s average q heavily depends on the equity price,
which is much more subject to mis-pricing than corporate debt, the measurement error
argument in Philippon (2009).
       Eqs. (31) and (32) motivate us to control for the risk-free rate information and the firm’s
leverage and to consider the following three empirical measures of credit risk: (1) the relative
bond price (Rela BP) as the ratio between the ten-year Treasury rate and the Baa corporate
                     0.1+10-year Treasury rate
bond yield, i.e.,       0.1+Baa bond yield
                                               ,   as in Philippon (2009);20 (2) Moody’s Baa corporate
yield in excess of the ten-year Treasury rate (Baa-Tb10y); and (3) Moody’s Baa corporate
bond yields in excess of Aaa corporate bond yields (Baa-Aaa).
       We find significant predictive powers by all three credit risk proxies. That is, at both
the firm and the aggregate level, we provide empirical support for the negative relation
between investment and credit spreads and the positive relation between investment and the
value of capital. Our results complement recent work by Philippon (2009) and Gilchrist and
Zakrajšek (2012), who find that bond yields (prices) are informative of investment.

4.1.        Data
       Our empirical analyses use both the aggregate and firm-level data from 1963 to 2014.
We describe the summary statistics and the construction of various variables. Appendix J
provides additional details.
  20
    Following Philippon (2009), we add 0.1 to both the ten-year Treasury rate in the numerator and the
Baa bond yield in the denominator to reflect that the average maturity of corporate bonds is ten years. In
our model, this is achieved by setting α = 0.1.


                                                         16
4.1.1.       Aggregate Data

       Aggregate investment is the private nonresidential fixed investment, and the corresponding
stock of capital is the private nonresidential fixed assets from National Income and Product
Accounts (NIPA.) Treasury interest rates and the Moody’s Baa and Aaa corporate bond
yields are from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Missouri. Book leverage is the total
liabilities of the nonfinancial corporate business sector from the flow of funds scaled by the
stock of capital from NIPA.21
       Panel A of Table 1 reports the summary statistics of the aggregate variables. Investment
rate (IK ) has a mean of 11% and volatility of 1% per annum. Relative bond price (Rela
BP) has a mean of 0.89 and volatility of 0.04 per annum. Baa-Tb10y and Baa-Aaa have a
mean of 2.03% and 1.03% and volatility of 0.74% and 0.42%, respectively.

                                      [Insert Table 1 near here.]

       To control for the impact of idiosyncratic volatility, we construct a measure of idiosyncratic
volatility (IdioV ) by calculating the cross-sectional volatility of the monthly stock returns
as in Philippon (2009) and use IdioV in our empirical analysis. The mean of IdioV is 0.56
per annum. The mean and volatility of book leverage (BLev ) are 0.48 and 0.06, respectively.
To control for the impact of the time-varying risk premium on investment, we calculate
the price-to-dividend ratio (PD) of the Standard & Poor (S&P) composite stock price
index, which has been shown to predict the expected stock market returns.22 The mean
and volatility of PD are 37.28 and 16.80, respectively.

4.1.2.       Firm-level data

       Monthly market values of equities are from the Center for Research in Security Prices
(CRSP) and accounting information is from the CRSP and Compustat Merged Industrial
Files. The sample includes firms with common shares (shrcd= 10 and 11) and firms traded
on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ (exchcd= 1, 2, and 3). We omit firms whose primary
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes are between 4900 and 4999 (utility firms) or
  21
    We use book leverage for our empirical analyses, but all our results remain valid with market leverage.
  22
    Campbell and Shiller (1988) and Hodrick (1992), among others, have shown that dividend yields predict
stock market returns.



                                                    17
between 6000 and 6999 (financial firms). We correct for the delisting bias following the
approach in Shumway (1997).
       Panel B of Table 1 reports the summary statistics of the annual firm-level variables. The
firm-level investment-capital ratio (IK ) has a mean of 0.29 and volatility of 0.25 per annum.
Firms’ book leverage (BLev ) has a mean of 0.29 and an annual volatility of 0.24. The
moments of return on assets (ROA), tangibility (Tang), and the logarithm of sales (Sales)
are within the range of estimates in the literature.

4.2.        Predicting firms’ investments
       We specify our baseline investment regression as follows:
                                                         ′
                                 IKj,t+1 = βxt + γZj,t + ϕj + εj,t+1 ,                                (33)

where IK j,t+1 denotes the investment rate of firm j in period t + 1, xt is the key aggregate
predictive variable, ϕj is the firm-specific fixed effect, and Zj,t denotes a vector of control
variables for firm j in period t including BLev, ROA, Tang, and Sales.23 Table 2 reports the
regression results. We cluster the standard errors by firm and time. Our aggregate predictive
variable x corresponds to the aggregate relative bond price (Rela BP) in Specifications 1 and
4, Baa corporate yield in excess of the ten-year Treasury rate (Baa-Tb10y) in Specifications
2 and 5, and Baa corporate bond yields in excess of Aaa corporate bond yields (Baa-Aaa)
in Specifications 3 and 6.

                                      [Insert Table 2 near here.]

       Consistent with the model, the aggregate relative bond price (Rela BP) positively forecasts
firm-level investment rates with a slope of 0.9 and a t-statistic of 9.3 in the univariate
regression (i.e., Specification 1) Importantly, this predictability result remains significant in
the multivariate regression (i.e., Specification 4) with various controls introduced earlier.
The point estimate is 0.39 with a t-statistic at 5.2.
       In our other univariate regressions (i.e., Specifications 2 and 3), we show that the credit
risk measures, Baa-Tb10y and Baa-Aaa, negatively predict firm-level investment rates with
  23
    We do not include a time dummy because xt is an aggregate variable. Our results remain robust after
controlling for the aggregate price-to-dividend ratio, which proxies for the time-varying risk premium. We
also do not include the Tobin’s q as a control because our main regressors capture the effects of q as seen
from Eqs. (31) and (32).

                                                    18
an ordinary least squares coefficient of −4.3 and −2.6, respectively. These estimates are also
highly significant with a t-statistic of −6.7, and −1.9, respectively. In summary, all three
univariate regression results are consistent with the theory. We also report multivariate
regressions for Baa-Tb10y and Baa-Aaa with the various control variables defined earlier in
Specification 5 and 6, respectively. Both two measures remain significant.
      Finally, the predictability of bond value–based measures for firms’ investments is economically
significant. For example, a one standard deviation increase of Baa-Tb10y is associated with
a 1.6 percentage decrease of the firm’s investment.
      As the aggregate credit spreads are plausibly exogenous to firms, our findings suggest that
micro-level corporate investments respond negatively to aggregate interest rates, consistent
with our model’s key prediction.

4.3.        Predicting aggregate investments
      Having shown that credit risk–based measures predict firm-level investments, we now
examine the time series predictability of the aggregate relative bond price and credit spreads
for future aggregate investment. (Predictive variables are lagged by one year as in Subsection
4.2.) The first specification of Table 3 shows that the relative bond price (Rela BP) positively
forecasts aggregate investment with a slope of 0.11, which is significant with a t-statistic of
4.4. This prediction is consistent with our model as Tobin’s average q measured by using
bond data instead of market equity data contains information about firms’ future investment,
as argued by Philippon (2009).

                                         [Insert Table 3 near here.]

      The other two measures, Baa-Tb10y and Baa-Aaa, negatively predict future aggregate
investment, with slopes of −0.7 and −1.2, respectively (Specifications 2 and 3). They are
also highly significant with a t-statistic of −4.8 and −2.7, respectively.
      Specifications 4 to 6 present the multivariate regressions with various controls. These
regressions show that Rela BP, Baa-Tb10y, and Baa-Aaa still predict aggregate investments
after we control for the three-month Treasury bill rate (Tb3m), idiosyncratic volatility
(IdioV ), book leverage (BLev ), and the price-to-dividend ratio (PD).24
 24
      The results for book leverage are also significant after controlling for market leverage. The predictability


                                                        19
     In summary, our empirical findings are economically and statistically significant, and are
consistent with our model’s theoretical predictions on the relation between credit-risk-based
measures and investments at both the firm level and the aggregate level.


5.      Conclusion
     We recognize the importance of stochastic interest rates and incorporate a widely used
term structure model of interest rates into a neoclassic q theory model of investment. We
show that the term structure of interest rates significantly alter both the qualitative and
quantitative effects of interest rates on investment and the value of capital. Empirically,
we show that our theory-guided bond information–based measures of firms’ investment
opportunities have strong predictive powers for both the firm level and the aggregate investments,
complementing Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2007, 2012) and Philippon (2009) by providing
additional empirical support for the q theory.
     For simplicity, we have chosen a one-factor model for the term structure of interest rates.
Much empirical work has shown that multi-factor term-structure models fit the yield curve
much better.25 As a result, different factors contributing differently to various interest rates
should also have different effects on investments and firm value. For example, a multi-factor
term structure model allows us to analyze the different effects of long-term and short-term
interest rates on investments.
     Also, extending our model to incorporate financial constraints allows us to analyze
how the term structure of interest rates influences a firm’s interdependent investment and
financing (e.g., cash holdings, leverage, and risk management) policies.26 Finally, structurally
estimating our model with both term structure and corporate investment information could
allow us to generate additional insights, provide quantitative predictions, and better understand
the what-if counterfactuals.27
of aggregate investment by interest rates remains significant after we control for the time-varying aggregate
risk premium, which is proxied by the aggregate price-to-dividend ratio.
   25
      See Piazzesi (2010) for a survey.
   26
      See Cooley and Quadrini (2001), Gomes (2001), and Whited (1992), among others, for quantitative
assessments of financial frictions on corporate investment. See Gourio and Michaux (2011) on the effects of
stochastic volatility on corporate investment under imperfect capital markets.
   27
      Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006) esimate both convex and nonconvex adjustment costs parameters in a
dynamic neoclassical investment model but with constant interest rates. See also Strebulaev and Whited
(2012) for a review of the recent research development in dynamic models of finance and investment and


                                                     20
References
 Abel, A. B., 1979. Investment and the Value of Capital, Garland Publishing, New York.

 Abel, A. B., 1990. Consumption and investment, In: Friedman, B. M., Hahn, F. H. (Eds.),
      Handbook of Monetary Economics, Volume 2, Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 725–778.

 Abel, A. B., Blanchard, O. J., 1986, The present value of profits and cyclical movements
      in investment, Econometrica, 54, 249–273.

 Abel, A. B., Eberly, J. C., 1994. A unified model of investment under uncertainty, American
      Economic Review, 84, 1369–1384.

 Arrow, K. J., 1968. Optimal capital policy with irreversible investment, in Wolfe J. N. ,
      (Ed.), Value, Capital and Growth. Papers in honour of Sir John Hicks. Edinburge
      University Press, Edinburgh, Scotland, pp. 1–19.

 Caballero, R. J., 1999.        Aggregate investment, in Taylor J. B., Woodford M. (Eds.),
      Handbook of Macroeconomics, volume 1, Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 813–862.

 Campbell, J. Y., Shiller, R. J., 1988. The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future
      dividends and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195–228.

 Cooley, T. F., Quadrini, V., 2001. Financial markets and firm dynamics, American Economic
      Review 91, 1286–1310.

 Cooper, R. S. Haltiwanger, J. C., 2006. On the nature of capital adjustment costs, Review
      of Economic Studies 73, 611–633.

 Cox, J. C., Ingersoll, J. E. Jr., Ross, S. A., 1985. A theory of term structure of interest
      rates, Econometrica 53, 385–408.

 Dai, Q., Singleton, K., 2000. Specification analysis of affine term structure models, Journal
      of Finance 55, 1943–1978.

 Dixit, A. K., Pindyck, R. S., 1994. Investment under Uncertainty, Princeton University
      Press, Princeton, NJ.
structural estimation in corporate finance.

                                               21
Downing, C., Jaffee, D., Wallace, N., 2009. Is the market for mortgage-backed securities a
    market for lemons? Review of Financial Studies 22, 2457–2494.

Duffie, J. D., 2002. Dynamic Asset Pricing Theory, Princeton University Press, Princeton,
    NJ.

Duffie, J. D., Kan, R., 1996. A yield-factor model of interest rates, Mathematical Finance
    6, 379–406.

Eberly, J. C., Rebelo, S., Vincent, N., 2012. What explains the lagged-investment effect?
    Journal of Monetary Economics 59, 370–380

Eisfeldt, A., L, Rampini, A. A., 2006.      Capital reallocation and liquidity, Journal of
    Monetary Economics 53, 369–399.

Erickson, T., Whited, T. M., 2000. Measurement error and the relationship between
    investment and Q, Journal of Political Economy 108, 1027–1057.

Fazzari, S. M., Hubbard, R. G., Petersen, B. C., 1988. Financing constraints and corporate
    investment, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 141–195.

Gilchrist, S., Himmelberg, C. P., 1995. Evidence on the role of cash flow for investment,
    Journal of Monetary Economics 36, 541–572.

Gilchrist, S., Himmelberg, C. P., Huberman, G., 2005. Do stock price bubbles influence
    corporate investment? Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 805–827.

Gilchrist, S., Zakrajšek, E., 2007, Investment and the cost of capital: new evidence from
    the corporate bond market, Unpublished working paper, National Bureau of Economic
    Research, Cambridge, MA.

Gilchrist, S., Zakrajšek, E., 2012. Credit spreads and business cycle fluctuations, American
    Economic Review 102 (4), 1692–1720.

Gomes, J. F., 2001. Financing investment, American Economic Review 91, 1263–1285.

Gourio, F., Michaux, M., 2011, Stochastic volatility, bond yields, and the Q theory of
    investment, Unpublished working paper, Boston University, Boston, MA.

                                            22
Hall, R. E., 2001. The stock market and capital accumulation, American Economic Review
    91, 1185–1202.

Hall, R. E., 2004. Measuring factor adjustment costs, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119,
    899–927.

Hall, R. E., Jorgenson, D. W., 1967. Tax policy and investment behavior, American
    Economic Review 57, 391–414.

Hayashi, F., 1982. Tobin’s marginal Q and average Q: A neoclassical interpretation,
    Econometrica 50, 215–224.

Hennessy, C. A., Whited, T. M., 2005. Debt dynamics, Journal of Finance 60, 1129–1165.

Hennessy, C. A., Whited, T. M., 2007. How costly is external financing? Evidence from a
    structural estimation, Journal of Finance 62, 1705–1745.

Hodrick, B., 1992. Dividend yields and expected stock returns: Alternative procedures for
    inference and measurement, Review of Financial Studies 3, 357–386.

Jorgenson, D. W., 1963. Capital theory and investment behavior, American Economic
    Review 53 (2), 247–259.

Leland, H. E., 1994. Bond prices, yield spreads, and optimal capital structure with default
    risk, Unpublished working paper 240, University of California—Berkeley, Walter A.
    Haas School of Business, Institute of Business and Economic Research, Berkeley, CA.

Leland, H. E., 1998. Agency costs, risk Management, and capital structure, Journal of
    Finance 53, 1213–1243.

Lucas, R. E., Jr., Prescott, E. C., 1971. Investment under uncertainty, Econometrica 39,
    659–681.

McDonald, R., Siegel, D., 1986. The value of waiting to invest, Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 101, 707–728.




                                           23
Pearson, N. D., Sun T. S., 1994. Exploiting the conditional density in estimating the term
    structure: an application to the Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross model, Journal of Finance
    54, 1279–1304.

Philippon, T., 2009. The bond market’s q, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1011–1056.

Piazzesi, M., 2010. Affine term structure models, in Ait-Sahalia Y., Hansen, L. P. (Eds.),
    Handbook of Financial Econometrics, Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 691–766.

Pulvino, T. C., 1998. Do asset fire sales exist? An empirical investigation of commercial
    aircraft transactions, Journal of Finance 53, 939–978.

Riddick, L. A., Whited, T. M., 2009. The corporate propensity to save, Journal of Finance
    64, 1729–1766.

Shumway, T., 1997. The delisting bias in CRSP data, Journal of Finance 52, 327–340.

Summers, L. H., 1981. Taxation and corporate investment: A q theory approach, Brookings
    Papers on Economic Activity 1, 67–127.

Strebulaev, I., Whited, T. M., 2012. Dynamic models and structural estimation in corporate
    finance, Foundations and Trends in Finance 6, 1–163.

Vasicek, O., 1977.   An equilibrium characterization of the term structure, Journal of
    Financial Economics 5 (2), 177–188.

Warusawitharana, M., 2008. Corporate asset purchases and sales: theory and evidence,
    Journal of Financial Economics 87, 471–497.

Whited, T. M., 1992. Debt, liquidity constraints, and corporate investment: evidence from
    panel data, Journal of Finance 47, 1425–1460.

Zhang, L., 2005. The value premium, Journal of Finance 60, 67–104.




                                           24
Appendix F. Technical details

F.1     Unlevered firm under stochastic interest rates
   We use the homogeneity property of the firm’s value function in capital stock K to
simplify our analysis. We write the firm’s value function as

                                      V (K, r) = K · q (r) ,                                   (34)

and Proposition 1 characterizes the solution for q (r). Below we briefly sketch out a proof
for Proposition 1.
   Substituting Eq. (34), and various implied relations into the partial differential equation
(PDE) (8) for V (K, r) and simplifying, we obtain the ODE Eq.                (11).   The FOC for
investment I given in Eq. (9) implies that the optimal i satisfies Eq. (12). Next, we
turn to the boundary conditions. Upon the liquidation of capital at τ ℓ , the firm collects its
liquidation value ℓKτ ℓ and, hence, the value-matching condition V (Kτ ℓ , r ∗ ) = ℓKτ ℓ . Also, the
optimal liquidation decision gives the smooth pasting condition, Vr (Kτ ℓ , r ∗) = 0 . Simplifying
these two conditions, we obtain Eq. (13) and Eq. (14).
   Finally, we report the natural boundary condition at r = 0. Equation (8) implies the
following condition at r = 0: maxI πK − C(I, K) + (I − δK) VK (K, 0) + κξVr (K, 0) = 0 .

F.2     The benchmark with constant interest rates
   We provide closed-form solutions for i and Tobin’s q when rt ≡ r for all t. This special
case is Hayashi (1982) with i.i.d. productivity shocks. We summarize the main results with
constant interest rates. The ODE (11) is simplified to

                               rq = max (π − c(i)) + (i − δ) q,                                (35)
                                       i


where i satisfies c′ (i) = q. Equivalently, we can write the average q under optimal i as

                                                  π − c(i)
                                       q = max             ,                                   (36)
                                              i   r+δ−i
provided that the following condition holds:

                                           π < c(r + δ) .                                      (37)


                                                  25
Eq. (37) ensures that firm value is finite. Let rb denote the interest rate level with the firm
indifferent between liquidating and operating as a going concern, in that Tobin’s average q
satisfies q(b
            r ) = ℓ, where q( · ) is given by Eq. (36).
   For the case with quadratic adjustment costs, when c(i) is quadratic and given in Eq.
(22), the convergence condition Eq. (37) takes the explicit expression

                                (r + δ)2 − 2 (π − (r + δ)) /θ > 0 .                       (38)

If r > rb, the firm liquidates itself and its value is V = ℓK. If r ≤ rb, V = qK, where

                                               q = 1 + θi ,                               (39)

and the optimal investment-capital ratio i = I/K is constant and given by
                                    r
                                                 2
                        i = r + δ − (r + δ)2 − (π − (r + δ)) .                            (40)
                                                 θ
The cutoff rb at which the firm is indifferent between liquidation and continuation satisfies:
                                          r
                        ℓ−1                           2
                              = rb + δ − (b  r + δ)2 − (π − (b r + δ)) .                  (41)
                          θ                           θ

F.3     The user cost of capital
   Incorporating risk premia into Abel (1990), we define the user cost of capital u via the
present value formula                     Z                                     
                                                   ∞        Rs
                                                       −         (rv +δ)dv
                                qt = Et                e    t                us ds .      (42)
                                               t
Eq. (42) states that time t marginal q equals the risk-adjusted present value of the stream
of marginal cash flows attributable to a unit of capital installed at time t. Because capital
depreciates at the rate of δ, a unit of capital purchased at time t only is worth e−δ(s−t) unit
at time s, explaining (r + δ) in the exponent in Eq. (42). Our definition of user cost of
capital is after the risk adjustment in that the expectation operator Et [ · ] in Eq. (42) is
under the risk-neutral measure, which incorporates the effects of risk premia for interest rate
and productivity shocks.

F.4     Decomposition: assets in place and growth opportunities
   We separate the impact of interest rates on assets in place and growth opportunities, and
we quantify their separate contributions to firm value.

                                                           26
F.4.1    Assets in place

   Let A(K, r) denote the value of assets in place, which is the present discounted value
of future cash flows generated by existing capital stock without any further investment or
divestment in the future, by permanently setting I = 0. We use the following standard HJB
equation for A(K, r):

                                                                    σ 2 (r)
              rA(K, r) = πK − δKAK (K, r) + µ(r)Ar (K, r) +                 Arr (K, r) .    (43)
                                                                       2
Using the homogeneity property A(K, r) = K · a (r) and substituting it into Eq. (43), we
obtain the following ODE (44) for a(r):

                                                            σ 2 (r) ′′
                          (r + δ) a(r) = π + µ(r)a′ (r) +          a (r) .                  (44)
                                                               2
The value of assets in place A(K, r) vanishes as r → ∞, i.e., limr→∞ A(K, r) = 0, which
implies limr→∞ a(r) = 0. Finally, Eq. (44) implies that the natural boundary condition at
r = 0 can be simplified as π − δa(0) + κξa′ (0) = 0.
   Intuitively, the value of assets in place (per unit of capital) for an infinitely lived firm
can be viewed as a perpetual bond with a discount rate given by (r + δ), the sum of interest
rate r and capital depreciation rate δ. Using the perpetual bond interpretation, the effective
coupon for this asset in place is the firm’s constant expected productivity π after the risk
adjustment (i.e., under the risk-neutral measure).
   Panel A of Fig. 5 plots the value of assets in place, a(r). By definition, a(r) is independent
of growth and the adjustment cost parameter θ. By the perpetual bond interpretation, we
know that a(r) is decreasing and convex in r. Quantitatively, a(r) accounts for a significant
fraction of firm value. For example, at its long-run mean ξ P = 0.0574, a(ξ P ) = 1.117, which
accounts for about 96% of total firm value, i.e., a(ξ P )/q(ξ P ) = 0.96 for θ = 2.
   The value of assets in place generally is not equal to the book value or replacement costs of
capital, contrary to the conventional wisdom. The value of assets in place is A(K, r) = a(r)K,
and the book value of capital is K. In general, a(r) 6= 1. However, the value of assets in
place does not account for growth opportunities.




                                                27
F.4.2    Growth opportunities

   The value of growth opportunities, G(K, r) given by G(K, r) = V (K, r) − A(K, r),
accounts for the value of optimally adjusting investment in response to changes in interest
rates. The scaled value, g(r) = G(K, r)/K, is given by

                                      g(r) = q(r) − a(r).                                  (45)

   Panel B of Fig. 5 plots g(r) for θ = 2, 5, 20. The quantitative effects of interest rates and
capital illiquidity on g(r) are strong. At a low interest rate environment such as today’s, the
value of growth opportunities is very sensitive to the level of adjustment cost θ and interest
rates. With a moderate value of θ = 2, the value of growth opportunities is about 55.2%
of the existing capital stock, i.e., g(0) = 0.552. As the interest rate increases from zero to
its long-run mean ξ P = 0.0574, the value of growth opportunities per unit of capital stock
drops by more than 90%, from 0.552 to 0.047. As θ increases from 2 to 5, at r = 0, the value
of growth opportunities decreases by 0.472, from 0.552 to 0.080. In summary, both interest
rates and capital illiquidity have first-order effects on the value of growth opportunities.

F.5     Levered firm under stochastic interest rates
   For simplicity, we assume that the investment decision I and the liquidation time τ ℓ are
chosen to maximize the firm’s total value. That is, we assume that the MM theorem holds
and leverage simply requires us to do valuation given the leverage policy. Therefore, the
firm’s (investment and liquidation) decisions and Tobin’s q are given in Proposition 1. We
thus need to report only the bond pricing results given corporate policies.
   Given investment and liquidation decisions in Proposition 1, the firm’s total debt (bond)
value B(K, r) satisfies the following pricing equation when r < r ∗ :

                                              B                         σ 2 (r)
   rB(K, r) = ρΨ − α(B − Ψ) − (I − δK)ψ         + (I − δK)BK + µ(r)Br +         Brr .      (46)
                                              Ψ                            2
The first term on the right side of Eq. (46) gives the total coupon payments. The second
term reflects the net gains or losses due to the rollover of the existing bonds Ψt and the new
bond issue at the market price Bt . By fixing the firm’s book leverage Ψt /Kt at a constant
level ψ, the net change of the face value for the bond is dΨt = ψdKt = (It − δKt )ψdt and,
thus the shareholders collect Bt dΨt /Ψt = (It − δKt )ψBt dt/Ψt by adjusting the outstanding

                                              28
debt amount, which is captured by the third term. Finally, the last three terms illustrate
the effects of the physical capital stock K and interest rate r on B(K, r). Upon liquidation,
given the debt holders’ seniority over equity investors, we must have

                       B(Kτ ℓ , r ∗ ) = min{Ψτ ℓ , ℓKτ ℓ } = min{ψ, ℓ}Kτ ℓ .             (47)

   Using the homogeneity property bt = Bt /Kt and the pricing Eq. (46), we obtain the
ODE (20) for b. Eq. (47) implies (21). Equity pricing is given by e(r) = q(r) − b(r), where
q(r) and b(r) are given by Propositions 1 and 2, respectively.

F.6     A non-MM model
   As in Leland (1994), we can generalize our model for levered firms by allowing the firm
to choose its default policy with the objective of maximizing its equity value. By doing so,
equity investors face a time-inconsistency problem as incentives before and after debt issue
differ. The pricing formulae for equity and debt will thus be different, but the key idea that
bond’s q is still a more robust measure than the Tobin’s q for firms’ investment opportunities
remains valid. We summarize the main results when investment and default decisions are
chosen sequentially by the firm’s equity holders, in the Proposition 3.

Proposition 3 The scaled bond value b(r), equity value e(r), and investment i(r) jointly
satisfy the following equations in the continuation region where r < r ∗ :
                                                                σ 2 (r) ′′
                        rb(r) = ρψ + α(ψ − b(r)) + µ(r)b′ (r) +        b (r) ,           (48)
                                                                   2
           (r + δ − i(r))e(r) = π − c(i(r)) − ρψ + α(b(r) − ψ) + (i(r) − δ)b(r)
                                               σ 2 (r)e′′ (r)
                                +µ(r)e′ (r) +                 ,                          (49)
                                                     2
and
                                     c′ (i(r)) = b(r) + e(r) ,                           (50)

subject to the following boundary conditions:

                                   b(r ∗ ) = min{ψ, ℓ} ,                                 (51)
                                  e(r ∗ ) = max{0, ℓ − ψ}                                (52)

and
                                           e′ (r ∗ ) = 0 .

                                                29
And the firm’s Tobin’s q is given by q(r) = b(r) + e(r).

     Eq. (50) reflects that the firm’s investment policy is chosen to maximize Tobin’s q. The
optimal default decision is chosen to maximize equity value, as one see from e′ (r ∗ ) = 0.


Appendix G. Stationary distributions of r and q(r)

     We now report the stationary distributions of the interest rate r and Tobin’s q. The
stationary distributions of the interest rate in the CIR model under both the physical and
risk-neutral measures are the Gamma distribution with different parameter values. The
probability density function (pdf) under the risk-neutral measure, fr (r; κ, ξ), is given by
                                           1             
                                                        2 2κξ/ν
                                                                2
                                                                    2κξ/ν 2 −1 −2κr/ν 2
                     fr (r; κ, ξ) =                2κ/ν           r           e         ,     (53)
                                      Γ (2κξ/ν 2 )

where Γ( · ) is the Gamma function. The pdf for r under the physical measure is then
fr (r; κP , ξ P ).
     Applying the standard probability density transformation technique, we have the following
probability density function for Tobin’s q under a given measure,
                                                          fr (r)
                                              fq (q) =             .                          (54)
                                                         |q ′ (r)|

Intuitively, the pdf fq (q) depends on the pdf fr (r) for the interest rate and inversely depends
on the sensitivity of Tobin’s q with respect to r. We plot the stationary distributions for
Tobin’s q under both measures in Panel B of Fig. 6. The distribution of r after risk
adjustments shifts to the right, as interest rates are on average higher and more transitory
under the risk-neutral measure than under the physical measure. As a result, the distribution
of q after risk adjustments shifts to the left due to the risk premium.

                                        [Insert Fig. 6 near here.]


Appendix H. Asymmetry, price wedge, and fixed costs

H.1         Model
     We extend the convex adjustment cost C(I, K) in our baseline model along three important
dimensions. First, empirically, downward adjustments of capital stock are often more costly

                                                      30
than upward adjustments. We capture this feature by assuming that the firm incurs asymmetric
convex adjustment costs in investment (I > 0) and divestment (I < 0) regions. Hall
(2001) uses the asymmetric adjustment cost in his study of aggregate market valuation
of capital and investment. Zhang (2005) uses this asymmetric adjustment cost in studying
investment-based cross-sectional asset pricing.
      Second, as in Abel and Eberly (1994), we assume a wedge between the purchase and
sale prices of capital, for example due to capital specificity and illiquidity premium. Much
empirical work shows the size of the wedge between the purchase and sale prices. Arrow
(1968, p. 2) states that “there will be many situations in which the sale of capital goods
cannot be accomplished at the same price as their purchase.” The wedge naturally depends on
the business cycles and market conditions.28 Let p+ and p− denote the respective purchase
and sale prices of capital. An economically sensible assumption is p+ ≥ p− ≥ 0 with an
implied wedge p+ − p− .
      Third, investment often incurs fixed costs. Fixed costs can capture investment indivisibilities,
increasing returns to the installation of new capital, and organizational restructuring during
periods of intensive investment. In addition, fixed costs significantly improve the empirical
fit of the model with the micro data. Inaction becomes optimal in certain regions. To ensure
that the firm does not grow out of fixed costs, we assume that the fixed cost is proportional to
its capital stock. See Hall (2004), Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006), and Riddick and Whited
(2009) for the same size-dependent fixed cost assumption.
      Following Abel and Eberly (1994), we write the region-dependent function c(i) as
                             
                             
                                     0,                 if i = 0 ,
                             
                      c(i) =   φ+ + p+ i + θ2+ i2 ,       if i > 0 ,                   (55)
                             
                             
                             
                               φ− + p− i + θ2− i2 ,       if i < 0 ,

where φ+ and φ− parameterize the fixed costs of investing and divesting, p+ and p− are the
price of purchasing and selling capital, and θ+ and θ− are the asymmetric convex adjustment
cost parameters. For i > 0, c(i) is convex in i. For i < 0, c(i) is also convex. Panels A and
B of Fig. 7 plot c(i) given in Eq. (55), and the marginal cost of investing c′ (i), respectively.
 28
    The estimates range from 0.6 to 1, depending on data sources, estimation methods, and model
specifications. See Pulvino (1998), Hennessy and Whited (2005), Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006), and
Warusawitharana (2008), for example.



                                                 31
c(i) is not continuous at i = 0 and, hence, c′ (i) is not defined at the origin (i = 0). For
illustrative simplicity, we set the liquidation value to zero, i.e., ℓ = 0.

H.2      Solution
   In general, the model solution has three distinct regions: (positive) investment, inaction,
and divestment. We use q+ (r), q0 (r) and q− (r) to denote Tobin’s q in these three regions,
respectively. Proposition 4 summarizes the main results.

Proposition 4 Tobin’s q in investment, inaction, and divestment regions, q+ (r), q0 (r), and
q− (r), respectively, solve the following three linked ODEs,
                                  (q+ (r) − p+ )2          ′       σ 2 (r) ′′
      (r + δ) q+ (r) = π − φ+ +                     + µ(r)q+ (r) +        q (r), if r < r, (56)
                                        2θ+                           2 +
                                         σ 2 (r) ′′
       (r + δ)q0 (r) = π + µ(r)q0′ (r) +        q (r),                        if r < r < r, (57)
                                            2 0
and
                                  (q− (r) − p− )2        ′       σ 2 (r) ′′
      (r + δ) q− (r) = π − φ− +                   + µ(r)q− (r) +        q (r),    if r > r .   (58)
                                        2θ−                         2 −
The endogenously determined cutoff interest rate levels for these three regions, r and r, satisfy
the boundary conditions
                                    (q+ (0) − p+ )2       ′
              π − φ+ − δq+ (0) +                     + κξq+ (0) = 0 ,                          (59)
                                          2θ+
                                     q+ (r) = q0 (r),    q0 (r) = q− (r) ,                     (60)
                                     ′
                                    q+ (r) = q0′ (r),      q0′ (r) = q−
                                                                      ′
                                                                        (r) ,                  (61)
                                     ′′
                                    q+  (r) = q0′′ (r),    q0′′ (r) = q−
                                                                       ′′
                                                                          (r) ,                (62)

and
                                        lim q− (r) = 0 .                                       (63)
                                        r→∞

The optimal investment-capital ratios, denoted as i+ (r), i0 (r), and i− (r), are given by
                                    q+ (r) − p+
                          i+ (r) =              ,          if r < r,                           (64)
                                         θ+
                           i0 (r) = 0,                     if r ≤ r ≤ r ,                      (65)

and
                                           p− − q− (r)
                              i− (r) = −               ,    if r > r .                         (66)
                                               θ−

                                                   32
   When r is sufficiently low (r < r), the firm optimally chooses to invest, I > 0. Investment
is proportional to q+ (r) − p+ , the wedge between Tobin’s q and purchase price of capital, p+ .
Tobin’s q in this region, q+ (r), solves the ODE (56). Condition (59) gives the firm behavior
at r = 0. The right boundary r is endogenous. Tobin’s q at r, q+ (r), satisfies the first set of
conditions in (60)-(62), i.e. q(r) is twice continuously differentiable at r.
   When r is sufficiently high (r > r), the firm divests, I < 0. Divestment is proportional
to p− − q− (r), the wedge between the sale price of capital, p− , and Tobin’s q. Tobin’s q in
the divestment region, q− (r), solves the ODE (58). Condition (63) states that the firm is
worthless as r → ∞, the right boundary condition. The left boundary for the divestment
region r is endogenous. Tobin’s q at r, q− (r), satisfies the second set of the conditions in
(60)-(62), i.e. q(r) is twice continuously differentiable at r.
   For r in the intermediate range (r ≤ r ≤ r), the firm optimally chooses to be inactive,
i(r) = 0, and, hence incurs no adjustment costs. Tobin’s q in this region thus behaves
likes assets in place and solves the linear ODE (57). The optimal thresholds r and r are
endogenously determined by conditions (60)-(62), as we discussed previously.
   Proposition 4 focuses on the case in which all three regions exist, i.e. 0 < r < r.

H.3      Three special cases
   We next study the impact of each friction on investment and Tobin’s q. For the baseline
case, we set θ+ = θ− = 2 (symmetric convex costs), p+ = p− = 1 (no price wedge) and
φ+ = φ− = 0 (no fixed costs). For each special case, we change only the key parameter of
interest and keep all other parameters the same as in the baseline case just described.

H.3.1    Asymmetric convex adjustment costs

   Much empirical evidence suggests that divestment is generally more costly than investment,
i.e., θ− > θ+ . We set the adjustment cost parameter θ+ = 2 for investment (I > 0) and
θ− = 2, 5, 20 for divestment (I < 0).
   Fig 8 shows that the divestment adjustment cost parameter θ− has a strong impact on
Tobin’s q and i(r) in the divestment region (high r), but almost no impact on q(r) and i(r) in
the positive investment region. When r is sufficiently high, the firm divests and changing θ−
has first-order effects on divestment. The higher the value of θ − , the more costly divestment


                                               33
and the less divestment activity. With θ− = 20, the firm is close to facing an irreversible
investment option and, hence, the optimal divestment level is close to zero. When r is
sufficiently low, it is optimal to invest. The divestment option is far out of the money and
thus changing θ− has negligible effects on valuation and investment.

                                  [Insert Fig. 8 near here.]

H.3.2    The wedge between purchase and sale prices of capital

   We now turn to the effects of price wedge. We normalize the purchase price at p+ = 1 and
consider two sale prices, p− = 0.8, 0.9, with implied wedge being 0.2 and 0.1, respectively.
We also plot the baseline case with no price wedge as a reference.
   Fig. 9 plots Tobin’s q and the investment-capital ratio i(r) for a firm facing a price
wedge. The price wedge leads to three distinct investment regions: investment (I > 0),
inaction (zero), and divestment (I < 0). With low interest rates, the firm invests for growth
and the asset sales option is sufficiently out of the money. Hence, price wedge has negligible
effects on Tobin’s q and investment. However, with high interest rates, the asset sales option
becomes in the money and divestment is optimal. The price wedge thus has significant
effects on divestment and value. With the wedge being p+ − p− = 0.2, the firm invests when
r ≤ 0.082 and divests when r ≥ 0.141. For intermediate values of r (0.082 ≤ r ≤ 0.141),
inaction is optimal. In this range, the marginal cost of investment or divestment justifies
neither purchasing nor selling capital due to the price wedge. Inaction is generated here
by the price wedge, not fixed costs. Finally, investment/divestment activities and inaction
significantly depend on the price wedge. For example, the inaction region narrows from
(0.082, 0.141) to (0.082, 0.109) when the price wedge decreases from 20% to 10%.

                                  [Insert Fig. 9 near here.]

H.3.3    Fixed costs and optimal inaction

   We now study two settings with fixed costs: fixed costs for divestment only (φ+ = 0, φ− =
0.01) and symmetric fixed costs for both investment and divestment (φ+ = φ− = 0.01). We
also plot the case with no fixed costs (φ+ = φ− = 0) as a reference.
   Fig. 10 plots Tobin’s average q and the investment-capital ratio i(r) under fixed costs.
With fixed costs for divestment, φ− > 0, we have three regions for i(r). For sufficiently low

                                             34
interest rates (r ≤ 0.082), optimal investment is positive and is almost unaffected by φ− . For
sufficiently high r (r ≥ 0.142), divestment is optimal. The firm divests more aggressively with
fixed costs of divestment than without. Intuitively, the firm’s more aggressive divestment
strategy economizes fixed costs of divestment. In addition, fixed costs generate an inaction
region, 0.082 ≤ r ≤ 0.142. The impact of fixed costs of divestment is more significant on
Tobin’s q in medium to high r region than in the low r region.

                                   [Insert Fig. 10 near here.]

   Now we incrementally introduce fixed costs for investment by changing φ+ from 0 to 0.01,
while holding φ− = 0.01. We have three distinct regions for i(r). For high r, r ≥ 0.142, the
firm divests. Tobin’s q and i(r) in this region remain almost unchanged by φ+ . For low r,
r ≤ 0.038, the firm invests less with φ+ = 0.01 than with φ+ = 0.
   Introducing the fixed costs φ+ discourages investment, lowers Tobin’s q, shifts the inaction
region to the left, and widens the inaction region. The lower the interest rate, the stronger
the effects of φ+ on Tobin’s q, investment, and the inaction region.

H.4      Irreversibility
   Investment is often irreversible, or at least costly to reverse after capital is installed. Much
work is motivated by the irreversibility of capital investment. Arrow (1968) is a pioneering
study in a deterministic environment. Our model generates irreversible investment as a
special case. We have three ways to deliver irreversibility within our general framework.
Intuitively, they all work to make divestment very costly. We can set the resale price
of installed capital to zero (p− = 0), making capital completely worthless if liquidated.
Alternatively, we can set the adjustment cost for either convex or lumpy divestment to
infinity, (i.e., θ− = ∞, φ− = ∞). The three cases all deliver identical solutions for both the
divestment and the positive investment regions. Fig. 11 plots Tobin’s q and the optimal
investment-capital ratio i(r) under irreversibility. As in our baseline model, investment
varies significantly with the level of the interest rate. Ignoring interest rate dynamics induces
significant error for Tobin’s q and investment.

   To explain the derivation for Proposition 4, with homogeneity property, we conjecture
that there are three regions (positive, zero, and negative investment), separated by two

                                               35
endogenous cutoff interest rate levels r and r. Firm value in the three regions can be written
as                              
                                 K · q− (r) ,           if   r > r,
                     V (K, r) =   K · q0 (r) ,           if   r ≤ r ≤ r,
                                
                                  K · q+ (r) ,           if   r < r,
At r and r, V (K, r) satisfies value-matching, smooth pasting, and super contact conditions,
which imply Eqs. (60), (61), and (62), respectively. Eq. (59) is the natural boundary
condition at r = 0, and Eq. (63) reflects that firm value vanishes as r → ∞. Other details
are essentially the same as those in Proposition 1.
     When the fixed cost for investment φ+ is sufficiently large, there is no investment region,
i.e., r = 0. In addition, the condition at r = 0, Eq. (59), is replaced by the condition

                                   π − δq0 (0) + κξq0′ (0) = 0 .                            (67)

In sum, for the case with inaction and divestment regions, the solution is given by the
linked ODEs (57)-(58) subject to Eq. (67), the free-boundary conditions for the endogenous
threshold r given as the second set of conditions in Eqs. (60)-(62), and the limit condition
(63).
     Similarly, if the cost of divestment φ− is sufficiently high, the firm has no divestment
region, i.e. r = ∞. The model solution is given by the linked ODEs (56)-(57) subject to (59),
the free-boundary conditions for r given as the first set of conditions, and limr→∞ q0 (r) = 0 .


Appendix I. Serially correlated productivity shocks

     We now extend our baseline convex model to allow for serially correlated productivity
shocks. Let st denote the state (regime) at time t. The expected productivity in state s at
any time t, π(st ), can take on only one of the two possible values, i.e., π(st ) ∈ {π L , π H },
where π L > 0 and π H > π L are constant. Let s ∈ {H, L} denote the current state and s−
refer to the other state. Over the time period (t, t + ∆t), under the risk-neutral measure,
the firm’s expected productivity changes from π s to π s− with probability ζ s ∆t and stays
unchanged at πs with the remaining probability 1 − ζ s ∆t. The change of the regime could
be recurrent. That is, the transition intensities from either state, ζ H and ζ L , are strictly
positive. The incremental productivity shock dX after risk adjustments (under the risk



                                                 36
neutral measure) is given by

                              dXt = π(st− )dt + ǫ(st− )dZt ,       t ≥ 0.                          (68)

The firm’s operating profit dYt over the same period (t, t + dt) is also given by Eq. (6) as
in the baseline model. The homogeneity property continues to hold. Again, for illustrative
simplicity, we set the liquidation value to zero, i.e., ℓ = 0. We summarize the results in
Proposition 5.

Proposition 5 Tobin’s q in two regimes, qH (r) and qL (r), solves the linked ODEs

                                                            σ 2 (r) ′′
rqs (r) = π s −c(is (r))+(is (r)−δ)qs (r)+µ(r)qs′ (r)+             q (r)+ζ s (qs− (r)−qs (r)), s = H, L,
                                                               2 s
                                                                                                    (69)
subject to the boundary conditions

             π s − c(is (0)) + (is (0) − δ)qs (0) + κξqs′ (0) + ζ s (qs− (0) − qs (0)) = 0 ,       (70)

and
                                             lim qs (r) = 0 .                                      (71)
                                             r→∞

The optimal investment-capital ratios in two regimes iH (r) and iL (r) is by

                                             qs (r) − 1
                                  is (r) =              ,   s = H, L.                              (72)
                                                  θ

   Fig. 12 plots Tobin’s average q and the investment-capital ratio i(r) for both the high- and
the low-productivity regimes. We choose the expected (risk-neutral) productivity, π H = 0.2
and π L = 0.14, set the (risk-neutral) transition intensities at ζ L = ζ H = 0.03. The expected
productivity has first-order effects on firm value and investment. Both qH (r) and iH (r) are
significantly larger than qL (r) and iL (r), respectively. In addition, both qH (r) and qL (r)
are decreasing and convex as in the baseline model. Our model with serially correlated
productivity shocks can be extended to allow for richer adjustment cost frictions such as
the price wedge and fixed costs as we have done in Appendix H, and multiple-state Markov
chain processes for productivity shocks.




                                                    37
Appendix J. Data construction

J.1       Aggregate data
    We use data for aggregate investment I and capital stock K from the national account
and fixed asset tables available from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). We construct
                                                                                          It
annual series of the aggregate investment rate, denoted by IK, as IKt =             0.5×(Kt−1 +Kt )
                                                                                                    ,
where investment I is gross private nonresidential fixed investment from NIPA Table 1.1.5
and capital K is nonresidential fixed asset from NIPA fixed asset Table 1.1. Investment I and
capital K are scaled by the annual implicit price deflator for the gross private nonresidential
fixed investment, reported in NIPA Table 1.1.9.
    We obtain financial information from Compustat for US publicly held companies with
information for two or more consecutive years. We use fiscal year annual company data
from balance sheets, income statements, and cash flow statements, and we omit observations
with negative total assets (AT ) or current assets (ACT ). Utilities and financial firms are
excluded from the sample. Specifically, We omit firms whose primary SIC code is between
4900 and 4999 (utility firms) or between 6000 and 6999 (financial firms).

J.2       Firm-level data
    The firm-level investment rate (i.e., the change in gross capital stock) is defined as IKi,t =
    CAP Xi,t
0.5×(Ki,t−1 +Ki,t )
                      where K is the firm’s net property, plant and equipment (P P ENT ) and
CAP X is its capital expenditure. Both K and CAP X are scaled by the annual implicit price
deflator of gross private nonresidential fixed investment, reported in NIPA Table 1.1.9. Our
firm-level control variables are book leverage, defined as BLev = (DLC + DLT T )/(DLC +
DLT T + CEQ), where DLC is debt in current liabilities, DLT T is long-term debt, and
CEQ is the Compustat common book equity; return on assets (ROA), calculated as ROA =
Earnings/AT , where Earnings is defined as the sum of income before extraordinary items
(IB), interest expense (XINT ), and income statement deferred taxes (T XDI); and T ang
= P P EGT /AT, where P P EGT is gross property, plant, and equipment. We further control
for firm size, proxied via the logarithm of sales. In the unreported robustness checks, we
control for the Tobin’s q, which is computed as MV /AT , where MV is the market value of
assets and is given by MV = AT + ME − CEQ − T XDB, ME is the CRSP market value


                                                38
of equity (calculated as the December stock price times shares outstanding), and T XDB
denotes the balance sheet deferred taxes. All the variables are winsorized at the 0.5 and 99.5
percentiles.




                                             39
                    A. investment-capital ratio: i(r)                              B. average q: q(r)
        0.5                                                            2
                                               θ=2
                                               θ=5
        0.4                                                          1.8
                                               θ = 20

        0.3                                                          1.6


        0.2                                                          1.4


       0.1
                                                                     1.2

            0
                                                                       1

       -0.1
                0        0.05           0.1             0.15               0      0.05           0.1           0.15
                            interest rate r                                          interest rate r



Fig. 1. The investment-capital ratio i(r) and Tobin’s average q, q(r).




                        A. duration: D(r)                                      B. user cost of capital: u(r)
       18                                                           0.45
                                              θ=2
       16                                     θ=5
                                                                     0.4
                                              θ = 20
       14

       12                                                           0.35

       10
                                                                     0.3
        8

        6                                                           0.25

        4
                                                                     0.2
        2

        0                                                           0.15
            0          0.05           0.1               0.15               0     0.05           0.1            0.15
                          interest rate r                                           interest rate r



Fig. 2. Duration for firm value D(r) and the user cost of capital u(r).




                                                               40
                                         bond q: b(r)
                      1.2


                     1.1


                       1


                      0.9


                      0.8


                      0.7


                      0.6


                      0.5

                           0        0.05                0.1     0.15
                                        interest rate r



Fig. 3. The bond q, b(r). Parameter values are ψ = 0.5, ℓ = 0.9, α = 0.1, and ρ = 0.2.




                                              41
                   A. investment-capital ratio: i(r)                                    B. firm q: q(r)
                                                                   2

    0.5                                                           1.8
    0.4
                                                                  1.6
    0.3
                                                                  1.4
    0.2
                                                                  1.2
    0.1
                                                                   1
      0
                                                                  0.8
      0.75       0.8      0.85      0.9       0.95     1            0.75       0.8      0.85      0.9       0.95   1
              relative bond price: brelative (r)                            relative bond price: brelative (r)

                   C. investment-capital ratio: i(r)                                    D. firm q: q(r)
                                                                   2

    0.5                                                           1.8
    0.4
                                                                  1.6
    0.3
                                                                  1.4
    0.2
                                                                  1.2
    0.1
                                                                   1
      0
                                                                  0.8
          0           0.1             0.2              0.3              0           0.1             0.2            0.3
                        yield spreads: y(r)                                           yield spreads: y(r)



Fig. 4. The effects of relative bond price and yield spreads on i(r) and firm Tobin’s q,
q(r). Parameter values are ψ = 0.5, ℓ = 0.9, α = 0.1, ρ = 0.2.




                                                             42
              A. value of assets in place: a(r)                               B. value of growth opportunities: g(r)
    1.5
                                                                                                                θ=2
                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                                θ=5
    1.4
                                                                                                                θ = 20
                                                                    0.4
    1.3


    1.2                                                             0.3


    1.1                                                             0.2

     1
                                                                    0.1

    0.9
                                                                      0
          0           0.05             0.1              0.15              0            0.05             0.1              0.15
                         interest rate r                                                  interest rate r



Fig. 5. Valuing assets in place a(r) and growth opportunities g(r).




                    A. stationary distributions of r                                 B. stationary distributions of q
    20                                                                4
                                 physical measure
                                 risk neutral measure               3.5

    15                                                                3

                                                                    2.5

    10                                                                2

                                                                    1.5

     5                                                                1

                                                                    0.5

     0                                                                0
          0   0.1         0.2       0.3      0.4        0.5               0             0.5               1               1.5
                          interest rate r                                                     average q: q(r)



Fig. 6. Stationary distributions for r and Tobin’s average q.




                                                               43
                A. total scaled adjumtment costs: c(i)                                 B. marginal scaled adjumtment costs: c′ (i)




                                                                           1




    0                              o
                                   0                                                                    0
                                   i                                                                    i



Fig. 7. The cost of investing c(i) and marginal cost of investing c′ (i).




                             A. average q: q(r)                                          B. investment-capital ratio: i(r)
        2                                                                  0.5
                                                    θ− = 2
     1.8                                            θ− = 5                 0.4
                                                    θ − = 20

     1.6                                                                   0.3


     1.4                                                                   0.2


     1.2                                                                  0.1


        1                                                                      0


     0.8                                                                  -0.1


     0.6                                                                  -0.2
            0         0.05          0.1           0.15         0.2                 0        0.05         0.1         0.15      0.2
                              interest rate r                                                      interest rate r



Fig. 8. Tobin’s average q and i(r) with asymmetric convex adjustment costs.




                                                                     44
                     A. average q: q(r)                                      B. investment-capital ratio: i(r)
      2                                                            0.5
                                           p− = 1
    1.8                                     p− = 0.9               0.4
                                            p− = 0.8

    1.6                                                            0.3


    1.4                                                            0.2


    1.2                                                           0.1


     1                                                               0


    0.8                                                           -0.1


    0.6                                                           -0.2
          0   0.05          0.1           0.15         0.2               0     0.05         0.1         0.15     0.2
                      interest rate r                                                 interest rate r



Fig. 9. Tobin’s q and the investment-capital ratio i(r) with price wedges.




                     A. average q: q(r)                                      B. investment-capital ratio: i(r)
      2                                                            0.5
                                 φ+ = φ− = 0
    1.8                         φ+ = 0, φ− = 0.01                  0.4
                                 φ+ = φ− = 0.01

    1.6                                                            0.3

                                                                   0.2
    1.4

                                                                  0.1
    1.2

                                                                     0
     1
                                                                  -0.1
    0.8
                                                                  -0.2
    0.6
          0   0.05          0.1           0.15         0.2               0     0.05         0.1         0.15     0.2
                      interest rate r                                                 interest rate r



Fig. 10. Tobin’s q and i(r) with fixed adjustment costs.




                                                             45
                     A. average q: q(r)                                          B. investment-capital ratio: i(r)
      2                                                               0.5
                                             p− = 0
    1.8                                     φ− = ∞
                                            θ− = ∞                    0.4

    1.6
                                                                      0.3
    1.4

                                                                      0.2
    1.2


     1                                                                0.1

    0.8
                                                                        0
    0.6
          0   0.05          0.1           0.15            0.2                0     0.05         0.1         0.15            0.2
                      interest rate r                                                     interest rate r



Fig. 11. Tobin’s q and i(r) with irreversible investment.




                     A. average q: q(r)                                          B. investment-capital ratio: i(r)
                                                                     0.15
    1.6                                          qL (r)                                                            iL (r)
                                                 qH (r)                                                            iH (r)
                                                                      0.1
    1.4


    1.2                                                              0.05


     1                                                                  0


    0.8
                                                                     -0.05

    0.6
                                                                     -0.1
          0   0.05          0.1           0.15            0.2                0     0.05         0.1         0.15            0.2
                      interest rate r                                                     interest rate r



Fig. 12. Tobin’s q and i(r) with serially correlated productivity shocks.




                                                                46
Table 1
Descriptive statistics
   This table reports the annual average value (mean) and standard deviation of the variables of interests
from 1963 to 2014. Panel A reports the aggregate statistics. Investment rate (IK ) is the real gross private
nonresidential fixed investment scaled by real private nonresidential fixed asset. Baa-Tb10y is the Moody’s
Baa corporate bond yield in excess of the ten-year Treasury rate. Baa-Aaa is the Moody’s Baa bond
yield in excess of Moody’s Aaa yield. Relative bond price (Rela BP ) is defined as 0.1+10-year       Treasury rate
                                                                                            0.1+Baa bond yield
following Philippon (2009). Idiosyncratic volatility (IdioV ) is the cross-sectional return volatility based on
the Center for Research in Security Prices. Book leverage (BLev ) is the total liabilities of the nonfinancial
corporate business sector from the flow of funds scaled by the stock of capital from National Income and
Product Accounts. The price-to-dividend ratio (PD ) is the ratio between Standard & Poor (S&P) composite
stock price index and the sum of all dividends accruing to stocks in the index from Robert Shiller’s website
(http://www.econ.yale.edu/˜shiller/data.htm). Panel B reports firm-level statistics. Investment rate (IK ) is
capital expenditure over net property, plant, and equipment. Book leverage (BLev ) is total liabilities scaled
by the sum of total liabilities and the book value of common equity. Return on assets (ROA) is earnings over
total assets. Tangibility (Tang) is gross property, plant, and equipment scaled by total assets. Firm size is
measured by logarithm of sales (Sales).

                                Variable  Mean Standard deviation
                                        Panel A: Aggregate
                               IK           0.11              0.01
                               Baa-Tb10y 2.03%              0.74%
                               Baa-Aaa    1.03%             0.42%
                               Rela BP      0.89              0.04
                               IdioV        0.56              0.15
                               BLev         0.48              0.06
                               PD          37.28             16.80
                                        Panel B: Firm level
                               IK           0.29              0.25
                               BLev         0.29              0.24
                               ROA          0.09              0.05
                               Tang         0.54              0.37
                               Sales        0.49              2.31




                                                       47
Table 2
Predicting firm-level investments
    This table reports the predictive regression results of firm-level investments. Relative bond price (Rela
BP ) is defined as 0.1+10-year Treasury rate
                      0.1+Baa bond yield     following Philippon (2009). Baa-Tb10y is the Moody’s Baa corporate
bond yield in excess of the ten-year Treasury rate. Baa-Aaa is the Moody’s Baa bond yield in excess of
Moody’s Aaa yield. Investment rate (IK ) is capital expenditure over net property, plant, and equipment.
Book leverage (BLev ) is total liabilities scaled by the sum of total liabilities and the book value of common
equity. Return on assets (ROA) is earnings over total assets. Tangibility (Tang) is gross property, plant, and
equipment scaled by total assets. Firm size is measured by logarithm of sales (Sales). All the regressions
include the firm fixed effect. Standard errors are clustered by firm and by time. Sample is from 1963 to
2014. t-statistics are in parentheses.

        Variable              (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)
        Rela BP               0.906                                 0.390
                            (9.310)                               (5.229)
        Baa-Tb10y                        -4.326                                 -2.229
                                       (-6.710)                               (-5.627)
        Baa-Aaa                                      -2.627                                   -2.865
                                                   (-1.891)                                 (-4.253)
        BLev                                                  -0.158    -0.157                -0.156
                                                           (-14.523) (-14.541)             (-14.698)
        ROA                                                    0.649     0.660                 0.690
                                                            (22.434) (22.524)               (23.139)
        Tang                                                  -0.238    -0.240                -0.244
                                                           (-19.917) (-19.903)             (-20.047)
        Sales                                                 -0.035    -0.037                -0.041
                                                           (-12.517) (-13.461)             (-16.817)
        Observations       166,293     166,293     166,293   127,528   127,528               127,528
        R2                    0.02        0.02        0.00      0.14      0.14                  0.14




                                                      48
Table 3
Predicting aggregate investments
    This table reports the predictive regression results of aggregate investment. Investment rate (IK ) is the
real gross private nonresidential fixed investment scaled by real private nonresidential fixed asset. Relative
bond price (Rela BP ) is defined as 0.1+10-year     Treasury rate
                                            0.1+Baa bond yield    following Philippon (2009). Baa-Tb10y is the
Moody’s Baa corporate bond yield in excess of the ten-year Treasury rate. Baa-Aaa is the Moody’s Baa
bond yield in excess of Moody’s Aaa yield. Tb3m is the real three-month Treasury rate. Idiosyncratic
volatility (IdioV ) is the cross-sectional return volatility based on the Center for Research in Security Prices.
Book leverage (BLev ) is the total liabilities of the nonfinancial corporate business sector from the flow of
funds scaled by the stock of capital from National Income and Product Accounts. The price-to-dividend ratio
(PD ) is the ratio between Standard & Poor (S&P) composite stock price index and the sum of all dividends
accruing to stocks in the index from Robert Shiller’s website (http://www.econ.yale.edu/˜shiller/data.htm).
The slopes of PD are multiplied by a hundred. In parentheses are heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation
consistent t-statistics (Newey-West.) Sample is from 1963 to 2014.

            Variable           (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
            Rela BP            0.107                                0.102
                             (4.373)                              (2.554)
            Baa-Tb10y                     -0.678                                -0.598
                                        (-4.825)                              (-3.335)
            Baa-Aaa                                    -1.197                               -0.984
                                                     (-2.693)                             (-4.453)
            Tb3m                                                 0.152    0.176              0.231
                                                               (2.107) (3.334)             (5.229)
            IdioV                                               -0.001    0.006              0.004
                                                              (-0.113) (0.552)             (0.461)
            BLev                                                -0.042   -0.053             -0.076
                                                              (-1.728) (-2.642)           (-4.203)
            PD                                                   0.040    0.030              0.030
                                                               (4.916) (4.202)             (3.066)
            R2                 0.271       0.305        0.294    0.620    0.653              0.682




                                                       49
