                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        LEVERAGE AND THE FORECLOSURE CRISIS

                                             Dean Corbae
                                            Erwan Quintin

                                        Working Paper 19323
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19323


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2013




We wish to thank Daphne Chen and Jake Zhao who have provided outstanding research assistance.
Mark Bils, Morris Davis, Carlos Garriga, Kris Gerardi, Francisco Gomes, Francois Ortalo-Magne,
and Paul Willen provided many useful suggestions. We also wish to thank seminar participants at
the Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Dallas, Minneapolis, and New Zealand as well as the Cowles Conference
on General Equilibrium, the Econometric Society Meetings, the Gerzensee Study Center, Institute
for Fiscal Studies, NBER Summer Institute Group on Aggregate Implications of Microeconomic Consumption
Behavior, SED conference, University of Auckland, Australian National University, Cambridge University,
European University Institute, University of Maryland, University of Melbourne, NYU Stern, Ohio
State University, Oxford University, Queens University, University of Rochester, University of Wisconsin,
and Wharton for their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19323.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Dean Corbae and Erwan Quintin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Leverage and the Foreclosure Crisis
Dean Corbae and Erwan Quintin
NBER Working Paper No. 19323
August 2013
JEL No. E44,G21,R3

                                             ABSTRACT

How much of the recent rise in foreclosures can be explained by the large number of high-leverage
mortgage contracts originated during the housing boom? We present a model where heterogeneous
households select from a set of mortgage contracts and choose whether to default on their payments
given realizations of income and housing price shocks. The set of mortgage contracts consists of loans
with high downpayments and loans with low downpayments. We run an experiment where the use
of low downpayment loans is initially limited by payment-to-income requirements but then becomes
unrestricted for 8 years. The relaxation of approval standards causes homeownership rates, high-leverage
originations and the frequency of high interest rate loans to rise much like they did in the US between
1998-2006. When home values fall by the magnitude observed in the US from 2007-08, default rates
increase by over 180% as they do in the data. Two distinct counterfactual experiments where approval
standards remain the same throughout suggest that the increased availability of high-leverage loans
prior to the crisis can explain between 40% to 65% of the initial rise in foreclosure rates. Furthermore,
we run policy experiments which suggest that recourse could have had significant dampening effects
during the crisis.


Dean Corbae
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin, Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
corbae@ssc.wisc.edu

Erwan Quintin
University of Wisconsin-Madison
equintin@bus.wisc.edu
1         Introduction
The share of high-leverage loans in mortgage originations started rising sharply in the late
1990s.1 Pinto (2010, see ﬁgure 1) calculates that among purchase loans insured by the Federal
Housing Administration (FHA) or purchased by Government Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs)
the fraction of originations with cumulative leverage in excess of 97% of the home value was
under 5% in 1990 but rose to almost 40% in 2007. Gerardi et. al (2008) present similar
evidence using a dataset of mortgages sold into mortgage-backed securities marketed as “sub-
prime.” Among these subprime loans, transactions with a cumulative loan-to-value (CLTV)2
represented just 10 percent of all originations in 2000 but exceeded 50% of originations in
2006.3
        The increased availability of loans with low downpayments made it possible for more
households to obtain the ﬁnancing necessary to purchase a house. At the same time however,
because these contracts are characterized by little equity early in the life of the loan, they
are prone to default when home prices fall. Not surprisingly then, (see, again, Gerardi et al.,
2008 (Figure 4), or Mayer et. al., 2009, among many others) mortgages issued during the
recent housing boom with high leverage have defaulted at much higher frequency than other
loans since home prices began their collapse in late 2006.
        How much of the rise in foreclosures that started in 2007 can be attributed to the increased
originations of high-leverage mortgages during the housing boom? To answer this question,
we describe a housing model where the importance of high-leverage loans for default rates
can be measured. Households move stochastically through three stages of life and make their
housing and mortgage decisions in the middle stage. Two types of ﬁxed-payment mortgages
    1
      As Foote et al. (2012, section 2) among others point out, high-leverage loans are not new in the United
States. Our paper is about the fact that their frequency increased in the years leading up to the foreclosure
crisis.
    2
      The CLTV at origination is the sum of the face value of all loans secured by the purchased property
divided by the purchase price.
    3
      Mayer et al. (2009) among others discuss similar evidence. These studies also point out that the use
of secondary “piggy-back” loans increased markedly during that period. See also Duca et. al. (2011) and
Bokhari et. al. (2013).



                                                     2
        Figure 1: FHA and GSE purchase loans with a cumulative LTV above 97%




            40.00%


            35.00%


            30.00%


            25.00%


            20.00%


            15.00%


            10.00%


             5.00%


             0.00%
                     1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007




Source: Pinto (2010). Fannie Mae’s purchase loans are the proxy for conventional loans.
FHA loans are classiﬁed according to the ﬁrst mortgage’s size only.

are available to households: a contract with a 20% downpayment and a contract with no
downpayment. Mortgage holders can terminate their contract before maturity. We consider
a mortgage termination to be a foreclosure if it occurs in a state where the house value is
below the mortgage’s balance (that is, the agent’s home equity is negative) as a result of
aggregate and/or idiosyncratic home price shocks, or where the agent’s income realization is
such that they cannot make the mortgage payment they would owe for the period.
   Foreclosures are costly for lenders because of the associated transaction costs and because
they typically occur when home equity is negative. As a result, intermediaries demand higher
yields from agents whose asset and income position make foreclosure more likely. In fact,


                                                            3
                             Figure 2: The housing boom and bust



            200                                                                                   1.60

            190
                                                                                                  1.40
            180
                                                                                                  1.20
            170
                                                                                                  1.00
            160

            150                                                                                   0.80

            140
                                                                                                  0.60
            130
                                                                                                  0.40
            120
                                                                                                  0.20
            110

            100                                                                                   0.00
               1990           1995                 2000              2005                  2010
                         RealHomePriceIndex(leftaxis)    Foreclosurestarts(rightaxis)




Source: The real home price index is the US S&P/Case-Shiller Index. Foreclosure starts are
from the Mortgage Bankers Association’s National Delinquency Survey and are the reported
number of mortgages for which foreclosure proceedings are started in a given quarter divided
by the initial stock of mortgages.

intermediaries do not issue loans to some agents because expected default losses are too high.
In particular, our model is consistent with the fact that agents at lower asset and income
positions are less likely to become homeowners, face more expensive borrowing terms, and
are more likely to default on their loan obligations.
   We approximate the course of events depicted in ﬁgures 1 and 2 using a three-stage
experiment. The ﬁrst stage is a long period of moderate real house prices with “tight”
approval standards that lasts until the late 1990s. Between 1998 and 2006, approval standards
are relaxed and, at the same time, aggregate home prices rise. In 2007, aggregate home prices

                                                          4
and approval standards return to their pre-boom level. We think of the beginning of this last
stage as the crisis period.
       We model changes in approval standards as exogenous changes in payment-to-income
(PTI) requirements. A version of our model calibrated to capture key features of pre-boom
US housing markets predicts that, following the relaxation of approval standards, the use of
low-downpayment mortgages rises to a peak of 37% at the onset of the crisis, which is in line
with the evidence displayed in ﬁgure 1. Likewise, home-ownership rates rise markedly as new
households gain access to mortgage markets.
       The aggregate home price collapse that takes place at the end of the boom stage in our
model causes default rates to increase by 182% in the ﬁrst two years of the crisis, accounting
for over 98% of the rise in the data. In a counterfactual experiment where PTI requirements
are left unchanged throughout the experiment, the use of high-downpayment loans changes
little during the boom, and default rates only rise by 64%. In a second counterfactual where
both approval standards and home values are left unchanged in the few years preceding the
crisis, a price drop of the same relative magnitude as in the baseline experiment causes default
rates to rise by 111%. In that sense, in our model, 40% to 65% of the initial spike in foreclosure
rates can be attributed to the greater availability of high-leverage loans during the boom.
       Importantly, while approval standards do change during the boom period we simulate, this
does not imply that underwriting standards become poor during that period. At all times
in this experiment, loans are priced correctly. Lenders fully understand the environment in
which they are writing mortgages and, ex ante, all loans imply zero economic proﬁts. Default
rates spike when home values collapse because, for recently issued loans, an early home value
correction is the worst possible realization of the underlying process.4 We do not model
the possibility that lenders had the wrong stochastic process in mind. Our results say that
even with fully rational expectations, the large aggregate home value correction that took
   4
    Since the worst-case scenario materializes during the crisis, the intermediary does experience ex-post losses
on the loans it wrote shortly before the crisis. Had it known (or assigned a high probability to the possibility)
that aggregate home prices were going to fall, the intermediary would have priced loans diﬀerently.




                                                       5
place in late 2007 was enough to generate a default spike of a magnitude quite similar to
what transpired at least initially. An interesting question we leave for future work is whether
incorrect expectations may have magniﬁed the size of the crisis and the role of leverage further.
   In the model, the increased use of high-downpayment loans magniﬁes the eﬀect of the home
price correction for two fundamental reasons. First and most obviously, more households ﬁnd
themselves in negative equity territory following the aggregate shock since average equity
levels are lower before the shock when low downpayment mortgages are more frequent. But
this equity eﬀect is compounded by the selection eﬀects associated with broadening access
to mortgage markets. Relaxing approval standards allows agents with lower income and
assets to enter mortgage markets. These new borrowers are inherently more prone to default.
As discussed above, default typically involves a shock other than a pure home value shock.
Selection eﬀects compound the equity eﬀect of high-leverage by populating mortgage markets
with borrowers that are more likely to face payment diﬃculties.
   We show in section 6.2 that new entrants into mortgage markets and households who opt
for low-downpayment loans rather than high-downpayment loans when approval standards
are relaxed account for much of the increase in default rates following the home-price collapse.
Measuring the role of leverage in the foreclosure crisis requires predicting what housing choices
and default decision these new entrants and loan-type switchers would have made during the
boom period under stricter approval scenarios. We use our model makes predictions for these
endogenous objects.
   A fully articulated economic model also makes it possible to discuss the potential role of
policy in the crisis. In addition to measuring the role leverage may have played in the crisis,
we use our model to ask a policy question motivated by the observation that the extent of
lender recourse varies signiﬁcantly across economies. Feldstein (2008) and others have argued
that the fact that recourse is highly limited in law or in practice in most US states greatly
magniﬁed the impact of the home value correction on default rates. In our model, broadening
recourse to include non-housing assets turns out to have limited eﬀects on default rates in
the long-run. On the one hand, the risk of default falls due to harsher punishment for a

                                               6
given set of asset and income characteristics at origination and average recoveries rise, which
lowers interest rates at origination. On the other hand, lower payments allow agents with
lower income and assets to enter mortgage markets. This eﬀect on the composition of the
borrower pool turns out to mostly oﬀset the direct, loan-level eﬀect of recourse on default
in the long-run, and long-run default rates only fall by 4% or so. This part of our paper is
closely related to Hatchondo et. al. (2013). Like us they use a life-cycle model to simulate
the eﬀect of broader recourse on default rates, but they broaden recourse to include wage
garnishment and, as a result, ﬁnd a larger eﬀect of recourse on default.5
      The fact that the long-term eﬀect of recourse on default is small in our model could
suggest that broader recourse would have done little to mitigate the foreclosure crisis. That
intuition turns out to be wrong, however. Repeating the same 3-stage experiment as above
in an economy with recourse leads to a much smaller ﬂare-up of default rates. By lowering
interest rates and mortgage payments in the pre-boom period, broader recourse means that
relaxed approval standards have much less impact on households’ ability to participate in
mortgage markets. Furthermore, given the increased cost of default for borrowers, the use of
low-downpayment loans becomes riskier. Leverage is thus less prevalent at the onset of the
crisis, and, as a result, the impact of the home value correction on default rates falls.
      As ﬁgure 2 shows, default rates brieﬂy retreated in late 2007 before experiencing a second
spike, even though home prices appear to have stabilized by that point. A possible explanation
for this second spike is the fact that, as Saez (2013) among many others document, the housing
crisis was followed by decline in average household income of over 15% between 2007 and 2009.
We show that an aggregate income shock of that size can cause a second spike in default rates
of the right magnitude. Furthermore, the same counterfactuals as above suggest that the
same aggregate income shock would have caused a much smaller increase in defaults had
access to high-leverage loans been more restricted during the boom. In other words, the
frequency of high-leverage loans during the boom increased the sensitivity of default rates to
both aggregate home price and aggregate income shocks.
  5
      They also simulate the impact of down-payment regulations on default rates.


                                                      7
   Our paper is related to several other structural models. The idea that mortgage innovation
may have implications for foreclosures is taken up in Garriga and Schlagenhauf (2009). They
quantify the impact of an unanticipated aggregate house price decline on default rates where
there is cross-subsidization of mortgages within but not across mortgage types. A key
diﬀerence between our paper and theirs is that we consider a menu of diﬀerent terms on
contracts both within and across mortgage types.6 Our paper is more closely related to Guler
(2008) where intermediaries oﬀer a menu of FRMs at endogenously chosen downpayment rates
or Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2009) where intermediaries oﬀer a menu of inﬁnite maturity
interest-only mortgage contracts in which borrowers accumulate no equity over time. Guler
studies the impact of an innovation to the screening technology on default rates and Chatterjee
and Eyigungor study the eﬀect of an endogenous price drop arising from an overbuilding
shock. Mitman (2012) considers the interaction of recourse and bankruptcy on the decision
to default in an environment with one period mortgages and costless reﬁnance. Campbell and
Cocco (2012) study the eﬀect of diﬀerences in loan-to-value and loan-to-income on the default
decision in an environment with a rich structure of aggregate shocks but where households
are identical at the time of contract selection.
   Section 2 lays out the economic environment. Section 3 describes optimal behavior on
the part of all agents and deﬁnes an equilibrium. Section 4 discusses our parameterization
procedure. Section 5 characterizes equilibrium behavior across diﬀerent long run equilibria
to understand contract selection, default, mortgage pricing, and the role of recourse policy.
Section 6 presents our main transition experiment. Section 7 concludes.
   6
     Here we extend the one-period pricing framework of Chatterjee, et al. (2007) to long term but ﬁnite
contracts.




                                                   8
2     Environment

2.1    Demographics, Tastes, and Technologies

Time is discrete and inﬁnite. The economy is populated by a continuum of households and by
a ﬁnancial intermediary. Each period a constant mass of households are born. We normalize
this constant mass so that the unique invariant size of the population is one. Households move
stochastically through four stages: youth (Y), mid-age (M), old-age (O), and death (D). At
the beginning of each period, young households become mid-aged with probability ρM , mid-
age households become old with probability ρO , and old households die with probability ρD
and are replaced by young households.
    Each period when young or mid-aged, households receive an idiosyncratic shock to their
earnings yt denominated in terms of the unique consumption good. For η ∈ {Y, M}, these
income shocks follow a Markov process with ﬁnite support Y η ⊂ IR+ and transition matrices
P η . Earnings shocks obey a law of large numbers. Agents begin life at an income level drawn
from the unique invariant distribution associated with the young agent’s income process.
When old, agents earn a ﬁxed, certain amount of income y O > 0. Where convenient, we will
write Y ≡ Y Y ∪ Y M ∪ {y O } for the set of all possible income values.
    Households can save by depositing at ≥ 0 with the intermediary and earn the risk-free
storage return r with certainty on these savings. For old agents, returns are annuitized so
                                         1+r
that surviving households earn return   1−ρD
                                               − 1 on their deposits while households who die
do so with no wealth.
    Households value consumption and housing services. They can obtain housing services
from the rental market or from the owner-occupied market. On the ﬁrst market, they can
rent quantity h1 > 0. When they become mid-aged, agents can choose to purchase quantity
ht ∈ {h2 , h3 } ∈ IR+
                    2
                      of housing capital. We refer to this asset as a house. While mid-aged, a
household which is currently renting has an exogenous opportunity to purchase a house with
probability γ.



                                                9
       Our economy is subject to aggregate uncertainty at date t denoted st ∈ S ≡ {L, N, H}.
We take the unit price qst of homes as the exogenous realization of a Markov process deﬁned
on:
                                                                 3
                                         Q ≡ {qL , qN , qH } ∈ IR+

where qL < qN < qH with transition matrix P q .7 Rental rates respond to the same aggregate
uncertainty so we assume three distinct values {RL , RN , RH } which we calibrate to match the
pertinent evidence on price-to-rent ratios.
       Once agents own a house of size ht ∈ {h2 , h3 }, the market value of the housing capital
they own in any given aggregate state s is qst t ht where t is an idiosyncratic shock drawn
from
                                               E ≡ {b , 1, g }

which follows a Markov process with transition matrix P  . The idiosyncratic shock process
is independent of aggregate shocks and obeys a law of large numbers. One possible interpre-
tation of these shocks is “neighborhood eﬀects8 ” which change the market value of the house
to a potential buyer independent of aggregate housing price changes. We introduce these
idiosyncratic shocks so that even when aggregate home prices are stable, some homeowners
experience negative equity after house purchases while other homeowners experience positive
capital gains on their houses. We will specify the  process to match the relevant evidence on
the dispersion of housing capital gains in the United States.
       Households thus face aggregate uncertainty about home prices and three sources of id-
iosyncratic uncertainty – aging shocks, income shocks, and house-speciﬁc price shocks. For
   7
     In a previous version of this paper, we assumed a linear technology for transforming consumption goods
into housing capital in which case under perfect competition aggregate prices were simply given by the inverse
of aggregate housing total factor productivity shocks.
   8
     While we assume that idiosyncratic shocks obey a law of large numbers, we do not assume that these
shocks are independent across households so that clusters of agents one could think of as geographical locations
may have ex-ante correlated house values.




                                                      10
every household of age t ∈ {0, +∞}, histories are thus elements of

                                                                        t
                                       S × {Y, M, O, D} × Y × E .


Households order history-contingent processes {ct , ht }+∞
                                                        t=0 according to the following utility

function:
                                                 
                                                 ∞
                                            E0         β t u(ct , ht )
                                                 t=0

where for all t ≥ 0, ct ≥ 0, ht ∈ {h1 , h2 , h3 }, and


                                  u(ct , ht ) ≡ log ct + log[ht × θ(ht )]


with
                                        θ(h3 ) = θ(h2 ) > 1 = θ(h1 )

so that homeowners enjoy a proportional utility premium over renters. We think of θ as
capturing any enjoyment agents derive from owning rather than renting their home, but it
also serves as a proxy for any pecuniary beneﬁt associated with owning which we do not
explicitly model.
   For all date t, owners of a house of size ht ∈ {h2 , h3 } bear maintenance costs δqst ht where
δ > 0.9 Owners who turn old must sell their house. Since this is the only source of exogenous
sales in our model one could think of this possibility as capturing events such health shocks or
divorce that constrain agents to sell their home and experience a permanent change in their
income prospects.
   The ﬁnancial intermediary is an inﬁnitely-lived risk-neutral agent that holds household
savings and can store these savings at net return r ≥ 0 at all dates. At date t, it can also buy
existing homes at unit price qt t , transform the resulting housing capital into the consumption
   9
     We assume that maintenance costs depend only on the aggregate state of the economy (i.e. qs ) and do
not include idiosyncratic shocks (). Assuming that idiosyncratic shocks also aﬀect maintenance costs does
not have a signiﬁcant impact on our results.



                                                       11
                   1
good at rate      qt  t
                         ,   or rebundle it to rent or sell to new homebuyers.10 When it buys an existing
home of size ht at market value qst t ht , rebundling either requires an expenditure of qst (1−t )ht
when t < 1 to return the home to marketable value or entails a windfall qst (t − 1)ht when
t > 1.


2.2       Mortgages

Households that purchase a house of size ht ∈ {h2 , h3 } at time t must ﬁnance this purchase
with a ﬁxed rate mortgage contract of maturity T with downpayment fraction νt ∈ {LD, HD}.
Speciﬁcally, the mortgage requires a downpayment of size νt qst ht and stipulates an interest
rate rtν (at , yt , ht ; st ) that depends on the household’s wealth and income characteristics at
time of origination, the size of the loan (which obviously depends on house prices qst and
the size of the house ht ), and state dependent mortgage approval standards parameterized
by αst . Given this interest rate, constant payments mνt (at , yt , ht ; st ) and a principal balance
                                     T −1
schedule {bνt,n (at , yt , ht ; st )}n=0  can be computed using standard ﬁxed annuity calculations,
where n = 0, 1, ..., T − 1 denotes the period following origination.11
       A simple way to specify approval standards on mortgages originated at date t is to assume
that a household applying for a mortgage must meet a payment-to-income (PTI) requirement.
Speciﬁcally, in order to qualify for a mortgage with downpayment νt at time t, a mid-aged
household of type (at , yt ) who wants a loan of size (1 − νt )qst ht must satisfy

                                                         mνt
                                                             ≤ α st                                     (2.1)
                                                         yt
  10
     Rebundling keeps the dimension of the state space manageable. Note that the fact that each agent’s
housing choice set is discrete does not impose an integer constraint on the intermediary since it deals with a
continuum of households.
  11
     Suppressing initial characteristics for notational simplicity, then
                                                          rtν
                                           mνt =                    (1 − νt )qst ht
                                                   1 − (1 + rtν )−T

and
                                              bνt,n+1 = bνt,n (1 + rtν ) − mνt ,
where bνt,0 = (1 − νt )qst ht .


                                                             12
where αst > 0 for all aggregate states. Despite assuming that the PTI requirement is the
same across downpayment sizes12 , a given household is less likely to qualify for a high-leverage
loan than a low-leverage loan since they carry a higher interest rate in equilibrium and start
with a higher balance.
       Varying α will enable us to generate fractions of high leverage loans that mimic Figure
1 and trace the consequences of this change. While we do not view this speciﬁc aspect of
our model as a deep theory for why the frequency of high leverage loans started increasing
in the late 1990s, all evidence is that PTIs did rise markedly during the housing boom. For
instance, Bokhari et. al. (2013) calculate that among single-family home loans purchased
by Fannie Mae, the share of loans with PTIs above 42% rises from around 5% in 1990 to
over 40% in 2007. Similarly, according to data released by the FHA in 201113 , the fraction of
ﬁrst-lien, single family mortgages acquired by government sponsored enterprises with a PTI
above 28% or a total monthly debt to income (or “back-end DTI”) above 36% doubled from
38% in 1998 to 77% in 2007. Finally and as we discuss in further detail in our calibration
section, Survey of Consumer Finance data suggest that loan-to-income ratios rose noticeably
on purchase loans during the housing boom. While our model generates such an increase for
several reasons – including the fact that the relaxation of approval standards allows lower
income households to obtain a mortgage – such a signiﬁcant increase in loan-to-income ratios
is consistent as we will argue with a change in PTI requirements.
       The set of mortgage terms from which a given household can choose is endogenous in
our model and must be consistent in equilibrium with certain conditions. Speciﬁcally, let
Kt (at , yt , ht ; st ) ⊂ {LD, HD} be the set of feasible downpayment options on a mortgage
oﬀered to a household with characteristics (at , yt ) which wants to purchase a house of size ht
at price qst under approval standards αst . The set Kt must satisfy the following conditions
in equilibrium: (i) the downpayment must budget feasible given household wealth; (ii) the
  12
     FHA loans, which account for most high leverage loans in ﬁgure 1 prior to 1998, had formal PTI limits
in the 1990s that were only slightly lower than those typical of conventional loans (see Bunce et. al., 1995,
for a discussion).
  13
     See Mortage Market Note 11-02, available at http://www.fhfa.gov/webﬁles/20686/QRM FINAL ALL.pdf.


                                                    13
payment-to-income requirement is satisﬁed; and (iii) the lender must expect to make zero
proﬁts on such mortgages (these conditions will be made rigorous below). Of course, in
equilibrium, the set Kt may be empty.
       A mortgage-holder can terminate the contract at the beginning of any period, in which
case the house is sold. We will consider a termination to be a foreclosure when the outstanding
principal exceeds the house value or when the agent’s state is such that it cannot meet its
mortgage payment in the current period. In the event of foreclosure, fraction χ > 0 of the sale
value is lost in transaction costs (e.g. legal costs, costs of restoring the property to saleable
conditions, etc.).14 If the mortgage’s outstanding balance at the time of default t + n is bνt,n ,
the intermediary collects min{(1 − χ)qst+n t+n ht , bνt,n } where qst+n t+n ht is the house value at
date t + n, while the household receives max{(1 − χ)qst+n t+n ht − bνt,n , 0}.
       More formally, default arises in two cases at a given date t + n. First, if it is not budget
feasible for the household to meet its mortgage payment:


                               yt+n + at+n (1 + r) − mνt − δqst+n ht < 0,                       (2.2)


the household is constrained to terminate its mortgage. A second form of default occurs when
the household can meet their mortgage payment (i.e. (2.2) does not hold) but the household
chooses to sell with negative home equity:


                                        qst+n t+n ht − bνt,n < 0,                              (2.3)


In either default case, we will write Dt+n = 1 while Dt+n = 0 otherwise. Defaulting agents
include households who become old at the start of the period and must sell a home with
negative equity. Naturally, mortgage holders may also choose to sell their house even when
they can meet the payment and have positive equity, for instance because they are borrowing
constrained in the current period. We will think of such a transaction as a regular sale.
  14
       For more discussion of these costs, see http://www.nga.org/Files/pdf/0805FORECLOSUREMORTGAGE.PDF.



                                                   14
2.3     Timing

The timing in each period is as follows. At the beginning of the period, agents discover
whether or not they have aged and receive a perfectly informative signal about their income
draw. Aggregate and idiosyncratic house price shocks are also realized at the beginning of
the period. Owners then decide whether to remain owners or to become renters either by
selling their house or through foreclosure. Renters discover whether or not home-buying is an
option at the beginning of the period. Agents who just turned mid-aged get this option with
probability one. Agents who get the home-buying option make their housing and mortgage
choice decisions at the beginning of the period, after all uncertainty for the period is resolved.
Downpayments are thus made at the beginning of the period. At the end of the period, agents
receive their income, mortgage payments are made, and consumption takes place.



3       Equilibrium
This section describes a recursive competitive equilibrium for our economy. To ease notation,
we drop all time markers using the convention that, for a given variable x, xt ≡ x and
xt+1 ≡ x .


3.1     Household Problem

3.1.1    Old agents

In aggregate state s, the individual state of old households is fully described by their asset
position a ≥ 0. The value function for an old agent with assets a ∈ IR+ solves

                                       1           D                 
                                                                              
                     VO (a; s) = max
                                  
                                      u c, h + β(1 − ρ  )E s  |s VO (a ; s )
                                 a ≥0



s.t.
                                    (1 + r)
                              c=a           + y O − h1 Rs − a ≥ 0.
                                    1 − ρD

                                                15
Note that even though old agents do not own homes, the aggregate value of the housing good
aﬀects their welfare because it moves the rental rate.


3.1.2      Mid-aged Agents

For mid-aged agents we need to consider three distinct cases depending on housing status.

       Case 1: Renter

       If the mid-aged household enters the period as a renter (R), the value function is:


                  VMR (a, y; s) =    max u(c, h1 ) + βρO Es |s [VO (a ; s )]
                                    c ≥0,a ≥0
                                                            ⎡                            ⎤
                                                                        R   
                                                               (1 − γ)V M (a  , y ; s )
                                    +β(1 − ρO )Ey ,s |y,s ⎣                            ⎦
                                                                                     
                                                              +γVM (a , y , n = 0; s )



s.t.
                                     c + a = y + a(1 + r) − Rs h1

where VM (a , y  , n = 0; s ), deﬁned below, is the value function for mid-aged agents who have
the option to buy a home given their assets and income and given the aggregate state.

Case 2: Existing Homeowners

       Households who already own a home have to decide whether to remain homeowners or to
become renters. As in the case of renters, their value function depends on their asset, their
income and aggregate conditions, but it also depends on the current market value of their
home (hence on ) and on the choices they made when their mortgage was originated. Let
(ν, κ) be the tuple of mortgage characteristics at origination where κ = (a, y, h; s) denotes
the origination state. This original information pins down mortgage payments mν (κ) and the
remaining balance bνn (κ) under the existing contract. Equipped with this notation, we can

                                                    16
now deﬁne the value function of a homeowner (n ≥ 1):15

                                                                                                                         
 (ν,κ)                                                           O                               (ν,κ)
VM (a, y, , n; s)     =         max             u(c, h) + βρ E ,s |,s VO (a +       1{h=h} Sn+1 ( , s ); s )
                           c≥0,a ≥0,h∈{h1 ,
                                            h}
                                                                           ⎡                                                      ⎤
                                                                                          1{h=h1 } VMR (a , y  ; s )
                                                 +β(1 − ρO )Ey , ,s |y,,s ⎣                                                  ⎦
                                                                                             (ν,κ)
                                                                                   +1{h=h} VM (a , y  ,  , n    + 1; s ) 




where if h = h, then


                             s.t. c + a = y + a(1 + r) − mν (κ)1{n<T } − δqs h


and if h = h1 , then

                                                           
                    c + a = y + (1 + r) a + Sn(ν,κ) (, s) − Rs h1
                                                                                  
              Sn(ν,κ) (, s) = max (1 − D(ν,κ) (a, y, , n; s)χ)qs h − bνn (κ), 0

   D(ν,κ) (a, y, , n; s) = 1 if y + a(1 + r) − mν (κ)1{n<T } − δqs h < 0 or qs h − bνn (κ) < 0.


      The budget constraint depends on whether or not the household keeps its house. When
households become renters, their asset position is increased by the homeowner’s share of the
                                                  (ν,κ)
salvage value of the house, denoted Sn                    (, s), net of their outstanding principal and, in
the event of default, net of transaction costs. When households become renters, their asset
position is increased by the proceeds from selling the house net of the outstanding principal
                                                                       (ν,κ)
and, in the event of default, net of transaction costs. Sn                     (, s) denotes these net proceeds.
Their housing expenses are the sum of mortgage and maintenance payments if they keep
the house or the cost of rental otherwise. The ﬁnal constraint states that selling the house
without incurring default costs is only possible if the household is able to meet its mortgage
obligations and has positive equity.
 15
      1x denotes the indicator function which takes the value 1 if x is true.




                                                            17
Case 3: The Option to Buy a House

   A renter who receives the option to buy a home at the start of a given period must decide
whether to exercise that option, and if they become homeowners, what mortgage to use to
ﬁnance their house purchase. Let K(κ) ⊂ {LD, HD} be the set of feasible downpayment
options on a mortgage oﬀered to a household given contract-relevant characteristics κ =
(a, y, h; s) at origination.
   The household’s value function solves:

                                                                                                                                  
                                                                     O                                     (ν,κ)
VM (a, y, n = 0; s) =                max           u(c, h) + βρ E ,s |1,s VO (a +        1{h∈{h2 ,h3 }} Sn=1 ( , s ); s )
                          c≥0,a ≥0,h∈{h1 ,h2 ,h3 },ν∈K
                                                    ⎡           ⎛                                 ⎞          ⎤
                                                                     (1 − γ)VMR (a , y  ; s )
                                                    ⎢ 1{h=h1 } ⎝                                  ⎠          ⎥
                                  O                 ⎢                                                        ⎥
                          +β(1 − ρ )Ey , ,s |y,1,s ⎢
                                          
                                                                                 
                                                                    +γVM (a , y , n = 0; s )    
                                                                                                             ⎥
                                                    ⎣                                                      ⎦
                                                                          (ν,κ)
                                                      +1{h∈{h2 ,h3 }} VM (a , y  ,  , n = 1; s


where if h = h1 , then
                                   s.t. c + a = y + a(1 + r) − Rs h1

and if h ∈ {h2 , h3 }, then the following conditions must hold


                          c + a = y + (1 + r) [a − νqs h] − mν (κ) − δqs h

                              a ≥ νqs h                                                                       (3.1)
                         mν (κ)
                                ≤ αs .                                                                        (3.2)
                           y

3.1.3    Young Agents

The value function of a young household depends only on their assets and income and on
aggregate conditions. It solves:

                                1
                                                           M                    M                      
                                                                                                                 
 VY (a, y; s) =      max u(c, h   ) + βE y  ,s |y,s (1 − ρ  )V Y (a , y ; s ) + ρ   V M (a  , y , n = 0; s   )
                       
                   c≥0,a ≥0




                                                          18
s.t.
                                         c + a = y + a(1 + r) − Rs h1 .


3.2       Intermediary’s Problem

All possible uses of loanable funds must earn the same return for the intermediary.16 This
implies that the expected return on originated mortgages net of expected foreclosure costs
must cover the opportunity cost of funds. The intermediary incurs mortgage service costs
which we model as a premium φ > 0 on the opportunity cost of funds loaned to the agent for
housing purposes.
       To make the resulting condition precise, given discount rate r + φ, denote the expected
present value to the intermediary of an existing mortgage contract with origination character-
istics (ν, κ) held by a mid-aged home-owner with current characteristics (a, y, , n) and given
                                (ν,κ)                                                                       (ν,κ)
the aggregate state s by Wn             (a, y, ; s). If the mortgage is paid oﬀ (n ≥ T ) then Wn                   = 0.
Otherwise,


  Wn(ν,κ) (a, y, ; s) =   1{h(ν,κ) (a,y,,n;s)=h1 } min{(1 − D(ν,κ) (a, y, , n; s)χ)qs h, bνn (κ)}
                                                                                     (ν,κ)                     
                                                        mν (κ)                        Wn+1 (a , y  ,  ; s )
                           +1{h(ν,κ) (a,y,,n;s)=h}            + Ey , ,s |y,,s                                .
                                                       1+r+φ                             1+r+φ


Indeed, in the event of a sale (i.e. h(ν,κ) (a, y, , n; s) = h1 ), the bank either recovers the loan’s
balance or, if lower and in the event of default, foreclosure proceeds. If the homeowner stays
  16
     While we take home and rental prices as driven by exogenous processes, an arbitrage condition must
implicitly hold between these two activities. Since homes are subject to valuation shocks, it is natural to
assume that rental units are subject to valuation shocks as well. Any exogenous speciﬁcation of rental rates
and home prices pins down what the expected value of these shocks must be in equilibrium because the
intermediary is free to direct the capital it holds to either the rental or the owner-occupied market. To see
this, let Δ be the gross rate of valuation growth of rental units, a random variable which can depend on the
aggregate state of home prices. Arbitrage requires that at all dates and for all current states q of aggregate
prices,
                                                   R(q) + Eq [Δq]
                                              q=                  .
                                                        1+r
Any speciﬁcation of the process for q and R implies a speciﬁcation for Eq [Δq].



                                                        19
in her home (i.e. h(ν,κ) (a, y, , n; s) = h), the bank receives the mortgage payment and the
mortgage ages by one period.
       If the household was a renter and receives an exogenous opportunity to purchase a house
in state (a, y; s), the household qualiﬁes for a mortgage with downpayment ν on a house of
size h ∈ {h2 , h3 } only provided it can make the associated downpayment (i.e. constraint (3.1)
is satisﬁed) and it meets the P T I requirement (i.e. constraint (3.2)) If either (3.1) or (3.2)
                                                                          (ν,κ)
is violated at origination, we normalize the present value W0                     = 0. If the household does
meet both qualiﬁcation constraints, then:
                                                                                            
                                        ν                              (ν,κ)    
                (ν,κ)                 m   (κ)                        W 1    (a , y ,  ; s )
               W0 (a, y,  = 1; s) =          + Ey , ,s |y,1,s                             .
                                     1+r+φ                               1+r+φ

       Given the interest rate schedule rν (κ) which implies mν (κ), the intermediary expects to
earn zero proﬁt on a loan contract with characteristics κ if

                                      (ν,κ)
                                   W0         (a, y, 1; s) − (1 − ν)qs h = 0.                           (3.3)


Assuming free-entry into intermediation activities, it must be in equilibrium that the set K(κ)
of mortgage contracts and interest rate schedules rν (κ) available for the purchase of a home
of size h ∈ {h2 , h3 } for a household with characteristics (a, y) in aggregate state s satisfy
condition (3.3) along with (3.1)-(3.2).17
  17
     As discussed at length by Quintin (2012), there may be several interest rate oﬀerings that produce
zero expected proﬁts, even at equal downpayment, since the endogeneity of default generically makes W0
discontinuous and non-monotonic. Computationally, we need to make sure that among rates that satisfy
the zero-proﬁt constraint for a given set of origination characteristics, the most favorable to the household
prevails, which prevents us from using geometrically convergent search methods such as bisection. Instead,
we start the search for the best possible rate from r + φ and crawl forward until condition (3.3) is met. This
is the most time-consuming part of the algorithm we describe in an online appendix.




                                                        20
3.3    Cross-Sectional Distribution

From any given set of initial conditions and given any given realization of home prices and
rental rates, our model implies a sequence of distributions of household states. This section
makes the mapping from aggregate price shocks to distributions precise. Much of our up-
coming calibration entails matching moments of these cross-sectional distributions with the
relevant data.
   The set of possible histories of aggregate shocks up to date t is S t . An element st ∈ S t
implies a path for home prices, approval standards and rental rates. Now recall that old
households who die are immediately replaced by young households. Therefore, the transition
matrix across ages is eﬀectively given by:
                                  ⎡                                       ⎤
                                             M           M
                                      (1 − ρ )       ρ             0
                                  ⎢                                       ⎥
                                  ⎢                                       ⎥
                                  ⎢      0        (1 − ρ )   O
                                                                  ρ   O   ⎥.
                                  ⎣                                       ⎦
                                        ρD            0          1 − ρD

Let (ψ Y , ψ M , ψ O ) be the corresponding invariant distribution of ages. Making the mass of
agents born each period μ0 ≡ ψ O ρD normalizes the total population size to one. Recall in
addition that newborns start their life with no assets and that their income is drawn from
the unique invariant income distribution p0 associated with P Y .
   There are ﬁve fundamental types of agents in our environment. Old agents are distributed
over the set of possible assets
                                                 ΩO = IR+ .

Denote the distribution of individual states for old households at the start of date t given a
history st−1 of aggregate shocks up to the preceding period by

                                                        
                                      μtO (·|st−1 ) : B ΩO → [0, 1]

        
where B ΩO is the set of Borel measurable subsets of ΩO . By convention, we will deﬁne

                                                    21
this and all state distributions at a given date after all shocks are realized but before housing
choices are made.
    Young agents are distributed on the following set of possible states:

                                                           
                                     ΩY = (a, y) ∈ IR+ × Y Y .


Denote by μtY (·|st−1 ) the corresponding cross-sectional distribution of individual states for the
young given a history st−1 of past shocks.
    Mid-aged renters and mid-aged households with the option to buy (n = 0) are distributed
over the same asset-income space

                                                                 
                               ΩM,R = ΩM,n=0 = (a, y) ∈ IR+ × Y M


and we denote their respective history-conditional distributions at date t by μtM,R (·|st−1 ), and
μtM,n=0 (·|st−1 ).
    The ﬁfth and ﬁnal type of agents are mid-aged homeowners. Their state includes not
only their asset and income position, but also their idiosyncratic house price shock (), their
mortgage type (κ, ν) and the age (n) of their contract. The corresponding space is:

                                                                              
             ΩM,n≥1 = (a, y, , n, ν, κ) ∈ IR+ × Y M × E × IN++ × {LD, HD} × K

                                               
where K =          IR+ × Y M × {h2 , h3 } × S       is the set of possible mortgage characteristics at
origination. Let μtM,n≥1 (·|st−1 ) be the associated distribution.
    With this notation in hand, we can deﬁne transition functions for distributions of individ-
ual states. Consider ﬁrst the young. Let A be any Borel subset of IR+ and pick any y  ∈ Y Y .
An agent is young at the start of a period if: (i) they were just born; or (ii) they were young




                                                      22
in the previous period and did not age. It follows that for any t,


    μt+1   t        0 0                     M
     Y (A , y |s ) = μ p (y )1{0∈A )} + (1 − ρ )                    1{aY (ω;st )∈A )} P Y (y  |y)dμtY (ω|st−1 ).
                                                           ω∈ΩY


Here, aY (ω; st ) is the agent’s savings choice given his individual state ω = (a, y) ∈ ΩY and
aggregate history st ∈ S t . Transitions are similarly deﬁned for the old and we omit them for
conciseness.
   Agents are mid-aged renters at the start of a given period if: (i) they were mid-aged
renters, did not get the option to buy, and did not age; or (ii) if they had the option to
become homeowners in the previous period, chose to forego that option, and did not age. For
any measurable subset (A , y  ) of ΩM,R and history, the transition is given by


μt+1     t             O
 M,R (A , y |s ) = (1 − ρ )(1 − γ)                1{aM,R (ω;st )∈A )} P M (y  |y)dμtM,R (ω|st−1 )
                                       ω∈ΩM,R

                 + (1 − ρO )                                         1{aM,n=0 (ω;st )∈A )} P M (y  |y)dμtM,n=0 (ω|st−1 ).
                               {ω∈ΩM,n=0 :h   M,n=0   (ω;st )=h1 }


Here, hM,n=0 (ω; st ) is the household’s housing choice given its individual state ω = (a, y) ∈
ΩM,n=0 and aggregate history st ∈ S t .
   Households start a period with the option to buy if: (i) they were mid-aged renters in the
previous period and received the option to buy; or (ii) if they just became mid-aged. This
gives, for any measurable subset (A , y  ) of ΩM,n=0 and history,


       μt+1       t             O
        M,n=0 (A , y |s ) = (1 − ρ )γ                   1{aM,R (ω;st )∈A )} P M (y  |y)dμtM,R (ω|st−1 )
                                            ω∈ΩM,R

                          + ρM            1{aY (ω;st )∈A )} P Y (y  |y)dμtY (ω|st−1 )
                                   ω∈ΩY


   Finally, the cross-sectional distribution of homeowners evolves according to whether they
were: (i) homeowners in the previous period and did not age or choose to sell or default; or
(ii) were given the option to buy, took it, and did not change age state. Consider any Borel
subset A of IR+ , y  ∈ Y M , ε ∈ E, n ∈ IN++ , ν ∈ {LD, HD} and κ = (a, y, h; s) ∈ K at

                                                   23
                                                                         (κ,ν)
any date t and in any history st . Denote by Ωn                                   the subset of ΩM,n≥1 of homeowners with
mortgage characteristics (κ, ν) and mortgage age n ∈ IN . Then,


                                               μt+1                      t
                                                M,n≥1 (A , y ,  , n , ν, κ|s ) =



                        !
                  O
         (1 − ρ ) ×                          1{a                 t )∈A ,h                t )=     P M (y  |y)P  ( |)dμtM,n≥1 (ω|st−1 )
                                  (κ,ν)          M,n≥1 (ω;s                   M,n≥1 (ω;s       h}
                               ω∈Ωn −1
                                                                                                                                                  "
                                                                                                     M              
+              1{a            t )∈A ,h                t )=                       ν ,stt =
                                                                                t )=            P       (y |y)P (       |1)dμtM,n=0 (ω|st−1 )
                  M,n=0 (ω;s               M,n=0 (ω;s       h,ν   M,n=0 (ω;s                s}
    ω∈ΩM,n=0


where stt is the date t realization of aggregate shock history st .


3.4     Deﬁnition of Equilibrium
                                                                                         
Given an an initial distribution of household states μ0Y , μ0M,n=0 , μ0M,n≥1 , μ0M,R , μ0O , an equi-
librium is a set of recursive household policy functions, a menu K of mortgages, and a sequence
 t t                                +∞
  μY , μM,n=0 , μtM,n≥1 , μtM,R , μtO t=1 of cross-sectional distributions for all possible histories of
aggregate shocks such that:

    1. Policies solve the household problems in subsection 3.1 given the mortgage menu K;

    2. Given household policies and for all possible ω ∈ ΩM,n=0 and aggregate histories st ,
      mortgage options in K(ω, st ) satisfy the intermediary’s zero-proﬁt condition (3.3) in
      subsection 3.2;

    3. The contingent history of cross-sectional distributions is the one implied by optimal
      household policies for all possible histories of aggregate shocks, as detailed in subsection
      3.3.

    In all the equilibria we discuss below, aggregate household assets vastly exceed the balance
on outstanding mortgage hence storage investments are strictly positive in all periods. Since


                                                                       24
all mortgage loans are priced in such a way that the intermediary is indiﬀerent between storage
and funding mortgages, loan markets trivially clear and our economy is eﬀectively closed.



4        Parameter Selection
Our main quantitative goal is to simulate a course of aggregate home price shocks that is
consistent with the pattern displayed in ﬁgure 3 under various scenarios for approval stan-
dards. To that end, we ﬁrst need to parameterize the model. We take a model period to be 2
years long so that we only need to keep track of 15 model periods when considering 30-year
mortgages.


4.1       Parameters Selected Independently

As evident in ﬁgure 3, real home values were relatively stable between 1890 and 2013 with
two key exceptions: a roughly 25-year span of low relative home values that begins around
1918, and the recent boom period between 1999 and 2006. In order to approximate these data
with our three-point process, we will treat the 1890-1917 and 1944-1998 time span as periods
where real home values are at their intermediate, “normal” level qN , while home values are at
their low level qL between 1918 and 1943 and at their high level qH between 1999 and 2006.
       The normal level qN of home values will be selected below when we target pre-housing
boom moments. To match the magnitude of historical deviations from this typical level, we
specify
                                         Q = qN × (0.7, 1, 1.45)

since home values are roughly 30% below their normal time average value between 1918 and
1943 and are, on average, 45% above their normal level between 1999 and 2006.18
  18
    Real home values peak at near 85% above their previous trough in 2006 but since we are approximating
the entire 1999-2006 period with one q level, we are eﬀectively calibrating qH to its mid-point value during
the boom. Another virtue of this calibration is that it implies a 30% decline in values in the ﬁrst two years
of the crisis which roughly matches the decline in the real US Case-Shiller index between the last quarter of
2006 and the last quarter of 2008.


                                                     25
                           Figure 3: Real US home price index since 1890




                 190


                 170


                 150


                 130


                 110


                  90


                  70


                  50
                    1890      1910       1930       1950       1970       1990       2010




Source: Shiller (2000), updated data available at http://www.econ.yale.edu/ shiller/data.htm.

       We then calibrate the transition matrix P q so that: 1) two deviations from normal value
levels are expected in any given century; 2) deviations to qL are expected to last 25 years;
and 3) deviations to qH are expected to last 8 years.19 Since we think of a model period as
  19
    Obviously, calibrating the expected length of each deviation to match the exact duration of their unique
respective counterpart is but one of many ways to pin down expectations but it seems to be the natural
starting point. Furthermore, our results are not sensitive to that assumption: calibrating P q so that the
boom is expected to last 20 years rather than 8 years barely changes our main quantitative ﬁndings.




                                                    26
lasting two years, the transition matrix for the aggregate shock for all t is:
                                       ⎡                    ⎤
                                       0.90 0.10 0.00
                                     ⎢                ⎥
                                  q  ⎢                ⎥
                                 P = ⎢ 0.02 0.96 0.02 ⎥ .
                                     ⎣                ⎦
                                       0.00 0.25 0.75

   As for rental rates, Davis et. al (2008) calculate that the ratio of yearly gross rents to
house prices is around 5% for much of the 1960-2008 time period with the exception of the
boom period when the ratio falls to about 3.5%. Correspondingly, and given our two-year
convention, we set RN = .10 × qN and RH = .07 × qH . Since rent-to-price data do not exist to
our knowledge for earlier periods, we simply assume that the ratio is also around its typical
10% during period of low prices hence set RL = .1 × qL .
   Next we set demographic parameters to (ρM , ρO , ρD ) = ( 17 , 15
                                                                  1 1
                                                                     , 10 ) so that, on average,
agents are young for 14 years starting at 20, mid-aged for 30 years, and old aged (retired)
for 20 years. Recall that becoming old in our environment has two key consequences: agents
are forced to sell and their income expectation are permanently altered. In particular, a
recent homeowner who experiences that shock early in the life of their mortgage loan can be
                                                                                              1
constrained to default as a result of this exogenous shock. Roughly speaking, setting ρO =    15

means that households expect to be constrained to sell for exogenous (non-income) reasons
once every 30 years.
   The income process is calibrated using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID)
survey. We consider households in each PSID sample whose head is between 20 and 34 years
of age to be young while households whose head is between 35 and 64 years are considered
to be mid-aged. Each demographic group in the 1997 and 1999 PSID surveys is then split
into income quartiles. The support for the income distribution is the average income in each
quartile in the two surveys, normalized by the median income value for the mid-aged group.




                                               27
This yields a support for the income distribution of young agents of:


                            Y Y = {0.1452, 0.5725, 0.9216, 1.8533},


while the support for mid-aged agents is


                            Y M = {0.1543, 0.7199, 1.3320, 2.8555}.


   We then equate the income transition matrix for each age group to the frequency distri-
bution of transitions across quartiles for households which appear in both the 1997 and 1999
survey. The resulting transition matrix for young agents is:
                                ⎡                                     ⎤
                                     0.5920 0.2759 0.1034 0.0287
                            ⎢                             ⎥
                            ⎢                             ⎥
                            ⎢ 0.1292 0.5015 0.2769 0.0923 ⎥
                          Y ⎢
                         P =⎢                             ⎥,
                                                          ⎥
                            ⎢ 0.0512 0.1898 0.491 0.2681 ⎥
                            ⎣                             ⎦
                              0.0317 0.0762 0.1238 0.7683

while, for mid-aged agents, it is:
                                ⎡                                     ⎤
                                 0.7490 0.1926      0.0393 0.0190
                               ⎢                                  ⎥
                               ⎢                                  ⎥
                               ⎢ 0.1787 0.6388      0.1559 0.0266 ⎥
                         PM   =⎢
                               ⎢
                                                                  ⎥.
                                                                  ⎥
                               ⎢ 0.0546 0.1615      0.6394 0.1445 ⎥
                               ⎣                                  ⎦
                                 0.0202 0.0303      0.1573 0.7921

   Income in old age is y O = 0.40. This makes retirement income 40% of median income
among the mid-aged, which is consistent with standard estimates of replacement ratios.
   We next let the (two-year) risk-free rate be r = 0.08 and choose the maintenance cost (δ)
to be 5% in order to match the yearly gross rate of depreciation of housing capital, which is
2.5% annually according to Harding et al. (2007).
   The down-payment ratio ν HD is 20% while the maturity T is 15 periods (=30 years).

                                               28
                             Table 1: Benchmark parameters


   Parameters determined independently                  Parameters determined jointly
  M
 ρ     Fraction of young agents    1/7        θ          Owner-occupied premium              1.767
       who become mid-aged                    β          Discount rate                       0.849
 ρO    Fraction of mid-aged agents 1/15       αN (= αL ) PTI level in normal (low) state     0.200
       who become old                         φ          Mortgage service cost               0.058
 ρD    Fraction of old agents      1/10       χ          Foreclosing costs                   0.499
                                                 1
       who die                                h          Size of rental unit                 1.000
 r     Storage return              8%         h2         Size of small house                 1.225
                                                 3
 δ     Maintenance rate            5%         h          Size of large house                 1.879
   HD
 ν     High downpayment            20%        λ          Home-value shock probability        0.217
 T     Mortgage maturity           15         ˜         Size of home value shock            0.351
 qL
 qN
       Low home value level        0.7        qN         Normal home value level             0.864
 qH
 qN
       High home value level       1.45



Low-downpayment contracts have the same 30-year term but require no downpayment (i.e.
ν LD = 0). The P T I requirement is assumed to be the same for both mortgages and the same
whether q = qL or q = qN . During the boom (when q = qH ), PTI constraints are fully relaxed.
We will think of the second stage of our transition experiment as a period of high prices and
relaxed approval standards, and compare the model’s prediction for that stage to the relevant
data from the 1999-2006 period. The PTI level when q ∈ {qL , qN } will be selected in the joint
part of the calibration, to which we now turn.


4.2    Parameters Selected Jointly

Our strategy to jointly select remaining parameters is to think of the few years that preceded
the housing boom as following a long period of normal aggregate home values. We make
the assumption that the distribution of household states at that point is near the long-
run distribution that would obtain following a inﬁnitely long draw {qt = qN }+∞
                                                                             t=0 of normal




                                              29
aggregate home values.20
       We make the strong assumption that buying a home is a one-time-only option for com-
putational tractability (i.e. γ = 0). Forcing agents who have sold their home or defaulted
to become renters for the rest of their life enables us to price mortgage contracts for each
possible asset-income-house size position at origination independently from rates oﬀered to
borrowers with diﬀerent characteristics. If agents had the option to take another mortgage
after they terminate their ﬁrst contracts, their decisions to default – hence the intermediary’s
expected proﬁts – would depend on future contracts, which would mean we need to jointly
solve a high-dimensional set of ﬁxed points. We emphasize, however, that this does not imply
that all home-buyers are identical. Since agents become mid-aged stochastically, the model
generates an endogenous distribution of asset-holdings among potential home-buyers. As we
will argue in the next section, this heterogeneity in the pool of borrowers matters critically
for contract selection.
       Remaining parameters include the owner-occupied premium (θ), the household discount
rate (β), the normal level (qN ) of home prices, the mortgage service premium (φ), the PTI level
αN = αL , the foreclosure transaction cost (χ), and the housing commodity space (h1 , h2 , h3 ).
We normalize the location of the housing space by making h1 = 1 since a parallel shift in
(h1 , h2 , h3 ) together with an oﬀsetting shift in qN leaves the equilibrium allocation unchanged.
As for the idiosyncratic home price shock, we specify


                                          E = {1 − ˜, 1, 1 + ˜}
  20
     Alternatively and given the data shown in ﬁgure 3, one could compute model counterparts for pre-1998
moments by starting at the US economy at this long run distribution in 1918, assuming that 12 or 13 model
periods (24 or 26 years) of low prices followed, and that 27 periods (44 years) of normal home price levels
followed that low price phase. Predicted model moments are virtually unchanged under that alternative
strategy.




                                                    30
and                                          ⎡                  ⎤
                                             λ 1−λ 0
                                           ⎢            ⎥
                                          ⎢            ⎥
                                       P = ⎢ λ 1 − 2λ λ ⎥ ,
                                           ⎣            ⎦
                                             0 1−λ λ

which adds two parameters to be calibrated: (˜, λ) ∈ [0, 1] × [0, 12 ]. Note that this symmetric
speciﬁcation of the idiosyncratic process implies that households expect zero capital gains
absent aggregate shocks. It also implies that the standard deviation of idiosyncratic gains
                                             √
over the ﬁrst two years of home ownership is 2λ˜. We will use a data counterpart for that
moment to discipline the parameterization of P  .
       We select the ten remaining parameters via a simulated method of moments so that, at the
long-run distribution associated with aggregate state N , our model best approximates pre-
1998 US data counterparts for eleven targets. Our ﬁrst target is the ownership rate among
households whose head is between 30 and 55 years old, and use as model counterpart for this
statistic the rate of ownership among agents who have been mid-aged for thirteen periods or
fewer. According to Census data, the home-ownership rate is roughly 66% for that age range
on average between 1990 and 1998.
       Our second target is the average ratio of non-housing assets to income among homeowners
whose head age is between 35 and 64 in the 1998 Survey of Consumer Finance (SCF) survey.
The yearly value of this ratio is 2.84, which corresponds to a ratio of assets to two-years worth
of income of 1.42.21
       We then set three housing spending share targets meant to identify the parameterization
of (h2 , h3 ) and qN . First, according to the evidence available from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis’ Personal Consumption Expenditure data, the ratio of rents (in imputed terms for
owners) to overall expenditures is near 15%. Second, Green and Malpezzi (1993, p11) calculate
that renters in the bottom income deciles in the US spend between 40% and 50% of their
  21
    Because agents only have one asset in our model besides a house, we interpret a as net assets. Our
measure of net assets does not include housing-related assets or debts, such as home equity or mortgages.
Since agents are not allowed to have negative assets in our model, households who have negative non-housing
assets are assumed to have zero assets in the calculation.


                                                    31
income on rent. Correspondingly, we target a ratio of rents to income for renters at income
level y1 of 45%. Third, according to the 1998 Consumer Expenditure Survey, expenditures
on shelter account for 17.3% of the expenditures of home-owners.
   Next, we target an average yield of 14.5% for the high-down-payment mortgage over a
two-year period, which corresponds to 7.25% a year. This target implies a 300 basis points
spread in bond-equivalent terms between 30-year conventional ﬁxed-rate mortgage rate and
1-year treasury rates which is consistent with data available from the Federal Housing Finance
Board for the 1990-98 time period.
   Pinto (2010) estimates that among conventional and FHA mortgages, loans with a CLTV
in excess of 97% accounted for roughly 4% of home purchase origination between 1990 and
1998. Glaeser et. al. (2012) estimate on the other hand that mortgages with zero equity
at origination accounted for “at least 10%” of purchase originations by 1998. We choose to
target a pre-boom fraction of LD originations at the midpoint of those two estimates, namely
7%.
   Since mortgage pricing obviously depends on expected losses in the event of default, we
include in our set of targets a loss severity rate deﬁned as the present value of all losses
on a given foreclosed loan as a fraction of the default date balance. As Hayre and Saraf
(2008) explain, these losses are caused both by transaction and time costs associated with
the foreclosure process, and by the fact that foreclosed properties tend to sell at a discount
relative to other, similar properties. Using a dataset of 90,000 ﬁrst-lien liquidated loans, they
estimate that loss severity rates range from around 35% among recent mortgages to as much
as 60% among older loans. Based on these numbers we choose parameters so that in the event
of default and on average,
                                    min{(1 − χ)qh, b)
                                                      = 0.5
                                           b
where b is the outstanding principal at the time of default and qh is the house value. In other
words, on average, the intermediary recovers 50% of the outstanding principal it is owed on
defaulted loans.


                                               32
       While estimates vary across studies (see Pennington-Cross, 2006, for a review), a typical
ﬁnding is that foreclosed properties sell for a price that is around a quarter lower than that of
observably similar properties. We therefore target a market discount on foreclosed properties
of 75%. We deﬁne this discount to be the average price of foreclosed properties divided by
the average price of regular home sales, after conditioning on size at origination.
       The average foreclosure discount and the average loss severity rates are related since part
of the loss incurred by intermediaries in the event of default stems from the fact that foreclosed
properties tend to be devalued properties. However, a loss in market value of 25% alone could
not account for an average loss severity rate of 50%. In the data, this discrepancy reﬂects
the transaction costs associated with foreclosure. Our transaction cost parameter χ proxies
for these costs and we use this parameter in our calibration to bridge the gap between the
foreclosure discount and the total loss associated with foreclosure.
       Our ﬁnal two targets are intended to inform the parameterization of the idiosyncratic
process. First, we use data from the 1998 SCF to estimate a standard deviation of roughly
22% of reported capital gains on homes purchased in 1996 or 1997 by households whose head
is between 35 and 64 years old.22 Second, we target the rate of mortgage terminations caused
by default in 1998. To measure that number, we begin with data from the Mortgage Bankers
Association (MBA)’s National Delinquency Survey on the fraction of mortgages that enter
the foreclosure process in a given quarter. As Jeske et. al. (2011) or Herkenhof and Ohanian
(2012) among others have pointed out, many foreclosures started do not end up leading to
termination and eviction as they do in our model. Jeske et. al. (2011) point to a 2006 survey
that suggest that around a quarter of foreclosure started end up in liquidation. To get more
direct evidence on the eventual outcome of foreclosure starts we obtained a dataset23 that
  22
     In all our SCF computations, we use the exact calculation methods used by the Federal Reserve Board
to produce its biennial Federal Reserve Bulletin SCF summary. To minimize the eﬀect of outliers, we remove
observations with reported 2-year gains in excess of 200% or 2-year losses in excess of 75%. These represent
3% of house capital gains reports in SCF-weighted terms in the 1998 survey.
  23
     We purchased the data from Illinois’ Record Information Services (RIS). RIS collects and compile these
data from case ﬁles of county circuit court. See http://www.public-record.com/ for details. The dataset
covers the following counties: DeKalb, DuPage, Kane, Kendall, Lake, McHenry and Will, and includes over
180,000 foreclosure start records between 1998 and 2011. The number of yearly starts hovers between 4,000


                                                    33
                                     Table 2: Long-run moments

                                                             Pre-98  Pre-98          Long
                                                              data benchmark         boom
              Home-ownership rate                             0.66    0.65            0.72
              Ex-housing asset to income ratio                1.42    1.53            1.46
              Housing expenditure share                       0.15    0.15            0.15
              Rent to income ratio                            0.45    0.56            0.57
              Homeowner housing share                        0.173   0.183           0.277
              Interest rate on HD loans                      0.145   0.148           0.161
              Foreclosure rate                                1.45    1.41            2.52
              Foreclosure discount                            0.75    0.70            0.72
              Recovery rate                                   0.50    0.50            0.45
              Fraction of LD loans                            0.07    0.07            0.33
              Standard error of 2-year capital gains          0.22    0.23            0.23



tracks all foreclosures started in seven Chicago-area counties between 1998 and 2011 from the
time the procedure is legally initiated to its end either by auction or non-auction resolutions.
In these data, 52.7% of foreclosures started in 1998 end up leading to an auction. Over the
entire 1998-2011 period the ratio of auctions to start is 49.3%. In light of these statistics, we
chose to target half the rate of foreclosure starts reported by the MBA in 1998 which gives a
two-year target default rate of 1.45 (or roughly 0.18 on the standard quarterly basis.)


4.3     Model Fit

Tables 1 and 2 show the outcome of minimizing the distance between our model’s predictions
and these targets. The estimate of normal and low state PTI is α = 20% which, at ﬁrst
glance, seems low given that the traditional ratio typically used in mortgage underwriting in
the 1990s was closer to 30% (29% for low-downpayment FHA loans.)24 However, in practice,
that ratio includes property taxes, insurance and other owning costs such as home-owner
association fees which we do not model. Furthermore, in our environment, the PTI must
and 10,000 until 2006 but then increases to reach a peak of nearly 33,000 in 2010.
  24
     See Bunce et. al., 1995.


                                                    34
proxy for all underwriting criteria that governed approval decisions before the boom. Given
these considerations, our model PTI does not seem unreasonable.
       Overall, the method of moments we employ reaches a set of ten parameters that produces
model moments that are very close to the eleven targets we described in the previous section.
In our transition experiment, we will show that the model also makes reasonable predictions
for key aspects of the post-98 boom period which we did not explicitly target, including the
behavior of home-ownership rates and the rise of high-priced loans during the transition. This
section considers another set of predictions we didn’t explicitly target: how the use of leverage
co-varies with borrower characteristics in the cross-section.
       Table 3 compares the cross-sectional predictions of our model for the use of leverage as
proxied by loan-to-income (LTY) ratios at origination and the fraction of loans with cumula-
tive loan-to-value ratios above 95% to the corresponding evidence from the 1998, 2007, and
2010 Survey of Consumer Finance. The model counterparts are the pre-98 benchmark, the
last period of the boom in the transition experiment we will describe in detail in section 6,
and the ﬁrst period of the crisis in that same experiment. All data moments are computed
for homeowners who bought a home in the two years preceding the survey.
       Predicted loan-to-value ratios are below their SCF counterparts in 1998 but are at the
right level in 2007, at the end of the boom period. The same pattern holds for the frequency
of high-CLTV loans which is almost as high in the SCF in 1998 as it is in 2007.25 Given
our calibration strategy (we target a 7% frequency of high-LTV loans in 1998), the model
under-predicts the use of high-leverage loans in 1998 but over-predicts it in 2007. As we will
discuss in the transition section however, our model’s predictions for the overall fraction of
high leverage loans at the onset of the crisis accords well with other sources of data.



  25
    The fraction of loans with CLTV higher than 95% rises from 13.5% to 15.5%. At the same time, these
same data contain a high number of unreasonably high self-reported CLTVs on recent loans which suggests
that the SCF is not a reliable source for measuring average CLTVs at origination. Here we use these data
to evaluate where whether our model makes reasonable predictions for how leverage should covary with
observable characteristics.


                                                  35
                                                     Table 3: Cross-sectional predictions

                                     1998 survey                            2007 survey                            2010 survey
                                 LTY          High-LTV                  LTY          High-LTV                  LTY          High-LTV
                             Data   Model   Data    Model           Data   Model   Data    Model           Data   Model    Data   Model
         Income
         Below median         1.27     0.87      0.16     0.14       1.92     1.91      0.21     0.55       1.57     0.85      0.22     0.25
                             (0.04)             (0.02)              (0.06)             (0.01)              (0.06)             (0.01)
         Above median         0.71     0.46      0.10     0.00       1.07     0.76      0.10     0.12       1.01     0.46      0.21     0.00
                             (0.01)             (0.01)              (0.02)             (0.01)              (0.02)             (0.01)
         Asset-to-income
         Below median         0.95     0.68      0.19     0.14       1.49     1.34      0.22     0.58       1.16     0.65      0.28     0.25
                             (0.02)             (0.02)              (0.04)             (0.02)              (0.03)             (0.02)
         Above median         0.97     0.64      0.08     0.00       1.47     1.33      0.09     0.08       1.38     0.65      0.14     0.00
                             (0.02)             (0.01)              (0.04)             (0.01)              (0.05)             (0.01)




36
         Age
         Below 35             0.99     0.66      0.17     0.10       1.60     1.33      0.24     0.43       1.24     0.65      0.25     0.19
                             (0.03)             (0.02)              (0.04)             (0.02)              (0.04)             (0.02)
         Above 35             0.95     0.68      0.11     0.04       1.37     1.36      0.10     0.20       1.30     0.66      0.18     0.04
                             (0.02)             (0.01)              (0.04)             (0.01)              (0.04)             (0.01)
         Loan size
         Below median         0.79     0.54      0.06     0.11       1.08     1.33      0.16     0.29       0.89     0.54      0.16     0.18
                             (0.03)             (0.02)              (0.03)             (0.01)              (0.02)             (0.01)
         Above median         1.10     0.74      0.21     0.04       1.79     1.31      0.15     0.39       1.57     0.72      0.26     0.07
                             (0.02)             (0.01)              (0.04)             (0.01)              (0.05)             (0.01)

     Notes: All numbers are for purchase loans originated in the two years preceding each survey. LTY entries are the average loan-to-income
     ratio in each categories and include all reported liens. High-LTV entries are the fraction of contracts with cumulative leverage in excess of
     95% of reported home value. SCF sample weights are used throughout, standard errors are in parentheses. In the model, “Below 35 years”
     refers to homeowners who become middaged after 12 periods of youth or fewer.
       Loan-to-income ratios are lower in the 2010 survey than in the 2007 survey in all subgroups,
most notably among poor and young home-owners. Our model delivers a fall in LTYs as
well since approval standards become tighter when the boom end but the model’s predicted
correction is more abrupt than in the data.
       The table shows that our model correctly predicts that loan-to-income ratios and the use of
high-CLTV loans should fall with income. There seems to be little relationship between asset
holding or age and LTYs in either the model or the data. The model correctly predicts that
low-downpayment loans should be highly concentrated at the bottom of the asset distribution
and among young borrowers.26 Quantitatively, our model exaggerates the concentration of
high-leverage loans among asset-poor agents, which may owe to the fact that we only give
agents one ex-housing investment alternative. Introducing investment options with diﬀerent
risk-return characteristics could lead more asset-rich agents to take advantage of high-leverage
mortgage options.
       The third section of the table breaks down home-owners according to whether or not the
head is 35 years of age or younger. In the model, we classify a home buyer to be under 35
years of age if they become mid-aged in 12 periods or fewer. There is no clear relationship
between age and LTYs but younger households select high-LTV loans more frequently both
in the model and in the data.
       The use of leverage is higher for loans of above-median size pre-98, both in the data and
our model. In the 2007 SCF, LTYs fall with loan size. The model fails to fully capture this
apparent reversal but it does go from predicting a positive relationship between loans size
and LTYs to predicting no relationship.
       In summary then, the model misses on some of the quantitative features of cross-sectional
patterns in the SCF which is not surprising given that it only contains so many sources of
heterogeneity among households. At the same time, the model correctly picks up the parts
  26
    Since γ = 0, our simulations do not make predictions for repeat buyers but, to the extent that these
would be tend to older buyers in the model, these repeat buyers would presumably be less likely to select
high-leverage loans.




                                                   37
of the income, asset and age distributions where leverage should be the most prevalent.



5     Long-run Consequences of Rising Leverage
This section compares properties of the long run equilibrium associated with normal times
(our benchmark) to a long run equilibrium associated with a boom in house prices and relaxed
approval standards. The last column of table 2 displays equilibrium moments at the long-run
distribution that follows a “long boom” period {qt = qH , αt = ∞}+∞
                                                                 t=0 . Comparing these two

long-run equilibria highlights the impact of leverage on housing and default decisions and
paves the way for interpreting the transition experiments we run in Section 6.


5.1    Contract Selection and Home-Ownership

The last column of table 2 shows that the change in approval standards causes home-ownership
rates to rise from 65% to 72% and that the use of LD loans rises dramatically (from 7% of
originations to 33%). Put another way, the greater availability of LD loans in the long-boom
equilibrium more than oﬀsets the fact that homes become more expensive.
    Table 4 displays contract selection and housing decisions in the benchmark and in the
boom state conditional on a household’s asset and income position at origination. In the
benchmark, none of the households at the very bottom of the income distribution are able
to become home-owners. During the boom, some of the lowest income households whose
assets are suﬃciently high for the intermediary to expect to break even are able to enter
mortgage markets. But all of them make a 20% down-payment because the interest rate the
intermediary would need to impose on those households would be prohibitively high if they
started with no equity. Poor homeowners are mostly found in the second income quartile.
For those households, the asset threshold above which they become home-owners falls from
1.77 to 0.63 as we go from the benchmark to the boom and low-asset agents use the LD
mortgage to become home-owners. Households in the third income quartile who have low


                                             38
               Table 4: Housing and mortgage decisions by asset and income

                                 Rent            LD    loan                    HD loan
                                   h1         h2           h3               h2             h3
                          y1     all a0        –            –               –              –
     Normal state         y2   a0 < 1.77       –            –           1.77 ≤ a0          –
 (q = qN , P T I = 20%)   y3       –       a0 < 0.34        –               –          0.34 ≤ a0
                          y4       –           –        a0 < 0.34           –          0.34 ≤ a0
                          y1   a0 < 1.35       –            –       1.35 ≤ a0 < 3.26 3.26 ≤ a0
      Boom state          y2       –       a0 < 0.63        –       0.63 ≤ a0 < 1.35 1.35 ≤ a0
   (q = qH , no PTI)      y3       –           –        a0 < 0.63           –          0.63 ≤ a0
                          y4       –           –        a0 < 0.63           –          0.63 ≤ a0


assets (a0 < 0.34) now opt for larger homes using an LD-loan while those in the intermediate
range (a0 ∈ (0.34, 0.63)) continue to buy large homes but use LD loans in the boom since
the price rise makes the downpayment expensive. At the top of the income distribution, all
agents buy large homes but those with low assets now opt more frequently for LD loans.
   The frequency of diﬀerent housing contracts depends both on the decision rules displayed
in Table 4 and on the cross-sectional income and asset distribution. Figure 4 shows the
endogenous asset distribution among households who just became mid-aged in the pre-98
benchmark and in the long boom (i.e. μM,n=0 (A, y|s)). It is clear from the ﬁgure that low
income but high asset agents are a rare type of homeowner during boom times. They turn
out to represent less than 5% of home-owners. All but 15% of households who have the lowest
income choose to remain renters. One key reason why low-income but high-asset households
are rare in this economy is that the income process is highly persistent so that assets and
income are highly correlated. Low income households are heavily concentrated at the bottom
of the asset distribution in both equilibria.
   In summary then, LD loans tend to allow agents with lower assets to start participating
in mortgage markets, to take on bigger loans, or to put less money down even when they
choose to remain at the same loan size. Because the income process is highly persistent,
assets and income tend to be correlated hence the greater frequency of LD loans implies a


                                                39
                   Figure 4: Distribution of assets upon entering mid-age

                                             Pre−98 benchmark
            0.05
                                                                             y = y1
                                                                             y = y2
            0.04                                                             y = y3
                                                                             y = y4
            0.03

            0.02

            0.01

              0
                    0         0.5        1                 1.5     2   2.5             3
                                                              a)
                                              Initial assets (
                                                Long−boom
            0.05
                                                                             y = y1
                                                                             y = y2
            0.04                                                             y = y3
                                                                             y = y4
            0.03

            0.02

            0.01

              0
                    0         0.5        1                 1.5     2   2.5             3
                                                              a)
                                              Initial assets (




greater frequency of low income borrowers. Combined with the direct eﬀect of the relaxation
of PTI constraints, the composition of the pool of borrowers shifts towards the low income
and low asset part of the state space.


5.2    Default

The last column of table 2 shows a large long-run increase in overall default rates (by over
75%) when approval standards are relaxed. Default rates increase during booms as a result
of two complementary factors. First, the greater availability of LD mortgages enable agents
at the bottom of the asset and income distribution to select into homeownership. These
are high-default risk agents because they are more likely to ﬁnd themselves unable to meet
their mortgage payments at some point over the life of the contract. Second, even at equal
asset and income conditions at origination, LD loans are associated with higher default rates


                                                  40
because agents are slower to build up home equity.
   To illustrate the second “equity” channel, ﬁgure 5 displays the evolution of home equity
as a function of maturity for both types of contracts of size qN h3 and given a contract rate
of 14.5%. LD loans feature less equity at all maturities than HD loans for obvious reasons.
The key consequence of this fact is that a devaluation shock is more likely to make net equity
negative for the ﬁrst type of loans, as the bottom panel of the ﬁgure illustrates. The dotted
lines show home equity following a negative idiosyncratic shock. The shock causes equity to
become negative on high-downpayment loans in the ﬁrst eight periods while for high-leverage
loans equity become negative following the same shock for the ﬁrst eleven periods.

                       Figure 5: Mortgage debt and home equity by contract type

                                                      Home equity
              2
                           q h3−b , HD loan
                            n           n
                                3
                           qnh −bn, LD loan
             1.5           q ε h3−b , HD loan
                            n L             n
                                    3
                           qnεLh −bn, LD loan

              1




             0.5




              0




            −0.5




             −1
                   0                            5                      10         15
                                                    Mortgage age (n)




   Figure 6 illustrates the link between loan types and default rates by plotting average
hazard rates (the fraction of remaining loans that default at all possible loan ages) in the
benchmark equilibrium and in the long-boom equilibrium based on random samples of 50,000


                                                       41
loans in each case. LD loans have a higher propensity to default at all ages in both equilibria.
Nevertheless, the gap is very small in the benchmark until at least half-way to maturity. This
is because, as we documented above, pre-boom approval standards are such that low income
agents do not qualify for high-leverage loans. As a result, as a group, LD borrowers are not
much riskier than their HD counterparts. After 8 periods however, the two plots diverge
noticeably. This is because by that time high-leverage borrowers remain in positive equity
territory even if their house devalues while a bad idiosyncratic shocks continues to send LD
borrowers into negative equity territory. In summary then, high-leverage mortgages are not
much riskier than HD loans in the pre-boom economy because selection eﬀects are muted by
tight approval standards.
   In sharp contrast, hazard rates are completely diﬀerent for the two types of loans in
the long boom economy. Agents at the bottom of the asset and income distribution take
advantage of weakened approval standards to become home-owners. LD borrowers are at a
much higher risk of being unable to meet mortgage payments hence default at a much higher
frequency, even early in the loan’s life. Since low downpayments become much more frequent
during the boom and average default rates on those loans rise noticeably, average defaults
rates are bound to rise, which is what table 2 shows.
   To document more systematically the eﬀects of selection and equity eﬀects on default, we
generated a random sample of 50,000 loans originated in the long-boom equilibrium and esti-
mated a competing risk model with the following covariates for borrower i ∈ {1, . . . , 50000}:

  1. the mortgage type (1LD = 1 if the borrower selects a zero-downpayment loan, 0 other-
     wise);

  2. the loan-to-income ratio at origination (LT Yi );

  3. the asset-to-loan ratio at origination (AT Li );

  4. a measure HEi,n ≡ hi,n qH − bn of home-equity on each loan at each possible age
     n = 0, . . . 14 where n is the value of the idiosyncratic value shock on loan i in period n

                                              42
                                  Figure 6: Average default hazard rates

                                                   Pre−1998 hazard rates
                0.04
                                                                                          HD loans
                                                                                          LD loans
                0.03


                0.02


                0.01


                   0
                       0                      5                            10                        15
                                                     Mortgage age (n)
                                                  Long−boom hazard rates
                 0.1
                                                                                          HD loans
                0.08                                                                      LD loans

                0.06

                0.04

                0.02

                   0
                       0                      5                            10                        15
                                                     Mortgage age (n)




        while bn is the loan balance;

  5. the income IN Ci,n of borrower i in period n.

Note that the ﬁrst three covariates are ﬁxed at origination while the last two covariates vary
with loan age.
           e
      Let ξn,i be the hazard rate at loan age n for homeowner i due to event e ∈ {D, S}, where
D stands for default while S stands for sale. We adopt a standard Cox proportional hazard
speciﬁcation for hazard rates, namely:

    e
   ξn,i = H (ωne × exp {βLD
                         e           e
                            1LD,i + βLT            e             e
                                        Y LT Yi + βAT L AT Li + βHE HEn,i + βIN C IN Cn,i }) ,



where H(x) = exp(− exp x) for all x > 0, and ξne is the baseline hazard rate at loan age n.27
 27
      Most of the empirical literature on default rates adopts a version of this proportional hazard speciﬁcation.


                                                         43
    Table 5 shows the result of the estimation. As expected, estimated hazard rates into default
rise with loan-to-income at origination and fall with the asset-to-loan ratio. Income and home
equity have a negative impact on both hazards. After controlling for all these characteristics,
the loan type dummy has no signiﬁcant eﬀect on default which conﬁrms that loan selection
aﬀects survival prospects mainly through its consequences on equity accumulation and because
diﬀerent borrower pools have diﬀerent income distributions.

                           Table 5: Determinants of mortgage termination

               Covariate                          Default                       Sale
               LIP indicator                -0.0661     (0.0417)        -0.4005∗∗∗ (0.0341)
                                                    ∗∗∗
               Loan to Income Ratio          0.3690     (0.0186)         0.8782∗∗∗ (0.0199)
                                                    ∗∗∗
               Assets to Loan Ratio         -0.5938     (0.0472)        -0.8792∗∗∗ (0.3320)
               Income                       -1.0817∗∗∗ (0.0219)         -4.2591∗∗∗ (0.0197)
               Home equity                  -4.5963∗∗∗ (0.0541)         -0.0048∗∗ (0.0215)

Notes: Bootstrapped standard errors (based on 50 replications) are in parenthesis; Log Likelihood :−285818.42;
*** signiﬁcant at 1% level; ** signiﬁcant at 5% level.


    In both the benchmark economy and the boom economy, the vast majority (86% in the
pre-98-benchmark, 78% in the Long Boom) of defaults involve negative equity. The key reason
for this is that agents who have positive equity in their house can always sell unless they can’t
make their mortgage payment (i.e. their budget set happens to be empty). Following an
aggregate price correction (i.e. in the ﬁrst period of the bust in the transition experiment we
describe in the net section), almost all default (over 99%) of defaults involve negative equity.
    While most foreclosures involve negative home equity, most households (roughly 93% in
the pre-98 benchmark, 90% in the Long Boom) with negative home equity choose to keep
their home and continue meeting their mortgage obligations. In the benchmark equilibrium,
It is diﬃcult to compare our results directly to the outcomes of these studies because they usually control
for covariates that have no clear counterpart in our model, and usually lack detailed information on borrower
assets. Gerardi et al., 2009, for instance, include proxies for county-level economic and state-wide house price
conditions, but do not control for assets at origination. Still, theirs and most other papers ﬁnd as we do that
high LTVs at origination and high debt-to-income ratios have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on default rates as do proxies
for home equity and borrower income. We estimate the model using method A in Lunn and McNeil, 1995.


                                                      44
default decisions that are voluntary in the sense that agents could choose to make their current
mortgage payment and do not experience an aging shock that would constrain them to sell
account account for barely 2% of the overall default rate. In the long boom equilibrium, that
share rises to about 15% but remains low. The aging shock is involved in 80% of defaults
on both types loans in the benchmark since most borrowers begin with comparatively high
income or assets before the change in approval standards. In the long boom however, income
shocks play a much more signiﬁcant role, accounting for 35% of all defaults. On LD loans in
particular, three quarters of default entail an income shock in that equilibrium.
   These model predictions are consistent with the empirical literature on the determinants
of foreclosure (see, e.g., Gerardi et al., 2009). Available data suggest that most foreclosures
involve negative equity but that, at the same time, most households with negative equity
choose not to foreclose. Our model, in this sense, captures the fact that most foreclosures
involve a combination of negative equity and other adverse shocks.


5.3      Interest Rates

A distinguishing feature of our model is that mortgage terms depend not only on downpayment
choices but also on the initial asset and income position of borrowers as well as the size of the
loan. Figure 7 plots the menu of equilibrium interest rate oﬀerings conditional on the house
size they opt for and their asset and income position at origination in the aggregate boom
state.
   Some schedules in Figure 7 are left-truncated because agents whose income and assets
are too low do not get a mortgage in equilibrium. The left truncation can be thought of as
an endogenous borrowing constraint associated with diﬀerent borrower characteristics. Some
agents become mid-aged with asset and income characteristics such that the intermediary
could not break even on a mortgage issued to them, which may occur even when the agents
have the means to ﬁnance the initial downpayment. Among agents who do receive a mortgage
oﬀer, rates fall both with assets and income.


                                                45
               Figure 7: Equilibrium interest rate schedules in the boom state

                       HD interest rate schedule for 
                                                     h3                                  HD interest rate schedule for 
                                                                                                                       h2
            0.22                                                              0.22
                                                          y = y1
                                                                                                                            y = y1
                                                          y = y2                                                           y = y2
                                                          y = y3                                                           y = y3
             0.2                                          y = y4              0.2                                          y = y4



            0.18                                                              0.18


            0.16                                                              0.16

                   0    2         4          6       8              10               0    2         4          6       8              10
                                               a)
                               Initial assets (                                                                 a)
                                                                                                 Initial assets (

                       LD interest rate schedule for 
                                                     h3                                  LD interest rate schedule for 
                                                                                                                       h2
            0.22                                                              0.22
                                                          y = y1
                                                                                                                            y = y1
                                                          y = y2                                                           y = y2
                                                          y = y3                                                           y = y3
             0.2                                          y = y4              0.2                                          y = y4



            0.18                                                              0.18


            0.16                                                              0.16

                   0    2         4          6       8              10               0    2         4          6       8              10
                                               a)
                               Initial assets (                                                                 a)
                                                                                                 Initial assets (




   While Figure 7 graphs equilibrium oﬀers, Figure 8 graphs the equilibrium distribution
of interest rates chosen by mortgage type following a long boom period and in the pre-98
benchmark. The distribution of rates on low-downpayment loans displays a large amount of
dispersion because, as we discussed earlier, these loans are taken up both by high-risk and
low-risk borrowers. The dispersion of interest rates becomes much higher during the boom
than in the pre-98 benchmark since only relatively safe borrowers are able to borrow until
approval standards are relaxed.
   Table 6 shows that much of the equilibrium variation in yields can be accounted for by loan
and borrower characteristics at origination in the long boom economy. Once again using our
representative sample of 50,000 mortgages to regress log mortgage rates on assets, income and
loan size at origination yields an R2 of nearly three-quarters. Furthermore, higher assets and
income are associated with lower yields since they reduce the likelihood of default. A higher


                                                                         46
                        Figure 8: Distribution of equilibrium interest rates


                                                     Distribution of interest rates in pre-98 benchmark
                        0.09
                                                                                                                          HD loans
                        0.08                                                                                              LD loans
                        0.07

                        0.06

                        0.05

                        0.04

                        0.03

                        0.02

                        0.01

                          0
                          0.14   0.142   0.144   0.146       0.148         0.15         0.152         0.154   0.156   0.158      0.16




                                                    Distribution of interest rates following a long-boom
                        0.07
                                                                                                                          HD loans
                        0.06                                                                                              LD loans


                        0.05

                        0.04

                        0.03

                        0.02

                        0.01

                          0
                          0.15   0.16    0.17    0.18         0.19          0.2          0.21          0.22   0.23    0.24       0.25




loan size at origination, however, is associated with a lower rate because large loans tend to be
selected by agents with high assets and high income. In our calibration, this selection eﬀect
turns out to more than oﬀsets the fact that large loans obviously involve larger payments.28
       One of the most publicized features of the recent boom period in the US is the explosion
of “subprime” originations. Also well known is the fact that subprime is a diﬃcult notion to
deﬁne precisely. In empirical work, loans are classiﬁed as subprime either because they are
reported as such by lenders or, more compellingly, because they carry a signiﬁcant interest
rate premium over the best-priced (“prime”) loans at origination. Under either deﬁnition,
subprime originations rose considerably in the few years preceding the crisis.
  28
    By way of comparison, consider the 2007 sample of recent home-buyers in the SCF we used to produce
table 3. Among those buyers, interest rates on ﬁrst mortgages are negatively correlated with reported income,
with loan size and with net worth, with the ﬁrst two correlations being statistically signiﬁcant. Running the
regression displayed in table yields coeﬃcients with the right (negative) sign but only income is signiﬁcant
at conventional levels. Furthermore and not surprisingly given the heterogeneity among SCF borrowers and
loans which our model does not contain, the R2 in that regression is low.


                                                                       47
                          Table 6: Determinants of log mortgage rates

                          Covariate             Coeﬃcient
                          Constant               -1.4880∗∗∗         (0.0017)
                          Assets at origination  -0.0724∗∗∗         (0.0004)
                          Income at origination -0.0735∗∗∗          (0.0005)
                          Loan size              -0.0300∗∗∗         (0.0009)
            Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses; R2 = 0.72; *** signiﬁcant at 1% level



   Our model correctly predicts that the frequency of high-priced loans should explode when
approval standards are relaxed. To see this, deﬁne a loan to be high-priced in our simulations
if it carries a rate at origination 300 basis points above the best-priced loan. In normal times,
the fraction of such loans is zero due to strict approval standards. In the boom equilibrium,
that fraction rises to 31%. LD loans, not surprisingly, account for the majority of those
loans (88%) but, importantly, not all LD loans are high-priced since they are used by some
high-income borrowers to buy bigger homes. In the Long Boom equilibrium, as many as
18% of LD loans are priced within 300 basis points of the best rate available hence by that
deﬁnition would be considered prime loans. On the ﬂip side, while most (94%) HD loans are
prime in that sense, the rest are originated to agents whose assets are suﬃcient to meet the
down-payment requirement but whose income is low, and as a result are high-priced.
   In our model like in the data then, leverage and “subprime” loan pricing are correlated but
distinct notions. Some high-income agents employ leverage to buy bigger homes or improve
their consumption proﬁle without becoming risky borrowers. Some very low income agents
have to put down a positive downpayment to keep payments low or be oﬀered a mortgage in
the ﬁrst place.


5.4    The Long-run Eﬀects of Recourse

So far we have maintained the assumption that, in the event of default, the borrower’s liability
is limited to their home. In several states – known as anti-deﬁciency or non-recourse states –


                                                  48
the law does in fact make it diﬃcult for mortgage lenders to pursue deﬁciency judgments. The
list of such states varies but generally includes Arizona, California, Florida (and sometimes
Texas).29 There are other states, known as “one-action” states, that allow the holder of the
claim against the household to only ﬁle one lawsuit to either obtain the foreclosed property
or to sue to collect funds. The list of such “nearly non-recourse” states includes Nevada and
New York. Even in states where deﬁciency judgments are legal, conventional wisdom is that
the costs associated with these judgments are so high, and the expected returns are so low,
that recourse is seldom used.
   Some empirical studies (see Ghent and Kudlyak , 2009) ﬁnd that recourse decreases the
probability of default when there is a substantial likelihood that a borrower has negative
home equity. In this subsection we quantify the role of the recourse for long-run equilibrium
statistics. Table 7 compares long-run statistics in our pre-98 benchmark economy (which
assumes no recourse) to their counterparts in the same economy with recourse. Speciﬁcally,
in the event of default by a borrower with assets a ≥ 0 and house size h, the intermediary
collects min{(1 − χ)qh + a, b} with recourse (as opposed to min{(1 − χ)qh, b} without
recourse), while the household retains max{(1 − χ)qh + a − b, 0} with recourse (as opposed
to max{(1 − χ)qh − b, 0} without recourse). In other words, in the recourse economy, any
asset the household owns at the time of default can be claimed as collateral by the lender.
Recourse imposes a harsher punishment on borrowers, thus lowering the extensive default
margin, and the higher repayment by borrowers lowers the intensive loss incidence margin to
the lender. Both eﬀects on these margins lead to lower interest rates.
   As the table shows, this change in the environment greatly raises average recovery rates
(from 50% to 88%) for obvious reasons. Conditional on a given set of characteristics at
origination, the fact that default is a more costly option and the fact that recoveries are
greater when default does happen make lenders willing to originate loans with a lower risk
premium. With falling payments, it turns out that more agents are able and willing to
  29
     See, for instance, http://www.helocbasics.com/list-of-non-recourse-mortgage-states-and-anti-deﬁciency-
statutes.



                                                    49
                              Table 7: The long-run eﬀects of recourse

                                               Pre-98               Pre-98 benchmark
                                             benchmark                with recourse
                   Home-ownership rate          0.65                       0.76
                   Interest rate on HD loans   0.148                      0.141
                   Interest rate on LD loans   0.153                      0.142
                   Foreclosure discount         0.70                       0.69
                   Recovery rate                0.50                       0.88
                   Fraction of LD loans         0.07                       0.04
                   Foreclosure rate             1.41                       1.35



enter mortgage markets, and the home-ownership rate rises. While each loan is safer due to
recourse, the pool of borrowers changes to allow more low income and low asset agents to
enter. The net result on default rates is a rather small decrease.30
       In summary, the long-run consequences of recourse on default rates are quantitatively
small in our economy. One could be tempted to infer from this result that broader recourse
would have done little to prevent the ﬂare-up in default rates that followed the 2007 home
price correction in the US. That intuition is wrong as the next section will show, and table
7 contains a preview of why it so: LD loans become less popular when recourse broadens
because they make default more likely, and default is now very costly. As the next section
shows and for the same reason, our model predicts that the frequency of LD loans would have
been limited in the few years preceding the crisis had recourse been tougher. Since the next
section will also show that the rise of leverage made the foreclosure crisis twice as large as
it would have been otherwise, tougher recourse would have greatly muted the rise in default
rates.
  30
    Quintin (2012) discusses the interaction of the direct eﬀect and composition eﬀect of recourse in details.
While broader recourse causes rates on loans to fall conditional on borrower characteristics at origination,
the equilibrium eﬀects on default are fundamentally ambiguous because broader recourse can enable riskier
borrowers to obtain a mortgage. This is exactly what transpires in this experiment.




                                                     50
6        The Crisis: Transitional Consequences of Leverage
The previous section shows that relaxing approval standards has signiﬁcant long-run eﬀects
on foreclosure rates by making high-leverage loans much more common and allowing high-risk
borrowers to enter the mortgage market. This section describes an experiment designed to
answer the question “How much of the recent rise in foreclosures can be explained by the
large number of high-leverage mortgage contracts originated during the housing boom?” No
parameters were chosen to match data in this section, so all experiments can also be seen as
a “test” of the model.


6.1       A Boom-bust Experiment

We will think of the recent history of housing markets in the United States as follows. We
assume that in 1998 the US economy is near the long-run distribution that would prevail
following a long period of normal home values and normal approval standards. We take the
following 8 years (1999-2006) as 4 model periods of boom (that is, 4 periods of high home
prices and relaxed approval standards). The economy then returns to the normal state. Data
counterparts are averages over two-year periods for each period of the transition. The ﬁfth
period of the transition, for instance, corresponds to 2007-08, and we think of it as the ﬁrst
two years of the crisis.31
       Figure 9 plots the outcome of the experiment.32 The ﬁrst panel of the ﬁgure shows that
  31
     Following the aggregate price collapse, the intermediary experiences losses for several periods on mortgages
priced before the realization of the aggregate shock. The previous version of this paper detailed how to measure
the intermediary’s losses on a period-by-period basis and imposed lump-sum taxation on households to pay
for the losses. In this version of the paper, those losses amount to a small fraction (at most under 3/10 of
one percent) of aggregate household earnings and as long as such a bailout is unexpected introducing this
taxation does not change our quantitative results. An anticipated bailout, of course, would change mortgage
pricing and hence could change mortgage choices as well. To keep the analysis simple, here we assume that
the risk neutral, deep pocket investors in the intermediary bear the ex-post loss.
  32
     The behavior of the equilibrium variables shown in table 2 but not displayed on the ﬁgure is mostly
stable during the transition. Housing expenditure shares for homeowners rise somewhat due to the increase in
aggregate home prices. This is broadly consistent with the available evidence from the Consumer Expenditure
Survey. The fraction spent on shelter by homeowners goes from 17.3% in 1998 as mentioned in the calibration
section to 18.7% in 2006.



                                                       51
                                                                   Figure 9: The boom-bust


                                             home-ownership rates                                                                fraction of LD loans
                                0.72                                                                                0.4
                                                                           model                                                                          model
                                0.71                                       data                                    0.35                                   data

                                 0.7
                                                                                                                    0.3




                                                                                             % of originations
                                0.69
                                                                                                                   0.25
                                0.68
                                                                                                                    0.2
                                0.67
                                                                                                                   0.15
                                0.66

                                0.65                                                                                0.1

                                0.64                                                                               0.05
                                  Pre-98   2007-08            2017-18         2027-28                                Pre-98   2007-08           2017-18      2027-28




                                           fraction of high-priced loans                                                             default rate
                                0.16                                                                               0.06
                                                         model                                                                                            model
                                0.14                     MBA subprime count data                                                                          data
                                                                                                                   0.05
                                0.12
          % of mortgage stock




                                                                                             % of mortgage stock




                                                                                                                   0.04
                                 0.1

                                0.08                                                                               0.03

                                0.06
                                                                                                                   0.02
                                0.04
                                                                                                                   0.01
                                0.02

                                  0                                                                                  0
                                 Pre-98    2007-08            2017-18         2027-28                               Pre-98    2007-08           2017-18      2027-28




Notes: Data on home-ownership rates are for households whose head is between 30 and 55
years old as estimated by the Census Bureau. The fraction of LD loans is from Pinto (2010,
see ﬁgure 1) until 2006 and roughly estimated as two-thirds of FHA’s share of purchase origi-
nations for 2007-10. The fraction of high-priced loans is compared to the fraction of subprime
mortgages in the stock of mortgages covered by the MBA’s National Delinquency Survey.
Default rates are computed from that same survey as described in the calibration section.

once the boom begins, home-ownership rates start rising towards a peak of roughly 71% at
the onset of the crisis. Even though we did not target that aspect of the data in any fashion,
the model tracks the empirical behavior of this variable remarkably closely.
   The frequency of low-downpayment loans jumps to over 30% during the boom. Compared


                                                                                        52
to the numbers produced for conventional loans by Pinto (2010, see ﬁgure 1) the rise in
LD originations is too sharp which is not surprising since we relax PTIs fully in one period
rather than progressively. Still, recall from ﬁgure 1 that Pinto’s LD origination rate estimate
peaks at near 40% by 2007 as does our model.33 Furthermore, Pinto’s numbers only include
conventional originations hence probably understate the actual share of LD loans during the
boom.
       In the aftermath of the crisis, the share of FHA-insured loans in purchase originations
rose above 25%. Furthermore, roughly two-thirds of FHA loans are issued at LTVs in excess
of 95%34 This suggests that the share of LD loans in origination has remained elevated since
the crisis, as shown in the second panel of ﬁgure 9. Our experiment does not capture that
aspect of the evidence because it assumes a return to pre-98 approval standards following
the home value collapse. Diﬀerent scenarios would require that we augment the model to
include a fourth aggregate shock. It should be clear, however, that the post-crisis strength
of LD originations in the data cannot inﬂuence our counterfactual accounting as long as
it was unexpected during the boom period. Indeed, the foreclosure spike is the result of
decisions made by agents who already have a mortgage when home values collapse and of the
shocks that hit those incumbent borrowers. These borrowers’ choice set and decisions are not
impacted by the PTIs that new borrowers face. As long as the sudden boom in FHA activity
was mostly unforeseen then, the initial behavior of default rates cannot depend on this aspect
of the crisis’ aftermath.
       As we mentioned in the previous section, relaxing approval standards causes the frequency
of high-price loans to rise, as displayed in the third panel of the ﬁgure. By that metric, the
experiment thus generates a signiﬁcant subprime boom, one that closely tracks estimates of
  33
      In other words, the data counterpart for the fraction of LD loans does not rise as much in this ﬁgure as
it does in ﬁgure 1 because the last period of the boom is matched with 2005-06 date, which excludes the 40%
peak reached in Pinto’s data. The 2006-07 average fraction of LD loan in ﬁgure 1 is around 35%, very near
the peak our model predicts.
   34
      See    pages    16   and    17    of    the    2012    US    Department      of   Housing    and    Ur-
ban       Development     Annual    Report      to    Congress,    p17,     available    for   download     at
http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/documents/huddoc?id=F12MMIFundRepCong111612.pdf.



                                                     53
the share of subprime loans in the stock of US mortgages available from the Mortage Bankers
Association (MBA).
   The ﬁnal panel of the ﬁgure shows the key outcome of this transition experiment for our
purposes: the path of default rates during the boom and following the collapse of home prices.
Despite the fact that they are in the process of converging towards the higher long-term level
we analyzed in the previous section, default rates are not very diﬀerent at the onset of the
crisis from what they were before the boom began. Because we model home prices starkly
using three possible values, the default rate actually falls at the start of the boom as all loans
originated at lower aggregate prices receive an equity injection. The eﬀect of that aggregate
injection dissipates over time as pre-existing loans exit the stock of mortgages through sale,
foreclosure, or simply being paid oﬀ.
   Default rates increase by 182% in the ﬁrst period of the crisis relative to their pre-98
baseline. In the National Delinquency Survey data, default rates rise by roughly 185% between
the last quarter of 2006 and the last quarter of 2008 so that our transition experiment captures
more than 98% of the initial spike in default rates. Again, we emphasize that this was not
targeted in our estimation so the fact that the model captures so much of the foreclosure data
provides an important test.
   However, as the quarterly foreclosure numbers in ﬁgure 2 show, while default rates begin
brieﬂy retreating in 2008 they spike again in 2009. The two-year averaged data counterpart
for our model’s default rate correspondingly shows a second peak in the second period (i.e
the 2009-10 time period) of the crisis. Since the experiment so far only contains a one-time
aggregate shock to home prices, it cannot produce that second spike. A second home-price
shock (down to qL ) would generate a second spike, but the data displayed in ﬁgure 2 show
that the aggregate price shock was mostly complete two years into the collapse. A more likely
explanation is that the impact of the housing collapse on the distribution of income caused
the second spike. We will take up this possibility below and show that the frequency of high
leverage loans magnify the impact of income shocks on default rates just like they magnify
the eﬀect of prices drops.

                                               54
6.2    The Importance of Selection

Table 8 shows default rates by borrower types in the pre-1998 benchmark and in the ﬁrst
period of the crisis. In a pure accounting sense, the contribution of LD loans to the increase
in foreclosure rates between 1998 and the peak of the crisis is easy to measure. To see this,
let ξtν be the share of loans of type ν ∈ {HD, LD} in the stock in period t while Dtν is the
default rate on those loans. Using this notation and as a matter of accounting, the overall
default rate at time t is always the sum of two parts


                                   Dt = ξtLD DtLD + ξtHD DtHD .


One way to measure the contribution of LD loans to the increase in default rates between
1998 and the start of the crisis is to divide the total increase in D by the increase in the ﬁrst
element of the sum, namely

                                                            
                         Δ ξtLD DtLD ≈ Δ ξtLD DtLD + ξtLD Δ DtLD

                                                                        
where Δ is the time diﬀerence operator between 2007 and 1998 (e.g. Δ ξtLD = ξ2007
                                                                              LD     LD
                                                                                  − ξ1998 ).
                                                 LD 
   Thus changes in the pool of borrowers (i.e. Δ ξt ) and changes in default rates of that
                 
pool (i.e. Δ DtLD ) matter. The table shows that both the change in the LD share and the
change in the default rate are large, which means that the accounting contribution of LD
loans to the increase in overall default rates is large as well.
   The result of those calculations are diﬃcult to interpret, however, because as this section
shows, new entrants and switchers into the LD pool of borrowers account for much of the
increase in ξtLD DtLD . Restricting leverage would presumably cause many of these borrowers to
make diﬀerent contract choices, exit mortgage markets altogether and/or aﬀect their propen-
sity to default. In particular, whenever ξtLD DtLD changes, ξtHD DtHD is bound to change as
well. Most obviously, as diﬀerent households select into the set of HD borrowers when access
to leverage changes, DtHD is likely to be aﬀected. Our model enables us to measure the eﬀects


                                                55
of access to leverage while taking all endogenous eﬀects into account.
   Almost 28% of LD holders in the ﬁrst period of the crisis are households who took a loan
during the boom and, given their asset and income when they were given the option to buy a
home, would have rented in the pre-98 benchmark. Table 8 shows that in the ﬁrst period of
the crisis these “new entrants” in the LD sample default at 4 times the pace of “incumbent”
LD households do (an incumbent household is deﬁned as one which already had taken an
LD loan before the boom started or had characteristics such that if given the opportunity to
purchase would have opted for an LD loan pre-98). In addition, roughly 28% of LD holders
at the onset of the crisis are “loan-type switchers.” These households took their loan during
the boom and, in the pre-98 economy, would have opted for an HD loan by choice or by
constraint. These loan-type switchers default at almost twice the pace incumbents do when
the crisis strikes. Entry also contributes to the increased default rates on HD loans. Roughly
5% of HD holders are new entrants when the crisis strikes and they default at 3 times the
pace HD incumbents do. We ﬁnd that no households who take an HD loan during the boom
would have taken an LD loan pre-98 (which accounts for “NA” in the table).
   Given these fundamental changes in the composition of each pool of borrowers during the
boom, measuring the eﬀect of diﬀerent mortgage access scenarios on default rates requires
predicting how these scenarios change mortgage housing choices. It also requires predicting
the default decisions of households who are constrained to change mortgage choices but remain
home-owners. Not only do we need to predict who would exit mortgage markets given diﬀerent
access scenarios, we also need to predict how loan-switchers would default if forced to return
to their pre-98 choices. The next section uses our model to run counterfactual experiments
that take these endogenous eﬀects into account.
   The table also shows that, in our model, default rates are not that diﬀerent across loan
types pre-98. As we discussed in the long-run section, the gap in default propensities increases
in the boom state. But it is following the aggregate price correction that the two loan types
truly separate in terms of their propensity to default. This parting of default rates is broadly
consistent with the evidence presented in Figure 4 in Gerardi et. al. (2009.) However, our

                                              56
                          Table 8: Default rates by borrower type

                                                    LD loans    HD loans    All loans
         pre-1998
         Fraction of stock                             6.92       93.08      100.00
         Default rate                                  1.90       1.37        1.41
         First period of the crisis
         Fraction of stock                            17.86       81.14        100
         Default rate                                 10.78       2.50        3.98
         Default rate among incumbents                5.49        2.28        2.57
         Default rate among loan-type switchers       10.28        NA         10.28
         Default rate among new entrants              19.90       7.54        14.70

Notes: All entries are model predictions. New entrants are borrowers who took their loan
during the boom and, given their characteristics at origination, would have been renters in the
pre-98 economy. Loan-type switchers are boom-stage borrowers who would have opted for a
diﬀerent loan type in the pre-98 economy. Incumbents are all other home-owners in the ﬁrst
period of the crisis.

default rates begin drifting signiﬁcantly apart starting in period 2 of the boom period (i.e in
2001-2002) which is somewhat earlier than the evidence in Gerardi et. al. (2009) would seem
to suggest.


6.3    Counterfactuals

To quantify the role of leverage in the crisis using our model, we run two distinct counter-
factuals. In counterfactual 1, we leave the price path as in the baseline experiment but make
approval standards (PTIs on both types of loans) during the boom the same as during normal
times. Since the boom period now features more costly homes without any oﬀsetting changes
in access to mortgages, home-ownership rates fall and the use of high leverage loans remains
virtually unchanged, as ﬁgure 10 displays. Default rates actually fall prior to the boom be-
cause only the safest (high-income and high-asset) borrowers remain home-owners. Default
rates do spike when aggregate home prices collapse but only rise 64% above their pre-boom
level in the ﬁrst two years of the crisis, which is roughly a third of the baseline increase in

                                              57
default rates. This ﬁrst counterfactual thus suggests that relaxed approval standards and the
                                                                                  64
                                                                                            
resulting greater availability of LD loans can account for almost two thirds 1 − 182  ≈ 65%
of the rise in foreclosure rates in the ﬁrst two years of the crisis.
       Counterfactual 2 assumes no changes in approval standards and home prices during the
boom so that the boom period is now nothing but another four periods of normal times. At
the onset of the crisis then, the distribution of borrowers is exactly what it was in 1998, before
approval standards change. The importance of high-leverage loans, in particular, remains at
7% until the crisis strikes. In late 2006, we subject those borrowers to a fall in home values
from qN to qL (which is a fall of roughly 30% in aggregate values, much like in the baseline
experiment.) In that case, foreclosure rates rise by 111%, so that the overall increase in
                                     
default rates is about 39% ≈ 1 − 111
                                  182
                                        lower than in our baseline experiment.35
       Both these counterfactuals ask the same fundamental question: how much lower would
the default rate spike have been had approval standards not changed post 1998? The ﬁrst
one does so assuming that the path of home values would have been the same regardless of
these standards. The second one, in essence, makes the exact opposite assumption: prices
would not have risen during the boom without the change in standards. These two polar
experiments suggest that the contribution of high leverage loans to the initial spike in default
was somewhere between 40% and 65%.
       Why does the second counterfactual suggest a role for LD loans that is signiﬁcantly lower
than what the ﬁrst counterfactual suggests? Once again, the answer is selection. Keeping
approval standards the same, the increase in price causes home-ownership rates to drop.
Intuitively, agents who became home-owners during the boom in the benchmark experiment
but choose to remain renters in counterfactual 1 tend to have lower income and assets than
  35
    Gerardi et. al (2009) run a very similar counterfactual using their econometric model. They subject
borrowers who took a loan in 2002 to the same price history as their 2006 counterparts and ﬁnd (see ﬁgure
10) that 2002 loans would have defaulted at approximately half the rate of their 2005 counterparts. We
view these two approaches as complementary and ﬁnd it reassuring that they yield similar quantitative
answers. The empirical approach is conditional on the econometric structure used to estimate the elasticity
of default decisions to price shocks. The outcome of our counterfactual experiment likewise depends on the
modeling assumptions we make, but, conditional on that economic structure, the eﬀect of diﬀerent price and
underwriting scenarios on default can be measured exactly.


                                                    58
                                                       Figure 10: Leverage counterfactuals


                                            home-ownership rates                                                                      fraction of LD loans
                                                                                                                         0.4
                                                                   model
                                                                   counterfactual 1                                     0.35
                                                                   counterfactual 2
                                                                                                                         0.3
                                 0.7




                                                                                                    % of originations
                                                                                                                        0.25

                                                                                                                         0.2
                                0.65
                                                                                                                        0.15

                                                                                                                         0.1

                                 0.6                                                                                    0.05
                                 Pre-98   2007-08            2017-18            2027-28                                   Pre-98   2007-08           2017-18   2027-28




                                          fraction of high-priced loans                                                                   default rate
                                0.16                                                                                    0.04

                                0.14                                                                               0.035

                                0.12                                                                                    0.03
          % of mortgage stock




                                                                                           % of mortgage stock




                                 0.1                                                                               0.025

                                0.08                                                                                    0.02

                                0.06                                                                               0.015

                                0.04                                                                                    0.01

                                0.02                                                                               0.005

                                  0                                                                                       0
                                 Pre-98   2007-08            2017-18            2027-28                                  Pre-98    2007-08           2017-18   2027-28




those households who buy regardless of approval standards. In countefactual 1 therefore,
only the safest households remain in mortgage markets and those households, as we have
repeatedly discussed in this paper, are more likely to opt for HD loans and are less prone to
payment diﬃculties.




                                                                                          59
6.4       Broader Recourse, Smaller Crisis?

Could the foreclosure crisis have been avoided had tougher recourse statutes been in place
in the United States?36 Figure 11 compares the baseline path of default rates during the
transition to what the path would have been with recourse broadened to include ex-housing
assets. With recourse access is already broad in the pre-98 benchmark hence the relaxation
of approval standards has less impact. The increase in home prices becomes the dominant
impact and home-ownership rates actually fall in the second stage. The increase in LD use
is muted, as the second panel of the ﬁgures shows, and there is no pick up in the frequency
of high-priced, risky loans. Not surprisingly then, the collapse in aggregate home values
only causes default rates to peak at 2%, 50% lower than in the baseline experiment. Even
though recourse has little long term eﬀect on default rates in our model economy as shown
in Subsection 5.4, its presence greatly limits the use of LD loans even when they are broadly
available, and all but eliminates the crisis.
       We should emphasize that this result is obtained under the strong assumption that lenders
can claim ex-housing assets fully and at no cost. In practice, even when households in fore-
closure have other assets to claim, they also have opportunities to protect or dispose of them
before they become subject to deﬁciency judgments. Our experiment should only be inter-
preted as saying that economies where recourse is broad and cost-eﬀective in practice may in
fact be less sensitive to aggregate home price shocks.


6.5       The Second Spike

After declining for two quarters in late 2008, default rates ﬂared up again to reach a new
peak in the last quarter of 2010. Our experiment as it stands cannot generate this second
peak because the only shock occurs in the ﬁrst two years (the ﬁrst model period) of the crisis.
  36
    In a 2008 Wall Street Journal editorial, Martin Feldstein writes: “The no-recourse mortgage is vir-
tually unique to the United States. That’s why falling house prices in Europe do not trigger defaults.
The creditors’ ability to go beyond the house to other assets or even future salary is a deterrent.” See
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB122697004441035727.html.



                                                  60
                                            Figure 11: Broader recourse mitigates the crisis


                                             home-ownership rates                                                                    fraction of LD loans
                                  0.8                                                                                    0.4
                                                                      model
                                                                      with recourse                                     0.35

                                 0.75                                                                                    0.3




                                                                                                    % of originations
                                                                                                                        0.25

                                  0.7                                                                                    0.2

                                                                                                                        0.15

                                 0.65                                                                                    0.1

                                                                                                                        0.05

                                  0.6                                                                                     0
                                  Pre-98   2007-08            2017-18           2027-28                                  Pre-98   2007-08           2017-18   2027-28




                                           fraction of high-priced loans                                                                 default rate
                                 0.16                                                                                   0.04

                                 0.14                                                                              0.035

                                 0.12                                                                                   0.03
           % of mortgage stock




                                                                                           % of mortgage stock




                                  0.1                                                                              0.025

                                 0.08                                                                                   0.02

                                 0.06                                                                              0.015

                                 0.04                                                                                   0.01

                                 0.02                                                                              0.005

                                   0                                                                                      0
                                  Pre-98   2007-08            2017-18           2027-28                                  Pre-98   2007-08           2017-18   2027-28




One explanation for the second peak is the fact that the housing crisis was followed by a
deterioration of household income. To evaluate this possibility while retaining tractability,
we consider the eﬀect of a one-time, fully unexpected shock to the income distribution at the
start of the second period of the bust.37 Speciﬁcally, we consider a ﬁrst-order degradation
of the income distribution indexed by ζ ∈ (0, 1) among young mid-aged agents. For any
y ∈ Y Y or y ∈ Y M , an agent whose income is currently y remains at that income level
with probability 1 − ζ but, in the complementary event, sees their income fall with equal
  37
    The fact that the change in the distribution is unexpected means we do not need to add more aggregate
states.


                                                                                          61
probability to one of the lower income levels.
    In other words, while agents make decisions thinking that the transition probability matrix
between the ﬁrst and the second period of the bust will be P Y or P M as expected, the actual
transition matrix is the expected one convoluted with:
                                  ⎡                               ⎤
                                       1      0        0     0
                               ⎢                                  ⎥
                               ⎢                                  ⎥
                               ⎢       ζ    1−ζ        0     0    ⎥
                            P =⎢
                             ζ
                               ⎢
                                                                  ⎥.
                                                                  ⎥
                                       ζ      ζ
                               ⎢                      1−ζ    0    ⎥
                               ⎣       2      2                   ⎦
                                       ζ      ζ        ζ
                                       3      3        3
                                                            1−ζ

We set ζ = 0.2126 so that average household income (y + ar) at the start of the second period
of the bust is 15% below what it was at the start of the ﬁrst period. According to Saez (2013),
average real income declined by 17.4% between 2007 and 2009.
    Figure 12 shows the outcome of the experiment. The model now predicts a second spike in
the second period of the crisis of a magnitude very similar to the data. In either counterfactual
experiment and in sharp contrast, the income shock has little impact on the path of default
rates since there are much fewer negative equity loans in the stock when the income shock
hits. Put another way, the frequency of high leverage loans magniﬁes the eﬀect on default
rates of the aggregate income shock much like they magnify the eﬀect of the aggregate price
shock.



7     Conclusion
The calculations we present in this paper suggest that the rise in high leverage loans between
1999 and 2006 accounted for somewhere between 40% and 65% of the magnitude of the
foreclosure crisis. We also ﬁnd a quantitatively signiﬁcant role for recourse in the short run.
    Our ﬁndings raise at least two natural questions. First, did relaxed approval standards and
higher leverage mortgages directly contribute to the run-up and eventual collapse in home-



                                                 62
        Figure 12: Model with aggregate income shock in second period of the crisis


                                            home-ownership rates                                                                   fraction of LD loans
                                                                                                                      0.4
                                                                   model
                                                                   counterfactual 1                                  0.35
                                                                   counterfactual 2
                                                                   data
                                                                                                                      0.3
                                 0.7




                                                                                               % of originations
                                                                                                                     0.25

                                                                                                                      0.2
                                0.65
                                                                                                                     0.15

                                                                                                                      0.1

                                 0.6                                                                                 0.05
                                 Pre-98   2007-08            2017-18            2027-28                                Pre-98   2007-08           2017-18   2027-28




                                          fraction of high-priced loans                                                                default rate
                                0.16                                                                                 0.06

                                0.14
                                                                                                                     0.05
                                0.12
          % of mortgage stock




                                                                                               % of mortgage stock




                                                                                                                     0.04
                                 0.1

                                0.08                                                                                 0.03

                                0.06
                                                                                                                     0.02
                                0.04
                                                                                                                     0.01
                                0.02

                                  0                                                                                    0
                                 Pre-98   2007-08            2017-18            2027-28                               Pre-98    2007-08           2017-18   2027-28




prices? Second, what caused the marked change in mortgage practices starting in 1999?
   Our model takes the path of home prices as given. If high leverage mortgages contributed
to the price collapse directly as well, their contribution to the crisis may be even greater than
our numbers suggest. For instance, the availability of these mortgages may have led to some
form of overbuilding as in Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2009). Their presence may also have
contributed to the fragility and eventual freeze of the ﬁnancial system, leading to a collapse
of demand for housing, hence of housing prices. Formalizing and quantifying these ideas are
promising avenues for future work, and should reinforce our main message: the rise of leverage


                                                                                          63
played a signiﬁcant role in the recent foreclosure boom.
   As for what caused the change in the composition of mortgage originations starting in the
late 1990s, or alternatively, the relaxation of approval standards, several explanations have
been proposed. For instance, some view it as the natural consequence of the US government’s
eﬀort to promote home-ownership over the past two decades, which included a loosening of
the restrictions on what mortgages government-sponsored agencies could back or purchase.
Our experiments are consistent with the idea that greater access to mortgage markets –
whatever its cause – was a driving force behind the rise of home-ownership during the boom.
Further research into endogenizing the timing and reasons for changes in approval standards
will greatly enhance our understanding of the current foreclosure crisis.




                                              64
  Bibliography

Bokhari, S., Torous, W., and W. Wheaton (2013), “Why did Household Mortgage Leverage
   Rise from the mid-1980s until the Great Recession?,” mimeo, Massachusetts Institute
   of Technology, Center for Real Estate.

Bunce, H., Capone, C., Neal, S., Reeder, W., Scheessele, R., and E. Szymanoski (1995) “An
   Analysis of FHA’s Single-Family Insurance Program,” US Department of Housing and
   Urban Development report HUD -7017.

Campbell, J. Y., and Cocco, J. F. (2012) “A Model of Mortgage Default,” mimeo, Harvard
   University.

Chatterjee, S., D. Corbae, M. Nakajima, and V. Rios-Rull (2007) “A Quantitative Theory
    of Unsecured Consumer Credit with Risk of Default,” Econometrica, 75, pp 1525-1589.

Chatterjee, S. and B. Eyigungor (2009) “Foreclosures and House Price Dynamics: A Quan-
    titative Analysis of the Mortgage Crisis and the Foreclosure Prevention Policy,” Federal
    Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper 09-22. x

Davis, M., Lehnert, A., and R. Martin, “The Rent-Price Ratio for the Aggregate Stock of
    Owner-Occupied Housing,” Review of Income and Wealth, 54, pp. 279-284.

Duca, J., Muellbauer, J., and A. Murphy (2011), “House Prices and Credit Constraints:
   Making Sense of the US Experience,” Economic Journal 121, pp 533-551.

Feldstein, M. (2008, November 18) “How to Help People Whose Home Values Are Under-
    water,” Wall Street Journal editorial.

Foote, C., K. Gerardi, and P. Willen (2012)“Why Did So Many People Make So Many Ex
    Post Bad Decisions? The Causes of the Foreclosure Crisis,” Federal Reserve Bank of
    Boston Public Policy Discussion Papers, No 12-2.

Garriga and D. Schlagenhauf (2009) “Home Equity, Foreclosures, and Bail-outs,” Unpub-
    lished manuscript.

Gerardi, K., A. Shapiro, and P. Willen (2009) “Decomposing the Foreclosure Crisis: House
    Price Depreciation versus Bad Underwriting”, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working
    Paper 2009-25.

Gerardi, K., Lehnert, A., S. M. Sherland and P. Willen (2008, Fall) “Making Sense of the
    Subprime Crisis, ” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

Glaeser, E., Gottlieb, J., and J. Gyourko (2010), “Can Cheap Credit Explain the Housing
    Boom?,” NBER Working Papers 1623.

                                            65
Ghent, A. C. and M. Kudlyak (2009) “Recourse and Residential Mortgage Default: Theory
   and Evidence from U.S. States,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper
   09-10.x

Green, R. K. and S. Malpezzi (1993) “US Housing Markets and Housing Policy”, The Urban
    Institute Press, Washington D.C.

Guler, B. (2008) “Innovations in Information Technology and the Mortgage Market,” mimeo,
    University of Texas at Austin.

Harding J. P., Rosenthal, S. S., and C.F. Sirmans (2007)“Depreciation of housing capital,
    maintenance, and house price inﬂation: Estimates from a repeat sales model,” Journal
    of Urban Economics 61(2), pp 193-217.

Hatchondo, J. C., Martinez, L., and J. Sanchez (2011) “Mortgage Defaults,” Federal Reserve
    Bank of Saint-Louis Fed Working Paper 2011-019A.

Hayre L. S., and M. Saraf (2008) “A Loss Severity Model for Residential Mortgages”, Journal
    of Fixed Income, pp 5-31.

Herkenhof , K., and L. Ohanian (2012) “Foreclosure Delay and U.S. Unemployment,” Federal
    Reserve Bank of Saint-Louis Fed Working Paper 2012-017A.

Jeske, K., D. Krueger, and K. Mitman (2011) “Housing and the Macroeconomy: The Role
    of Bailout Guarantees for Government Sponsored Enterprises,” NBER Working Paper
    w17537.

Kahn, J. (2008) “What Drives Housing Prices?,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staﬀ
   Report No. 345.

Lunn, M., and D. McNeil (1995), “Applying Cox regression to competing risks,” Biometrics,
   pp 524-32.

Mayer, C., K. Pence, and S. Sherlund (2009). “The Rise in Mortgage Defaults,” Journal of
   Economic Perspectives, 23(1), p. 27-50.

Mitman, K. (2012) “ Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Bankruptcy and Foreclosure Policies”, mimeo,
    University of Pennsylvania.

Pennington-Cross, A. (2006) “The Value of Foreclosed Property,” Journal of Real Estate
    Research, vol. 28(2), pp 193-214.

Pinto, E. (2010) “Government Housing Policies in the Lead-up to the Financial Crisis: A
    Forensic Study,” Discussion draft, American Enterprise Institute.

Quintin, E. (2012), “More Punishment, Less Default?,” Annals of Finance, 8, pp. 427-454.

                                           66
Saez, E, (2013) “Striking it Richer: The Evolution of Top Incomes in the United States,”
    mimeo, University of California, Berkeley.

Shiller, R. (2000) “Irrational Exuberance,” Princeton University Press.




                                           67
          Computational Appendix (not intended for publication)

A   Long Run Equilibrium
1. In the model, except for assets, all other state variables are elements of ﬁnite sets. We
   discretize the asset space into twenty grid points between 0 and 10 times the median
   income level. The last value of the asset grid is chosen so that no households are
   constrained at the highest asset grid point. The asset grid is unevenly spaced where
   every point of an equally spaced grid between 0 and 102/3 is raised to the 3/2 power. This
   type of grid contains more points close to zero and oﬀers better numerical performance.

2. Use value function iteration to ﬁnd VO (a; s) from which we obtain savings decision rules
   for old agents.

3. Assuming γ = 0, obtain a candidate value function VMR (a, y; s) from which we obtain
   savings decision rules for mid-aged renters.

4. Find the value function for mid-aged homeowners who have paid oﬀ their mortgage
     (ν,κ)
   VM (a, y, , n ≥ T ; s) from which we obtain saving and home sales decision rules.

5. Calculate homeowners value functions where n ∈ {0, ..., T − 1}.

    (a) To avoid calculating value functions for contracts which are not feasible for a given
        ν (say ν0 ) and house size h (say h0 ) with κ = (a, y, h0 ; s) (i.e. to ensure ν0 ∈ K),
        check if the household in that state has enough assets to make a downpayment
        (i.e. constraint (3.1) is satisﬁed) and that if the mortgage rate is given by riν0 (κ),
        the implied mortgage payment meets the PTI requirement (i.e. constraint (3.2) is
        satisﬁed). As an initial guess, let r0ν0 (κ) = r + φ (i.e. the risk free rate).
                                                                                (ν,κ)
    (b) For each feasible ν0 and h0 , use backward induction starting from VM           (a, y, , h0 , n =
        T − 1; s) to an initial value function
          (ν ,κ)
        VM 0 (a, y, 1, h0 , n = 0; s) with the risk-free rate as the initial guess for the mort-
        gage interest rate. The former value functions yield saving, default, and sale de-
        cision rules for n ∈ {1, ..., T − 1}. The ﬁnal value function VM (a, y, n = 0; s) =
                                 (ν ,κ)
        maxν0 ∈K,h0 ∈{h2 ,h3 } {VM 0 (a, y, 1, h0 , n = 0; s)} yields the optimal mortgage choice.
                      (ν,κ)
    (c) Calculate W0 (a, y,  = 1; s) according to the resulting decision rules for all
        possible paths of (y, , s).
                                   (ν,κ)
    (d) If the present value of W0 (a, y,  = 1; s) is less than the initial loan size, increase
                                                     ν0
        the interest rate by a small amount (i.e. ri+1   (κ) > riν0 (κ) ) and repeat this step.
        Otherwise, the equilibrium interest rate is found.



                                             68
    6. Once we obtain the value functions for homeowners, we can update the values of mid-
       aged renters by using the true γ. Repeat from step 4 and iterate until the value function
       for mid-aged renters converges.

    7. Find VY (a, y; s) from which we obtain asset decision rules for young agents. Because of
       a potential discontinuity caused by the downpayment requirements, the value functions
       for young agents are solved for by grid search (all others use interpolation).

    8. Compute a long run cross-sectional distribution for any s by starting at normal times,
       with zero assets, using the invariant distribution of income for the young and ﬁnd the
       sequence of distributions given in subsection 3.3.


B       Transition Dynamics
    1. Begin with the benchmark equilibrium distribution generated with a long sequence
       st = N such that the distribution diﬀerence from another N draw of the aggregate
       shock is below double precision.

    2. Use the operators in Section 3.3 to compute μt+1         t     t+1     t       t+1       t
                                                        Y (A , y |s ), μM,R (A , y |s ), μM,n=0 (A , y |s ),
       μt+1                      t        t+1  t
        M,n≥1 (A , y ,  , n , ν, κ|s ), and μO (A |s ) with aggregate shock st+1 = H.

    3. Repeat step 2 for st+2 = st+3 = st+4 = H and sτ = N for τ > t + 4.




                                                   69
