NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXCHANGE RATES AND INTEREST PARITY
Charles Engel
Working Paper 19336
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19336

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

This essay is to appear as a chapter in the Handbook of International Economics, vol. 4 (Elsevier),
edited by Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff. I thank Philippe Bacchetta and Fabio
Ghironi, as well as Gita Gopinath and Ken Rogoff for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Charles Engel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Exchange Rates and Interest Parity
Charles Engel
NBER Working Paper No. 19336
August 2013
JEL No. F31,F41,G15
ABSTRACT
This paper surveys recent theoretical and empirical contributions on foreign exchange rate determination.
The paper first considers monetary models under uncovered interest parity and rational expectations.
Then the paper considers deviations from UIP/rational expectations: foreign exchange risk premium,
private information, near-rational expectations, and peso problems.

Charles Engel
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
and NBER
cengel@ssc.wisc.edu

1. Exchange Rates and Interest Parity
This chapter surveys empirical and theoretical research since 1995 (the publication date of the previous
volume of the Handbook of International Economics) on the determination of nominal exchange rates. This
research includes innovations to modeling based on new insights about monetary policymaking and
macroeconomics. While much work has been undertaken that extends the analysis of the effects of traditional
macroeconomic fundamentals on exchange rates, there have also been important developments that examine
the role of non-traditional determinants such as a foreign exchange risk premium or market dynamics.
This chapter follows the convention that the exchange rate of a country is the price of the foreign currency
in units of the domestic currency, so an increase in the exchange rate is a depreciation in the home currency. St
denotes the nominal spot exchange rate, and st { log( St ) .
A useful organizing feature for this chapter is the definition of Ot :
(1.1)

Ot { it*  Et st 1  st  it .

In this notation, it is the nominal interest rate on a riskless deposit held in domestic currency between periods

t and t  1 , while it* is the equivalent interest rates for foreign-currency deposits. 1 Et st 1 is the rational

expectation of st 1 - the mean of the probability distribution of st 1 , conditional on all information available to
the market at time t . Ot is the difference between (approximately) the expected return on the foreign-currency
deposit expressed in units of the domestic currency, it*  Et st 1  st , and it . It can be called the deviation from
uncovered interest parity 2, the expected excess return, or less generally, the foreign exchange risk premium.
Rearrange equation (1.1) to get:
(1.2)

st { (it  it* )  Ot  Et st 1 .

An increase in the domestic to foreign short-term interest differential, it  it* , ceteris paribus is associated with
an appreciation. An increase in the expected excess return on the foreign deposit, Ot , is also associated, ceteris
paribus, with an appreciation. Holding interest rates and Ot constant, a higher expected future exchange rate

implies a depreciation.
Models of the exchange rate for the past 40 years have often focused on the case in which Ot

0 . Let qt be

the log of the real exchange rate (the relative foreign to domestic consumer price levels, expressed in common
units, where pt is the log of the domestic consumer price index (CPI), and pt* is the log of the foreign CPI in
foreign currency units), so qt
(1.3)

st  pt*  pt , and set Ot

st { (it  it* )  E t S t 1  Et S t*1  pt  pt*  Et qt 1

0 . Equation (1.2) can be written as:
( rt  rt* )  pt  pt*  Et qt 1 ,

where S t 1 { pt 1  pt is approximately the domestic inflation rate and rt { it  Et S t 1 is approximately the
1
2

Generally, a superscript * in the chapter refers to a foreign-country variable.
This is a version of uncovered interest parity that assumes rational expectations.

1

domestic ex ante real interest rate (with analogous definitions for the foreign variables.) Iterate equation (1.3)
forward to get:
f

st { ¦ Et (it  j  it* j )  lim Et st  j 1
j 0

(1.4)

j of

f

f

j 0

j 0

¦ Et (it  j  it* j )  ¦ Et (S t  j 1  S t* j 1 )  pt  pt*  lim Et qt  j 1 .
j of

f

¦ Et (rt  j  rt* j )  pt  pt*  lim Et qt  j 1
j 0

j of

This equation summarizes the concerns of the literature that sets Ot

0 , and also helps to demarcate the scope

of this essay. Monetary models of exchange rates have focused on the role of monetary policy in setting
interest rates and determining inflation. These models have also emphasized the macroeconomic forces that
determine expected future interest rates, real and nominal, and expected future inflation. We will survey recent
developments in this line of research.
The term lim Et qt  j 1 can be thought of as the long-run real exchange rate. This survey will not attempt to
j of

encompass the large literature that examines the neoclassical determinants of equilibrium real exchange rates.
The chapter is about nominal exchange rates, but economists, policymakers and individuals are concerned
about nominal exchange rates mostly because they believe that their fluctuations matter for real exchange rates
and other relative prices such as the terms of trade, so we focus on models in which the determination of real
prices depends integrally on the nominal exchange rate level.
We are also not concerned with the pt  pt* term. This term is of course important in nailing down the level
of nominal exchange rates – it helps to answer the question of why a dollar buys 80 yen instead of 8 yen. It
also is important in high-inflation countries for understanding shocks to the nominal exchange rate,

st  Et 1 ( st ) . Here we stipulate that in these high-inflation countries, monetary growth is most influential in
determining the variance of pt  Et 1 ( pt ) . There is little need to go further than that for high-inflation
countries; and for low-inflation countries, the behavior of pt  Et 1 ( pt ) contributes little to our understanding
of nominal exchange rate shocks, so we set it aside.
Much recent theorizing about exchange rate determination focuses on Ot . There are a number of reasons
why Ot may not equal zero. If agents require a higher expected return on foreign compared to domestic
deposits, because of a foreign exchange risk premium or some sort of liquidity premium, then Ot z 0 . The
definition of Ot used rational expectations, but participants in the market may form expectations using some
other algorithm. There might be private information relevant for the demand for foreign and home deposits, so
even if agents all form their expectations rationally on the basis of their own information, the market
equilibrium condition might not aggregate to it*  Et st 1  st

it . Individuals might have “rational inattention”,

2

so that they do not act continuously on publicly available information. The market microstructure – how
foreign currency demand and supply gets translated into a price for foreign exchange – might affect the market
equilibrium. The modern “asset-market” approach is built off the assumption that capital flows freely between
markets, but capital controls or other transactions costs can upset the asset-market equilibrium, as could other
limits to arbitrage such as collateral constraints. Equation (1.4) can be generalized to:
f

f

j 0

j 0

st { ¦ Et (it  j  it* j )  ¦ Et Ot  j  lim Et st  j 1
j of

f

f

f

j 0

j 0

j 0

¦ Et (it  j  it* j )  ¦ Et (S t  j 1  S t* j 1 )  ¦ Et Ot  j  pt  pt*  lim Et qt  j 1 ,

(1.5)

f

f

j 0

j 0

j of

¦ Et (rt  j  rt* j )  ¦ Et Ot  j  pt  pt*  lim Et qt  j 1
j of

which demonstrates that it is not only current but also expected future values of Ot that matter for the exchange
rate.
Of special interest are the theories of Ot that might account for the uncovered interest parity puzzle. This is
the empirical puzzle that finds over many time periods for many currency pairs the slope coefficient in the
regression:
(1.6)

st 1  st

a  b(it  it* )  ut 1

is less than one and often negative. Under the null hypothesis that Ot

0 in equation (1.1), the regression

coefficients should be a 0 and b 1 . This survey will draw the link between models that are derived to
explain the empirical findings concerning regression (1.6) and the implications of the implied behavior of Ot
for the exchange rate. In addition to the theoretical reasons noted in the previous paragraph for why we might
have Ot z 0 , the literature has also raised the possibility that empirical work mismeasures Et st 1 (the “peso
problem”), or that econometric issues lead to spurious rejection of the null hypothesis.
The plan of the chapter is to consider first the “traditional” asset market approach, in which Ot

0 . We

survey how the New Keynesian literature has given theoretical and empirical insights into nominal exchange
rate behavior. We consider exchange rate dynamics and volatility, and whether models are useful for
forecasting exchange rate changes.
Then we consider different exchange-rate regimes and survey the large empirical literature on sterilized
foreign exchange market intervention in floating-exchange rate countries.
The last part of the survey turns to models of Ot . We take up the literature that has modeled foreign
exchange risk premiums, and approaches that allow for violations of the representative-agent rationalexpectations framework. Both have implications for the determination of exchange rates and the resolution of
the uncovered interest parity puzzle.

3

2. Monetary Sticky-Price Models of Exchange Rates
2.a New Keynesian monetary models

In this section, we ignore deviations from uncovered interest parity, Ot

0 and we give scant attention to

determinants of the equilibrium long-run level, lim Et (qt  j 1 ) . Equation (1.4) shows that qt in this case
j of

depends only on the behavior of current and expected future real interest rates in the domestic and foreign
countries. In sticky-price monetary models, the proximate determinant of ex ante real interest rates is monetary
policy. A tight monetary policy increases the real interest rate, and an easy monetary policy lowers it. If real
interest rates are positively serially correlated, expected future real interest rates tend to move in the same
direction as the current real interest rate. Then a monetary contraction leads to a real appreciation, and
monetary easing to a real depreciation.
This is the conclusion reached in the textbook Mundell-Fleming model, in Dornbusch’s (1976) classic
contribution to the asset-market approach to exchange-rates, and in modern New Keynesian models, but this
description only presents part of the picture. Real exchange rates and real interest rates are endogenous
macroeconomic variables. Their dynamic path, and the determination of expected future real interest rates,
depend on the structure of the macroeconomy. There are differences in the structure of the models and in the
dynamics of real exchange rates in Dornbusch’s approach versus the standard New Keynesian model. The New
Keynesian models are derived from optimizing behavior by households and firms under uncertainty, while
Dornbusch’s model is behavioral and derived under perfect foresight with no shocks except an initial monetary
policy surprise. If firms are slow to adjust prices, they must have enough power in the market to set their own
prices.

They cannot be perfectly competitive price takers. New Keynesian models posit that firms are

monopolistic, with the economy populated by many such firms whose products are imperfect substitutes for
each other. The models assume that not all firms are able to adjust nominal prices every period. Because firms
are monopolists, when they are able to set prices, they set them above average and marginal cost, and earn
profits. When the firm subsequently cannot change its price, it is willing to sell the amount demanded (for
small enough changes in demand) because the firm makes a profit on each unit sold.
In Dornbusch, the money supply is the instrument of monetary policy, and the price level is determined in
the long-run independently of initial prices. In many New Keynesian models, the interest rate is the instrument
of monetary policy. Inflation rates are determined in the model, but the price level even in the long run
depends on past prices. Finally, monetary policy is exogenous in the Dornbusch model – it is determined as an
exogenous path for the money supply. In many New Keynesian model, the interest rate is set according to a
policy rule, where the interest rate reacts to inflation, the output gap and possibly other variables.
We consider here a simple New Keynesian two-country model (the countries are designated Home and
Foreign). It assumes uncovered interest parity holds. In terms of equation (1.1), Ot
(2.1)

it

0:

it*  Et st 1  st .

4

Monetary policy sets the interest rate endogenously. A simple Taylor rule for the Home country takes the
form:
(2.2)

it

rt  VS t  D (it 1  rt 1 )  H t , V  D ! 1 , 0 d D  1 .

The Home country policymaker tightens monetary conditions by increasing the nominal short-term interest
rate, but it practices interest-rate smoothing so that the current interest rate depends on the previous period’s
rate. rt is the “Wicksellian” real interest rate – here it is the real interest rate that would prevail if prices fully
adjusted instantaneously. In other words, if the central bank hit its target of zero inflation at all times, and

Ht

0 , it would want it to equal rt . H t accounts for other influences in setting the interest rate, so that higher

values of H t mean tighter money. Taking into account the gradual adjustment of the interest rate, the ultimate
effect of an increase in inflation on the nominal interest rate is, ceteris paribus, equal to V /(1  D ) . The
condition V  D ! 1 amounts to a condition that an increase in inflation leads policymakers eventually to
increase the nominal interest rate more than one for one.
The aggregate relationships in New Keynesian models are derived from the underlying decisions of
households and firms. Each country produces a range of products, with each good being produced by a
monopolist. In this model, labor markets are competitive and workers are mobile between sectors within an
economy.
We assume that the two countries are symmetric, and to keep with a simple example, that they have
identical preferences so there is no “home bias” in consumption. S t is the consumer price index inflation rate,
which is the simple average of the inflation rates in the Home country of the goods produced in each country.
We assume the Foreign policymaker follows a rule similar to (2.2), with the same parameters. Foreign
monetary policy targets the Foreign inflation rate, S t* , and includes other exogenous factors, H t* . The Foreign
policy rule is given by:
(2.3)

it*

rt *  VS t*  D (it*1  rt *1 )  H t* .

Since Home and Foreign consumers have identical preferences, if faced with the same price they would
consume the same basket, and purchasing power parity would hold all the time. However, we can assume that
there is pricing to market that arises from a particular type of nominal price stickiness. Assume that firms set
different prices for their goods sold in each country, and each of those prices is sticky in the currency in which
it is set – “local-currency pricing” or LCP. This contrasts to the New Keynesian models of Obstfeld and Rogoff
(1995a) and Clarida, Gali and Gertler (2002) that assume producers set nominal prices in their own currency,
and the law of one price holds. The price of imported goods for consumers then fluctuates with the exchange
rate. That type of price stickiness is known as “producer-currency pricing” or PCP.
We assume Calvo price setting. Under this price-setting mechanism, any given firm has a constant
hazard rate of changing its two prices in a given period. The firm cannot adjust prices at all during a given
period unless it receives a signal that it “won the lottery” and is allowed to change prices in the period. Because

5

preferences are identical, the only source of movements in the real exchange rate is attributable to the LCP
price stickiness, which engenders deviations from the law of one price as the nominal exchange rate fluctuates.
These deviations are expected to converge toward zero, so long run purchasing power parity holds.
Consider the evolution of the price for Home firms for sale in the Home market. The log of the
aggregate price of these goods is given by
(2.4)

(1  T ) p Ht  T pHt 1 .

p Ht

p Ht is the log of the price of firms that reset their price in period t . A fraction 1  T reset their price, so
equation (2.4) describes the evolution of the aggregate price of Home goods at Home.
Firms produce output using only labor, so wt  at is the log of the unit cost. wt is the log of the nominal
wage, and at is the log of labor productivity. If prices were completely flexible, pHt would be set equal to

wt  at (plus a constant mark-up.) With a discount factor of E and a probability T that the price will not
change, the firms that reset prices in time t set them to maximize the expected present discounted value of
profits, which implies that (to a log-linear approximation) the optimal price satisfies the recursion:
(2.5)

(1  TE )( wt  at )  TE Et p Ht 1 .

p Ht

With a bit of manipulation, equations (2.4) and (2.5) give us:
(2.6)

S Ht

G ( wt  at  pHt )  E Et S Ht 1 ,

G { (1  T )(1  TE ) / T ,

where S Ht { pHt  pHt 1 . The larger the probability that a firm will be able to adjust its price, the larger is G .
The cost per unit in Foreign currency terms of the Home good is wt  st  at . Following similar steps as in
the derivation of (2.6), we can find an equation for the evolution of prices of Home goods sold in the Foreign
*
:
country, priced in Foreign currency, pHt

(2.7)

*
S Ht

*
*
G ( wt  at  st  pHt
)  E Et S Ht
1 ,

*
*
*
{ pHt
 pHt
where S Ht
1 . Then (2.6) and (2.7) give us:

(2.8)

*
S Ht  S Ht

*
*
 pHt )  E Et (S Ht 1  S Ht
G ( st  pHt
1 ) .

In a symmetric model, the deviations from the law of one price are equal for Home- and Foreign-produced
goods:
(2.9)

*
pHt  st  pHt

*
pFt  st  pFt
,

which also implies
(2.10)

pFt  pHt

*
*
pFt
 pHt
.

Under the assumption of identical preferences, pt
*
S Ht  S Ht

S Ft  S Ft*

S t  S t* . Also, qt { st  pt*  pt

( pHt  pFt ) / 2 , and pt*
*
st  pHt
 pHt

*
*
( pHt
 pFt
) / 2 . In this case,

*
st  pFt
 pFt . We can then derive the

relationship:
(2.11) S t  S t*

G qt  E Et (S t 1  S t*1 ) .

6

Uncovered interest parity, equation (2.1), along with the Taylor rule, (2.2), and its Foreign equivalent, (2.3)
, and the price adjustment equation (2.11), allow us to derive a three-equation dynamic system for the real
exchange rate, and Home relative to Foreign inflation: 3
(2.12)

Et zt 1

Bzt  wt ,

ªS t  S t* º
«
»
« qt » , wt
« it 1 »
¬
¼

where zt

ª 0 º
«H  H * » , B
t »
« t
«¬H t  H t* »¼

ª 1/ E
«(VE  1) / E
«
«¬
V

G / E
0º
( E  G ) / E D »» .
0
D »¼

At time t, only one element of zt is predetermined. Both S t  S t* and qt may jump in response to
contemporaneous Home or Foreign monetary shocks. Algebraically, for the dynamic system (2.12) to have a
unique stable solution, two roots of the matrix B must be greater than one, which requires V  D ! 1 . 4 This is
the familiar “Taylor condition” that the central banks ultimately raise nominal interest rates more than one-forone with an increase in inflation.
The solution to equation (2.12) in general is somewhat complicated. We will consider some special cases.
In the first case, we will assume that the errors to the monetary policy rules are i.i.d. random variables that have
mean zero; i.e., Et H t  j

Et H t* j

0 for j ! 0 . We will also make the following assumption on the parameters:

V  D 1/ E . We make this assumption only because it allows for a simpler algebraic solution, but make two
observations. First, this assumption on the parameters does satisfy the condition for a stable unique solution.
Second, the equations in (2.12) can be rewritten under this assumption to give us:
(2.13) it  Et S t 1  it*  Et S t*1

§G
¨
©E

·
*
*
*
¸ qt  D ª¬it 1  S t  it 1  S t º¼  H t  H t .
¹

We can interpret this equation as saying that the Home less the Foreign real interest rate is set by policymakers
to rise when there is a home real depreciation (an increase in qt ). There is real interest rate smoothing in which
the ex ante real interest rate at time t responds to the lagged ex post real interest rate. Under this assumption on
parameters, the eigenvalues of the matrix B in equation (2.12) are given by 1/ E , P1 , and P2 , where

P1
and P2

1
2

1  D  G / E  (1  D  G / E ) 2  4D ! 1 ,

D / P1  1 .

The solution for the real exchange rate in this case is given by:
(2.14)

3

qt

P2 qt 1 

(1  E )(1  DE )  G
(H t  H t* ) .
(1  DE ) > (1  E )(D  P1 )  GP1 @

*
In this derivation, we have used the fact that rt  rt

0 . The difference in the Wicksellian real interest rates equals the

expected change in the real exchange rate under flexible prices, which here is zero given identical preferences.
See Blanchard and Kahn (1980) for the method of solving a system of rational expectations difference equations such as
(2.12),
4

7

With some labor, it can be shown that the coefficient in front of the monetary shocks is negative. This means
that a Home monetary policy contraction (or a Foreign monetary expansion) leads to a Home real appreciation.
The expected rate of convergence of the real exchange rate toward purchasing power parity is determined
by the eigenvalue P2 . We see from (2.14) that Et qt 1

P2 qt . Since P2 D / P1  1 , we have that P2 d D . The

real exchange rate can be no more persistent than the degree of interest rate smoothing. If there is no interestrate smoothing, the real exchange rate adjusts immediately to its purchasing power parity level even when
prices are sticky through movements in the nominal exchange rate. Benigno (2004) first pointed out how real
exchange rate persistence might be independent of the sluggishness of price adjustment in a New Keynesian
model, and illustrated the role of interest-rate smoothing. We have assumed that the frequency of price
adjustment for home and foreign goods is identical. Benigno shows that when the speed of adjustment is
different, then relative prices and hence real exchange rates adjust more slowly.
It is also the case that P2 d T , where T is the probability that a firm’s price will not change during the
period. In other words, an upper limit for the persistence of the real exchange is given by the persistence of
nominal price stickiness. Rogoff (1996) coined the phrase the “purchasing power parity puzzle” to refer to the
fact that real exchange rates in advanced countries converge very slowly (an estimated half life of three to five
years) yet are very volatile. As we will see, potentially monetary sticky-price models can account for the
volatility of the real exchange rate, but the implication of many models is that real exchange rate adjustment
should be no more sluggish than nominal price adjustment. It is not plausible that nominal prices have a halflife of three to five years, so the models seem incapable of accounting for real exchange rate persistence. One
extension of the model is to allow for different preferences in the Home and Foreign countries, allowing the
possibility that even in the long run purchasing power parity does not hold. Let ut

lim Et (qt  j 1 ) be the longj of

run equilibrium real exchange rate. We can write

qt

(qt  ut )  ut .

In the model we have considered so far, ut

0 , but more generally nominal price adjustment may explain

persistence in qt  ut . The overall slow convergence of the real exchange rate might be governed by the
persistence of the equilibrium real exchange rate, ut , so a resolution to the purchasing power parity puzzle may
require a fleshed-out model of equilibrium deviations from purchasing power parity.5
We move on to another special case of (2.12). We will allow for persistence in the monetary policy errors,
but will now assume there is no interest rate smoothing, so D

0 . In this case, the system (2.12) reduces to two

equations. The inflation differential, S t  S t* and the the real exchange rate, qt , have forward-looking
solutions. Each can be expressed as the sum of two infinite sums. Each infinite sum can be interpreted as a

Engel (2000), however, argues that in practice the variance of ut is so small relative to the variance of qt  ut that it
cannot plausibly account for the measured persistence of the real exchange rate.
5

8

present discounted value of current and expected future exogenous variables, H t  H t* (the relative errors in the
Taylor rules), with the discount factors being the inverses of the two eigenvalues of B. Because the solutions
are entirely forward-looking, as we noted above, there is no “endogenous persistence” in the real exchange
rate. It will only be persistent if H t  H t* is persistent.
A special case helps to illustrate this point. We can express the solution for qt very simply in the special
1 , the special case of our assumption above that V  D 1/ E , when D

case in which VE
(2.15)

qt

E
G E

0:

j

§ E ·
*
¦
¨
¸ Et (H t  j  H t  j ) .

G
E
j 0©
¹
f

The dynamics of qt are determined by the dynamics of H t  H t* . For example, suppose H t  H t* follows a firstautocorrelation, with an autocorrelation coefficient of UH , (and 0  UH  1 ). The solution for the real exchange
rate is given by:
(2.16)

qt



E
G  (1  UH ) E

(H t  H t* ) .

In this relationship, qt follows a first-order autoregression, and its persistence is determined by the persistence
of H t  H t* .
The sluggishness of prices does not affect the persistence of the real exchange rate in this New Keynesian
model, but stickier prices do lead to a more volatile exchange rate. A smaller value of G indicates less frequent
price adjustment. From equation (2.16), we can see that smaller G leads to a higher variance of qt . A smaller

G in equation (2.15) increases the weight on expected future fundamentals in the discounted sum, which
magnifies the effect of a change in those fundamentals on the real exchange rate.
We must find a solution for S t  S t* to get a solution for the nominal exchange rate. Keeping with the case
of VE

1 , we find:

(2.17) S t  S t*

f

G Et ¦ E j qt  j .
j 0

When H t  H t* follows a first-order auto regression, we have:
(2.18) S t  S t*

§
·§ 1 ·
GE
*
¨
¸¨
¸ (H t  H t ) .

(1

)
1

G
E
U
EU
H ¹©
H ¹
©

We see from (2.16) and (2.18) that the real exchange rate and the relative inflation rates are stationary
when the exogenous variables are first-order autoregressions. 6 The relative consumer price level, pt  pt* ,
clearly has a unit root. This implies that the nominal exchange rate also has a unit root:
(2.19)
6

st

qt  S t  S t*  pt 1  pt*1 .

And, more generally, when they are stationary.

9

Combining equation (2.19) with the solutions for the real exchange rate in (2.16) and the relative inflation rate
in (2.18) gives a full solution for the nominal exchange rate in terms of the current values of exogenous
variables ( H t  H t* ) and the lagged endogenous variable, pt 1  pt*1 .
While there are many variants of open-economy New Keynesian models, most have not focused on the
implications of the model for exchange-rate dynamics 7. Benigno and Benigno (2008) examine the dynamics of
the nominal exchange rate in a PCP model similar to the one considered here. They show that when not
targeted by monetary policy, the nominal exchange rate will have a unit root. If monetary policy targets a
particular level for the nominal exchange rate, it will be stationary. Policy rules that target the real exchange
rate or the terms of trade (perhaps indirectly, by targeting output gaps that depend on these variables) will
influence the volatility and persistence of those variables.
Betts and Devereux (1996, 2000) examine the implications of LCP for nominal exchange rate behavior.
Because prices are set in the buyers’ currencies, they are not as sensitive to nominal exchange rates as they are
under PCP. As a result, nominal exchange rates have a small effect in the short run on relative prices faced by
consumers. The expenditure-switching effect of exchange rates on demand is diminished. There still may be
wealth effects on consumer demand – for example, the profits of Home firms (owned by households) increase
in Home currency terms with a depreciation of the Home currency. Or there may be wealth effects operating
through the effects of exchange rates on the value of securities that are denominated in either the Home or
Foreign currency. Overall, however, the equilibrating role of the exchange rate appears to be smaller under
LCP, which in turn means that larger exchange rate changes are required to bring markets into equilibrium.
Betts and Devereux find that nominal exchange rates may be substantially more volatile under LCP.8 Devereux
and Engel (2002) push this idea farther by minimizing or eliminating wealth effects through various
assumptions. Then they show that the exchange-rate volatility can be unboundedly high, because in the limit
the exchange rate is “disconnected” from the real economy.
Obstfeld and Rogoff (2001) coin the term “exchange-rate disconnect” to encapsulate two puzzles. On the
one hand, as in the context above, changes in the exchange rate seem to have only small effects on the real
economy. Even very large swings in nominal exchange rates in advanced countries seem to have quite small
effects on output, inflation, unemployment and even the trade balance. On the other hand, there seems to be
very little evidence that the supposed determinants of exchange rates – monetary policy and the determinants of
real income and inflation – can explain exchange-rate movements. This is true in two senses: the correlation of
the exchange rate with the economic fundamentals is low, and the economic models are not very useful for
7

Note, however, that the first of the open-economy New Keynesian models, Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995a), emphasizes the
comparison of exchange rate dynamics in their model to the Dornbusch model. Kollman (2001) examines exchange rate
dynamics in a model with Calvo price setting. Hau (2000) and Dotsey and Duarte (2008) show how the presence of nontraded goods influences exchange rate dynamics in New Keynesian models. Landry (2009) considers a two-country
model with state-dependent pricing, and demonstrates the effects of monetary shocks on exchange rates.
8
The benchmark is the PCP model of Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995a), which is the original open-economy New Keynesian
model.

10

forecasting changes in the exchange rate. We will return to the latter problem below. As to the
contemporaneous correlation between exchange rates and fundamentals, some insight can be gotten by
considering the solution for the real exchange rate in equation (2.15). As above, assume that the relative
monetary shocks follow a first-order autoregression (define H tR { H t  H t* ):
(2.20)

H tR

UH H tR1  Zt ,

0  UH  1 .

In the solution (2.16), we assumed in effect that Et Zt  j

0 for all j ! 0 , but now we assume that potentially

there is a signal at time t of future monetary policy shocks. We assume the signals are uncorrelated with the
current and past values of H tR . We find:
(2.21)

qt

§
· R
E
¨
¸ ª¬H t  N t º¼ ,
© G  E (1  UH ) ¹

j

§ E ·
where N t { Et ¦ ¨
¸ Zt  j .
j 1©G  E ¹
f

N t is the component of the real exchange rate that incorporates news about the future. Let qtN represent the
solution for the real exchange rate when there is news, in equation (2.21) and qtNN be the solution when there is
no signal about the future, as in equation (2.16).
Since N t is uncorrelated with H tR , then clearly
(2.22)

var(qtN ) ! var(qtNN ) .

When markets have sources of news beyond the current realization of the economic fundamentals, the variance
of the real exchange rate increases. It is also less correlated with the current fundamentals, which follows from
the fact that cov(qtN , H tR ) cov(qtNN , H tR ) , but var(qtN ) ! var(qtNN ) . Potentially, news plays an important role in
accounting for the lack of correlation between the current values of economic fundamentals and the real
exchange rate, as with any asset price that is forward-looking.
News may play a smaller role in accounting for real exchange rate volatility. Equation (2.22) is an example
of the general result (extending Shiller (1981)) that when an asset price is given by a present value of expected
fundamentals that are stationary, the variance of the asset price increases when the market has more
information about the future. However, West (1988) shows that the variance of innovations (unexpected
changes) in the asset price fall when there is more information, a result that does not depend on stationarity of
the fundamentals. Maybe even more surprisingly, Engel (2005) shows that the variance of changes in the asset
price falls with more information, so that, if the fundamentals or stationary or have a unit root:
var(qtN  qtN1 )  var(qtNN  qtNN
1 ) .
That is, news can account for a high variance in the real exchange rate, but not for a high variance in the
change in the real exchange rate.
In sum, because asset prices (such as exchange rates) are forward-looking, their correlation with the current
fundamentals may be low because there is a news component driving the asset price. This same news
component can account for a high unconditional variance of the real exchange rate, but not for a high variance

11

in the change in the real exchange rate.
An alternative view of the exchange rate disconnect puzzle is that exchange rates are driven by noise –
something other than the economic fundamentals. Jeanne and Rose (2002) and Devereux and Engel (2002)
examine models in which a small amount of noise trading can lead to a sizeable component of exchange rate
movements that is unrelated to fundamentals. A related literature examines how order flow aggregates
information of different traders. In the models of Evans and Lyons (2002a, 2008), Evans (2002, 2010), and
Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006), this imperfect knowledge, not only of the economic fundamentals but also
imperfect knowledge by one agent of another’s expectations, leads to fluctuations in exchange rates that are
greater than those predicted from simple models based on economic fundamentals.
2.b Current account balances and exchange rates

In policy-related work and in older descriptive models, the current account balance is often identified as an
important determinant of exchange rates. From a general equilibrium viewpoint, this is difficult to interpret –
current account balances and exchange rates are both determined in the macroeconomic system as a whole, and
are functions ultimately of exogenous variables. However, there are intuitive links between the two variables
that suggest that there might be dynamic relationships between them. As exchange rates change, when goods
prices are sticky, relative international costs and prices change, which in turn might influence import demand
and export supply. In reverse, to unwind a current account imbalance, some exchange-rate adjustment might
be required. In addition, current account imbalances lead to changes in wealth in one country relative to
another, which might have feedback effects on exchange rates.
A simple generalization to the model presented in the previous section illustrates how these forces might
work. Allow “home bias” in consumption – each country’s households put a relatively higher weight on
consumption of the good produced within their own country:
(2.23)

*
*
pt Q pHt  (1 Q ) pFt , pt* Q pFt
 (1  Q ) pHt
.

Under home bias, Q ! 1/ 2 . Expressing things in terms of inflation:
(2.24)

*
S t QS Ht  (1  Q )S Ft , S t* QS Ft*  (1  Q )S Ht
.

Using equations (2.6) and (2.7) and their counterparts for pricing of Foreign goods, we obtain:
(2.25) S t  S t*

G (2Q  1)( wt  st  wt* )  G (qt  ut )  E Et (S t 1  S t*1 ) .

As in section 2.a, ut is the level the real exchange rate would take on if prices were flexible. In this case,
ut

(2Q  1)(at  at* ) . Under flexible prices, an increase in Home productivity relative to Foreign reduces the

price of Home goods, pHt  pFt , proportionately. Under home bias, this reduces the relative price of Home’s
consumption basket, implying an increase in ut .
Suppose in each country, the utility each period is a power function of consumption, and linear in labor
input. In the Home country, for example, this is given by

12

1
Ct1V  Lt , V ! 0 ,
1V
where Ct is consumption and Lt is labor supply. The first-order condition that sets the marginal rate of
substitution between consumption and leisure to the real wage is, in logs,
(2.26)

wt

pt  V ct .

We can now define:
(2.27) -t { wt  st  wt* V (ct  ct* )  qt .
The log of the purchasing power of a unit of Home currency is given by  pt , so the log of the marginal
utility of of consumption of a unit of Home currency for Home consumers is V ct  pt . The log of the
marginal utility of a unit of Home currency for Foreign consumers is V ct*  st  pt* . So V (ct  ct* )  qt is the
log of the ratio of the marginal utility of consumption of a unit of Home currency for Foreign consumers
relative to Home consumers. Similarly, wt  st  wt* is the log of the marginal utility of leisure that can be
bought for a unit of Home currency, in the Foreign country relative to the Home country. If financial markets
are complete, so there is a nominal contingent claim traded for each state of the world, -t is a constant (set
equal to zero when countries have equal wealth.) Equation (2.12) still completely describes the dynamics of the
economy when markets are complete, except that qt in (2.12) is replaced with qt  ut . (The relative monetary
policy rules in this case are given by it  it*

rt  rt*  V (S t  S t* ) , where the relative Wicksellian real interest

rates equal the expected change in the expected Wicksellian real exchange rate by interest parity:
rt  rt *

Et ut 1  ut .)

When markets are incomplete, -t , varies over time. -t is the marginal utility of an additional unit of
wealth for Home relative to Foreign households, so it falls when Home wealth rises relative to Foreign wealth.
There is a role for current account imbalances to influence the macroeconomy in general, and the exchange rate
in particular, because when a country runs a current account imbalance, its net claims on the rest of the world
change. Ceteris paribus, if Home has a current account surplus at time t, its wealth increases between t and

t  1 , so -t 1  -t will be positive. In the New Keynesian model, higher relative wealth in the Home country is
associated with higher relative wages in Home (by equation (2.27).) An increase in wealth changes the
marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure, tending to raise consumption and reduce labor
supply. This leads to higher relative inflation in the prices of Home-produced goods, which in turn implies
higher relative consumer price inflation in the Home country (equation (2.25)) under home bias. Monetary
policymakers react to higher inflation by raising nominal interest rates, which will appreciate the currency.
There is a self-equilibrating mechanism at work here. If some exogenous shock depreciates Home’s currency in
real terms, the current account of Home will rise and it will accumulate claims on the Foreign country. We
have decribed how that real depreciation is reversed as wealth accumulates.

13

The particular way in which current account balances correlate with exchange rates depends on the
specifics of the model – the structure of asset markets and goods markets. The channel through which the
current account affects the economy is somewhat different than in the descriptive models of the 1970s. Some
models posited a portfolio balance channel – changes in relative wealth affected relative demands for risky
assets – but that link is not present under our uncovered interest parity assumption.9 Another channel in the
1970s models was a link from wealth to money demand. If the money demand includes a wealth term, then
current account balances may affect money demand. In contrast, in the New Keynesian model, an increase in
wealth affects the marginal utility of leisure. Under our utility specification, the wage is driven up, which
increases the relative cost of producing goods in the Home country.
Cavallo and Ghironi (2002) investigate the properties of exchange rates in a New Keynesian model in
which asset markets are incomplete in that only nominal non-state-contingent bonds are traded. 10 The set-up of
the model is similar to the one described here, except that there is population growth in an overlappinggenerations framework as new households are born into the economy. Households maximize utility that
depends on consumption of Home and Foreign goods, and there is home bias in preferences. Cavallo and
Ghironi assume that the law of one price holds for all goods: goods prices are set in the currency of the
producer. There is a quadratic cost to adjusting prices which results in aggregate price dynamics that are
identical to those under Calvo pricing. The accumulation of claims on foreigners affects exchange rates through
a channel similar to the one described above. However, different assumptions on preferences and monetary
policy imply that an accumulation of claims on the Foreign country leads to a Home real depreciation. Cavallo
and Ghironi assume identical Home and Foreign preferences, so purchasing power parity holds at all times.
However, monetary policy targets domestic output. When wealth increases, labor supply falls, leading to lower
Home output and therefore a drop in the Home interest rate, which in turn causes a depreciation.
Ganelli (2005) examines a similar model to trace the effects of fiscal policy on exchange rates. One
important difference between Ganelli’s model and the New Keynesian models such as Cavallo and Ghironi is
that Ganelli assumes that the money supply is the instrument of monetary policy, and that money supply
growth is exogenous. Money demand depends on home consumption and the home interest rate. The effects of
a fiscal expansion, however, work through familiar channels. A tax cut, for example, leads to an expansion in
Home demand. Home households expand demand in an overlapping generations framework because they will
not bear the full burden of future taxes that must be raised to pay off government debt. The increase in home
consumption results in an increase in money demand. For a given Home money supply, interest rates must
increase, which leads to a Home currency appreciation.
In a representative agent two-country New Keynesian model with imperfect capital markets, Benigno and
Thoenissen (2003) examine the effects of productivity shocks on exchange rates. In this model, there are three
9

Blanchard, Giavazzi and Sa (2005) use such a model to analyze the dynamics of the needed U.S. dollar exchange rate
change that might facilitate adjustment of the U.S. current account deficit.
10
See also Ghironi (2008).

14

factors that influence the behavior of real and nominal exchange rates. First, there are nontraded goods. In the
long run, an increase in productivity in the traded sector leads to a real appreciation through the traditional
Balassa-Samuelson effects. Second, there is home bias in preferences. This channel tends to promote a real
depreciation in the long run in response to Home productivity shocks in the traded sector. As supply of the
Home good increases, its price relative to Foreign traded goods falls. This reduces the aggregate consumer
price level in the Home country relative to the Foreign because Home goods are weighted more heavily in the
Home consumption basket (the home bias assumption.) These two channels work in opposite directions for the
long-run determination of real exchange rates. In the short run, firms set prices in the currency of consumers. A
Home productivity increase leads to higher potential Home output. As potential output rises, inflationary
pressures decline, which in turn leads policymakers to reduce interest rates. This reduction in interest rates
contributes to a short run real and nominal Home currency depreciation.
An important related contribution is Gourinchas and Rey (2007). They begin with the accounting identity:
(2.28)

NAt 1

Rt 1 ( NAt  NX t ) ,

where NAt is the country’s net foreign assets, and NX t refers to net exports. Rt 1 is the gross return on the
country’s portfolio of net foreign assets. Imposing a no-Ponzi condition, Gourinchas and Rey then derive an
approximation around values in a deterministic economy in which variables may be trending:
f

(2.29)

nxat | ¦ U j Et (rt  j  'nxt  j ) .
j 1

The specifics of the approximation are complex, but we can think of nxat as a weighted sum of the log of
foreign assets and the log of exports less a weighted sum of the log of foreign liabilities and the log of imports.
Gourinchas and Rey call this the “cyclical external imbalance”. Equation (2.29) tells us that, subject to
approximation error, nxat should predict perfectly the discounted sum of rt  j  'nxt  j , where rt  j is a measure
of the return on foreign assets. Equation (2.29) is derived only from the budget identity (2.28), and so must
hold up to the approximation error.
The equation has the following interpretation. Suppose a country has a negative value for its cyclical
external imbalance, perhaps because it is a net debtor. There are two possible sources of adjustment toward
cyclical balance. On the one hand, the country could run trade surpluses in the future, which Gourinchas and
Rey call the “trade channel”. Alternatively, the country may adjust through the “valuation channel”: returns on
net foreign assets may be higher than average. An important possible avenue for higher expected returns is
through currency depreciation.
f

Equation (2.29) shows that nxat is the market’s best forecast of ¦ U j (rt  j  'nxt  j ) . Gourinchas and
j 1

Rey are particularly interested in the hypothesis that the predictability of this sum arises because of
predictability of future returns. Especially relevant for our purposes is the possibility that a particular

15

component of the returns, the currency depreciation, may be predictable. Gourinchas and Rey present several
types of empirical evidence that support this hypothesis using data on nxat constructed for the U.S., quarterly,
1952:I to 2004:I.
Using the methods of Campbell and Shiller (1988), Gourinchas and Rey find that they cannot reject the
intertemporal restrictions implied by equation (2.29). In a sense, this is a test of whether a budget constraint
holds (along with the approximations used to derive equation (2.29)), so perhaps this finding is not surprising.
But Gourinchas and Rey go further, to test whether nxat can forecast returns and exchange rate changes.
Consider their findings for an FDI-weighted U.S. exchange rate. There is evidence of in-sample predictability
derived from regressing st 1  st on nxat and other controls over the sample, with a finding of a statistically
significant coefficient on nxat . This predictability remains even over longer horizons. That is, nxat is a
significant (in-sample) predictor of exchange rate changes over horizons as long as 24 quarters. Moreover, as
we will discuss in the next section, they find that nxat is able to forecast the change in this dollar exchange rate
out of sample.
We next turn to a more comprehensive survey of recent empirical work on exchange rates.

3. Empirical Studies of Exchange-Rates

Much of the earliest empirical work on testing models of exchange rates evaluated models by their insample fit. While this work continues to be valuable, ever since the seminal paper of Meese and Rogoff (1983)
the “gold standard” for evaluation of exchange-rate models has been their usefulness in predicting exchange
rates. We first survey recent in-sample evaluation of exchange-rate models before turning to the out-of-sample
exercises.
3.a In-sample exchange-rate model evaluation

We can further divide the within-sample evaluations into methods that rely on single-equation methods
(such as in the early work of Frankel, 1979); methods that use VARs or evaluate general equilibrium models;
and the approach of using the model’s implications about the response of exchange rates to market news.
Single-equation empirical models

Most empirical work on exchange rate models has focused on finding better tests for uncovering the link, if
any, between the monetary fundamentals and exchange rates outlined in the models of section 2. Few recent
papers have looked for new economic variables that are important in accounting for exchange rate movements.
As has been noted already, Gourinchas and Rey (2007) have explored the role that external imbalances play in
driving exchange rates. Another line of research has related exchange rates for commodity-exporting countries
to prices of those commodities. Chen and Rogoff (2003) uncover empirical links between the real exchange
rates of Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, and the real prices of commodities that they export (measured as
weighted averages of the world prices of commodities, with weights determined by their shares in each

16

country’s total commodity exports.) Chen et. al. (2010) extend this finding with evidence that exchange rates
have forecasting power for commodity prices at short horizons in these countries.
A literature has developed that asks whether nominal exchange rates are related in the long-run to the
monetary and real variables that the models say are supposed to drive them. Since exchange rates and the
fundamentals are non-stationary unit root (I(1)) random variables, the research question has been posed: are
exchange rates and the fundamentals cointegrated? A key contribution in this area is Groen (2000). Using a
panel of quarterly data for fourteen major currencies from 1973:I to 1994:I with the U.S. dollar, and
alternatively the German mark, as numeraire, Groen rejects the null hypothesis that the exchange rate is not
cointegrated with relative log money supplies and relative log GDPs. Mark and Sul (2001) use quarterly data
for a panel of 19 countries from 1973:I to 1997:I, and test the null hypothesis is st  (mt  mt* )  ( yt  yt* )
contains a unit root. They consider the U.S., Switzerland, and Japan as numeraire countries, and they strongly
reject the null of no cointegration. Rapach and Wohar (2002) find cointegration between U.S. dollar exchange
rates and these economic fundamentals using annual data for fourteen countries with samples of over 100
years. 11 Cerra and Saxena (2010) extend the analysis to an unbalanced panel of 98 developing and developed
countries with annual data from 1960 to 2004. They find strong evidence for cointegration in their entire
sample, as well as sub-samples consisting only of developing and of developed countries.
Tests for cointegration assume a linear process for the adjustment of exchange rates and the economic
fundamentals. Several papers have found evidence of non-linear adjustment – specifically, when the exchange
rate is far out of line with its “fundamental value”, the exchange rate and fundamentals converge more quickly.
Suppose st  ft is stationary, where ft is a linear combination of economic variables that determine the
exchange rate in the long run. When the absolute value of st  ft is large, the convergence between st and ft
may be faster then when st  ft is much smaller. Taylor and Peel (2000), and others, find nonlinear
relationships between the exchange rate and (mt  mt* )  ( yt  yt* ) using various nonlinear models and
exchange rates. Taylor and Peel, for example, estimate models for the dollar/pound and dollar/mark exchange
rates using quarterly data from 1973:I to 1996:IV. They find evidence to support an exponential smoothedtransition autoregression (ESTAR) specification. Under this specification, the speed of adjustment declines
smoothly as st  ft declines to zero.
So far, the discussion has been about the empirical fit of the monetary model. The implication is that
monetary policy exogenously sets money supply growth, and the exchange rate is ultimately determined by
monetary growth and output growth in one country relative to another. Monetary policy research in the last
twenty years has conformed more to the reality that central banks use the interest rate as the policy instrument
rather than money supply growth, and that monetary policy is endogenous. The interest rate is set to react to
11

However, in country by country tests, this paper finds the exchange rate is not cointegrated with fundamentals for
Australia, Canada, Denmark, Norway, Sweden and the U.K.

17

inflation, the output gap, and potentially other important economic variables. The New Keynesian models have
developed to analyze open economies under such monetary regimes. Engel and West (2006) and Mark (2009)
present similar empirical models based on Taylor rules such as (2.2) and uncovered interest parity. Both papers
emphasize the forward-looking nature of the determinants of exchange rates. Engel and West specify a more
sophisticated monetary policy rule than (2.2), with monetary policymakers setting interest rates to react to
expected inflation, rather than current inflation, in their own countries. In addition to consumer price inflation,
central banks in the Home and Foreign country are each concerned about the output gap ( yt and y t* ) in their
respective countries. Also they assume at least one of the countries reacts to exchange rate misalignments, and
that purchasing power parity holds in the long run equilibrium, so that the interest rate responds to movements
in the real exchange rate. Then we can specify the Home relative to Foreign monetary policy rules as:
(3.1)

it  it*

J q qt  J S Et (S t 1  S t*1 )  J y ( yt  yt* )  H t .

J q ! 0 , JS !1, J y ! 0

By adding and subtracting Home relative to Foreign inflation, uncovered interest parity can be expressed as:
(3.2)

Et qt 1  qt  Et (S t 1  S t*1 ) .

it  it*

Equations (3.1) and (3.2) can be two equations in a general equilibrium New Keynesian model. We discuss
estimation of general equilibrium models below. To close the system, we would need to add price adjustment
equations in each country and equations relating the output gap to the real exchange rate in each country.
Instead, Engel and West substitute (3.2) into (3.1) and rearrange to obtain
(3.3)

qt

Jy
(J  1)
1
1
( yt  yt* ) 
Et qt 1  S
Et (S t 1  S t*1 ) 
Ht .
1 Jq
1 Jq
1 Jq
1 Jq

Then, solving the model forward, we obtain an expression for the real exchange rate in terms of present values
of current and expected future relative inflation rates and output gaps (here, assuming H t is mean-zero, i.i.d.):
§ 1
¦ ¨
¨
j 0 ©1 J q
f

(3.4)

qt

j

·
½°
Jy
1
°­ (J  1)
(S t  j 1  S t* j 1 ) 
( yt  j  yt* j ) ¾ 
Ht .
¸¸ Et ® S



1
1
1
J
J
J
°
°
q
q
q
¹
¯
¿

This equation shows that the real exchange rate is determined as a discounted present value of current and
expected future output gaps and inflation rates (Home relative to Foreign in both cases). The equation delivers
an interesting message: expected higher Home inflation (or expected higher Home output gaps) leads to a
Home real appreciation. This surprising relationship holds because of the endogeneity of monetary policy.
When expected inflation or the output gap is higher, the central bank raises the interest rate. When the stability
condition, J S ! 1 , holds, the interest rate rises sufficiently to increase real interest rates, precipitating a real
appreciation.
Engel and West estimate the present value from a VAR that contains relative inflation rates, relative output
gaps, and interest rate differentials. Using standard VAR forecasting equations, the forecasted discounted sum
is constructed at each point in time. The paper uses monthly data for the U.S. and Germany from 1979:10 to
1998:12. The present value is estimated over this period, then compared with the actual dollar/deutschemark

18

real exchange rate. That paper finds mildly positive support for the model: the model’s implied real exchange
rate has a correlation of 0.32 with the actual real exchange rate, though the correlation of changes in the
model’s implied real exchange rate with the actual real exchange rate is only 0.09. Mark’s (2009) study uses
similar techniques, though the details differ, producing a model real exchange rate for U.S./Germany, quarterly
from 1976:I to 2007:III. A key innovation in Mark’s study is to allow for a changing monetary policy rule,
which the public learns about only over time by observing outcomes of economic variables. While the
correlation of the model’s implied real exchange rate with the actual real exchange rate is similar to Engel and
West’s in levels and slightly worse for short-horizon changes, it vastly improves on their fit in two ways. First,
the model real exchange rate fit by Mark has volatility that is similar to that of the actual real exchange rate,
while Engel and West’s implied real exchange rate is much less volatile. Second, Mark’s implied real exchange
rate has relatively high correlation for long-horizon changes, in the range of 0.40.
VARs and Structural Macroeconomic Models

An important strand of the empirical literature has attempted to measure the effects of monetary shocks on
exchange rates in “structural” vector autoregressions (VARs). The seminal paper in this literature is
Eichenbaum and Evans (1995), which considers a five variable VAR on U.S. data, containing a measure of
output, inflation, nonborrowed reserves (assumed to be the policy instrument), U.S. relative to foreign interest
rates, and the CPI real exchange rate. For various advanced countries relative to the U.S., Evans and
Eichenbaum find that a U.S. monetary contraction leads to higher U.S. interest rates in the short run. The dollar
appreciates in the short run. The key finding is that the maximum appreciation of the dollar does not occur
immediately following the monetary policy shock. Depending on the currency, the maximum real appreciation
occurs 24 to 39 months after the shock. 12
As Eichenbaum and Evans note, this behavior of exchange rates is not consistent with uncovered interest
parity. According to interest parity, if it  it* increases, then Et st 1  st should rise. If all other sources of
interest rate variation are held constant and only monetary shocks lead to the increase in it  it* , then the
impulse response of the exchange rate to that shock should show a depreciation of the currency between period
t and period t  1 . But Eichenbaum and Evans empirical finding is that the currency continues to appreciate
after the initial monetary contraction, contradicting the implications of uncovered interest parity. This
phenomenon has been dubbed “delayed overshooting.”
Delayed overshooting could potentially account for the empirical puzzle noted at the outset of this essay,
that the slope coefficient in equation (1.6) is generally estimated to be negative, implying
cov( Et st 1  st , it  it* )  0 . The intuition of this line of reasoning is clear: when it  it* rise from a monetary
shock, if st falls and then st 1 falls even more, there is a drop in st 1  st associated with the positive shock to

12

However, Kim and Roubini (2000), using a different identification scheme, find that the maximum appreciation occurs
within a few months of the monetary policy shock.

19

it  it* . However, it is important to note two caveats. First, monetary shocks are not the only determinant of
interest rate and exchange rate movements. Even if monetary shocks tend to lead to a negative correlation of
it  it* with st 1  st , there may be other forces that are important in driving these variables. The second caveat
is that, even if monetary shocks are the most important or even the sole driver of exchange rates and interest
rates, the logic of the dynamics we have described refers to innovations in it  it* and st 1  st . Even if
innovations in it  it* and st 1  st are negatively correlated, we may not have cov( Et st 1  st , it  it* )  0 .
Faust and Rogers (2003) cast doubt on the robustness of the delayed overshooting finding. They argue that
there are a large number of plausible assumptions on the structure of VARs that can be used to identify
monetary policy shocks. Considering various plausible identification assumptions, and taking into account
parameter uncertainty, Faust and Rogers find no robust evidence to support delayed overshooting. Moreover,
they conclude that it is unlikely that monetary policy shocks account for very much of the variance of the dollar
exchange rate against the U.K. pound or German mark in the 1974:1 to 1997:12 period.
There continues to be a dispute in the literature over whether delayed overshooting is a robust feature of
the data. Scholl and Uhlig (2008) use a sign restriction identification scheme and consider a VAR with the
same variables as in Eichenbaum and Evans’ study. They identify a U.S. monetary contraction by making the
following assumptions on the first twelve impulse responses: the impulse response function of nonborrowed
reserves (relative to borrowed reserves) is negative; U.S. interest rates relative to foreign interest rates are
positive; and, prices are negative. They estimate the model with monthly data over the original EichenbaumEvans sample period, as well as a sample that is updated through 2002. In both samples, they find significant
delays in the maximal response of the exchange rate, though the maximum delay is somewhat shorter in the
longer sample compared to the original sample.
Bjornland (2009) instead uses long-run restrictions to identify monetary policy shocks. The assumption
here is that monetary shocks have no effect on the long run real exchange rate. Then, in VARs using quarterly
data from 1983:I to 2004:IV for four small countries (Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and Sweden),
Bjornland finds that the maximum appreciation in response to a monetary shock occurs within one or two
quarters.
The structural VARs are not fully specified dynamic models, in contrast to the general equilibrium New
Keynesian models discussed in previous sections. Unfortunately, the New Keynesian models do not seem
capable of explaining exchange rate movements. Calibrated versions of the model fail to match the volatility
of exchange rates. For example, see Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2002) or Jung (2007). Models which include
an exogenous (not modeled) shock to the uncovered interest parity relationship, such as Kollmann (2001),
Bergin (2006), or Adolfson et. al. (2007), are more successful in accounting for exchange rate volatility.
Bergin (2006) performs structural estimation of New Keynesian models using maximum likelihood
techniques, while Lubik and Schorfheide (2006) and Adolfson et. al. (2007) use Bayesian estimation methods.

20

Both papers find some success with the models in accounting for exchange rate movements. Bergin in
particular finds that the model fits the data better than a random walk model for exchange rates, in the sense
that the in-sample one-period ahead forecast of the exchange rate outperforms the random walk forecast of no
change. Moreover, it is not the case that the interest parity shocks are the primary drives of the exchange rate.
More than half of the variance in exchange rates in the estimated model ise due to monetary shocks. Lubik and
Schorfheide (2006) find less encouraging results for the exchange rate, but their model does not allow for
endogenous deviations from purchasing power parity. The estimated model of Adolfson et. al. (2008) is able to
match the persistence and volatility of real exchange rates by allowing time-varying pricing to market.
It is probably a fair assessment that rarely have estimated open-economy New Keynesian models been put
to very rigorous tests of their ability to match the data. For example, none of these papers have reported the
correlation of the implied model exchange rate with the actual exchange rate. More rigorous tests would
include investigation of whether the model can capture the dynamic relationship between exchange rates and
other macroeconomic variables, and whether the model is useful in producing forecasts of exchange rates.
There are exceptions to this statement, however. Adolfson et. al. (2008) considers the ability of a New
Keynesian model to forecast real exchange rates compared to several alternative statistical models. It finds the
estimated New Keynesian structural model provides the best out-of-sample forecasts (as measured by lowest
root mean-squared-error) at horizons of 1 to 8 quarters.
Juvenal (2011) presents an interesting hybrid between the structural VAR analysis and full model
estimation. That paper builds a fully-specified New Keynesian model with multiple sources of shocks. Then,
Juvenal simulates the model to derive the response of endogenous variables to exogenous shocks. The
dynamics of the responses then are used to impose sign restrictions as in the approach of Scholl and Uhlig
(2008). Juvenal finds that in fact monetary shocks account for a very small fraction of the variance of real
exchange rates, while preference shocks (to the utility discount factor) account for a large fraction. A very
similar approach is taken by Enders et. al. (2011). The primary focus of the paper is to investigate the effects of
government spending and technology shocks on real exchange rates. They find that shocks to government
spending lead to a real depreciation while a positive productivity shock in the trade sector leads to a real
appreciation. Note that these reactions contrast to the predictions of the models of Ganelli (2005) and Benigno
and Thoenissen (2003) discussed above. The reversal in sign of the response is possible within the New
Keynesian model when the elasticity of substitution between Home and Foreign goods is sufficiently low and
there is home bias in preferences, as in Corsetti et. al. (2008). In that case, for example, in the long run a Home
productivity shock must lead to an increase in the price of the Home traded good. This leads to an increase in
Home’s wealth, which allows them to absorb the increased production of Home goods.
Response to News

The exchange rate is determined in general equilibrium and macroeconomic aggregates such as interest
rates and output are not exogenous with respect to the exchange rate. The empirical work of the previous

21

section is all aimed at identifying exogenous shocks – to monetary policy, exchange rates, technology – and
tracing the effects of these shocks on exchange rates.
The literature that looks at the effects of news announcements on exchange rates takes another approach to
finding exogenous variation. This literature examines exchange rate changes over very short time intervals at
the time of news announcements. Over these intervals, the economic fundamentals that drive exchange rates
are not likely to have changed much or at all, so that the primary driver of the exchange rate change is the news
itself. Take the change in the exchange rate between time t  ' and t  ' from the Taylor rule model of Engel
and West (2006), equation (3.4). A time period is one month in their model, while ' is a fraction of an hour.
We can write approximately
(3.5)

st '  st '

§ 1
| ¦ ¨
¨
j 1 ©1 Jq
f

j

·
Jy
°­ (J  1)
°½
(S t  j 1  S t* j 1 ) 
( y t  j  yt* j ) ¾ .
¸¸ ( Et '  Et ' ) ® S
1 J q
°¯ 1  J q
°¿
¹

Because prices of consumer goods do not adjust over very short intervals, the change in the real exchange rate
comes exclusively from changes in the nominal exchange rate, , so comparing this equation to equation (3.4),
on the left-hand-side, the change in qt is taken to be st  '  st ' . On the right-hand-side, we have assumed that
ut , S t  S t* , and yt  yt* do not change between t  ' and t  ' . The notation ( Et '  Et ' ) zt  j for any
variable z means Et ' zt  j  Et ' zt  j . According to (3.5), the change in the exchange rate over the very short
interval is driven only by changes in expectations of future relative inflation rates and output gaps.
As noted above, the Taylor rule model has the implication that higher expected inflation or a higher output
gap in the Home country leads to a Home real appreciation, assuming that the central bank follows a
sufficiently stabilizing monetary policy ( J q ! 0 , J S ! 1 , J y ! 0 ). This prediction of the Taylor rule model tends
to be borne out in empirical work on the impact of news.
The methods of studies of news announcements are all similar. Let xt be an announcement at time t. Some
measure of the expected value of xt is required in order to measure the news content of the announcement.
Typically studies use surveys that ask traders what they expect the announcement to be. Suppose xt is the
announcement in July of the U.S. unemployment rate in June. xte is a survey measure of what traders expect
the announced June unemployment number to be. Usually the survey is completed a few days before the
announcement. The studies then examine the change in the exchange rate from immediately before to
immediately after the announcement, by regressing st  '  st ' on xt  xte . This regression is not looking at the
change in the June unemployment rate on the exchange rate. Instead, it is looking at the impact effects on the
exchange rate of news about unemployment that is contained in the announcement (which comes in July) of the
unemployment rate that prevailed the previous month. xte is not a measure of the market’s expectation of some
future unemployment rate. It is the market’s expectation of the announcement of a past unemployment rate.

22

Andersen et. al. (2003) use exchange rate data recorded in 5-minute intervals for the U.S. dollar against
five major currencies, in the period January, 1992 – December, 1998. They take announcements of 28
American economic news: data on GDP, employment, consumer prices, etc. In addition, they consider the
effects on the dollar/deutschemark exchange rate of 13 German economic variables. They measure
expectations of the U.S. variables from a survey of 40 money managers, conducted by International Money
Market Services (MMS). Not surprisingly, news that the Federal Reserve has raised its target interest rate
above expectations leads to a dollar appreciation within five minutes of the announcement. But also, any U.S.
news that might be interpreted as the economy being stronger than expected, or inflationary pressures greater
than expected, also leads to a dollar appreciation. On the other hand, news of greater than expected activity in
Germany leads to an immediate dollar depreciation. Andersen et. al. (2007) confirm these findings in an
extended sample that runs through the end of 2002.
Faust et. al. (2007) consider five-minute windows around the announcements of ten U.S. economic
variables. They examine the response of dollar exchange rates and interest rates, and also use MMS to measure

xte . Their data run from January 1987 to December 2002. In all of the statistically significant cases, news that
the economy is stronger than expected leads to a dollar appreciation, and also an increase in expected future
interest rates as captured by the yield curve.
Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2005) make similar findings, for data covering Janary 1993 to Feburary 2003.
They look at the daily changes in the exchange rate, measured at 6 p.m. New York time. They also use MMS
to measure xte . In general, they find that good news for the U.S. economy appreciates the dollar, while good
news for the German economy appreciates the German currency.
Clarida and Waldman (2008) compare the response of exchange rates to news about inflation rates in
countries that explicitly follow inflation targeting monetary policy to countries that do not. While they find that
news of higher than expected inflation tends to appreciate the currency in all countries, the effect is stronger
and more statistically significant in the inflation-targeting countries. Moreover, the effect was small and
insignificant in two countries (the U.K. and Norway) before they adopted inflation-targeting but became large
and significant when the policy regime changed.
Fatum and Scholnick (2006) take a similar approach to these papers, but they do not use MMS to measure
the expectation of the markets. Instead, they look at the Fed Funds futures rate as a measure of the expected
interest rate. They then look at how day-to-day changes in the exchange rate relate to changes in the Fed Funds
futures rate on days in which the actual Fed Funds rate stays constant. The change in the exchange rate might
be attributed to changes in expectations of monetary policy. The paper controls for six U.S. economic news
announcements, changes in interest rates in other countries, and foreign exchange intervention by foreign
central banks. The study looks at the U.S. dollar relative to the yen, pound, and deutschemark from March

23

1989 to April 2001. 13 The paper finds strong evidence that changes in expectations of future monetary policy
affect exchange rates. When the market increases its expectations of the Fed Funds rate, the dollar appreciates.
3.b Out-of-Sample Forecasting

With a few exceptions, the studies surveyed above evaluate the in-sample fit of exchange-rate models. In
recent years, tests of the out-of-sample forecasting power of exchange-rate models have become the gold
standard for model assessment. The predecessor of this approach is the famous Meese and Rogoff (1983)
paper, though that paper actually tested the out-of-sample fit of the models, rather than their forecasting ability.
Mark (1995) is the progenitor of the more recent forecasting literature.
Empirical studies

Mark (1995) hypothesizes that an equation of the form:
(3.6)

st  k  st

D k  E k ( f t  st )  uk ,t  k

will be useful in forecasting the exchange rate at a k-period horizon.

ft is measured as some “fundamental”

value of the nominal exchange rate. Mark considers two different candidates for ft . One is the purchasing
power parity value for the exchange rate, pt  pt* . The other is taken from the monetary model, assuming
money demand has a unitary income elasticity: mt  yt  (mt*  yt* ) . Equation (3.6) is not derived from the
dynamics of any specific exchange rate model. Instead, Mark makes the intuitive assumption that ft represents
the long-run equilibrium value for the exchange rate. Equation (3.6) has the interpretation that, for some
unmodeled reasons, the exchange rate is not always equal to its equilibrium value, and between periods t and

t  k the log change in the exchange rate will be linearly related to the gap between the exchange rate and its
fundamental value at time t. uk ,t  k is the error for the kth horizon regression. Equation (3.6) is a simple
equation that can be estimated within a sample, and used to forecast outside the sample.
Mark (1995) makes two uses of the equation. First, the study estimates (3.6) over the entire sample
(quarterly observations from 1973:II to 1993:IV for the U.S., Canada, Germany, Japan and Switzerland) and
tests the null that E k

0 . It is the second exercise that has sired the literature on out-of-sample forecasts as a

tool for model evaluation. Mark estimates equation (3.6) for horizons of 1, 4, 8, 12, and 16 quarters, using only
the data through 1981:III. The estimated model is then used to construct forecasts of exchange rates, which are
compared to the actual exchange rates in the remainder of the sample. Mark calculates the root-mean-squared
error (RMSE) of the model forecast compared to the random walk forecast (of no change in the exchange rate).
He finds that for the U.S. dollar exchange rate relative to Germany, Japan, and Switzerland, the forecasting
model has lower RMSE at many horizons, and always at the longer horizons (12 and 16 quarters). The model
does not beat a random walk for the Canadian dollar exchange rate. Mark evaluates the significance of the
forecasting power using Diebold-Mariano (1995) statistics, and bootstrapped statistics, concluding that there is

13

The end date for the deutschemark is December 1998.

24

significant evidence of forecasting power.
Mark’s (1995) finding that equation (3.6) can be used to forecast exchange rates, currency-by-currency, out
of sample did not hold up well to subsequent investigations. Kilian (1999) finds that Mark’s results are not
robust when the sample is extended, and when an error in Mark’s bootstrap for the significance of the out-ofsample forecasts is corrected. Faust et. al. (2003) re-examined Mark’s forecasting model making two changes.
First, they introduced the use of “real time” data. Even though Mark estimated the model using data only
through 1981:III, and tested the model’s ability to forecast exchange rate changes in subsequent periods, Faust
et. al. point out that some of the data used by Mark was revised by statistical agencies after the end of the
estimation window. That is, the data would not have been available to forecasters in 1981:III. So Faust et. al.
use archives of data published in previous years to construct real time data that would have been available to
forecasters. They find that using the real-time data actually tends to produce better forecasts (lower RMSE)
than using the revised data. However, they also find that the usefulness of equation (3.6) for forecasting
exchange rates is very sensitive to the time period being examined. The equation loses forecasting power in
most time periods except those around the time that Mark’s study used.
Cheung et. al. (2005) casts further doubt on the forecasts generated by estimation of equation (3.6)
currency-by-currency. In fact, Cheung et. al. consider not only the two measures of ft that Mark examines, but
also measures that include interest rate differentials, trade balances, inflation differentials, and productivity
differentials between countries. These other variables are included in various combinations to match singleequation models of the exchange rate that had been proposed in earlier literature. The models do not perform
well in out-of-sample RMSE comparisons to the random-walk forecast. While Mark’s models of ft do not
require any parameter estimation, Cheung et. al. use rolling sample estimation of the parameters of the models.
They consider forecasts at horizons of 1, 4 and 20 quarters, using the same currencies as Mark (1995), using
data over the period 1973:II to 2000:IV. They look at forecast windows of 1987:II to 2000:IV and 1983:II to
2000:IV. In general, Cheung et. al. find little consistent evidence of forecasting power of the models. For some
models, and some currencies, over some windows, the RMSE of the models’ forecasts are lower than the
random walk, but there is no consistent evidence that any model can outforecast the random walk consistently
for any currency or horizon. 14
Mark and Sul (2001) find better success using eighteen exchange rates and panel methods to estimate
equation (3.6). In particular, their method forces the slope coefficient in equation (3.6) to be the same for all
exchange rates in the panel, and also allows for a common time effect, but allows the intercepts to be different
currency-by-currency. Mark and Sul estimate the model for both the monetary and the PPP measures of ft ,
allowing alternatively the U.S. dollar, Japanese yen and Swiss franc to be the numeraire currency. The model is
estimated on data from 1973:I to 1983:I, and then used to construct forecasts that can be compared to actual
14

See Abhyankar et. al. (2005), who use an alternative measure of forecasting performance to find support for the
monetary model over a random walk.

25

exchange rate data that run through 1997:I. They again compare the RMSE of the model to the RMSE of the
random walk forecast for each exchange rate, and construct bootstrap tests of significance. They find strong
forecasting power both at the 1-quarter ahead and 16-quarter ahead horizon, for both models of fundamentals.
However, the results are especially favorable for the monetary model, and especially at the longer horizon. At
the 16-quarter horizon, the monetary model produces a lower RMSE for seventeen of the eighteen dollar
exchange rates, and the improvement over the random walk is significant in fifteen of those cases.
Groen (2005) considers a small panel of exchange rates, involving the euro exchange rates of the yen,
Canadian dollar and U.S. dollar, using data from 1975:I to 2000:IV. 15 Rolling estimates of the model are used
to produce forecasts beginning in 1989:I. 16 In comparison with the random walk, the monetary model generally
produces forecasts with lower RMSE at horizons of 12 and 16 months. Groen produces bootstrapped tests of
significance that find the model significantly outforecasts the random walk at the 16-month horizon for most
currencies.
McCracken and Sapp (2005) employ a test statistic that takes into account the fact that the forecasts
generated by equation (3.6) require estimation of parameters, while the random-walk forecast does not. The
parameter uncertainty will tend to increase the RMSE of the model’s forecast if the model is true, thus biasing
results against the model in comparisons with the random walk. Clark and West (2006) propose a simple test
statistic to deal with this bias that has become popular in subsequent papers that test the power of models to
beat the random walk in out of sample forecasting exercises. McCracken and Sapp find that the corrected
statistics offer more power to reject the random walk, using the same sample and bootstrap proceure as Kilian
(1999).
Cerra and Saxena (2010) find strong evidence of out-of-sample forecasting power in their panel of 98
countries. Using annual data to estimate the model initially over the 1960-1983 period, and then updating
estimates using a rolling window, they find that the monetary model has strong forecasting power at 1- and 5year horizons. They find that the RMSE of the monetary model is significantly lower (using the Clark-West
test) than that of the random walk at both horizons when the model is estimated and tested on the entire panel
of countries. Moreover, that forecasting power does not come just from a small subset of countries. The model
has forecasting power when fit over different geographical regions, or when countries are grouped together by
income levels. The forecasting power holds for both high-inflation and low-inflation subsets of countries.
Engel et. al. (2008) update the panel estimates of Mark and Sul (2001) for the monetary and PPP models
for U.S. dollar exchange rates against the eighteen countries in the original panel. They also use a model based
on Taylor rules, as in Engel and West (2006). They begin by noting that uncovered interest parity says that the
interest differential should be an unbiased predictor of exchange rates: Et st 1  st

it  it* . In the context of

15

Groen constructs a synthetic euro for the pre-1999 data, and constructs weighted-average money supplies and income
levels to use as European fundamentals, although Groen also uses the German variables as an alternative measure in the
pre-1999 era.
16
Groen’s model is a vector error correction model with a slightly different specification than Mark and Sul (2001).

26

equation (3.6), this implies that when the forecast horizon is k 1 , that it  it*  st (which is approximately the
log of the one-period ahead forward exchange rate) is a candidate for the economic fundamental, ft . But rather
than use the actual interest rate differential, Engel et. al. assume the interest rates are set by Taylor rules as in
(3.1), but replacing expected inflation differentials between t and t  1 with the actual inflation differential
between t  1 and t . They set J q
literature, implying ft

0.1 , J y

0.1 , and J S

1.5 , based on Taylor-rule estimates from the

0.1qt  1.5 Et (S t 1  S t*1 )  0.1( yt  yt* )  st . They use quarterly data beginning in

1973:I. The models are estimated in-sample, then used to produce 1-quarter and 16-quarter ahead forecasts.
The estimation sample is updated recursively to produce forecasts for 1983:I-2005:IV. As in previous studies,
the monetary model and PPP model produce significantly better out of sample forecasts (using the Clark-West
statistic) at the 16-quarter horizon than either the driftless random walk or a random walk with drift (where the
estimate of the drift is updated recursively.) The Taylor rule model also beats the random walk with drift at the
16-quarter horizon, but not the driftless random walk.
Molodtsova and Papell (2009) use the Taylor rule model to forecast exchange rates one month ahead.
However, unlike Engel et. al. (2008), Molodtsova and Papell do not impose the coefficients of the Taylor rule.
Instead, they estimate a model of the form:
(3.7)

st 1  st

D 0  D1S t  D 2S t*  D 3 yt  D 4 yt*  D 5 qt  D 6 it 1  D 7 it*1  ut ,

with the coefficients unrestricted. In particular, they do not impose any sign restrictions in the model. They
argue that since in fact uncovered interest parity does not hold in the data, and many empirical studies find that

st 1  st is negatively correlated with it  it* , we should not impose the signs of the parameters a priori.
Equation (3.7) is estimated over the March 1973 to December 1998 period, then used to produce 1-month
ahead forecasts for the dollar against twelve different currencies from January 1999 to June 2006. The model is
estimated using several different specifications, and using different methods of producing a measure of the
output gap in each country. The version of the model that performs best in out-of-sample forecasts produces a
significantly lower RMSE than the random walk for nine of the twelve exchange rates. Related papers by
Molodtsova et. al. (2008, 2011) find the Taylor rule model can forecast the dollar/deutschemark exchange rate
in the pre-euro era and dollar/euro exchange rate, using real-time data. Also, Wang and Wu (2012) develop
evidence based on forecast intervals that is favorable toward the Taylor rule model.
Gourinchas and Rey (2007) find the approximate measure of the net foreign asset position, nxat , from
equation (2.29) can be used to forecast exchange-rate changes out of sample. They construct nxat beginning
with the period 1952:I to 1978:I, and use the variable to forecast exchange rate changes from 1 to 16 quarters
ahead (for weighted average dollar exchange rates). They then update the estimate of nxat using rolling
windows, and construct forecasts for the period up until 2004:I. They find, using the Clark-West statistic, that
forecasts based on nxat have significantly lower RMSE than the random-walk forecast at all horizons.

27

Exchange-rate Forecastability

Is out-of-sample forecasting power a valid way to test exchange rate models? Engel and West (2005) show
that even if the model is true, under some circumstances exchange rates cannot be forecast.
To motivate the class of models they consider, consider a standard monetary model (such as Frankel, 1979)
in which money demand equations with identical parameters hold in both the Home and Foreign countries, so
we have:
(3.8)

mt  mt*  ( pt  pt* ) J (it  it* )  vt  vt*

Now take the definition of ex ante excess returns given in equation (1.1), Ot { it*  Et ( st 1 )  st  it , and assume
purchasing power parity holds ( st
(3.9)

st

pt  pt* ) to arrive at:

(1  b)(mt  mt*  (vt  vt* ))  bOt  bEt st 1 ,

b { J /(1  J ) .

This model is an example of a typical model in which the exchange rate is determined by some current
economic fundamentals ( mt , mt* , vt , vt* , Ot ) and the expected future exchange rate. The future expected
exchange rate is “discounted” by the factor b, where 0  b  1 . Some of the fundamental economic variables
are multiplied by 1  b , but the risk premium is multiplied by b.
The general class of models considered by Engel and West (2005) takes the form: 17
(3.10)

st

(1  b) f1t  bf 2t  bEt st 1 ,

0  b 1.

where f1t and f 2t are linear combinations of “fundamental” economic variables that determine the exchange
rate. In the example of equation (3.9), f1t

mt  mt*  (vt  vt* ) and f 2t

Ot . Engel and West note that many

variants of the monetary model, as well as models in which the interest rate is the instrument of monetary
policy take on the form of equation (3.10). Engel and West assume the solution for the exchange rate in this
model is the forward-looking, no-bubbles solution that expresses the exchange rate as a present discounted
value (with discount factor b) of current and expected future values of the fundamentals.
Engel and West show that under some circumstances, as the discount factor gets large, the exchange rate
approaches a random walk. Formally, they show that lim( st 1  st ) is an i.i.d. random variable. There are two
b o1

possible conditions under which this result holds: (1) f 2t

0 , and f1t has a unit root (is I(1)); or, (2) f 2t z 0 ,

f 2t has a unit root (with no restriction on f1t .) The exchange rate will nearly follow a random walk when either
there are no f 2t variables and the other economic fundamentals have a unit root, or f 2t has a unit root. f 2t may
include a risk premium, or the error in a Taylor rule equation, such as H t in equation (3.1).
The conditions of the theorem do not require that

f1t or f 2t themselves be random walks, but only that

they have a permanent component. The intuition of the theorem can be gleaned by recognizing that any I(1)
random variable can be written as the sum of a pure random walk (call it xt ) and a stationary, I(0), component
17

Constant terms are suppressed in this discussion for simplicity.

28

(call it yt ). Since the exchange rate is the present discounted sum of I(1) fundamentals, it is a present
discounted sum of xt plus yt . When the discount factor is close to one, expected values of the fundamentals
far into the future matter for the exchange rate. Et xt  j is a random variable even as the horizon j goes to
infinity, but Et yt  j converges to a constant. More and more of the variance of the expected fundamentals in the
future is attributable to the random walk component as the horizon increases. As the discount factor goes to
one, the random walk term dominates the variance of the present value, so the exchange rate approaches the
behavior of a variable that is determined simply as the infinite discounted sum of pure random walk
fundamentals – which would behave as a random walk.
The practical question is whether the models actually do imply that the exchange rate is so close to being a
random walk that the change in the exchange rate cannot be forecasted. If the discount factor is very close to
one, or if the fundamentals themselves are very close to being pure random walks, the exchange rate will look
very unforecastable. Engel and West turn to implied estimates of the discount factor in various models, and
estimates of the serial correlation of the changes in the fundamentals. They show that even with relatively low
values for the discount factor and high values for serial correlation of the changes in fundamentals, the change
in the exchange rate will exhibit very low serial correlation and low correlation with lagged fundamentals.
They also show that even if the fundamentals are I(0), not I(1), that the exchange rate will look nearly like a
random walk if the largest root driving the fundamental is close to one.
An example in which the fundamentals obey the assumptions of the Engel-West theorem is:
(3.11)

f1t  f1t 1 I ( f1t 1  f1t  2 )  H t , 0  I  1 ,

f 2t  f 2t 1 K ( f 2t 1  f 2t  2 )  ut

0 K 1,

where H t and ut are mean-zero, i.i.d. random variables. The solution to the model given in (3.10) is:
(3.12)

st  st 1

bK
b
(1  b)I
1
Ht 
( f1t 1  f1t  2 ) 
( f 2t 1  f 2t  2 ) 
ut .
1  bI
1  bI
1  bK
(1  b)(1  bK )

In the case in which f 2t

0 , we can see that as b o 1 , st  st 1 o

1
H t . For values of b close to, but not
1I

equal to one, st  st 1 can be forecast using f1t 1  f1t  2 , but the forecasting power will be low. When f 2t z 0 ,
as b o 1 the variance of the innovation in st  st 1 goes to infinity. For values of b that are nearly equal to one,
the term multiplying ut is very large, so the forecastable component of st  st 1 has a very small variance
relative to the unforecastable component. It is also clear from this example that the further f1t and f 2t are from
being random walks – i.e., the larger are I and K – the more forecastable is st  st 1 for a given value of b.
Suppose the assumptions on the stochastic processes for the fundamentals in this example applies to the
model in equation (3.9), with f1t

mt  mt*  (vt  vt* ) , and f 2t

Ot . This model assumes that the change in

29

the exchange rate is predictable, because one of the building blocks of the model is Et ( st 1 )  st

it  it*  Ot .

Both it  it* and Ot should be useful in forecasting st 1  st , so why does the Engel-West theorem tell us the
exchange rate is nearly a random walk? We can solve to find:
(1  b)I
1
bK
( f1t  f1t 1 ) 
f 2t 
f 2t 1 ,
1  bI
1  bK
1  bK

it  it*

Ot

 f 2t .

The forecast error is given by

st 1  Et st 1

1
b
H t 1 
ut 1 .
1  bI
(1  b)(1  bK )
0 ), as b approaches one in value, the variance of the forecastable part of

In the case of no risk premium ( f 2t

st 1  st ,

(1  b)I
1
H t 1 , goes to zero.
( f1t  f1t 1 ) , relative to the variance of the unforecastable component,
1  bI
1  bI

So even if uncovered interest parity holds, a regression of st 1  st on it  it* has a very low R-squared. In fact,
West (2012) argues that the estimator of the regression coefficient in this classic regression is inconsistent as

b o 1 . Even if f 2t z 0 , and even if the econometrician could observe the risk premium, the variance of the
predictable component of st 1  st relative to the variance of the forecast error goes to zero as b o 1 .
Suppose f 2t is stationary, but has a root that is close to one in absolute value. For example, replace the
stochastic process in the example above with:
(3.13)

f 2t  D f 2t 1 K ( f 2t 1  D f 2t  2 )  ut

0 K  1, 0  D 1.

Then we find:
(3.14)
(1  b)I
1
b(D  1  K (1  bD ))
b(1  b)DK
b
( f1t 1  f1t  2 ) 
Ht 
f 2t 1 
f 2t  2 
ut .
1  bI
1  bI
(1  bD )(1  bK )
(1  bD )(1  bK )
(1  bD )(1  bK )

st  st 1

We have that lim lim( st 1  st ) is the same as lim( st 1  st ) in equation (3.12). For large enough values of D
b o1

D o1

b o1

and b, st  st 1 will be approximately i.i.d.
Engel and West suggest an alternative means of assessing the models, instead of the out-of-sample
forecasting power. Equation (3.10) has the forward-looking solution:
(3.15)

st

f

f

j 0

j 0

(1  b)¦ b j ( Et f1t  j )  b¦ b j ( Et f 2t  j ) .

If all of the economic fundamentals, f1t and f 2t were observable to the econometrician, the exchange rate
itself should provide an optimal forecast of the discounted sum of ex post fundamentals in equation (3.15). If
the data generating processes for the fundamentals can be represented by linear processes, then the method of
Campbell and Shiller (1988) can be used to test the model directly. However, Engel and West argue that in the
case of exchange rate models, many of the fundamentals are not measurable, so the Campbell-Shilller method

30

cannot be applied directly. Nonetheless, it might be reasonable to conclude that the exchange rate contains
information that is useful in forecasting the observable economic fundamentals. So one testable implication
turns the forecastability question on its head – are economic fundamentals forecastable using the exchange
rate? Engel and West find some weakly favorable evidence using Granger-causality tests.
In light of the Engel-West theorem, how do we interpret the evidence summarized above that we can use
the models to forecast exchange rates at long horizons? Does that mean the models are not true? Or perhaps the
conditions of the Engel-West theorem are not satisfied, but then why do the models have success only at long
horizons and not short horizons? One answer to these questions is that even the evidence of long-horizon
predictability is not unshakeable. As Cheung et. al. (2005) demonstrate, it may appear that the exchange rate
change is forecastable over some periods, but that outcome may simply be luck. The current evidence of longrun forecastability might be overturned.
Another answer arises from the possibility that there is a driving variable for exchange rates – possibly the
ex ante excess return, Ot – for which the econometrician does not have a measure. If Ot is persistent but
stationary, the change in the exchange rate may be nearly unforecastable in the short-run, but there may be
more forecasting power over longer horizons.
If the conditions of the Engel-West theorem are satisfied, there is no reason to expect that long-horizon
predictability will be greater than short-horizon. That theorem simply states that lim( st 1  st ) is an i.i.d.
b o1

random variable, which would mean that the change in the exchange rate is unpredictable at all horizons. On
the other hand, suppose f 2t is a stationary variable. Then from equation (3.10), we can conclude that st and f1t
are cointegrated, and that st  f1t is stationary. This means that st  k  f1t  k is predicatble at time t,
Et ( st  k  f1t  k ) converges to a constant. If f1t is an exogenous random variable, then the predictability of

st  k  f1t  k must arise out of our ability to forecast the exchange rate. In other words, if st  f1t deviates from
its unconditional mean, we can predict that st will converge toward the sum of f1t and the unconditional mean
of st  f1t . At very short horizons, the change in the exchange rate may still be nearly unpredictable if f 2t is
stationary, as example (3.14) shows. At longer horizons, st  k  st may be predictable because of the
convergence of st  k  f1t  k . At the longest horizons, we know st  k  st will be unpredictable because the
exchange rate has a unit root.
This logic suggests that if the econometrician observes f1t but not f 2t , and estimates Mark’s regression
(3.6) using f1t as the measure of the fundamental, a plot of the R-squareds against the horizon k will be humpshaped. At the shortest and longest horizons, the change in the exchange rate should be almost unpredictable,
but at some intermediate horizons there may be some forecasting power. Engel et. al. (2008) consider the
example in which f1t is a pure random walk, so I
correlation D , so K

0 in equation (3.11), and f 2t follows an AR(1) with serial

0 in equation (3.13). We can solve to find:

31

(3.16)

st

f1t 

b
f 2t .
1  bD

Then we can see that the error-correction term from Mark’s regression (3.6), f1t  st is proportional to the
b
f 2t .
1  bD

unobserved fundamental f 2t : f1t  st

The k-period change in the exchange rate is given by:
(3.17)

st  k  st

k

(1  D k )( f1t  st )  ¦ H t  i 
i 1

b
1  bD

k

¦D

k j

ut  j .

j 1

The R-squared for the k-horizon regression of st  k  st on f1t  st is given by:
(3.18)

Rk2

(1  D k ) 2 var(ut )
.
2(1  D k ) var(ut )  [k (1  D 2 )(1  bD ) 2 / b 2 ]var(H t )

When b and D are large, R12 may be quite small, but Rk2 may rise to fairly large values before ultimately
converging toward zero as k o f . For example, if we set var(ut )

var(H t ) 1 , and set D

b .95 , we find

R12 | 0.025 , so the short-run forecasting power of f1t  st is low. At a horizon of 25 periods, the forecasting
power has increased to R252 | 0.35 . Ultimately a maximum R-squared is reached at the 92-period horizon,
R922 | 0.473 , and then the forecasting power declines slowly toward zero.

A possible explanation for the finding of low forecasting power at short horizons and higher power at longhorizons is a stationary Ot . Section 4 examines the evidence on the failure of uncovered interest parity
empirically, and the theoretical literature that has been built to account for it. As equation (1.5) shows, Ot is
potentially an important determinant of exchange rates. Before turning to the literature on uncovered interest
parity, we turn to the empirical evidence on foreign-exchange market intervention, and exchange-rate regimes.
From a theoretical perspective, understanding the factors behind Ot may be important in understanding
channels through which sterilized foreign-exchange intervention can be effective.
3.c Exchange-rate regimes and exchange-rate intervention

The preceding analysis has assumed that exchange rates are floating and determined by market forces.
There are many real-world alternatives to fully flexible exchange rates – “hard pegs”, monetary union,
dollarization, crawling pegs, managed floating, etc. 18
Both in academic studies and in policymaking circles in the past twenty years, there has been increasing
recognition that monetary policy can and perhaps should be defined by the targets of policy. Many central
banks have adopted inflation-targeting regimes, in which central banks explicitly announce desired level of
inflation that monetary policy tries to achieve. Sometimes central banks implicitly or explicitly adopt “flexible
inflation targeting”. For example, the inflation rate is targeted but allowed to deviate from the target under
18

See Tavlas et. al. (2008) for a discussion of types of exchange-rate regimes, and a survey of the literature on exchangerate regime classification.

32

exceptional circumstances such as a financial crisis. Other central banks may trade off different goals. For
example, the Federal Reserve has a dual mandate to keep inflation low and employment high. In this context,
targeting the exchange rate can be seen as one form of flexible inflation targeting. A managed float is simply a
form of a monetary policy rule in which an exchange-rate target is included.
If sterilized intervention can be used to stabilize exchange rates, policymakers have the luxury of using an
instrument separate from monetary policy to achieve their exchange-rate goals. Sterilized intervention may
only be available as an independent tool when a country has capital controls in place. In fact, Eichengreen and
Razo-Garcia (2006) argue that control of the exchange rate and control of capital flows are ineluctably linked.
On the one hand, when capital flows freely between a pair of countries, the well-known “trilemma” tells us that
the countries must either have monetary policy that is tightly linked or there must be flexibility in the exchange
rate. Eichengreen and Razo-Garcia further argue that it is difficult to maintain floating exchange rates when
capital controls are in place. A country that introduces floating exchange rates must cope with currency
volatility. Firms with foreign-currency exposure will want to be able to buy financial instruments that hedge
their risk. There must be a banking system in place that can provide the forward cover to firms. None of this is
very feasible in a country that maintains tight capital controls.
Classification of exchange-rate regimes

The International Monetary Fund has maintained an “official” classification of exchange-rate regimes since
the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system. It is official in the sense that countries report their exchange rate
regime to the IMF. Since 1999 that classification scheme has included eight categories: no separate legal
tender; currency board arrangements; other conventional fixed pegs; horizontal bands; crawling pegs; crawling
bands; managed floating with no pre-announced path for the exchange rate; and, independently floating. 19 But
the adequacy of the IMF classification scheme has long been questioned. On the one hand, Obstfeld and
Rogoff (1995b) noted that countries that are classified as having fixed exchange rates very rarely maintain the
same exchange rate peg for as long as five consecutive years. On the other hand, Calvo and Reinhart (2002)
find that many countries that claim to have floating exchange rates in fact do not. They often use foreign
exchange reserves or interest rates to target exchange rate movements.
These observations have led to some attempts to provide “de facto” (as opposed to “de jure”) classification
schemes in which the exchange-rate regime is determined by the actual behavior of the policymakers rather
than what they claim.
Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) make several adjustments to the official classification of regimes based on the
actual performance of exchange rates. One important distinction they make is between the behavior of the
official exchange rate and the exchange rate that prevails on black markets. They note that these dual or
parallel market rates are much more prevalent than had previously been acknowledged over some periods. In
the 1940s and 1950s, they were prevalent in industrialized countries, and they have remained important in
19

See Hagen and Zhou (2007) for a discussion.

33

developing countries until the present. They also introduce a new category of exchange rates, “freely falling”.
In countries that have very high inflation, the currency depreciates at a very rapid rate. It is misleading to lump
such countries in with those that have stable monetary policy and freely floating rates. For example, if we were
interested in assessing the economic performance of countries with different types of exchange-rate regimes,
the freely falling group would clearly be outperformed by the stable floaters on many dimensions. They find
that the true exchange-rate regime of countries changes frequently. Their basic classification is finer than the
IMF official scheme, allowing for fourteen categories: no separate legal tender; preannounced peg or currency
board arrangement; preannounced narrow ( r 2%) horizontal band; de facto peg; preannounced crawling peg;
preannounced narrow crawling band; de facto crawling peg; de facto narrow crawling band; preannounced
wide crawling band; narrow non-crawling band; managed floating; freely floating; freely falling.
Shambaugh (2004) goes the other direction from Reinhart and Rogoff, in a sense, by classifying countries
either as having pegged exchange rates or being non-peggers. He first determines the base currency against
which a country has set its peg, which is where there is a role for judgment. Then a country is classified as a
pegger during any given year if its official exchange rate stays within a r 2% band against the base currency.
For Shambaugh’s set of 155 countries from 1973-2000, there are 4388 country/year observations, of which
2220 are coded as pegged.
Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2003) classify exchange rates into floats, fixed and intermediate regimes
for each year from 1974-2000 for 183 countries. They first calculate measures of exchange rate movements –
the average absolute monthly percentage change over the year and the standard deviation of the monthly
percentage change. They also calculate a measure of the volatility of the country’s foreign exchange reserves.
Then countries are grouped together using a statistical tool called cluster analysis. They form three groupings –
ones with high exchange-rate volatility and low reserve volatility, which are classified as floaters; ones with
low exchange-rate volatility and high reserve volatility, which are the fixers. Ones with moderate levels of both
measures are classified as the intermediate regimes, and ones with low values for all three measures are left
unclassified. 20
These classification schemes have been used to assess economic performance under various exchange-rate
regimes. For example, Reinhart and Rogoff measure how output growth, inflation, and volume of trade
(relative to GDP) are influenced by the choice of regime. Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2003) and Dubas et.
al. (2010) investigate the effects of exchange-rate regime on growth performance. Shambaugh (2003) and
Frankel et. al. (2004) consider how the independence of monetary policy is influenced by the regime. Husain,
et. al. (2005) evaluate regimes according to their inflation performance, levels and volatility of output growth,
and the probability of banking and currency crises.
Empirical studies of sterilized intervention

Sterilized intervention in foreign exchange markets by central banks or other government agencies presents
20

See also Dubas et. al. (2010), who use a statistical method for classifying regimes.

34

an empirical and theoretical challenge. Traditionally sterilized intervention is defined as buying and selling of
currencies by central banks, with offsetting operations to leave the money supply unchanged. For example, if
Bank of Japan buys U.S. dollars with Japanese yen, it sterilizes the foreign exchange operation by selling some
of its holdings of Japanese government bonds.21 Some central banks sell “sterilization bonds”, an action that
reduces the money supply just as would selling government bonds.
Most central banks no longer target monetary aggregates, so instead, sterilized intervention can be thought
of as foreign exchange market activity by the central bank that does not change its target interest rate. The
theoretical question that has occupied the literature concerns how sterilized intervention can affect exchange
rates if it does not change the interest rate. Consider the first line of equation (1.5). If the current interest
differential, it  it* , is held constant, there are still three other channels through which intervention might affect
the exchange rate: expected future values of the interest differential; current and expected future values of the
ex ante excess return, Ot ; and, the long-run expected future exchange rate. We foucs on the first two as
channels through which sterilized intervention may affect the spot exchange rate.
One hypothesis that has been advanced is that sterilized intervention works by signaling to markets the
intention of central banks to change monetary policy in the future, so the intervention changes expected future
interest rates. 22 However, to quote Neely (2011), “The literature on intervention has not been kind to the
signaling hypothesis. Lewis (1995) and Kaminsky and Lewis (1996) found that intervention generated perverse
impacts on monetary policy in their sample. Fatum and Hutchison (1999) found that intervention had no impact
on federal funds futures rates.”
This leaves changes in current Ot or Et Ot  j as channels through which intervention can affect foreign
exchange rates. We have taken so far a very broad view of the determinants of Ot , and section 4 surveys some
recent models of the determinants. Here we will briefly consider how intervention could work through three
possible determinants of Ot : a foreign exchange risk premium; imperfections in capital markets; and deviations
from the strictest meaning of rational expectations. 23
The “portfolio balance” channel is one possible way in which intervention could affect Ot . In this case, Ot
is interpreted as a risk premium rewarded for holding foreign bonds. Intervention changes the supply of assets
denominated in different currencies, and so changes their risk characteristics. Imagine again that the Bank of
Japan undertakes sterilized intervention that effectively increases the amount of Japanese government bonds
and reduces the amount of U.S. government bonds held by the public. In order to induce the public to hold a
greater share of their portfolio of assets in the form of Japanese government bonds relative to U.S. bonds, the
21

The amount of U.S. money in circulation also is ultimately unaffected because the Bank of Japan takes the dollars it has
purchased and buys U.S. government bonds.
22
See Vitale (2003) for a model that explains why a central bank would use foreign exchange intervention to signal future
monetary policy.
23
See Ho (2004) and Pasquariello (2010) for models in which intervention can affect Ot via a liquidity effect.

35

expected return on Japanese bonds must increase. Investors are rewarded with a risk premium for holding
Japanese government bonds. 24
From a theoretical perspective, generating a portfolio balance effect requires some sophistication in model
building. A model with an infinitely-lived representative agent that has rational expectations will not allow a
role for intervention to affect exchange rates through this channel. In that type of model, the central bank is
effectively owned by households – the balance sheet of the central bank is incorporated in the household
balance sheet. Consider again the example in which the Bank of Japan sells Japanese government bonds to the
public and buys U.S. government bonds. On the one hand, the portfolio held directly by the public becomes
more tilted toward Japanese government bonds. On the other hand, the portfolio held by the Bank of Japan has
become more tilted toward dollar denominated assets. A dollar depreciation has a smaller effect now on the yen
value of assets held by the public, but a larger effect on the yen value of the Bank of Japan’s portfolio. If the
Bank of Japan suffers a capital loss from dollar depreciation, the loss is ultimately passed on to Japanese
taxpayers because the Japanese government must rely more heavily on taxes and less on profits from the
central bank to finance expenditures. So while directly households may find their portfolios less exposed to
foreign exchange risk, indirectly through the central bank their portfolios are more exposed. On net, Japanese
investors with rational expectations will recognize the indirect exposure they have through the central bank, so
sterilized intervention will not influence the equilibrium risk premium. This neutrality result can be broken if
there is heterogeneity in households, so that the households that bear the ultimate tax burden are in some ways
different than investors on average. For example, in a framework of overlapping generations of unrelated
households, the burden of taxes is borne by generations that are not yet born and therefore not currently players
in international financial markets. 25 From a practical standpoint, it seems unlikely that sterilized intervention
could have a large impact on foreign exchange risk premiums for large financially developed economies. The
size of sterilized interventions is small compared to the size of outstanding government bonds. 26
Another possible reason for a wedge between expected returns on Home and Foreign assets is the presence
of capital market imperfections. For example, it is widely acknowledged that China can successfully implement
sterilized intervention because China has strong controls on both inflows and outflows of capital. Many
emerging markets also employ sterilized foreign exchange intervention as a policy tool. Its effectiveness might
depend on the presence of capital controls, or on underdevelopment of financial markets. When markets are
thin, speculative forces might not strongly move to push expected returns on Home and Foreign assets into
equality even if investors are not very averse to foreign exchange risk. If markets are not very liquid, the size of
central bank intervention may be large relative to typical market turnover, and therefore have at least a

24

See, for example, Dominguez and Frankel (1993).
On the other hand, see Kumhof (2010) for a model in which fiscal policy is influenced by foreign exchange intervention
through the effects of exchange rates on government liabilities.
26
However, see Ito (2003) on the massive interventions by the Bank of Japan in the 1990s. See also Dominguez and
Frankel (1993) and Fatum (2010).
25

36

temporary effect on exchange rates. Unfortunately, there is a relative scarcity of studies of foreign exchange
intervention in developing countries, primarily because of a lack of data on official intervention. Disyatat and
Galati (2007) survey empirical studies of sterilized intervention in emerging markets. They find that in general,
foreign exchange intervention has been found to have some weak influence on exchange rates, and that
influence is stronger when capital controls are present and markets are thin. In some cases, the intervention also
seems to be more effective when there is communication concerning the intervention.
Our definition of Ot includes a role for deviations of expectations held by the market of the interest rate
differentials, it  j  it* j , from the “rational expectation”, Et (it  j  it* j ) . In the latter, the expectation is assumed
to be the mathematical expectation conditional on all publicly available information. However, expectations of
agents in the market might differ from these rational expectations. Perhaps market participants follow rules of
thumb in forming expectations, or suffer from overconfidence or other biases. We explore models based on
these deviations from rationality in section 4.d. Alternatively, there is a large recent literature that considers
models in which the market equilibrium exchange rate depends not only on expectations based on publicly
available information but also on the aggregation of differential private information. Of particular note in this
regard are the studies of Evans and Lyons (2002b, 2008), Evans (2002, 2010), and Bacchetta and van Wincoop
(2006, 2010).
Sarno and Taylor (2001) propose a “coordination channel” through which sterilized intervention can affect
exchange rates. As in Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006), agents in financial markets might have imperfect
private information about the economic fundamentals. According to the coordination channel model, the
central bank undertakes sterilized intervention as a way to coordinate expectations. This channel is then similar
to the signaling channel, in that the intervention works through its effects on expectations of future interest
rates. Reitz and Taylor (2008) develop a model in which there are “uninformed” traders whose flow demand
for foreign exchange depends on a simple rule of thumb, while “informed traders” have a flow demand that
depends on their expectations of the current level of the fundamentals. Informed traders do not observe the
actual current fundamentals, and become increasingly less confident of their beliefs about the fundamentals the
further the exchange rate is from its fundamental value. Intervention can increase the confidence of the
fundamentals traders in their information, and therefore lead to greater demand from the informed traders that
pushes the exchange rate toward its fundamental value. This type of model explicitly gives a role to flow
demand for foreign exchange, rather than asset market equilibrium, in determining exchange rates.27
There is a burgeoning literature on central bank communication that examines the contrary idea that the
central bank would like to inform the market about the fundamental value of the exchange rate. Jansen and de
Haan (2005) conclude that statements by European Central Bank officials have at most a small effect on the
mean level of the exchange rate, but have increased its volatility. In contrast, Fratzscher (2006) examines the
27

See also Dominguez (2003, 2006) for a discussion of the role of foreign exchange intervention in influencing
expectations of agents with different information sets.

37

effects of statements regarding the exchange rate by officials in the U.S., Japan, and the euro area from 19902003. That study finds that communication does have a small but significant effect in the desired direction on
exchange rates. Using impulse response functions, the effect appears to be short-lived. However, the reaction
of forward exchange rates suggests that the influence of the communications may be longer-lived, perhaps up
to six months. In addition, verbal interventions work to reduce volatility significantly. 28
Beine et. al. (2009) find that actual foreign exchange market interventions are more effective when
accompanied by communication. Official statements either confirming or commenting on intervention tend to
lead to more significant changes in exchange rates in the desired direction, and to reduce the volatility of
exchange rates. This finding is confirmed in studies of dollar/yen interventions (1991-2003), and euro area/yen
interventions (1989-2002).
Empirical studies of actual interventions, as well as verbal interventions, are hampered by the simultaneous
causality problem. Interventions do not occur randomly, but instead always in reaction to conditions in the
foreign exchange market. It is generally believed (see, for example, Sarno and Taylor (2001)) that this
simultaneity problem biases studies against finding an effect on exchange rates of intervention. That conclusion
makes sense when intervention leans against the wind. That is, when markets are bidding up the value of a
currency, any central bank intervention to weaken the currency might only slow down the market tide. After
the intervention, the currency might continue to strengthen, but a slower rate if the intervention is successful.
The problem for the econometrician is in determining what would have happened in the absence of the
intervention. If the null is that the exchange rate is not expected to change, then in the leaning-against-the-wind
scenario, the intervention might appear to have little or no effect on exchange rates when in fact it stifled the
market trend. On the other hand, suppose intervention occurs when policymakers believe the currency is
misaligned. Then the intervention might appear to be effective when in fact the exchange rate may be returning
to its equilibrium because of market forces that are independent of the intervention. In this case, the
econometric analysis would tend to overstate the effects of intervention.
It is difficult to find a valid instrument to deal with this simultaneity problem. Almost any variable that is
correlated with the intervention is also correlated with the economic factors that drive the exchange rate. 29 One
way the literature has attempted to reduce the simultaneity problem is to look at very narrow windows around
the time of the intervention. The notion is that within the narrow time period, the direct effects of the
intervention are likely to be the most important determinants of the exchange rate movements, and dominate
any changes being driven by other market forces. That conclusion is especially tenuous during times of foreign
exchange market volatility, when trading activity might be high, but those are exactly the times when
intervention is likely to occur. In addition, this approach limits our ability to trace out longer-run effects of
foreign exchange intervention. Very few studies have found significant evidence of a sustained effect of
28

See also Fratzscher (2008, 2009), which bolster these findings.
See Kearns and Rigobon (2005) who identify the effects of foreign exchange intervention by claiming that there was an
exogenous change in the size of interventions undertaken by many central banks.

29

38

sterilized intervention on the level of the exchange rate.
The literature is filled with dozens of recent studies on the effectiveness of intervention. Sarno and Taylor
(2001) and Neely (2005) provide surveys of the empirical work. Most of the studies use very short term data to
investigate the effectiveness of intervention. There is almost always evidence that sterilized intervention is
effective in changing exchange rates. However, given that the window investigated is very small, it is
essentially impossible to ascertain how permanent the effect of intervention is. Typically these studies report
that st '  st responds in the desired direction of the intervention, where ' is a very small time interval after
the intervention. Changes over subsequent short time intervals are generally found to be insignificantly
affected. These tests cannot tell us whether the exchange rate is different one week from the time of
intervention than it would have been without the intervention. Because of the econometric difficulties of
separating out the effects of intervention from other forces driving exchange rates, the empirical studies are not
able to provide evidence on whether the policymakers can influence exchange rates over a week, a month, or a
quarter with sterilized intervention. Some studies also find that volatility increases at times of intervention. In
some cases, the volatility appears to increase prior to the intervention. However, again, simultaneity problems
prevail. Does the volatility precipitate the action by the policymaker, so that intervention occurs when markets
are volatile? Or does the intervention lead to more volatility, and in some cases cause volatility in anticipation
of the intervention?
Despite many empirical studies, it is not clear yet whether sterilized intervention meets the same criteria
that regulators use to decide whether to approve a cancer drug – that it is safe and effective.

4. Ex ante excess returns and the uncovered interest parity puzzle

We have so far focused attention on models of exchange rates in which uncovered interest parity holds.
However, we have noted that there are some reasons to suspect that these models are not adequate. First, there
is a weak relationship between exchange rates and the economic fundamentals that are supposed to explain
them. In a model with uncovered interest parity, exchange rates are related not only to current economic
fundamentals but news about future fundamentals, so there may be “disconnect”. 30 We have also seen that
models based on fundamentals are not able to forecast exchange rates out of sample, although the Engel-West
(2005) theorem states that in fact under plausible assumptions if uncovered interest parity holds, the models
imply that the exchange rate is nearly unforecastable. 31 However, there is some evidence that exchange rate
changes can be forecast at long horizons. One possible way to reconcile the fact that exchange rates are nearly
unforecastable at shorter horizons with the long-horizon evidence, is to introduce a stationary but persistent
deviation from uncovered interest parity. 32

30

See the discussion in section 2.b, concerning equation (2.21).
See the discussion in section 3.b.
32
See the discussion in section 3.b., concerning equations (3.17) and (3.18).
31

39

4.a Recent empirical evidence

Exchange rate models that incorporate uncovered interest parity have difficulty accounting for the high
volatility of exchange rates across high-income countries. For example, the calibrated variance of the nominal
exchange rates in some sticky-price dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models is too low if the model
assumes interest parity. Many models simply assume an exogenous stochastic process for Ot in equation (1.1)
in order to account for the high volatility. 33 Duarte and Stockman (2005) develop a model in which news drives
exchange rates. As in the example given in equation (2.21), the news leads to a disconnect between the
exchange rate and the economic fundamentals. But in their model, the news concerns the foreign exchange risk
premium. Their model allows for disconnect to occur because the econometrician does not observe the risk
premium, which in turn is time varying because it is driven by news.
One reason the literature has focused on the foreign exchange risk premium is to explain exchange-rate
volatility and exchange-rate disconnect. 34 A second reason is the uncovered interest parity puzzle. Equation
(1.6), repeated here for convenience, is the regression estimated by Bilson (1981) and Fama (1984) that tests
uncovered interest parity
(4.1)

st 1  st

a  b(it  it* )  ut 1 .

Under the null, the regression coefficients should be a 0 and b 1 . However, a long history of empirical
work has found the estimated value of b to be less than one, and usually less than zero. Hodrick (1987), Froot
and Thaler (1990), and Engel (1996) are older surveys of the empirical work, but the puzzle is still present in
more recent studies. For example, Burnside et. al. (2006) estimate equation (4.1) for nine currencies against the
U.K. pound using monthly data from January 1976 to December 2005. In all cases, the estimated slope
coefficient is negative. It is always found to be significantly less than one (at the 5 percent level of
significance), and usually significantly less than zero. 35
Several recent studies have measured the economic return to taking positions based on the deviation from
uncovered interest parity implied by the empirical findings of regression (4.1). One investment rule is the
“carry trade”, under which the investor simply takes a long position in the currency with the higher interest
rate. Suppose that interest parity does not hold, but that the only time t information that is useful in forecasting
the exchange rate is the interest differential, it  it* . Suppose further that the intercept term in (4.1) is zero:
a 0 . Then
(4.2)

Ot

it*  Et st 1  st  it

(1  b)(it*  it ) .

As long as b  1 , the ex ante excess return on the Foreign bond, Ot , is positive precisely when it* ! it . If the
33

See for example, Kollmann (2004), Adolfson et. al. (2007), and Wang (2010).
For example, that is the motivation for Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006). See also Engel and West (2004) for
evidence that observed economic fundamentals can only account for a fraction of the variance of the innovation in
exchange rates.
35
Bekaert and Hodrick (2001) also find evidence of b less than one, but note that statistical problems imply that the
confidence interval is wider than generally reported.
34

40

Foreign interest rate is higher than the Home interest rate, the Foreign deposit has a higher expected return than
the Home deposit, and vice versa.
Burnside et. al. (2008, 2011c) consider the payoffs to holding portfolios of short-term bonds based on the
carry trade. They assess the return to holding an equal-weighted portfolio of 23 currencies. The strategy is to
borrow in the foreign country and invest in the U.S. when the U.S. interest rate is above the interest rate in each
of these countries. When the U.S. interest rate is below the interest rate of the other country, the position is
reversed. Burnside et. al. (2008) consider monthly returns from January 1976 to June 2007, as well as subsamples. The mean annualized return on this portfolio is 5.4%, with a Sharpe ratio (the ratio of the average
return to the standard deviation of the return) of 0.83. Burnside et. al. (2011c) extend the sample period through
2010, and find an average payoff of 4.6%, with a Sharpe ratio of 0.89. Both studies find that the volatility of
the return on the carry trade is substantially reduced by holding the portfolio (compared to the average Sharpe
ratio for the carry trade for individual currencies.)
Lustig and Verdelhan (2007), Brunnermeier et. al. (2009) and Lustig et. al. (2011) all consider returns to a
carry trade portfolio in which assets are grouped. For example, Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) use exchange rate
data and interest rate data for 81 countries to construct portfolios, and measure returns in the 1953-2002 period
and also the subperiod of 1971-2002. At the beginning of each month, they group the countries into eight
equal-sized portfolios, ranked by their interest rate in the previous month relative to the U.S. interest rate, and
rebalance the portfolio each month. Then they measure the ex post average ex post annualized returns on a long
position in each portfolio. The portfolio with the lowest interest rate (portfolio 1) has an average return of 2.99 percent in the 1971-2002 period, while the portfolios with the highest (portfolio 8) and next-highest
interest rates (portfolio 7) have average returns of 1.48 and 3.94 percent, respectively. The Sharpe ratios for
these three portfolios are -0.38, 0.10, and 0.39. Because the highest interest rate portfolio generally contains
some very high inflation countries, the most interesting comparison might be between the returns on portfolio 7
and portfolio 1. Clearly there is a high return and low standard deviation to the strategy of going long in highinterest rate countries and short in low-interest rate countries.
Jorda and Taylor (2012) suggest augmenting the carry trade strategy by includig economic fundamentals.
They argue that the profits from the standard carry-trade strategy (using an equal-weighted portfolio of nine
currencies relative to the U.S. dollar) disappeared for many currencies, and were even reversed, in the 20072008 period as low interest rate currencies appreciated strongly. However, a strategy that takes into account not
only the interest rate differential but also the deviation of the exchange rate from its “fundamental” level
remained profitable over that time span. The fundamental value of the currency is measured as the long-run
mean real exchange rate. The trading strategy that appears to be most robust across periods is a threshold one in
which trades are only made when the absolute values of the interest differential and the deviation of the real
exchange rate exceed certain amounts.
An alternative trading strategy that has been examined is a momentum strategy. Under this strategy, if

41

returns on, say, the Foreign bond were positive in the previous period: it*1  st  st 1  it 1 , then the investor
should go long in the Foreign asset and short the Home bond. Menkhoff et. al. (2012b) and Burnside et. al.
(2011c) calculate the profits from following this rule. The former paper considers one-month returns for 48
countries relative to the U.S. dollar from January 1976 to January 2010. They report a return on the portfolio
of around 10%, and a Sharpe ratio of around 0.95. The latter paper reports somewhat lower expected returns
and Sharpe ratios, but ones that are still impressively high.
Burnside et. al. (2006, 2011c) and Menkhoff et. al. (2012b) investigate whether the excess returns on carry
trade or momentum strategies can be explained by traditional risk factors such as the growth rate of real
consumption, the market return, the term structure spread, the spread between LIBOR and Treasury rates, etc.
None of these factors are correlated with the excess returns from either strategy in foreign exchange markets.
On the other hand, Menkoff et. al. (2012a) do find that the returns to the carry trade are correlated with
volatility of exchange rates. Sorting currencies into five portfolios as in Lustig et. al. (2007), they find a high
average return to the carry trade. They further find that ex post returns for high interest rate currencies are low
during times of high volatility. They interpret this to mean that high interest rate currencies are risky because
they have poor payoffs when a measure of global volatility is high.
Clarida et. al. (2009) find regularities similar to those in Menkhoff et. al. (2012a). They examine weekly
returns of G10 currencies relative to the dollar. They construct carry trade portfolios that put the investor long
in the n currencies with the highest interest rate relative to the U.S. and short in the n lowest return currencies,

n 1, 2,3, 4,5 . They divide their sample into periods of high, medium and low return volatility for each
portfolio using both measures of ex post volatility and volatility implied in options. They find that in the
periods of lowest volatility, the slope coefficient in regression (4.1) is negative, but in the periods of highest
volatility, the slope coefficient is positive. High interest rate currencies pay a low return in volatile times, but a
high return during less volatile times. These results also coincide with the conclusions of Brunnermeier et. al.
(2009) that the gains from the carry trade unwind during times of “currency crashes”, when there are dramatic
depreciations of the high-interest rate currencies.
There are some circumstances under which regression (4.1) does not provide much evidence of deviations
from uncovered interest parity. Bansal and Dahlquist (2000) and Frankel and Poonawala (2010) find that the
slope coefficient in that regression is much closer to 1 for emerging market currencies relative to the U.S.
dollar. Another circumstance in which there is some evidence that uncovered interest parity holds is at longer
horizons. Alexius (2001), Chinn and Meredith (2004), and Chinn (2006) all report a regression of long-term
changes in exchange rates on long-term interest rate differentials. For example, Chinn (2006) considers a
regression of the 10-year change in the log of the exchange rate on the difference in 10-year yields to maturity
on quarterly data for Japan, Germany, the U.K. and Canada relative to the U.S. from 1983:I to 2004:IV. The
equation is estimated as a panel, imposing the same slope coefficient across currencies. Chinn finds an
estimated slope coefficient of 0.708, and cannot reject the null that the slope coefficient equals one. Similar

42

results are found in currency-by-currency regressions, and regressions using 5-year yields. 36
At the other end of the time spectrum, Chaboud and Wright (2005) find that uncovered interest parity holds
well over very short horizons. Specifically, they take into account the fact that a position held during the day
does not pay interest, but overnight balances do. A position is deemed to be overnight if it is held past 5 p.m.
New York time. So any interest received on a deposit held at 5 p.m. is the same whether the position was held
all day or just for a few minutes. The change in the exchange rate from right before until right after 5 p.m. is
expected (before 5 p.m.) to equal the interest differential if uncovered interest parity holds. Using data on the
Swiss franc, euro, U.K. pound and yen relative to the dollar, Chaboud and Wright estimate regression (4.1) for
very short time periods that span 5 p.m. New York time. They find that the slope coefficient is nearly one when
the time interval is only an hour or two, but as the time interval increases toward six hours and more, the
estimated slope coefficient turns negative.
4.b Risk premium models

The most direct explanation for the presence of ex ante expected returns is a risk premium. In this case, the
risk is from foreign exchange fluctuations. From the outset, we can recognize that there is something different
about the logic of foreign exchange risk premiums from the standard intuition about risk premiums. Consider a
two-country framework. For Home agents, the Home short-term bond is riskless, and for the Foreign agent, the
Foreign short-term bond is riskless. The Home agent bears foreign exchange risk by holding Foreign bonds,
and vice-versa. Who should be compensated for bearing foreign exchange risk if all agents can avoid bearing
that risk by only holding bonds from their own country?
A key assumption of a useful international model of asset pricing is that different agents get different
returns on a given asset. Home agents evaluate nominal returns in units of the Home currency or real returns in
units of the Home consumption basket, but Foreign agents evaluate nominal (real) returns in terms of the
Foreign currency (consumption basket). This essay does not allow space for a detailed examination of foreignexchange risk, and only can touch on the basics that are relevant for understanding the recent economic
literature. We briefly review the basic theory of foreign exchange risk premiums and relate the factors driving
the risk premium to the state variables driving stochastic discount factors. See, for example, Backus et. al.
(2001) or Brandt et. al. (2006).
Define Dt 1 { Qt 1 / Q t (and Qt is the level of the real exchange rate given by Qt { exp( qt ) ), and let
dt 1 { qt 1  qt . For simplicity, we will assume in this section that inflation rates are zero, so there is no
difference between real and nominal returns in each country. We will assume exchange rates are lognormally
distributed.

Ot as defined in equation (1.1) is technically not the ex ante excess return for any investor. For Home
36

In contrast, Bekaert et. al. (2007) find no evidence to support the claim that long-horizon uncovered interest parity holds
better than short-horizon. A related paper is Clarida et. al. (2003), which develops evidence that term structure spreads are
useful in forecasting short-run changes in exchange rates.

43

agents, who evaluate returns in Home currency, the expected return on Home bonds compared to Foreign
bonds is given by OtH { rt*  rt  Et d t 1  12 vart d t 1 . Notice that OtH z Ot because of the convexity term,
1
2

vart dt 1 . For Foreign investors, the difference between the expected return on Foreign bonds and Home

bonds is given by OtF { rt*  rt  Et d t 1  12 vart d t 1 . Given the sign convention adopted here, OtF is the risk
premium earned by Foreign investors on Home bonds. Under these definitions
(4.3)

OtH  12 vart dt 1 Ot

OtF  12 vart dt 1 .

It is possible, in other words, for Home investors to expect a premium for holding Foreign bonds and Foreign
investors to expect a premium for holding Home bonds because OtH

Ot  12 vart dt 1 and OtF

Ot  12 vart dt 1 .

Note that Ot is the simple average of OtH and OtF , so it is the average ex ante risk premium on Foreign bonds.
One of the most famous theorems in asset pricing states that in the absence of opportunities for
arbitrage, there exists a stochastic discount factor, M t 1 such that the returns on any asset j denominated in
r

units of Home consumption satisfy 1 Et ( M t 1e j ,t 1 ) . 37 This condition may look familiar as the first-order
condition for an agent that is maximizing intertemporal expected utility. M t 1 is the agent’s intertemporal
marginal rate of substitution. But the theorem is much more general than this setting. It says that in the absence
of arbitrage, we can always find a strictly positive random variable M t 1 that satisfies this condition. Even if
agents are not rational, even if there are plenty of market imperfections, as long as pure arbitrage opportunities
do not exist, this condition holds. However, as we shall see, the application of this condition in economic
models has indeed been to a setting in which agents maximize utility, and in fact generally one in which there
are no market imperfections so that markets are complete.
The models we examine assume that in each country there is a short-term bond whose return is riskless
in real terms. Applying this relationship to returns on Home and Foreign riskless real bonds, expressing returns
in units of Home consumption, we have:
(4.4)

1 e rt Et M t 1 , and

(4.5)

1 e rt Et M t 1 Dt 1

*

Under log normality, we can derive from these equations:
(4.6)

rt

 Et mt 1  12 vart mt 1 ,

(4.7)

rt*

 Et mt 1  Et d t 1  12 vart mt 1  12 vart d t 1  covt ( mt 1 , d t 1 ) .

Taking differences, we get
(4.8)

Ot

rt*  rt  Et d t 1

 12 vart d t 1  covt (mt 1 , d t 1 ) .

For returns expressed in units of the Foreign consumption basket, there exists a stochastic discount factor
37

See Cochrane (2005), for example.

44

M t*1 that satisfies
(4.9)

*

1 e rt Et M t*1 ,

(4.10) 1 e rt Et M t*1 Dt11 .
Clearly for any M t 1 that satisfies (4.5), there must be a M t*1 that satisfies (4.9) defined by
M t*1

M t 1 Dt 1 . Or,

(4.11)

mt*1  mt 1 .

dt 1

In general, there is not a unique stochastic discount factor that satisfies equations (4.4) and (4.5) for returns in
Home units, or (4.9) and (4.10) for returns in Foreign units. However, it can be shown that the discount factor
is unique when markets are complete. The models we consider in the rest of this subsection assume complete
markets.
From the equations above, OtH

 covt (mt 1 , d t 1 ) and OtF

 covt (mt*1 , d t 1 ) . As with any asset, the

excess return is determined by the covariance of the return with the stochastic discount factor. If the foreign
exchange return, dt 1 is negatively correlated with the Home discount factor, mt 1 , Home investors require a
compensation for risk so the Foreign security has an excess return relative to the Home bond. For Foreign
investors, the foreign exchange return on a Home bond is  d t 1 . If  dt 1 is negatively correlated with the
Foreign discount factor, mt*1 , the Home asset is relatively risky for the Foreign investor. Standard empirical
methods do not measure OtH or OtF but instead give us more direct evidence on Ot .
(4.12)

Ot

OtH  OtF
2

 covt (

mt 1  mt*1
, d t 1 ) .
2

From equation (4.11), we have
(4.13)

Et dt 1

Et ( mt*1  mt 1 ) ,

and from (4.12) we find
(4.14)

Ot

1
2

(vart ( mt 1 )  vart (mt*1 )) .

From equation (4.14), it is apparent that if the high interest rate currency has the riskier bonds, we must
have cov(rt  rt* , vart (mt 1 )  vart (mt*1 ))  0 . A model with this property requires that the variances of the
stochastic discount factors be random variables. In the general equilibrium models we discuss, mt , for
example, is related to moments of Home consumption, and so vart ( mt 1 ) is driven by volatility in the Home
country consumption. When vart (mt 1 )  vart (mt*1 ) is high, in essence the model must incorporate a
precautionary saving effect on interest rates, so that rt  rt* tends to be low.
The no-arbitrage conditions, equations (4.4)-(4.5) and (4.9)-(4.10) hold under very general conditions, but
do not by themselves give us much insight into the economic determinants of the risk premium. We will next

45

turn to two models built on utility-maximizing representative agents with rational expectations in the Home
and Foreign countries. In these models, M t 1 and M t*1 are the intertemporal marginal rate of substitutions for
Home and Foreign agents, respectively.
Generally, models with standard utility functions are not able to account for the uncovered interest parity
puzzle. 38 Some recent papers have employed the representative agent framework, but introduced non-standard
preferences. Verdelhan (2010) builds a model based on the Campbell-Cochrane (1999) specification of external
habit persistence to explain the familiar uncovered interest parity puzzle. In Verdelhan (2010) there are two
symmetric countries. The objective of Home household i is to maximize
f

(4.15)

Et ¦ E j (Ci ,t  j  H t  j )1J /(1  J ) ,
j 0

where J is the coefficient of relative risk aversion, and H t represents an external habit. H t is defined
implicitly by defining the “surplus”, st { ln (Ct  H t ) / Ct , where Ct is aggregate consumption, and st is
assumed to follow the stochastic process:
(4.16)

(1  I ) s  I st  P ( st )(ct 1  ct  g ) , 0  I  1 .

st 1

Here, I and s are parameters, and ct { ln(Ct ) is assumed to follow a simple random walk with drift, g:
(4.17)

g  ct  ut 1 , where ut 1  i.i.d . N (0, V 2 ) .

ct 1

P ( st ) represents the sensitivity of the surplus to consumption growth, and is given by:
(4.18)

P ( st ) {

1
1  2( st  s )  1 , when st d smax , 0 elsewhere.
S

S is the steady-state surplus-consumption ratio, and smax { s  (1  S 2 ) / 2 is an upper bound on the ratio. The
log of the stochastic discount factor is given by:
(4.19)

ln( E )  J > g  (I  1)( st  s )  (1  P ( st ))(ct 1  ct  g ) @

mt 1

When the parameters S and smax are suitably normalized, Verdelhan shows we can write the expected
rate of depreciation as:
(4.20)

Et d t 1

J (1  I )( st  st* ) ,

where st* is the Foreign surplus. The excess return is given by:
(4.21)

Ot

(J 2V 2 / S 2 )( st  st* ) .

From the definition of Ot , we have rt  rt*

Et dt 1  Ot . Although the empirical evidence that we survey

establishes cov( st 1  st , it  it* )  0 , a relationship for nominal returns, the theoretical literature is largely built
to explain real returns. But it is well known that in advanced low-inflation countries, nominal and real
exchange rate changes are highly correlated. To a lesser extent, it is agreed that most of the variation in
38

See Bekaert et. al. (1997) on this point.

46

nominal interest differentials can be attributed to variation in real interest differentials. So the literature builds
models to deliver cov(dt 1 , rt  rt* )  0 .
Under the assumption of Verdelhan (2010) that J 1  I  J 2V 2 / S 2 , this model can account for the finding
that cov(dt 1 , rt  rt* )  0 . The key to this assumption is that it delivers var(Ot ) ! var( Et dt 1 ) , which Fama
(1984) showed is a necessary condition to account for the uncovered interest parity puzzle. In this model,

Et d t 1 and Ot must be positively correlated, and under the appropriate assumptions Ot is more volatile than
Et d t 1 , so the interest differential and Et d t 1 move in opposite directions since rt  rt*

Et dt 1  Ot . 39

We next turn attention to models based on Epstein-Zin (1989) preferences. Colacito and Croce (2011) have
recently applied the model to understand several properties of equity returns, real exchange rates and
consumption. Bansal and Shaliastovich (2010) and Backus, et. al. (2010) demonstrate how model based on can
account for the interest-parity anomaly, by delivering var(Ot ) ! var( Et dt 1 ) .
We consider a simplified example based on Bansal and Shaliastovich (2010). In each country, households
are assumed to have Epstein-Zin (1989) preferences. The Home agent’s utility is defined by the recursive
relationship:
(4.22) U t

^

(1  E )CtU  E ª Et U tD1
«¬

U /D

`

º
»¼

1/ U

.

In this relationship, E measures the patience of the consumer, 1  D is the degree of relative risk aversion, and
1/(1  U ) is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.
Assume an exogenous path for consumption in each country. In the Home country (with ct { ln(Ct ) ):
(4.23)

ct 1  ct

P  uth H tx1 .

In the Foreign country, we have:
(4.24)

ct*1  ct*

P *  lt*  utf H t*x1

The innovation, H tx1 , is distributed i.i.d . N (0,1) , but may be correlated with H t*x1 . Conditional variances are
stochastic and follow first-order autoregressive processes:
(4.25) uti1

(1  Mui )Tui  Mui uti  V ui H tiu1 , i

h, f

Assume for now that the innovations, H tiu1 ,are uncorrelated, distributed i.i.d. with mean zero and unit variance.
We can log linearize the first-order conditions as in Backus et. al. (2010). We will ignore terms that are not
time-varying or that do not affect both the conditional means and variances of the stochastic discount factors,
lumping those variables into the catchall terms ; t and ;*t .
The Home discount factor is given by:

39

Moore and Roche (2002, 2010) also develop a model based on Campbell-Cochrane preferences.

47

(4.26)

 mt 1

J ur uth  Oxr uth H tx1  ; t .

The Foreign discount factor is given by:
(4.27)

 mt*1

J u*r utf  Ox*r utf H t*x1  ;*t .

The parameters in these log-linearization are:

J ur

D (D  U ) / 2

J u*r

D * (D *  U * ) / 2

Oxr 1  D

Ox*r 1  D *

Bansal and Shaliastovich (2010) and Backus et. al. (2010) assume agents have a preference for “early
resolution of risk” in the sense described by Epstein and Zin, so D  U . They also assume that the
intertemporal elasticity of substitution is greater than one, which requires 0  U  1 . As Bansal and
Shaliastovich (2010) explain, these parameter choices are needed in order for this model to account for
variance asset pricing facts, such as the term structure of interest rates. Further, they assume D  0 , in which
case the model can generate cov( Et dt 1 , rt  rt* )  0 .
Bansal and Shaliastovich assume identical parameters for Home and Foreign household preferences, and
assume identical parameters in the stochastic processes for consumption growth. In this case, we find:
(4.28)

Et d t 1

(4.29)

Ot

1
2

J ur (uth  utf )
(Oxr ) 2 (uth  utf ) .

Assuming D  0 and 0  U  1 as above, we find cov( Et dt 1 , rt  rt* )  0 .
Lustig et. al. (2011) consider a version of this model in which idiosyncratic shocks do not play a key role.
Instead, it is asymmetric preferences, which imply different loadings on the common factors that deliver the
result that cov( Et dt 1 , rt d )  0 . Assume now that uth and utf are common to the Home and Foreign countries,
and relabel them utc to indicate a common shock to the variance of output growth. Then
(4.30)

Et dt 1

(4.31)

Ot

1
2

(J ur  J u*r )utc
((Oxr ) 2  (Ox*r ) 2 )utc

This model can account for cov( Et dt 1 , rt  rt* )  0 if we assume there is asymmetry in the degree of risk
aversion, D z D * , but assume U

U * and, as above, that D ,D *  0 and 0  U  1 .

Recent sophisticated extensions of the model with Epstein-Zin preferences are Gourio et. al. (2013),
Colacito and Croce (2013), and Benigno et. al. (2012). The first extends the model by allowing output to be
produced using capital and labor, so that agents get utility over both consumption and leisure. They incorporate
the possibility of a “disaster” – a very bad outcome for output in both countries. An important assumption in
their model is that the two countries have different exposures to the disaster shock, and that the probability of
the disaster is time varying. The model is able to account for some of the important empirical regularities, such
as a time-varying risk premium, though it does have the implication (counter to the interpretation of the interest

48

parity puzzle) that low-interest rate currencies are riskier.
In all of the general equilibrium models discussed so far, there is no actual trade in output. Home
consumers, for example, get utility only from home goods. This greatly simplifies the solution for equilibrium
consumption since it must equal equilibrium output (less investment). Colacito and Croce (2013) solve a
simple two-country endowment model, in which households in each country consume products produced in
both countries, though with a home bias in consumption, putting more weight in utility on goods produced in
their own country. They show that the uncovered interest parity puzzle and other real exchange rate anomalies
can be reconciled when agents have Epstein-Zin preferences and there is a risky persistent component to output
growth. Benigno et. al. (2012) also consider a two-country model with home bias in preferences, and, on the
production side, a standard New Keynesian model in which a continuum of monopolistic firms produce goods
that are imperfect substitutes for other goods produced in the same country. Output is produced using labor,
and households get utility from not working. They consider both a neoclassical version of the model with
flexible nominal prices and a sticky-price version with Calvo-price setting with firms setting prices in the
currency of the country in which they produce. Monetary policy is determined by a simple Taylor rule. There
are shocks to productivity and to monetary policy which drive the uncertainty in the economy. They solve the
model via an approximation method, and find that under certain parameter assumptions, the model can account
for some of the empirical stylized facts. For example, a monetary policy contraction will lead to the delayed
overshooting found in Eichenbaum and Evans (1995), and can reproduce the negative correlation of exchange
rate changes and interest rate differentials that defines the interest parity puzzle. 40 The model can also
reproduce the high volatility of real exchange rates we see in the data, and the model draws a link between
volatility and the levels of real exchange rates.
Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) implement a test of the model of Epstein-Zin preferences. Theirs is not a test
of the general equilibrium models described above, but, in essence a test of whether expected returns are
consistent with the Euler equation for U.S. investors. They consider an extended version of the preferences
given in equation (4.22), where Ct can be interpreted as an aggregate over consumption of nondurable goods,

N t , and durable consumption flows, Kt :
(4.32) Ct

1/ I

ª¬(1  H ) N tI  H K tI º¼

.

They show that the expected excess return for any asset j (the expected return minus the U.S. real interest rate)
can be written as:
(4.33)

Et (rt j 1  rt 1 ) bc6 fj .

Here, b is a vector of parameters derived from the model. 6 fj is the 3x1 vector of covariances between the
“factors”, ftc
40

ª¬ nt  nt 1 , kt  kt 1 , rtW º¼ , and rt j  rt , where nt

ln( N t ) , kt

ln( K t ) , and rtW is the log of the

See the discussion in section 3.A.

49

U.S. market return. We can rewrite (4.33) as:
(4.34)

Et (rt j 1  rt 1 )

where x 6 ff b , E j

xcE j ,
6 ff16 fj , and 6 ff is the variance-coveraince matrix of ft . Lustig and Verdelhan (2007)

then follow the standard two-step procedure from the finance literature. We can see from the definition of E j
that it can be estimated by a regression of rt j  rt on ft , for the time-series of each asset j. They estimate the
“factor prices”, the elements of x, by doing a cross-section regression of the mean of rt j 1  rt 1 on the “betas”
(the estimataed E j ) across the carry-trade portfolios described in section 4.a above. They find that these betas
can explain 87 percent of the cross-section variation in the average annual return on their eight portfolios.41
Alvarez, et. al. (2009) do assume standard constant relative risk aversion preferences but do not assume a
representative agent in each country. Instead, there is a cost to accessing asset markets which varies across
individuals in the economy. Agents earn money in the goods market, but must pay a time-varying fixed cost to
enter the asset market. Suppose the Home country has an increase in money growth. This leads to inflation,
which increases the costs of not participating in the financial market, so more agents enter the financial market.
They show that as money growth increases, the variance of the pricing kernel for the agents participating in the
market falls. Nominal interest rates rise, thus leading to the conclusion that the foreign exchange risk premium
is negatively correlated with the Home less Foreign nominal interest differential.
In the next section, we examine a literature in which agents are heterogenous in a different way – they have
access to different information, and so expectations are not homogenous across all agents.
4.c Models of market dynamics and market microstructure

All of the models that we have considered up until this point have assumed a strict form of rational
expectations, which includes the assumption that there is a publicly available set of information shared by all
agents and no private information. However, a large literature examines cases in which market participants
have different sets of information and how that may impact exchange rate dynamics. One important strand of
that literature has developed models based on the “microstructure” of foreign exchange markets, highlighting
the important role for foreign exchange dealers in aggregating private information. 42 These models show that in
an environment in which the exchange rate is determined by orders submitted to traders who then clear the
market, order flow – the demand coming from individuals for foreign exchange – will help determine the
exchange rate, because the order flow embodies information. Even when underlying demands are determined
by portfolio balance, the flows of foreign exchange into and out of markets can play an important role because

41

However, Burnside (2011) disputes the statistical significance of their estimates, to which Lustig and Verdelhan (2011)
reply.
42
See the seminal contributions by Evans and Lyons (2002a, 2002b), Evans (2002, 2010), Jeanne and Rose (2002) and
Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006). Also see Devereux and Engel (2002) and Breedon and Vitale (2010).

50

of their information content. This approach has received empirical support in a number of studies.43 This
literature is large and too complex to survey satisfactorily in a small space. Fortunately, Evans (2011) provides
a comprehensive synthesis of this literature.
In this section, we briefly touch on two models of heterogeneous information that can be placed easily into
the context of the previous rational expectations models discussed in Section 2. Bacchetta and van Wincoop
(2006) consider a monetary model in which agents have symmetric, private information. This model sheds
some light on the exchange-rate disconnect puzzle mentioned in section 2.b. 44 Bacchetta and van Wincoop
(2010) build a model in which there are dynamics to information aggregation, which can account for the
uncovered interest parity puzzle. 45
To get some intuition of how private information affects the exchange rate, we work through the simple
example in Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006). Suppose the exchange rate is determined by the model in
equation (3.10), repeated here for convenience:
(4.35)

st

(1  b) f1t  bf 2t  bEt st 1

Assume that the first fundamental follows a random walk: f1t 1

f1t  H1t 1 . We will assume H1t is a N (0,V 12 ) ,

i.i.d. random variable. Assume f 2t is simply a N (0,V 22 ) , i.i.d. random variable. Clearly the solution for the
exchange rate under rational expectations is:
(4.36)

st

f1t  bf 2t .

Now suppose there is a public signal (a signal that all agents receive) about f1t 1 : vt

f1t 1  H vt , where H vt

is a N (0,V v2 ) , i.i.d. random variable. In that case, agents in essence have two independent signals about f1t 1 .
There is vt , and also, assuming they observe f1t , it is an unbiased signal since f1t

f1t 1  H1t . Given that the

signals are independent, Et f1t 1 is a weighted average of the two signals, with the weight on each signal
proportional to the inverse of its variance:
(4.37)

Et f t 1

af1t  (1  a )vt ,

where a V 12 /(V 12  V v2 ) . From equation (4.35) iterated one period forward, and taking expectations, we
have Et st 1

Et f 2t 1

(1  b) Et f1t 1  bEt f 2t 1  bEt st  2 . Since markets have no signal about the second fundamental,

0 . Markets do not have any news about future fundamentals past period t  1 , so Et f t  j

j t 1 , which implies that Et st  2

Et st 1 given that f1t follows a random walk. Hence Et st 1

Et ft 1 for

Et f1t 1 . Using

(4.35) and (4.37), we find:
(4.38)

st

(1  b(1  a)) f1t  b(1  a )vt  bf 2t .

43

See, for example, Evans and Lyons (2002a, 2002b, 2005, 2008), Evans (2002, 2010), Froot and Ramadorai (2005),
Berger et. al. (2008), Breedon and Vitale (2010), Chinn and Moore (2011), and Rime et. al. (2010).
44
See also Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2011) for a model in which there is private information and model uncertainty,
which can lead to an unstable relationship between exchange rates and economic fundamentals.
45
See Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2012) for a survey of these and related papers.

51

We compare (4.38) to (4.36) in a moment, after we derive the equilibrium exchange rate under the assumption
of heterogenous signals. We will use the label “Model 1” to refer to the model with no signal, and “Model 2” to
the case of a public signal.
Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006) build a model in which agents receive a private signal about the future
value of the first fundamental: agent i receives the signal vti

f1t 1  H vti , where H vti is a N (0,V v2 ) , i.i.d. random

variable. We call this “Model 3”. In their model, agents are symmetric, so the equilibrium exchange rate is
determined by the average expectation of the future exchange rate, Et st 1 . Equation (4.35) is replaced by:
(4.39)

st

(1  b) f1t  bf 2t  bEt st 1 .

Agents in the model are assumed not to observe f 2t . In their model, f 2t is interpreted as an equilibrium risk
premium. The risk premium comes from idiosyncratic “hedging” demands by each agent, but agents receive no
signal on the aggregate hedge component.
We can conjecture that the solution to this model is similar to (4.38). The exchange rate will be a function
in equilibrium of f1t , f 2t and the average signal, which Bacchetta and van Wincoop assume is equal to the true
future value of the first fundamental, vt

st

f1t 1 . We can write this in undetermined coefficients form as:

c1 f1t  c2 f 2t  c3 f1t 1 . In this case, the exchange rate itself will provide information about the future

fundamentals. Define g t { ( st  c1 f1t ) / c3 .
Then from the undetermined coefficients solution, we see f1t 1
is a N (0,V g2 ) , i.i.d. random variable, where V g2

g t  H gt , where H gt { c2 f 2t / c3 . Here, H gt

(c2 / c3 ) 2 V 22 . Each individual has three independent signals

about f1t 1 : f1t , vti , and g t . We can write agent i’s expectation about f1t 1 as a weighted average of those
signals, with the weight one each proportional to the inverse of its variance:
(4.40)

Eti ft 1

where a j
(4.41)

a1 f1t  av vti  ag g t ,

V j 2 /(V 12  V v2  V g2 ) , j 1, v, g . Averaging across all agents, we get:

Et f1t 1

a1 f1t  av f1t 1  ag g t .

Using the same logic as in the case of a public signal, we can conclude Et st 1

Et f1t 1 . Then substituting from

(4.41) into (4.39), we find:
(4.42)

st

(1  b(1  a1 )) f1t  b(1  a1 ) f1t 1  b(1  ( ag / av )) f 2t .

Compare equation (4.42) to the solution when there is a public signal of f1t 1 , given in equation (4.38). If the
public signal were perfect, so that vt

f1t 1 , the solutions are almost the same, except that under heterogenous

private information, the weight on f 2t is greater. That is because in the private signal case, agents individually
do not actually know f1t 1 . They try to infer f1t 1 based on their information, but they cannot separate out the

52

effects of others’ expectations of f1t 1 on the exchange rate from the effect of f 2t . So when f 2t rises, which
causes st to rise, they attribute some possibility that there has been a permanent increase in f1t 1 . Because a
permanent increase in the first fundamental has a larger effect on the exchange rate than a transitory increase in
the second fundamental in Model 1, this “rational confusion” tends to magnify the effect of an increase in f 2t
on the exchange rate.
Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006) use this model to help account for the “disconnect” between exchange
rates and fundamentals. This refers to the lack of a relationship that econometricians find between the exchange
rate and the economic fundamentals that are supposed to drive the exchange rate according to models. The
success of the econometric enterprise depends on the information that is used to explain exchange rates. Define
:t to be the econometrician’s information set used to explain st and let V 2 { var( st  E ( st | :t )) , so that V 2 is
the unexplained exchange rate variance. We will assume that the econometrician is not able to observe f 2t ,
perhaps because it is an umeasurable risk premium or other unmeasurable economic fundamental.
First compare Model 1 to Model 2. In Model 1, if f 2t is not in :t , V 2
:t but f1t and vt are, then V 2

b 2V 22 . In model 2, if f 2t is not in

b 2V 22 , just as in Model 1 when f 2t is not observed by the econometrician.

However, it is likely that the econometrician will not measure all of the public signals that the market uses, so
vt is also not in :t . Recognizing that vt
(4.43)

st

f1t  H1t 1  H vt , we can rewrite (4.38) as:

f1t  b(1  a )(H1t 1  H vt )  bf 2t .

Then when :t contains only f1t , we find
(4.44) V 2

ª V4
º
b 2 ª¬(1  a) 2 (V 12  V v2 )  V 22 ¼º b 2 « 2 1 2  V 22 » .
¬V1  V v
¼

We see that the more precise the signal about f1t 1 , which means smaller V v2 , the greater the disconnect for the
econometrician. That is because the stronger the signal the market has about f1t 1 , the more important is H1t 1
in driving the exchange rate.
Now consider the private information model. If only f 2t is excluded from :t , we find that the variance of
the econometrician’s fit is given by b 2 (1  (ag / av )) 2 V 22 . This is a larger variance than in Model 1 or Model 2 in
the case when only f 2t is excluded from :t , and this arises from the fact that the rational confusion causes an
excess response of the exchange rate to the unobserved variable f 2t in Model 3. Now consider the plausible
case in which the econometrician only includes f1t in :t . We can rewrite the solution (4.42) as
(4.45)

st

f1t  b(1  a1 )H1t 1  b(1  (ag / av )) f 2t .

In this case
(4.46) V 2

b 2 ª¬(1  a1 ) 2 V 12  (1  (ag / av )) 2 V 22 º¼ .

53

With some effort, it can be shown that the variance in expression (4.46) is larger than the variance in (4.44) –
that is, when signals are private, the variance of the exchange rate that is unexplained by the econometrician is
even larger than when signals are public.
A different sort of information heterogeneity arises in Bacchetta and van Wincoop’s (2010) model of the
uncovered interest parity puzzle. Their model formalizes an idea raised in Froot and Thaler (1990) and
developed informally in Eichenbaum and Evans (1995). The notion is that investors may react slowly to
changes in financial markets because it is costly to evaluate new information and costly to adjust portfolios
continuously.
Suppose, as in Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2010), the short term interest rate is controlled by monetary
policymakers, and follows a simple autoregressive process:
(4.47) it  it*

U (it 1  it*1 )  ut ,

0  U  1.

Agents hold portfolios of Home and Foreign bonds, which are imperfect substitutes because of foreign
exchange risk. Suppose that the Foreign interest rate rises. Ceteris paribus, this leads to an increase in demand
for Foreign bonds, which causes the Foreign currency to appreciate. Only some agents, however, enter the
market and purchase more Foreign bonds because of the costs of adjustment. The agents that act first will earn
an excess return on their Foreign bonds. As time passes, other agents reassess their portfolios and buy foreign
bonds, leading to a further appreciation. So, after the initial increase in the Foreign interest rate, the currency
appreciates initially but continues to appreciate for some time as the whole market gradually adjusts its
portfolio. The early movers might earn a high excess return, but the expected return differential will die out
over time. For example, suppose the expected excess return on the Foreign bond has a persistence given by G :
(4.48)

Ot

GOt 1  J ut ,

0  G  1.

Assume ut has unit variance, and using the fact that it  it*
cov( Et st 1  st , it  it* )

Et st 1  st  Ot , it is straightforward to calculate

1
J
1  UG

. This will be negative if J !
. If the initial reaction of Ot is
2
1  UG 1  U
1 U2

large enough, and Ot is sufficiently persistent relative to the interest differential, the model can deliver the
negative correlation of the interest differential with the change in the exchange rate.
If some investors are buying Foreign bonds, who is selling them? Bacchetta and van Wincoop assume that
the inactive investors maintain the shares of their wealth invested in Home and Foreign bonds constant in
between periods of portfolio rebalancing. Since the Foreign currency has appreciated, the value of Foreign
bonds increases for these inactive investors, so they must sell some of those bonds in order to maintain the
constant share. The infrequent adjustment of portfolios can be optimal because of the cost of reassessing the
optimal portfolio and rebalancing.
4.d Deviations from rational expectations

Perhaps a simpler explanation of the uncovered interest parity puzzle is that even with no private

54

information, agents do not form expectations rationally. It is obvious that one could “hardwire” a model of
expectations formation that can account for the empirical failure of uncovered interest parity from regression
(4.1). There are no explicit ground rules for building models of expectations that deviate from rational
expectations. Implicitly, the literature has applied two criteria: that the model of expectations is somehow
intuitively plausible, and/or that it has other support in the data beyond its ability to account for the interest
parity puzzle.
In the spirit of McCallum (1994), we can modify the New Keynesian model of section 2.b, but assume that
the market’s expectation of the currency depreciation differs from the rational expectation by a mean-zero,
i.i.d. random variable, ut :
(4.49)

Eˆ t ( st 1  st )

Et ( st 1  st )  ut ,

where Eˆ t refers to the market’s expectation, rather than the rational expectation. This model of expectations
has a ring of plausibility. Perhaps agents in the market do not make the effort to calculate the fully rational
expectations, so that each period they make an error in expectations formation that has a mean of zero and is
not persistent, so the deviation from rational expectations is not systematic.
We can combine this assumption with the price adjustment equation and the monetary policy rule of the
New Keynesian model of section 2.a. We summarize those equations here:
(4.50) S t  S t*

G qt  E Et (S t 1  S t*1 )

(4.51) it  it* V (S t  S t* )  H t  H t* .
Assume uncovered interest parity holds, but using market expectations, so
(4.52)

Eˆ t ( st 1  st ) it  it*

Eliminating the interest differential, the system comprised of (4.49)-(4.52) can be written
(4.53)
where zt

Et zt 1

Bzt  wt ,

ªS t  S t* º
«
» , wt
¬ qt ¼

0
ª
º
«H  H *  u » , B
t
t¼
¬ t

ª 1/ E
«(VE  1) / E
¬

G / E

º
.
( E  G ) / E »¼

This system is identical to that of the New Keynesian model, (2.12), except that H t  H t*  ut replaces H t  H t* in
the second element in the wt vector, and there is no interest-rate smoothing. As in section 2.a, assume (for
purposes of making the solution simpler) that VE

1 . Also assume H t and H t* are serially uncorrelated (so UH

from section 2.a equals zero.) The solution to (4.53) is the same as the solution to (2.12), but replacing H t  H t*
with H t  H t*  ut . From (2.18) we have
(4.54) S t  S t*



GE
G E

(H t  H t*  ut ) .

Then from (4.51) we can solve for the interest differential,

55

(4.55) it  it*

G  E  VGE
VGE
(H t  H t* ) 
ut .
G E
G E

From (4.55) as well as (4.49) and (4.52), we find
(4.56)

Et st 1  st

G  E  VGE
(H t  H t*  ut ) .
G E

Compariing (4.55) to (4.56), we see immediately that Et ( st 1  st ) it  it* if there are no expectational
errors ( ut

0 ). However, if G  E  VGE ! 0 , it is evident that the expectational shock imparts a force that

drives Et ( st 1  st ) and it  it* in opposite directions. If the variance of ut is sufficiently large relative to the
variance of H t , this model can even deliver a negative slope coefficient in the familiar interest parity
regression, (1.6).
Even though the deviations from rational expectations in equation (4.49) are white noise, these errors
induce a correlation between the expected change in the exchange rate and the interest differential. Since

Et ( st 1  st ) it  it*  ut , holding interest rates constant, a positive realization of ut implies the Home currency
is expected (rationally) to appreciate between t and t  1 . That is, Et ( st 1  st ) falls. In this sticky-price
framework, and given the stationarity of the real exchange rate, there must be a real Home depreciation at time
t in order to generate the expectation of the appreciation. The Home real depreciation raises Home inflation
relative to Foreign inflation, inducing a reaction by policymakers in both countries so that it  it* rises, which
implies a negative correlation between Et ( st 1  st ) and it  it* .
Burnside et. al. (2011b) generate a negative correlation between Et ( st 1  st ) and it  it* in a monetary
model in which agents receive a signal about future growth of the monetary fundamental. The expectational
error that agents make is putting too much weight on the signal they receive. Their signal, in other words, is
actually less informative than agents believe. This assumption not only sounds plausible, but, as the paper
notes, has empirical support in two forms. First, surveys and experimental data tend to confirm traders
overweight their private signals. Second, the model of overconfidence is helpful in explaining anomalies in
stock and bond markets.
Begin with a present-value model of the type we have discussed in section 3:
(4.57)

st

(1  E ) f t  E Eˆ t st 1 , 0  E  1 ,

where ft is the economic fundamental that drives the exchange rate. Eˆ t st 1 refers to agents’ expectation of

st 1 , which does not equal the rational expectation, Et st 1 , in this model. Assume the fundamental evolves
according to:
(4.58)

ft 1  f t

ut 1 ,

where ut 1  i.i.d ., N (0,V u2 ) . Agents receive a signal, vt at time t that conveys some information about ut 1 , but

56

does not reveal ut 1 perfectly.
In a present-value model, when the expected growth in the fundamental increases holding ft constant,
there is both an increase in the expected value of st 1  st , and a jump up in st . The latter implication can be
seen by rewriting (4.57) as st

f t  E ( Eˆ t st 1  st ) /(1  E ) . When agents overweight their signal, a positive

realization of vt leads them to increase their expectation of f t 1  f t too much. As a result, Eˆ t st 1  st rises too
much compared to the rationally expected depreciation, so the increase in it  it* is excessive. Also, st
increases more than it would under rational expectations. When the actual value of ft 1 is realized in period
t  1 , on average f t 1  f t is less than Et f t 1  f t conditional on a positive realization of the signal vt . Then on
average st 1  st rises less than Et st 1  st , while it  it* has risen more than under rational expectations. This
accounts for the downward bias, and possibly even negative coefficient, in the regression of st 1  st on it  it* .
Gourinchas and Tornell (2004) provide another avenue for deviations from rational expectations. They
note that evidence from the term structure can be interpreted as markets underestimating the persistence of
short-run nominal interest rate changes. Suppose it  it* rises, but the market believes the increase is transitory.
In period t  1 , the interest differential, it 1  it*1 on average turns out to be greater than the market expected. In
the model of Gourinchas and Tornell, an increase in it  it* is associated with a Home currency appreciation – a
decline in st – as in the models of section 2. In their model, equation (4.52) holds, so an increase in it  it* also
leads to an expected depreciation – that is the currency appreciates at time t but is expected to depreciate
between t and t  1 so that Eˆ t st 1  st exactly equals it  it* . At time t  1 investors are surprised (on average) to
find that it 1  it*1 is higher than they expected, so it is as if there is a positive surprise in it 1  it*1 at time t  1 .
On average, the currency appreciates relative to Eˆ t st 1 . So, while it  it* equals Eˆ t st 1  st , the average change
in st 1  st is smaller than the change in it  it* , which can account for the empirical findings of the uncovered
interest parity puzzle. Indeed the correlation between st 1  st and it  it* can be negative if the average
(absolute value of the) mistake in the forecast of it 1  it*1 is large enough.
Ilut (2012) develops a model of ambiguity aversion that can be seen as providing a foundation for the
assumption that agents underestimate the persistence of the interest-rate differential, as in Gourinchas and
Tornell (2004). In Ilut’s model, agents exhibit ambiguity aversion, which implies that they tend to overweight
possible bad outcomes in forming their expectations. In the model, investors seek profit when there is an
interest differential. The profit is smaller when the interest differential is less persistent, an outcome which the
investors believe is more probable than would be inferred under rational expectations.
4.e Peso problems

Several recent papers have suggested that the uncovered interest parity puzzle is a mirage – that, in

57

essence, the standard errors of the estimated slope coefficient in regression (4.1) are much larger than are
generally reported, so that we really cannot reject the null hypothesis of uncovered interest parity. 46
The “peso problem” is not a statistical bias per se, but a problem that arises when the econometrician’s
sample is biased. The name arises from the situation that occurred in the 1970’s, when the Mexican peso
exchange rate was fixed to the dollar, but markets anticipated the devaluation that eventually occurred in 1976.
The market’s expectation was embodied in forward exchange rates, but any sample of the forward premium
that ends before the actual devaluation would find the peso price of a dollar on forward markets persistently
larger than the fixed spot rate. Without further information, there is an unexplained bias in the forward rate.
The term is used more generally to describe a situation in which there is a large event that may occur but with a
small probability, so that a given sample has either no examples of the event or the event occurs less frequently
in the sample than its true probability.
Some recent literature 47 has proposed that the apparent risk-adjusted profitability of the carry trade is really
an artifact of the peso problem. Suppose an investor in the Home country follows the strategy of investing
k (it*  it  i ) of the Home currency in the Foreign short-term bond in period t, financed by borrowing in the
Home currency. 48 The profits one period later per unit of investment are

Mt 1 { ( St 1 / St )(1  it* )  (1  it )
given in Home currency units. This strategy is on average profitable if
E (Mt 1 (it*  it  r )) cov(Mt 1 , it*  it ) ! 0 ,
which is approximately equivalent to the condition that the slope coefficient in regression (4.1) is less than one.
Suppose there are two states of the world, state 1 and 2. Conditional on state 1, the profits from this carry
trade strategy are expected to be positive, which we denote as E1 (Mt 1 (it*  it  i )) ! 0 . State 2 is a state which
occurs infrequently, and is one of a “currency crash”. 49 In state 2, E2 (Mt 1 (it*  it  i ))  0 . If state 2 occurs with
probability S , then the true expected profit per unit of investment from the carry trade is:
(4.59)

(1  S ) E1 (Mt 1 (it*  it  i ))  S E2 (Mt 1 (it*  it  i )) .

Now suppose in the econometrician’s data set, the currency crash state is observed with frequency S c ,
which is smaller than the true probability, S c  S . The econometrician’s measured expected profit is
(1  S c) E1 (Mt 1 (rt*  rt  r ))  S cE2 (Mt 1 (rt*  rt  r )) ,
which is greater than the true expected profit given by equation (4.59).
Can a peso problem of this type account for the finding of a slope coefficient less than one in the Fama
regression, (4.1)? That is, does it mean that the apparent profitability of the carry trade is just an illusion
46

See for example, Baillie and Bollserslev (2000), Zivot (2000), Bekaert and Hodrick (2001), and West (2012).
See Brunnermeier, et. al. (2009), Burnside et. al. (2011a, 2011c), Farhi et. al. (2009), Farhi and Gabaix (2011), Gourio
et. al. (2013).
48
i is the mean of it*  it in this example.
49
This is the term introduced by Brunnermeier, et. al. (2009).
47

58

because the currency crash state has been observed less frequently in the data than its true likelihood of
occurring? Burnside et. al. (2006, 2011a, 2011c) use data on foreign exchange options that allow an investor to
hedge their carry trade portfolio against large losses in the case of a rare event that has a large negative payoff.
They find that the profit from the hedged carry trade is not too different from the unhedged carry trade,
suggesting that the potential losses in the currency crash state are not large enough to account for the apparent
profitability of the carry trade.
However, when investors are risk averse, profits in all states are discounted by the stochastic discount
factor, as in the no-arbitrage condition discussed above equation (4.4). In this case, we can write the noarbitrage condition as:
(1  S ) E1 ( M t 1Mt 1 (it*  it  i ))  S E2 ( M t 1Mt 1 (it*  it  i )) 0 ,
where M t 1 is the discount factor for nominal returns. It may appear to an econometrician that plausible values
of the stochastic discount factor still imply a violation of the no-arbitrage condition:
(1  S c) E1 ( M t 1Mt 1 (it*  it  i ))  S cE2 ( M t 1Mt 1 (it*  it  i )) ! 0

But Burnside et. al. (2011a, 2011c) make the case that if the frequency of state 2 is sufficiently underestimated,
the stochastic discount factor in state 2 (when there are losses, and the marginal utility of investors is relatively
high) could be high enough to account for the apparent failure of the no-arbitrage condition. They conclude that
we cannot reject the hypothesis that the risk-adjusted return from the carry trade is expected to be zero, taking
into account the peso problem and the variation in the discount factor.
5. Conclusions

Although this survey has suggested many different models, it is questionable that the models allow us to
explain, even after the fact, the movements in major currency rates. The dollar/euro market is by far the most
heavily traded, and that exchange rate is in many ways the most important. Consider the following swings in
the dollar price of a euro:
1. November 2005 – July 2008: The price of a euro rises from $1.17 to $1.59.
2. July 2008 – November 2008: The price of a euro falls from $1.59 to $1.25.
3. November 2008 – November 2009: The price of a euro rises from $1.25 to $1.50.
4. November 2009 – May 2010: The price of a euro falls from $1.50 to $1.19.
5. May 2010 – April 2011: The price of a euro rises from $1.19 to $1.48.
6. April 2011 – July 2012: The price of a euro falls from $1.48 to $1.22.
Clearly the post-2007 era has been one of great financial market volatility and stress. That period perhaps
presents a laboratory to test and refine theories of the exchange rate. At this stage, we do not have adequate
explanations for these exchange-rate swings:
x

Was the depreciation of the dollar in the first period associated with the property and equity market
boom in the U.S., or does it foretell its bust? What is the mechanism to relate booms and busts to the

59

currency value? Or is the change related to monetary policy?
x

Why did the dollar appreciate sharply in the second period, which was the apex of the global financial
crisis? Was the dollar a “safe haven”? What does that mean?

x

Did the appreciation of the euro in the third period represent a return to normality – a reversal of the
safe haven motive?

x

What accounts for the fall of the euro in the fourth period and rise in the fifth period? Was it
comparative ease of monetary policy in the U.S. versus the eurozone?

x

The euro’s fall in the final period is attributed usually to fears of sovereign default in the eurozone.
What mechanism links default risk with currency value?

Answering these questions should provide international economists with plenty of work in the years to
come. Currencies are a country’s only true national asset (or, in the case of the eurozone, the only asset of the
entire currency union.) Understanding their movements surely will shed light on broader asset pricing and
macroeconomic questions. While the work of the past fifteen years that is surveyed here has broadened and
deepened our understanding of the factors that influence exchange rates, we still are not at the stage where we
can provide a convincing explanation for the actual movements in currency values.

60

Reference
Abhyankar, Abhay; Sarno Lucio; and, Giorgio Valente. 2005. “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals: Evidence
on the Economic Value of Predictability.” Journal of International Economics 66, 325-348.
Adolfson, Malin; Stefan Laséen; Jesper Lindé; and, Mattias Villani. 2007. “Bayesian Estimation of An Open
Economy DSGE Model with Incomplete Pass-Through.” Journal of International Economics 72, 481-511.
Adolfson, Malin; Stefan Laséen; Jesper Lindé; and, Mattias Villani. 2008. “Evaluating An Estimated New
Keynesian Small Open Economy Model.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 32, 2690-2721.
Alexius, Annika. 2001. “Uncovered Interest Parity Revisited.” Review of International Economics 9, 505-517.
Alvarez, Fernando; Andrew Atkeson; and, Patrick Kehoe. 2009. “Time-Varying Risk, Interest Rates and
Exchange Rates in General Equilibrium.” Review of Economic Studies 76, 851–878.
Andersen, Torben G.; Tim Bollerslev; Francis X. Diebold; and, Clara Vega. 2003. “Micro Effects of Macro
Announcements: Real-Time Price Discovery in Foreign Exchange.” The American Economic Review 93,
38-62.
Andersen, Torben G.; Tim Bollerslev; Francis X. Diebold; and, Clara Vega. 2007. “Real Time Price Discovery
in Global Stock, Bond, and Foreign Exchange Markets.” Journal of International Economics 73, 251-277.
Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop. 2006. “Can Information Heterogeneity Explain the Exchange Rate
Determination Puzzle?” The American Economic Review 96, 552-576.
Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop. 2010. “Infrequent Portfolio Decisions: A Solution to the Forward
Discount Puzzle.” American Economic Review 100, 870-904.
Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop. 2011. “On the Unstable Relationship between Exchange Rates and
Macroeconomic Fundamentals.” Working paper, Department of Economics, University of Virginia.
Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop. 2012. “Modeling Exchange Rates with Incomplete Information.”
In Jessica James; Ian Marsh; and, Lucio Sarno, eds. Handbook of Exchange Rates. (Wiley).
Backus, David K.; Silverio Foresi; and, Chris I. Telmer. 2001. “Affine Term Structure Models and the Forward
Premium Anomaly.” The Journal of Finance 56, 279-304.
Backus, David K.; Federico Gavazzoni; Chris Telmer; and, Stanley E. Zin. 2010. “Monetary Policy and the
Uncovered Interest Parity Puzzle.” National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no. 16218.
Baillie, Richard T., and Tim Bollerslev. 2000. “The Forward Premium Anomaly is Not as Bad as You Think.”
Journal of International Money and Finance, 19, 471-488.
Bansal, Ravi, and Magnus Dahlquist. 2000. “The Forward Premium Puzzle: Different Tales from Developed
and Emerging Economies.” Journal of International Economics 51, 115-144.
Bansal, Ravi, and Ivan Shaliastovich. 2010. “A Long-Run Risks Explanation of Predictability Puzzles in Bond
and Currency Markets.” Unpublished working paper, Duke University and Wharton Business School.
Beine, Michel; Gust Janssen; and, Christelle Lecourt. 2009. “Should Central Bankers Talk to the Foreign
Exchange Markets?” Journal of International Money and Finance 28, 776-803.
Bekaert, Geert, and Robert J. Hodrick. 2001. “Expectations Hypotheses Tests.” The Journal of Finance 56,
1357-1394.
Bekaert, Geert; Robert J. Hodrick; and, David A. Marshall. 1997. “The Implications for First-Order Risk
Aversion for Asset Market Risk Premiums.” Journal of Monetary Economics 40, 3-39.
Bekaert, Geert; Min Wei; and, Yuhang Xing. 2007. “Uncovered Interest Rate Parity and The Term Structure.”
Journal of International Money and Finance 26, 1038-1069.
Benigno, Gianluca. 2004. “Real Exchange Rate Persistence and Monetary Policy Rules.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 51, 473-502.
Benigno, Gianluca, and Pierpaolo Benigno. 2008. “Exchange Rate Determination under Interest Rate Rules.”
Journal of International Money and Finance 27, 971-993.
Benigno, Gianluca, and Christoph Thoenissen. 2003. “Equilibrium Exchange Rates and Supply- Side
Performance.” The Economic Journal 113, 103-124.
Benigno, Ginaluca; Pierpaolo Benigno; and, Salvatore Nisticò. 2012. “Risk, Monetary Policy and The
Exchange Rate.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2011, 247-309.
Berger, David W.; Alain P. Chaboud; Sergey V. Chernenko; Edward Howorka,; and, Jonathan H. Wright.
2008. “Order Flow and Exchange Rate Dynamics in Electronic Brokerage System Data.” Journal of
International Economics 75, 93-109.

61

Bergin, Paul R. 2006. “How Well Can the New Open Economy Macroeconomics Explain the Exchange Rate
and Current Account?” Journal of International Money and Finance 25, 675-701.
Betts, Caroline, and Michael B. Devereux. 1996. “The Exchange Rate in A Model of Pricing-to-Market.”
European Economic Review 40, 1007-1021.
Betts, Caroline, and Michael B. Devereux. 2000. “Exchange Rate Dynamics in A Model of Pricing-to-Market.”
Journal of International Economics 50, 215-244.
Bilson, John F.O. 1981. “The 'Speculative Efficiency' Hypothesis.” Journal of Business 54, 435-451.
Bjørnland, Hilde C. 2009. “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Overshooting: Dornbusch was Right after
All.” Journal of International Economics 79, 64-77.
Blanchard, Oliver; Francesco Giavazzi; and, Filipa Sa. 2005. “International Investors, the U.S. Current
Account, and the Dollar.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 1-49.
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Charles M. Kahn. 1980. “The Solution of Linear Difference Models under Rational
Expectations.” Econometrica 48, 1305-1311.
Brandt, Michael W.; John H. Cochrane; and, Pedro Santa-Clara. “International Risk Sharing is Better than You
Think, or Exchange Rates are too Smooth.” Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 671-698.
Breedon, Francis, and Paolo Vitale. 2010. “An Empirical Study of Portfolio-Balance and Information Effects
of Order Flow on Exchange Rates.” Journal of International Money and Finance 29, 504-524.
Brunnermeier, Markus K.; Stefan Nagel; and, Lasse Pedersen. 2009. “Carry Trades and Currency Crashes.”
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2008, 313-347.
Burnside, Craig. 2011. “The Cross Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia and Consumption Growth Risk:
Comment.” American Economic Review 101, 3456-3476.
Burnside, Craig; Martin Eichenbaum; and, Sergio Rebelo. 2008. “Carry Trade: The Gains of Diversification.”
Journal of the European Economic Association 6, 581-588.
Burnside, Craig; Martin Eichenbaum; and, Sergio Rebelo. 2011c. “Carry Trade and Momentum in Currency
Markets.” Annual Review of Financial Economics 3, 511-535.
Burnside, Craig; Martin Eichenbaum; Isaac Kleshchelski; and, Sergio Rebelo. 2006. “The Returns to Currency
Speculation.” National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no. 12489.
Burnside, Craig; Martin Eichenbaum; Isaac Kleshchelski; and, Sergio Rebelo. 2011a. “Do Peso Problems
Explain the Returns to the Carry Trade?” Review of Financial Studies. 24, 853-891.
Burnside, Craig; Bing Han; David Hirshleifer; and, Tracy Yue Wang. 2011b. “Investor Overconfidence and the
Forward Premium Puzzle.” Review of Economic Studies 78, 523-558.
Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carmen M. Reinhart. 2002. “Fear of Floating.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
117, 379-408.
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane. 1999. “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation of
Aggregate Stock Market Behavior.” Journal of Political Economy 107, 205–251.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller. 1988. “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of Future
Dividends and Discount Factors.” Review of Financial Studies 1, 195-228.
Cavallo, Michele, and Fabio Ghironi. 2002. “Net Foreign Assets and the Exchange Rate: Redux Revived.”
Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 1057-1097.
Cerra, Valerie, and Sweta Chaman Saxena. 2010. “The Monetary Model Strikes Back: Evidence from the
World.” Journal of International Economics 81, 184-196.
Chaboud, Alain P., and Jonathan H. Wright. 2005. “Uncovered Interest Parity: It Works, But Not for Long.”
Journal of International Economics 66, 349-362.
Chari, V. V.; Patrick J. Kehoe; and, Ellen R. McGrattan. 2002. “Can Sticky Price Models Generate Volatile
and Persistent Real Exchange Rates?” The Review of Economic Studies 69, 533-563.
Chen, Yu-Chin, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2003. “Commodity Currencies.” Journal of International Economics 60,
133-160.
Chen, Yu-Chin; Kenneth S. Rogoff; and, Barbara Rossi. 2010. “Can Exchange Rates Forecast Commodity
Prices?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, 1145-1194.
Cheung, Yin-Wong; Menzie D. Chinn; and, Antonio Garcia Pascual. 2005. “Empirical Exchange Rate Models
of the Nineties: Are Any Fit to Survive?” Journal of International Money and Finance 24, 1150-1175.

62

Chinn, Menzie D. 2006. “The Partial Rehabilitation of Interest Rate Parity in the Floating Rate Era: Longer
Horizons, Alternative Expectations, and Emerging Markets.” Journal of International Money and Finance
25, 7-21.
Chinn, Menzie D., and Guy Meredith. 2004. “Monetary Policy and Long-Horizon Uncovered Interest Parity.”
IMF Staff Papers 51, 409-430.
Chinn, Menzie D., and Michael J. Moore. 2011. “Order Flow and the Monetary Model of Exchange Rates:
Evidence from a Novel Data Set.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 43, 1599-1624.
Clarida, Richard; Josh Davis; and, Niels Pedersen. 2009. “Currency Carry Trade Regimes: Beyond the Fama
Regression.” Journal of International Money and Finance 28, 1375-1389.
Clarida, Richard; Jordi Galõғ; and, Mark Gertler. 2002. “A Simple Framework for International Monetary Policy
Analysis.” Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 879-904.
Clarida, Richard H.; Lucio Sarno; Mark P. Taylor; and, Giorgio Valente. 2003. “The Out-of-Sample Success of
Term Structure Models as Exchange Rate Predictors: A Step Beyond.” Journal of International Economics
60, 61-83.
Clarida, Richard H., and Daniel Waldman. 2008. “Is Bad News About Inflation Good News for the Exchange
Rate? And If So, Can That Tell Us Anything about the Conduct of Monetary Policy?” In Asset Prices and
Monetary Policy (NBER) 371-396.
Clark, Todd E., and Kenneth D. West. 2006. “Using Out-of-Sample Mean Squared Prediction Errors to Test
the Martingale Difference Hypothesis.” Journal of Econometrics 135, 155-186.
Cochrane, John H. 2005. Asset Pricing: Revised Edition. (Princeton: Princeton University Press).
Colacito, Riccardo, and Mariano Massimiliano Croce. 2011. “Risks for the Long-Run and the Real Exchange
Rate.” Journal of Political Economy 119, 153-181.
Colacito, Riccardo, and Mariano Massimiliano Croce. 2013. “International Asset Pricing with Recursive
Preferences.” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Corsetti, Giancarlo; Luca Dedola; and, Sylvain Leduc. 2008. “International Risk Sharing and the Transmission
of Productivity Shocks.” Review of Economic Studies 75, 443–473.
Devereux, Michael B., and Charles Engel. 2002. “Exchange Rate Pass-Through, Exchange Rate Volatility, and
Exchange Rate Disconnect.” Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 913-940.
Diebold, Francis X., and Roberto S. Mariano. 1995. “Comparing Predictive Accuracy.” Journal of Business
and Economic Statistics 13, 253-263.
Disyatat, Piti, and Gabriele Galati. 2007. “The Effectiveness of Foreign Exchange Intervention in Emerging
Market Countries: Evidence From the Czech Koruna.” Journal of International Money and Finance 26,
383-402.
Dominguez, Kathryn M. E. 2003. “The Market Microstructure of Central Bank Intervention.” Journal of
International Economics 59, 25-45.
Dominguez, Kathryn M. E. 2006. “When Do Central Bank Interventions Influence Intra-Daily and LongerTerm Exchange Rate Movements?” Journal of International Money and Finance 25, 1051-1071.
Dominguez, Kathryn M. and Jeffrey Frankel. 1993. “Does Foreign Exchange Intervention Matter? The
Portfolio Effect.” American Economic Review 83, 1356-1369.
Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1976. “Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics.” Journal of Political Economy 84,
1161-1176.
Dotsey, Michael, and Margarida Duarte. 2008. “Nontraded Goods, Market Segmentation, and Exchange
Rates.” Journal of Monetary Economics 55, 1129-1142.
Duarte, Margarida, and Alan C. Stockman. 2005. “Rational Speculation and Exchange Rates.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 52, 3-29
Dubas, Justin M.; Byung-Joo Lee; and, Nelson C. Mark. 2010. “A Multinomial Logit Approach to Exchange
Rate Policy Classification with An Application to Growth.” Journal of International Money and Finance
29, 1438-1462.
Ehrmann, Michael, and Marcel Fratzscher. 2005. “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals: New Evidence from
Real-Time Data.” Journal of International Money and Finance 24, 317-341.
Eichenbaum, Martin, and Charles L. Evans. 1995. “Some Empirical Evidence on the Effects of Shocks to
Monetary Policy on Exchange Rates.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 975-1009.

63

Eichengreen, Barry, and Raul Razo-Garcia. 2006. “The International Monetary System in the Last and Next 20
Years.” Economic Policy 21, 393-442.
Enders, Zeno; Müller, Gernot J.; and, Almuth Scholl. 2011. “How Do Fiscal and Technology Shocks Affect
Real Exchange Rates?: New Evidence for the United States.” Journal of International Economics 83, 5369.
Engel, Charles. 1996. “The Forward Discount Anomaly and the Risk Premium: A Survey of Recent Evidence.”
Journal of Empirical Finance 3, 123-192.
Engel, Charles. 2000. “Long-Run PPP May Not Hold After All.” Journal of International Economics 51, 243273.
Engel, Charles. 2005. “Some New Variance Bounds for Asset Prices.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
37, 949-955.
Engel, Charles; Nelson C. Mark; and, Kenneth D. West. 2008. “Exchange Rate Models are Not as Bad as You
Think.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2007, 381-441.
Engel, Charles, and Kenneth D. West. 2004. “Accounting for Exchange Rate Variability in Present Value
Models when the Discount Factor is Near One.” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 94,
119-125.
Engel, Charles, and Kenneth D. West. 2005. “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals.” Journal of Political
Economy 113, 485-517.
Engel, Charles, and Kenneth D. West. 2006. “Taylor Rules and the Deutschemark-Dollar Real Exchange
Rate.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 38, 1175-1194.
Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley E. Zin. 1989. “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of
Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework.” Econometrica 57, 937-969.
Evans, Martin D. D. 2002. “FX Trading and Exchange Rate Dynamics.” The Journal of Finance 57, 24052447.
Evans, Martin D. D. 2010. “Order Flows and the Exchange Rate Disconnect Puzzle.” Journal of International
Economics 80, 58-71.
Evans, Martin D.D. 2011. Exchange Rate Dynamics. (Princeton: Princeton University Press).
Evans, Martin D. D., and Richard K. Lyons. 2002a. “Order Flow and Exchange Rate Dynamics.” Journal of
Political Economy 110, 170-180.
Evans, Martin D. D., and Richard K. Lyons. 2002b. “Informational Integration and FX Trading.” Journal of
International Money and Finance 21, 807-831.
Evans, Martin D. D., and Richard K. Lyons. 2005. “Do Currency Markets Absorb News Quickly?” Journal of
International Money and Finance 24, 197-217.
Evans, Martin D. D., and Richard K. Lyons. 2008. “How Is Macro News Transmitted to Exchange Rates?”
Journal of Financial Economics 88, 26-50.
Fama, Eugene F. 1984. “Forward and Spot Exchange Rates.” Journal of Monetary Economics 14, 319-338.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Xavier Gabaix. “Rare Disasters and Exchange Rates.” Working paper, Harvard
University.
Farhi, Emmanuel; Samuel P. Fraiberger; Xavier Gabaix; Romain Ranciere; and, Adrien Verdelhan. 2009.
“Crash Risk in Currency Markets.” Working paper, Harvard University.
Fatum, Rasmus. 2010. “Foreign Exchange Intervention When Interest Rates Are Zero: Does the Portfolio
Balance Channel Matter after All?” Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Globalization and Monetary Policy
Institute Working Paper, No. 57.
Fatum, Rasmus, and Michael Hutchison. 1999. “Is Intervention a Signal of Future Monetary Policy? Evidence
from the Federal Funds Futures Market.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 31, 54-69.
Fatum, Rasmus, and Barry Scholnick. 2006. “Do Exchange Rates Respond to Day-to-Day Changes in
Monetary Policy Expectations When No Monetary Policy Changes Occur?” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking 38, 1641-1657.
Faust, Jon, and John H. Rogers. 2003. “Monetary Policy's Role in Exchange Rate Behavior.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 50, 1403-1424.
Faust, Jon; John H. Rogers; and, Jonathan H. Wright. 2003. “Exchange Rate Forecasting: the Errors We've
Really Made.” Journal of International Economics 60, 35-59.

64

Faust, Jon; John H. Rogers; Shing-Yi B. Wang; and, Jonathan H. Wright. 2007. “The High-Frequency
Response of Exchange Rates and Interest Rates to Macroeconomic Announcements.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 54, 1051-1068.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. 1979. “On the Mark: A Theory of Floating Exchange Rates Based on Real Interest
Differentials.” The American Economic Review 69, 610-622.
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Jumana Poonawala. 2010. “The Forward Market in Emerging Currencies: Less Biased
Than in Major Currencies.” Journal of International Money and Finance 29, 585-598.
Frankel, Jeffrey; Sergio L. Schmukler; and, Luis Servén. 2004. “Global Transmission of Interest Rates:
Monetary Independence and Currency Regime.” Journal of International Money and Finance 23, 701-733.
Fratzscher, Marcel. 2006. “On the Long-Term Effectiveness of Exchange Rate Communication and
Interventions.” Journal of International Money and Finance 25, 146-167.
Fratzscher, Marcel. 2008. “Oral Interventions Versus Actual Interventions in Fx Markets – An Event-Study
Approach.” The Economic Journal 118, 1079-1106.
Fratzscher, Marcel. 2009. “How Successful is the G7 in Managing Exchange Rates?” Journal of International
Economics 79, 78-88.
Froot, Kenneth A., and Tarun Ramadorai. 2005. “Currency Returns, Intrinsic Value and Institutional-Investor
Flows.” Journal of Finance 60, 1535-1566.
Froot, Kenneth, and Richard H. Thaler. 2001. “Anomalies: Foreign Exchange.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 4, 179-192.
Ganelli, Giovanni. 2005. “The New Open Economy Macroeconomics of Government Debt.” Journal of
International Economics 65, 167-184.
Ghironi, Fabio. 2008. “The Role of Net Foreign Assets in a New Keynesian Small Open Economy Model.”
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 32, 1780-1811.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Helene Rey. 2007. “International Financial Adjustment.” Journal of Political
Economy 115, 665-773.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Aaron Tornell. 2004. “Exchange Rate Puzzles and Distorted Beliefs.” Journal
of International Economics 64, 303-333.
Gourio, François; Michael Siemer; and, Adrien Verdelhan. 2013. “International Risk Cycles.” Journal of
International Economics, forthcoming.
Groen, Jan J.J. 2000. “The Monetary Exchange Rate Model as A Long-Run Phenomenon.” Journal of
International Economics 52, 299-319.
Groen, Jan J.J. 2005. “Exchange Rate Predictability and Monetary Fundamentals in a Small Multi-Country
Panel.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 37, 495-516.
Hagen, Jürgen, and Jizhong Zhou. 2007. “The Choice of Exchange Rate Regimes in Developing Countries: A
Multinomial Panel Analysis.” Journal of International Money and Finance 26, 1071-1094.
Hau, Harald. 2000. “Exchange Rate Determination: the Role of Factor Price Rigidities and Nontradeables.”
Journal of International Economics 50, 421-447.
Ho, Wai-Ming. 2004. “The Liquidity Effects of Foreign Exchange Intervention.” Journal of International
Economics 63, 179-208.
Hodrick, Robert. 1987. The Empirical Evidence on the Efficiency of Forward and Futures Foreign Exchange
Markets (Harwood: Chur).
Husain, Aasim M.; Ashoka Mody; and, Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2005. “Exchange Rate Regime Durability and
Performance in Developing versus Advanced Economies.” Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 35-64.
Ilut, Cosmin. 2012. “Ambiguity Aversion: Implications for the Uncovered Interest Parity Puzzle.” American
Economic Journal:Macroeconomics 4, 33-65.
Ito, Takatoshi. 2003. “Is Foreign Exchange Intervention Effective?: The Japanese Experience in the 1990s.” In
Paul Mitzen (ed.), Monetary History, Exchange Rates and Financial Markets, Essays in Honour of Charles
Goodhart 2, Edward Elgar, UK.
Jeanne, Olivier, and Andrew K. Rose. 2002. “Noise Trading and Exchange Rate Regimes.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 117, 537-569.
Jordà, Òscar, and Alan M. Taylor 2012. “The Carry Trade and Fundamentals: Nothing to Fear but FEER
itself.” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.

65

Jung, Yongseung. 2007. “Can the New Open Economy Macroeconomic Model Explain Exchange Rate
Fluctuations?” Journal of International Economics 72, 381-408.
Juvenal, Luciana. 2011. “Sources of Exchange Rate Fluctuations: Are They Real or Nominal?” Journal of
International Money and Finance 30, 849-876.
Kaminsky, Graciela L., and Karen K. Lewis. 1996. “Does Foreign Exchange Intervention Signal Future
Monetary Policy?” Journal of Monetary Economics 37, 285-312.
Kearns, Jonathan, and Roberto Rigobon. 2005. “Identifying the Efficacy of Central Bank Interventions:
Evidence from Australia and Japan.” Journal of International Economics 66, 31-48.
Kilian, Lutz. 1999. “Exchange Rates and Monetary Fundamentals: What Do We Learn from Long-Horizon
Regressions?” Journal of Applied Econometrics 14, 491–510.
Kim, Soyoung, and Nouriel Roubini. 2000. “Exchange Rate Anomalies in the Industrial Countries: A Solution
with A Structural VAR Approach.” Journal of Monetary Economics 45, 561-586.
Kollmann, Robert. 2001. “The Exchange Rate in A Dynamic-Optimizing Business Cycle Model with Nominal
Rigidities: A Quantitative Investigation.” Journal of International Economics 55, 243-262.
Kollmann, Robert. 2004. “Welfare Effects of a Monetary Union: The Role of Trade Openness.” Journal of the
European Economic Association 2, 289-301.
Kumhof, Michael. 2010. “On the Theory of Sterilized Foreign Exchange Intervention.” Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control 34, 1403-1420.
Landry, Anthony. 2009. “Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics: A State-Dependent Pricing Approach.”
Journal of International Economics 78, 60-71.
Lewis, Karen. K. 1995. “Are Foreign Exchange Intervention and Monetary Policy Related and Does It Really
Matter?” Journal of Business 68, 185-214.
Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzenegger. 2003. “To Float or to Fix: Evidence on the Impact of
Exchange Rate Regimes on Growth.” The American Economic Review 93, 1173-1193..
Lubik, Thomas A., and Frank Schorfheide. 2006. “A Bayesian Look at New Open Economy
Macroeconomics.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005, 313–366.
Lustig, Hanno, and Adrien Verdelhan. 2007. “The Cross Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia and
Consumption Growth Risk.” The American Economic Review 97, 89-117.
Lustig, Hanno, and Adrien Verdelhan. 2011. “The Cross Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia and
Consumption Growth Risk:Reply.” The American Economic Review 101, 3477-3500.
Lustig, Hanno; Nick Roussanov; and, Adrien Verdelhan. 2011. “Common Risk Factors in Currency Markets.”
Review of Financial Studies 24, 3731-3777.
Mark, Nelson C. 1995. “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals: Evidence on Long-Horizon Predictability.” The
American Economic Review 85, 201-218.
Mark, Nelson C. 2009. “Changing Monetary Policy Rules, Learning, and Real Exchange Rate Dynamics.”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 41, 1047-1070.
Mark, Nelson C., and Donggyu Sul. 2001. “Nominal Exchange Rates and Monetary Fundamentals: Evidence
from A Small Post-Bretton Woods Panel.” Journal of International Economics 53, 29-52.
McCallum, Bennett. 1994. “A Reconsideration of the Uncovered Interest Parity Relationship.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 33, 105-132.
McCracken, Michael W., and Stephen G. Sapp. 2005. “Evaluating the Predictability of Exchange Rates Using
Long-Horizon Regressions: Mind Your p's and q's!” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 37, 473-494.
Meese Richard A., and Kenneth Rogoff. 1983. “Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the Seventies: Do They
Fit out of Sample?” Journal of International Economics 14, 3-24.
Menkhoff, Lukas; Lucio Sarno; Maik Schmeling; and, Andreas Schrimpf. 2012a. “Carry Trades and Global
Foreign Exchange Volatility.” Journal of Finance 67, 681-718.
Menkhoff, Lukas; Lucio Sarno; Maik Schmeling; and, Andreas Schrimpf. 2012b. “Currency Momentum
Strategies.” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Molodtsova, Tanya; Alex Nikolsko-Rzhevskyy; and, David H. Papell. 2008. “Taylor Rules with Real-Time
Data: A Tale of Two Countries and One Exchange Rate.” Journal of Monetary Economics 55, S63-S79.
Molodtsova, Tanya; Alex Nikolsko-Rzhevskyy; and, David H. Papell.2011. “Taylor Rules and the Euro.”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 43, 535-552.

66

Molodtsova, Tanya, and David H. Papell. 2009. “Out-of-Sample Exchange Rate Predictability with Taylor
Rule Fundamentals.” Journal of International Economics 77, 167-180.
Moore, Michael J., and Maurice J. Roche. 2002. “Less of A Puzzle: A New Look At the Forward Forex
Market.” Journal of International Economics 58, 387-411.
Moore, Michael J., and Maurice J. Roche. 2010. “Solving Exchange Rate Puzzles with Neither Sticky Prices
Nor Trade Costs.” Journal of International Money and Finance 29, 1151-1170.
Neely, Christopher J. 2005. “An Analysis of Recent Studies of the Effect of Foreign Exchange Intervention.”
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper No. 2005-030B.
Neely, Christopher J. 2011. “A Foreign Exchange Intervention in an Era of Restraint.” Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis Review 93, 303–324.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1995a. “Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux.” Journal of Political
Economy 103, 624-660.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1995b. “The Mirage of Fixed Exchange Rates.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 9, 73-96.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2001. “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeconomics. Is
There a Common Cause?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, 339-390.
Pasquariello, Paolo. 2010. “Central Bank Intervention and the Intraday Process of Price Formation in the
Currency Markets.” Journal of International Money and Finance 29, 1045-1061.
Rapach, David E., and Mark E. Wohar. 2002. “Testing the Monetary Model of Exchange Rate Determination:
New Evidence from A Century of Data.” Journal of International Economics 58, 359-385.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2004. “The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements: A
Reinterpretation.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 1-48.
Reitz, Stefan, and Mark P. Taylor. 2008. “The Coordination Channel of Foreign Exchange Intervention: A
Nonlinear Microstructural Analysis.” European Economic Review 52, 55-76.
Rime, Dagfinn; Lucio Sarno; and, Elvira Sojli. 2010. “Exchange Rate Forecasting, Order Flow and
Macroeconomic Information.” Journal of International Economics 80, 72-88.
Rogoff, Kenneth. 1996. “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle.” Journal of Economic Literature 34, 647–668.
Sarno, Lucio, and Mark P. Taylor. 2001. “Official Intervention in the Foreign Exchange Market: Is It Effective
and, If So, How Does It Work?” Journal of Economic Literature 39, 839–868.
Scholl, Almuth, and Harald Uhlig. 2008. “New Evidence on the Puzzles: Results from Agnostic Identification
on Monetary Policy and Exchange Rates.” Journal of International Economics 76, 1-13.
Shambaugh, Jay C. 2004. “The Effect of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 119, 301-352.
Shiller, Robert J. 1981. “Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to Be justified by Subsequent Changes in
Dividends?” The American Economic Review 71, 421-436.
Tavlas George; Harris Dellas; and, Alan C. Stockman. 2008. “The Classification and Performance of
Alternative Exchange-Rate Systems.” European Economic Review 52, 941-963.
Taylor, Mark P., and David A. Peel. 2000. “Nonlinear Adjustment, Long-Run Equilibrium and Exchange Rate
Fundamentals.” Journal of International Money and Finance 19, 33-53.
Verdelhan, Adrien. 2010. “A Habit-Based Explanation of the Exchange Rate Risk Premium.” The Journal of
Finance 65, 123-146.
Vitale, Paolo. 2003. “Foreign Exchange Intervention: How to Signal Policy Objectives and Stabilise the
Economy.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 841-870.
Wang, Jian. 2010. “Home Bias, Exchange Rate Disconnect, and Optimal Exchange Rate Policy.” Journal of
International Money and Finance 29, 55-78.
Wang, Jian, and Jason J. Wu. 2012. “The Taylor Rule and Forecast Intervals for Exchange Rates.” Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking 44, 103-144.
West, Kenneth D. 1988. “Dividend Innovations and Stock Price Volatility.” Econometrica 56, 37-61.
West, Kenneth D. 2012. “Econometric Analysis of Present Value Models When the Discount Factor is near
One.” Journal of Econometrics. Forthcoming.
Zivot, Eric. 2000. “Cointegration and Forward and Spot Exchange Rate Regressions.” Journal of International
Money and Finance 19, 785-812.

67

Technical Appendix to “Exchange Rates and Interest Parity”
Derivation of results in section 2.a
To derive the Phillips curve, S Ht

G ( wt  at  pHt )  E Et S Ht 1 , take the equation

(1  T ) p Ht  T pHt 1

pHt

and substitute for p Ht from p Ht

(1  TE )( wt  at )  TE Et p Ht 1 to get:

(1  T )(1  TE )( wt  at )  (1  T )TE Et p Ht 1  T pHt 1 .

pHt

Then note that pHt

(1  T ) p Ht  T pHt 1 implies (1  T ) Et p Ht 1

Et pHt 1  T pHt , so we have:

(1  T )(1  TE )( wt  at )  TE ( Et pHt 1  T pHt )  T pHt 1

pHt

(1  T )(1  TE )( wt  at  pHt )  (1  T ) pHt  TE ( Et pHt 1  pHt )  T pHt 1

.

Rearranging this slightly gives us the Phillips curve.
Turning to the model given by:

Et zt 1

Bzt  wt ,

where zt

ªS t  S t* º
«
»
« qt » , wt
« it 1 »
¬
¼

ª 0 º
«H  H * » , B
t »
« t
«¬H t  H t* »¼

ª 1/ E
«(VE  1) / E
«
«¬
V

G / E
0º
( E  G ) / E D »» .
D »¼
0

In the solution presented in the text, we assume V  D 1/ E . In this case, we can write:
B

ª 1/ E
«
D
«
«¬(1/ E )  D

G / E
0º
( E  G ) / E D »» .
D »¼
0

The eigenvalues of B are the values of P that satisfy
(1/ E )  P
(A.1)

D
(1/ E )  D

G / E
0
D
(( E  G ) / E )  P
D P
0

0.

ª

Clearly one root is 1/ E . The associated row eigenvector is «1

¬

§
· DE º
G
G
».
¨
E  G  1 © E  G  1 ¸¹ 1  DE ¼

1

§1
·§§
·
1
DG ·
 P in the determinant, to write (A.1) as ¨  P ¸ ¨ ¨1   P ¸ D  P 
¸ 0.
E
E ¹
©E
¹©© E
¹
§
·
1
DG
The other two eigenvalues then must satisfy ¨1   P ¸ D  P 
0 , and are given by the expression
E
© E
¹
in the text for P1 ! 1 and P 2  1 . It should be clear that P1 ! 1 because:
We can factor out

(A.2)

P1

1
2

1

1  D  G / E  (1  D  G / E ) 2  4D !

1
2

1  D  (1  D ) 2  4D

ª D  Pi
1, 2 are «1
D
¬

The row eigenvalues associated with Pi , i

1.

º
1» .
¼

Diagonalizing the matrix B, we can write:
(A.3)

Et xt 1

Where xt

0xt  yt ,

Dzt , yt

Dwt . 0 is the diagonal matrix whose i, i th element is the ith eigenvalue (that is, 1/ E ,

P1 and P2 .) D is the matrix whose ith row is the row eigenvector associated with the ith eigenvalue.
Therefore, the first row of equation (A.3) is given by the equation:

(A.4)

§
·
§
· DE
G
G
EtS t 1  ¨
it
¸ Et qt 1  ¨
¸
© E  G 1 ¹
© E  G  1 ¹ 1  DE
º §
§
·
§
· DE
·§
G
G
G
DE
1ª
it 1 »  ¨
«S t  ¨
¸ qt  ¨
¸
¸ ¨1 
E¬
© E  G 1 ¹
© E  G  1 ¹ 1  DE ¼ © E  G  1 ¹ © 1  DE

·
*
¸ (H t  H t )
¹

.

We can take the forward solution to this equation. In the case in which H t  H t* is i.i.d., we find:
(A.5)

·
§
· DE
G
G
it 1
¸ qt  ¨
¸
© E  G 1 ¹
© E  G  1 ¹ 1  DE

§

St  ¨

§ EG ·§ 1
¨
¸¨
© E  G  1 ¹© 1  DE

·
*
¸ (H t  H t ) .
¹

The second row of equation (A.3) is given by:
(A.6)

§ D  P1 ·
EtS t 1  ¨
¸ Et qt 1  it
© D ¹

ª

º P1
§ D  P1 ·
*
¸ qt  it 1 »  (H t  H t ) .
© D ¹
¼ D

P1 «S t  ¨
¬

The forward solution to this equation when H t  H t* is i.i.d. is given by:
(A.7)

DS t  (D  P1 )qt  D it 1 H t  H t* .
The third row of equation (A.3) is given by the equation

2

§ D  P2 ·
EtS t 1  ¨
¸ Et qt 1  it
© D ¹

(A.8)

º P2
§ D  P2 ·
*
¸ qt  it 1 »  (H t  H t ) .
© D ¹
¼ D

ª

P2 «S t  ¨
¬

We can use (A.5) and (A.7) to solve for each of S t and it 1 in terms of qt and H t  H t* . Substitute those
solutions into (A.8), and make use of the facts that P1P 2
solution in the text for the real exchange rate:
qt

P2 qt 1 

D and P1  P2 1  D  G / E to arrive at the

(1  E )(1  DE )  G
(H t  H t* ) .
(1  DE ) > (1  E )(D  P1 )  GP1 @

Next, we want to prove that the coefficient on H t  H t* is negative. This is not straightforward.
N
D

Ŷ Write

(1  E )(1  DE )  G and D

where N
Then
(A.9)

(1  E )(1  DE )  G
,
(1  DE ) > (1  E )(D  P1 )  GP1 @

D

(1  DE ) > (1  E )(D  P1 )  GP1 @ . Define X {  N .

(1  DE ) >D (1  E )  P1 ( X  DE (1  E )) @ .

Note that:

1 D 

G
E

E (1  D )  (1  E )(1  DE ) G  (1  E )(1  DE )

E
E
1  DE 2

E
2

and,

§
G·
¨1  D  ¸  4D
E¹
©



X

.

E
2

§ 1  DE 2 X · 4DE 2
 ¸ 
¨
E¹
E2
© E
2

§ 1  DE 2 · 2 X (1  DE 2 ) X 2
 2
¨
¸ 
E2
E
© E ¹

.

Hence,

P1
(A.10)

1
2

1  D  G / E  (1  D  G / E ) 2  4D

1/ 2

1/ 2
2
­
½
1 °1  DE 2 X ª§ 1  DE 2 · 2 X (1  DE 2 ) X 2 º °
  «¨
 2 » ¾.
®
¸ 
2° E
E «¬© E ¹
E2
E »¼ °
¯
¿
1/
2
1 ­
½
2
2 2
 2 X (1  DE 2 )  X 2 º ¾
®1  DE  X  «¬ª 1  DE
»
¼ ¿
2E ¯

3

Note that when X

0 , of course N

which then implies from (A.9) that D

0 , we can see from (A.10) that P1

0 . Also, when X

1

E

,

0 . Clearly when X ! 0 , we have N  0 , and when X  0 , we have

dD
! 0 , which will imply X ! 0 , we have D ! 0 , N  0 and when X  0 ,
dX
N
 0.
we have D  0 , N ! 0 . This will prove that when X z 0 ,
D
d P1 ( X  DE (1  E ))
dD
Since D  1 and E  1 , from (A.9) if
!0.
! 0 then
dX
dX
N ! 0 . We will now prove that

We have:

d P1 ( X  DE (1  E ))
dX

In turn, from (A.10),

d P1
dX

P1  ( X  DE (1  E ))

d P1
.
dX

1
ª1  1  DE 2  X º ª 1  DE 2
¼ «¬
2E ¬
ª 1  DE 2
¬«

2

 2 X (1  DE )  X º»
¼
2

2

2

 2 X (1  DE 2 )  X 2 º»
¼

1/ 2

1/ 2

.

P1

Hence,

d P1 ( X  DE (1  E ))
dX

ª
º
«
»
X  DE (1  E )
P1 «1 
».
1/
2
2
2
2
2
ª
º
«
»
 2 X (1  DE )  X
1  DE
»¼ ¼
¬ «¬

Clearly if X  DE (1  E ) t 0 , then

d P1 ( X  DE (1  E ))
! 0 if
dX
ª 1  DE 2
«¬

2

dD
d P1 ( X  DE (1  E ))
! 0 . If X  DE (1  E )  0 , then
! 0 , so
dX
dX

1/ 2

 2 X (1  DE 2 )  X 2 º»
¼

! DE (1  E )  X .

Since both sides of this inequality must be positive if we are assuming X  DE (1  E )  0 , then we can square
both sides and preserve the inequality:

1  DE 2

2

 2 X (1  DE 2 )  X 2 ! D 2 E 2 (1  E ) 2  X 2  2 X DE (1  E ) ,

1  DE 2

2

 D 2 E 2 (1  E ) 2  2 X (1  DE ) ! 0 .

or

Recalling that X

G  (1  E )(1  DE ) , then

d P1 ( X  DE (1  E ))
! 0 when X  DE (1  E )  0 if:
dX

4

1  DE 2

2

 D 2 E 2 (1  E )2  2G (1  DE )  (1  E )(1  DE )(1  DE ) ! 0

After simplifying and canceling terms, this condition is equivalent to:

E ¬ª E (1  D )2  1  E º¼  2G (1  DE ) ! 0 .
d P1 ( X  DE (1  E ))
dD
! 0 when
! 0 and hence
dX
dX
dD
X  DE (1  E ) t 0 and when X  DE (1  E )  0 (assuming X z 0 ), so
! 0 when X z 0 . This proves
dX
N
 0.
that when X z 0 ,
D
dN / dX
N
o
. Of course, dN / dX 1 .
Now take the case of X o 0 . By l’Hôpital’s Rule,
D
dD / dX X 0

This condition is clearly satisfied. So we have proven

So we need only calculate

dD
dX

. Using the algebra above, we find
X 0

(1  DE ) 2
! 0.
E 1  DE 2

X 0

Hence, as X o 0 ,
When D

dD
dX

N
converges to a negative number. Ŷ
D
0 and VE

ªS  S t*1 º
Et « t 1
»
¬ qt 1 ¼

1 , the model simplifies to:

ª1/ E
« 0
¬

G / E º ªS t  S t* º ª 0 º
«
»
( E  G ) / E »¼ ¬ qt ¼ «¬H t  H t* »¼

We can solve the second equation of this system using forward iteration to get the solution in the text:
(A.11) qt

E
G E

j

§ E ·
*
¦
¨
¸ Et (H t  j  H t  j ) .

G
E
j 0©
¹
f

Then the first equation can be solved by forward iteration to give the equation in the text:
f

S t  S t* G Et ¦ E j qt  j .
j 0

Now, to see what happens when there is news about future values of H tR j { H t  j  H t* j , in the case in
which H tR

UH H tR1  Zt , it is helpful to write out (A.11) term by term:

5

E
G E

qt

E
G E

2
­° R § E ·
½°
§ E ·
2 R
R
(
E
)
(
E
E
)
...
U
H
Z
U
H
U
Z
Z





®H t  ¨
¾
t t 1
t t 2
H t t 1
¸ H t
¨
¸ H t
©G  E ¹
©G  E ¹
°̄
°¿

2
2
­° ª § E ·
º§ 2 § E ·
· ½°
§ E ·
§ E ·
1
!
!
E
E
U
U
Z
Z



¨



¸
«
»
®
H
¨
¸ H ¨
¸
¨
¸ t t 1 ¨
¸ t t 2
¸ ¾°
©G E ¹
©G E ¹
©G  E ¹
»¼ ¨©
°¯ «¬ © G  E ¹
¹¿

.

This gives us the equation in the text:
qt

§
· R
E
¨
¸ ª¬H t  N t º¼ ,
© G  E (1  UH ) ¹

j

§ E ·
where N t { Et ¦ ¨
¸ Zt  j .
j 1©G  E ¹
f

Derivation of results in section 3.b

In this section, for the exchange-rate equation given by:
(A.12) st  k  st

k

(1  D k )( f1t  st )  ¦ H t  i 
i 1

b
1  bD

k

¦D

k j

ut  j ,

j 1

the claim is that the R-squared for the k-horizon regression of st  k  st on f1t  st is given by:
(A.13) Rk2

(1  D k ) 2 var(ut )
.
2(1  D k ) var(ut )  [k (1  D 2 )(1  bD ) 2 / b 2 ]var(H t )

We have from (A.12)
2

(A.14) var( st  k

§ b ·
2( k 1)
 st ) (1  D ) var( f1t  st )  k var(H t )  ¨
 D 2( k 1)  !  1 var(ut ) .
¸ D
© 1  bD ¹
k 2

Since, according to the text, f1t  st

b
f 2t , we have
1  bD

2

2

1
§ b ·
§ b ·
var( f1t  st ) ¨
var(ut ) .
¸ var( f 2t ) ¨
¸
2
© 1  bD ¹
© 1  bD ¹ 1  D
Also, D 2( k 1)  D 2( k 1)  !  1

1  D 2k
1D 2

Substituting into (A.14), we have:
2k
1
§ b ·
§ b · 1D
var(
)
var(
)
var(ut ) .


H
u
k
(A.15) var( st  k  st ) (1  D k ) 2 ¨
t
t
¸
¨
¸
2
2
© 1  bD ¹ 1  D
© 1  bD ¹ 1  D
2

2

The “explained” variance is given by:
2

1
§ b ·
(A.16) (1  D k ) 2 var( f1t  st ) (1  D k ) 2 ¨
var(ut )
¸
2
© 1  bD ¹ 1  D
The R-squared is given by the ratio of (A.16) to (A.15), which simplifies to (A.13).

6

Derivation of results in section 4.b

Proof that cov( Et dt 1 , rt  rt* )  0 in the Epstein-Zin model with asymmetric preferences, D z D * ,

U

U * , D ,D *  0 and 0  U  1 , but no idiosyncratic shocks:
We have from the text:

Et dt 1

(J ur  J u*r )utc

1
2

ª¬D (D  U )  D * (D *  U ) º¼ utc

Et dt 1  Ot , where

Then rt  rt*

Ot

1
2

((Oxr ) 2  (Ox*r ) 2 )utc

1
2

So, rt  rt*

1
2

^ª¬D (D  U )  D (D

*

*

ª¬(1  D ) 2  (1  D * ) 2 º¼ utc

1
2

ª¬D (D  2)  D * (D *  2) º¼ utc

`

 U ) º¼  ª¬D (D  2)  D * (D *  2) º¼ utc .

Then,

cov( Et dt 1 , rt  rt* )
1
4
1
4

1
4

^ª¬D (D  U )  D (D

^ª¬D (D  U )  D (D
*

*

*

*

`

2

 U ) º¼  ª¬D (D  U )  D * (D *  U ) ¼º ¬ªD (D  2)  D * (D *  2) º¼

2

`

 U ) º¼  ª¬D (D  U )  D * (D *  U ) º¼ ª¬D (D  U )  D ( U  2)  D * (D *  U )  D * ( U  2) º¼

ª¬D (D  U )  D * (D *  U ) º¼ ª¬D (2  U )  D * (2  U ) ¼º

ª¬D (D  D *  U )  D * (D *  D  U ) º¼ (2  U )(D  D * )
1
(D  D *  U )(2  U )(D  D * ) 2  0
4
1
4

Deriviation of results in section 4.c

We derive the difference in the variance of the unexplained exchange rate movement under private
signals versus public signals.
From the text, we have
ª V4
º
ª v2
º
(A.17) var( public) b 2 « 2 1 2  V 22 » b 2 « 1  v2 » ,
¬V1  V v
¼
¬ v1  vv
¼
where we have adopted the simplifying notation vi V i2 , i .
In the case of private information, from the text we have:
(A.18) var( private) b 2 ª¬(1  a1 ) 2 v1  (1  ( ag / av )) 2 v2 º¼ .
In this expression, using equations from the text,

a1

v11
v11  vv1  vg1

vv vg
vv vg  v1vg  v1vv

, so

7

(A.19) (1  a1 )

v12 (vg  vv ) 2

2

, where D { vv vg  v1vg  v1vv .

D2

v1vg

v1vv
and av
D

Also, we have ag

D

ag

, so

av

vv
, and therefore
vg

Then, from the text, since H gt { c2 f 2t / c3 , we have V g2

§ ag ·
¨1  ¸
av ¹
©

v2

§ vv  vg
¨¨
© vg

2

·
¸¸ .
¹

(c2 / c3 ) 2 V 22 , or

§ vv  vg
§ ag ·
b ¨1  ¸ b ¨
¨ vg
© av ¹
©

2

§ c3 ·
¨ ¸ vg , where from the text we have c3
© c2 ¹

2

b(1  a1 ) and c2

·
¸¸ .
¹

Then
(A.20) v2

§ (1  a1 )vg
¨¨
© vv  vg

2

·
¸¸ vg ,
¹

which then gives us that
2

§ ag ·
(A.21) ¨1  ¸ v2
av ¹
©

§ vv  vg
¨¨
© vg

·
¸¸
¹

2

§ (1  a1 )vg
¨¨
© vv  vg

2

·
¸¸ vg
¹

(1  a1 ) 2 vg .

We can now rewrite the expression (A.18), using (A.19) and (A.21) as:
(A.22) var( private) b (1  a1 ) (v1  vg ) b
2

2

2

v12 (vg  vv ) 2 (v1  vg )

D2

.

2

§ v1vg ·
Next, use (A.20) to write v2 ¨
¸ vg . We can interpret this last equation as simply an implicit definition
© D ¹
of vg . We can use it to replace v2 in expression (A.17) for the variance under public information. Then with
that substitution, we can use (A.22) and (A.17) to get:
2
­° v 2 (v  v ) 2 (v  v ) ª v 2
§ v1vg · º ½°
1
1
g
v
g
1
var( private)  var( public) b ®
«
¨
¸ vg » ¾
2
D
v
v
D

«
©
¹ ¼» °¿
1
v
¬
¯°
2

­°
ª D2
º ½°
2
(
v
v
)
(
v
v
)

 vg3 » ¾


® g v
«
1
g
°¯
¬ v1  vv
¼ °¿
b 2 v12
(vg  vv ) 2 (v1  vg )(v1  vv )  ª« vv vg  v1vg  v1vv
¬
D 2 (v1  vv )

b 2 v12
D2

^

^

2

`

 vg3 (v1  vv ) º»
¼

`

b 2 v12
vv ª¬vg (v1  vg )(v1  vv )  v1vv2 º¼ ! 0
2
D (v1  vv )

8

