                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF NON-COMMUNICABLE DISEASE IN CHINA AND INDIA:
              ESTIMATES, PROJECTIONS, AND COMPARISONS

                                           David E. Bloom
                                         Elizabeth T. Cafiero
                                         Mark E. McGovern
                                            Klaus Prettner
                                         Anderson Stanciole
                                           Jonathan Weiss
                                           Samuel Bakkila
                                          Larry Rosenberg

                                        Working Paper 19335
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19335


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2013

Manuscript prepared for presentation at “The Economics of Population Aging in China and India”,
a conference sponsored jointly by the Program on the Global Demography of Aging, the South Asia
Initiative, the Asia Center, the Harvard-Yenching Institute, the Harvard China Fund, and the Weatherhead
Center for International Affairs (all at Harvard University), and the Walter H. Shorenstein Asia-Pacific
Research Center (at Stanford University). We would like to thank Andrew Mason and the participants
of the Economics of Population Aging in China and India conference for valuable comments and suggestions.
Lauren Gurfein and Benjamin Osher provided helpful assistance. Funding source: This study was
funded in part by the Program on the Global Demography of Aging, which receives funding from
the National Institute on Aging, Grant No. 1 P30 AG024409-06. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by David E. Bloom, Elizabeth T. Cafiero, Mark E. McGovern, Klaus Prettner, Anderson Stanciole,
Jonathan Weiss, Samuel Bakkila, and Larry Rosenberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Economic Impact of Non-Communicable Disease in China and India: Estimates, Projections,
and Comparisons
David E. Bloom, Elizabeth T. Cafiero, Mark E. McGovern, Klaus Prettner, Anderson Stanciole,
Jonathan Weiss, Samuel Bakkila, and Larry Rosenberg
NBER Working Paper No. 19335
August 2013
JEL No. E13,I15,O40

                                             ABSTRACT
This paper provides estimates of the economic impact of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) in China
and India for the period 2012-2030. Our estimates are derived using WHO’s EPIC model of economic
growth, which focuses on the negative effects of NCDs on labor supply and capital accumulation.
We present results for the five main NCDs (cardiovascular disease, cancer, chronic respiratory disease,
diabetes, and mental health). Our undiscounted estimates indicate that the cost of the five main NCDs
will total USD 27.8 trillion for China and USD 6.2 trillion for India (in 2010 USD). For both countries,
the most costly domains are cardiovascular disease and mental health, followed by respiratory disease.
Our analyses also reveal that the costs are much larger in China than in India mainly because of China’s
higher income and older population. Rough calculations also indicate that WHO’s Best Buys for addressing
the challenge of NCDs are highly cost-beneficial.

David E. Bloom                                     Anderson Stanciole
Harvard School of Public Health                    The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
Department of Global Health and Population         500 5th Ave N
665 Huntington Ave.                                Seattle, WA 98109
Boston, MA 02115                                   Anderson.Stanciole@gatesfoundation.org
and NBER
dbloom@hsph.harvard.edu                            Jonathan Weiss
                                                   London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
Elizabeth T. Cafiero                               Keppel Street, London WC1E 7HT
Harvard School of Public Health                    United Kingdom
Department of Global Health and Population         and UNICEF Supply Division, Copenhagen, Denmark
665 Huntington Avenue                              jonathan.weiss@lshtm.ac.uk
Building 1, Suite 1202
Boston, MA 02115                                   Samuel Bakkila
ecafiero@hsph.harvard.edu                          Department of Global Health and Population
                                                   Harvard School of Public Health
Mark E. McGovern                                   665 Huntington Avenue
Harvard Center for Population                      Building I 12th Floor, Suite 1202
 and Development Studies                           Boston, Massachusetts 02115
9 Bow Street                                       sbakkila@gmail.com
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
mcgovern@hsph.harvard.edu                          Larry Rosenberg
                                                   Department of Global Health and Population
Klaus Prettner                                     Harvard School of Public Health
Department of Economics                            665 Huntington Avenue
University of Göttingen                            Building I 12th Floor, Suite 1202
Room 2.138 Platz der Goettinger                    Boston, Massachusetts 02115
Sieben 3 D-37073                                   larry_rosenberg@harvard.edu
Goettingen Germany
Klaus.prettner@wiwi.uni-goettingen.de
1. Introduction

Previous research has documented the impact of non-communicable diseases (NCDs)
worldwide, in terms of avoidable deaths (Marrero, Bloom, & Adashi, 2012), disability (Murray,
et al., 2012a, 2012b; Salomon, et al., 2012), and economic impact (Abegunde, Mathers, Adam,
Ortegon, & Strong, 2007; Bloom et al., 2011b, 2011c). Studies have highlighted the potential
increase in chronic disease in developing and emerging nations and the overall impact on
population health that this could have (Kearney et al., 2005). In fact, NCDs are responsible for
65.5 percent of all mortality (Lozano et al., 2012), and account for 54 percent of healthy life
years lost, as measured by Disability-Adjusted Life Years (DALYs) (Murray et al., 2012b).
Differentials in health-related behaviors and outcomes represent an important component of
disparities between the well-being of populations, both across countries and over time (Becker,
Philipson, & Soares, 2005). A comparison of India and China offers a good example. The
economies of both countries have undergone significant changes in terms of demographic and
economic structure (Bloom et al., 2010); however, recent estimates suggest that health and
disability may represent significant impediments to further growth, but with different outcomes
for the two countries.

The global burden of non-communicable diseases is expected to increase as a result of two
related demographic phenomena (Bloom, et al., 2011a, 2011b), first the rise in global population,
and second the growth of the older population. This is particularly the case for certain emerging
nations, such as China and India. Currently 5.3 percent of India’s population and 8.6 percent of
China’s is aged 65 or older; however, this will increase to 10.2 percent and 21 percent,
respectively, by 2035 (Wolf et al., 2011). This has important implications for the burden of
disease because this age group is the most affected by illness (Bloom et al., 2011b; Dey et al.,
2012; Williams & Krakauer, 2011; National Sample Survey Organisation, 2006). These trends
have particularly important implications for emerging nations, which rely on rapid economic
transformation to reduce poverty and improve population welfare.

Disease burden can impact economic growth through a number of different pathways. For
example, poor health is associated with early retirement (Dwyer & Mitchell, 1999), negative
expectations regarding employment (McGarry, 2004), and reduced productivity (Lopez-
Casasnovas, Rivera, & Currais, 2005). These factors may contribute to lowering labor supply
and increasing the ratio of dependents to workers.

By increasing public health expenditures to treat NCDs and reducing the amount of household
taxable income by pushing ill people out of the workforce, NCDs may reduce the net availability
of government resources. As a result, this limited fiscal capacity could compel governments to
increase tax rates to meet rising health expenditures, which in turn would depress aggregate
demand, further limiting the growth potential of the economy and reducing the public sector’s
ability to invest in strategic areas. Increased health expenditures would impede the accumulation
of physical and human capital (i.e., the portion that arises from better education). In addition, the
types of conditions that affect the health of aging populations may require an ever-growing share
of resources, thus reducing a government’s ability to target poverty reduction or improvements in
education.

Existing empirical research has established a strong relationship between economic growth and
health, including in China and India (Bloom et al., 2010), reflecting causality running from
health to economic growth (Bloom, Canning, & Sevilla, 2004 & Bloom, Canning, & Fink, in
press), as well as from the longer-understood effect of economic growth on improved health.
One way of estimating the magnitude of the impact of health on economic growth is to construct
a macroeconomic model that incorporates health alongside the factors of production. Growth
models have a long history in economics, dating back to Solow (1956), who described the
process of economic growth as a function of the aggregates of capital and labor. In this paper we
adopt the approach in Abegunde and Stanciole (2006), and Bloom et al. (2011b), and allow for
an effect of health on national income in two respects. First, NCDs cause the diversion of savings
from capital investment into non-productive health care, and second, NCD mortality results in
the reduction of the stock of available labor supply.

We present and compare results associated with the burden of disease using this EPIC model
from China and India over the time period 2012-2030. We assess the economic impact of four
types of NCDs (cardiovascular disease, cancer, chronic respiratory disease, and diabetes), and
also include estimates of the effect of mental health. We describe the relative contribution of
each to the total and identify the most important of these in terms of overall magnitude. These
results allow us to assess the potential impact of NCDs on each economy over the next 18 years.


                                                 2
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 supplies background on the nature and
magnitude of NCDs and their risk factors in general as well as in China and India specifically.
Section 3 describes the model and data used in the analysis, specifically WHO’s EPIC model.
Section 4 presents results from China and India, Section 5 discusses the results, and Section 6
provides conclusions and offers suggestions for further research.

2. Background on NCDs, their prevalence in China and India, and relevant policy
   implications

The transition from infectious disease to NCDs as the dominant cause of mortality is usually
regarded as a result of successful infectious disease control and greater longevity. However, the
first of these claims cannot yet be made for India. As shown in Figure 1, the burden of infectious
disease remains high in India, with communicable, maternal, perinatal, and nutritional conditions
accounting for 37 percent of all mortality, compared with just 7 percent in China. While China
has made good progress with regard to successful infectious disease control, India continues to
face a double burden of disease.

    Figure 1. Proportion of mortality due to NCDs and other causes in China and India




       Source: World Health Organization, 2011c

Figure 2 casts some doubt on the strength of the second claim – that greater longevity accounts
in part for the new dominance of NCDs as a cause of death – by showing that both China and
India experience a substantial burden of premature NCD deaths. Around 60 percent of NCD


                                                  3
deaths in India and 35 percent in China involve people under the age of 70, in contrast to fewer
than 30 percent in much of Western Europe.

                   Figure 2. Percentage of all NCD deaths occurring under age of 70:
                                          Male (left) and Female (right)a




a.
     Exact values: Male – India 61.8, China 43.9; Female – India 55.0, China 32.0;

 Source: World Health Organization, 2011d.


The development and progression of NCDs is determined by both modifiable and non-
modifiable risk factors. Non-modifiable risk factors include age, sex, and genetic make-up.
Although these risk factors cannot be the primary targets of interventions, they are important to
consider as they influence the overall burden of disease. Nearly all NCDs increase in prevalence
with age (Dey et al., 2012; Williams & Krakauer, 2011; Zhao, 2013). Due to rapid population
aging alone, both China and India will be at increased risk for non-communicable diseases if
other risk factors remain reasonably constant.

However, population aging is not the only risk factor that is driving China and India toward an
increased burden of NCDs and NCD-related premature mortality. The prevalence of modifiable
NCD risk factors, such as tobacco use, harmful alcohol use, poor diet, and sedentary lifestyles
has risen steadily over the past 30 years in both countries. These behavioral trends are related to
much larger changes in society: increased income, urbanization, and the transition to occupations
requiring less physical activity. In the context of China and India, air pollution — both indoor
and outdoor — is also an important risk factor due to its role in cancer, chronic lung disease, and
cardiovascular disease (Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, 2013a, 2013b).

See Table 1 for a comparison of major NCD risk factors. Overall, India fares better than China in
terms of modifiable NCD risk factors, with a lower prevalence of risk behaviors such as smoking


                                                            4
and physical inactivity as well as a lower prevalence of biomarkers for disease such as raised
blood pressure and raised cholesterol.

    Table 1. Percentage of population with specific NCD risk factors in India and China

                                                  India                      China
             Risk factors               Men       Women   Total     Men     Women       Total

       Daily tobacco smoking             25.1      2.0    13.9      49.3       2.1       26.3
    Overweight (BMI>25kg/m2)             9.9       12.2   11.0      25.5      25.4       25.4
       Obese (BMI>30kg/m2)               1.3       2.4     1.9      4.7        6.7       5.7
          Physical inactivity            10.8      17.3   14.0      29.3      32.0       30.6
          Raised cholesterol             25.8      28.3   27.1      31.8      35.3       33.5
        Raised blood glucose             10.0      10.0   10.0      9.5        9.3       9.4
       Harmful use of alcohol            3.5       0.4     2.0      6.9        0.2       3.8
        Raised blood pressure            33.2      31.7   32.5      40.1      36.2       38.2
Source: World Health Organization, 2011a, 2011c



Daily tobacco smoking is a major risk factor for which both China and India can improve. China
is the world’s largest producer and consumer of tobacco. Liu et al. (1998) note that cigarette
smoking among Chinese men rose rapidly in the period 1952-1996 and has since stabilized.
However, since there is a lag of several decades between the initiation of smoking and smoking-
related morbidity and mortality, the full health implications of the previous increases in smoking
have not yet been observed. Roughly 10 percent of the world’s smokers are in India, which is the
second largest group of smokers in the world, after only China. In India, beedi smoking (also
spelled bidi or biri) is common, and accounts for about half of Indian tobacco consumption.
Beedies are filterless Indian cigarettes that consist of tobacco rolled in a tendu or temburni leaf
and may be flavored. While beedies are seen as a low-cost alternative to cigarettes, they may be
more harmful than conventional cigarettes, because they deliver more nicotine, carbon
monoxide, and tar (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2013; Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, 2008). Taxes on cigarettes are low and typically do not apply to beedies due to
the fact that their sale is poorly regulated (John et al., 2010). Indians consume tobacco in other
forms, as well, including gutka and pan masala (types of chewing tobacco). Data from the third


                                                    5
wave of India’s National Family Healthy Survey show that among individuals aged 15-49, 57
percent of men and 11 percent of women use tobacco in some form (International Institute for
Population Sciences, 2007; Parasuraman et al., 2009).

The prevalence of overweight (see Figure 3) is higher in China than India and continues to rise in
both countries. Asians are at risk for diabetes at lower BMIs than Caucasians. Measures of
central adiposity, such as waist/hip ratio, are therefore preferred to BMI for South Asia (Dudeja
et al., 2001), but these data are not available on a national level.

                Figure 3. Prevalence of overweight, ages 20+, age-standardized:
                                    Male (left) and Female (right)




Source: World Health Organization, 2011b

Though a thorough review of the nutrition transition in China and India is beyond the scope of
this paper, it is important to note that changes in diet can have an independent effect on NCD
risk, in addition to changing BMI. Popkin et al. (2001) note that in both China and India, dietary
changes have heightened NCD risk, with an increase in meat consumption and edible oils in
China, and increased dairy and added sugar in India.

Having reviewed the major risk factors, we can now consider different NCDs as causes of
mortality. As shown in Figure 1, NCDs account for a greater proportion of overall mortality in
China than India: 83 percent and 53 percent, respectively. Furthermore, absolute NCD mortality
is greater in China than it is in India; NCDs caused an estimated 8 million deaths in China in
2008, and 5 million deaths in India (World Health Organization, 2011b). However, it is
important to note that this is largely due to differences in age structure. China currently has an
older population than India, and age itself is a risk factor for NCDs. As shown in Figure 4, India
actually has a slightly higher age-standardized death rate than China for NCDs overall. This is



                                                   6
due to the greater prevalence of ischemic heart disease in India, as compared with China (see
Figure 5).


               Figure 4. NCDs: broad causes of mortality, age-standardized rates


                   Respiratory diseases
               Cardiovascular diseases
                                     Cancer
                                   All NCDs
                                               0          200     400    600     800

                                              India       China
                                                                    (Deaths per 100,000)
Source: World Health Organization, 2008.

Figure 5 shows specific diseases of interest, either because they are large contributors to overall
NCD mortality, or because prevalence was markedly different in China and India. The overall
age-standardized mortality attributable to cardiovascular disease is moderately higher for India
than China, but there is variation within this category, with India having much higher mortality
from ischemic heart disease – commonly called a “heart attack” – and China having higher
mortality for cerebrovascular disease, or stroke.




                                                      7
                Figure 5. NCD-specific causes of mortality, age-standardized rates



                        Diabetes mellitus
                                      COPD
                Cerebrovascular disease
                Ischaemic heart disease
            Hypertensive heart disease
       Alzheimer and other dementias
      Trachea, bronchus, lung cancers
                              Liver cancer
                          Stomach cancer
                       Esophagus cancer

                                               0           50       100        150         200        250

                                                   India        China
                                                                             (Deaths per 100,000)

Source: World Health Organization, 2008.

China has substantially higher age-standardized mortality from cancer overall, with particularly
elevated rates of death from cancers of the esophagus, stomach, colon and rectum, liver, and
trachea, bronchus, and lung. These outcomes are associated with smoking, outdoor air pollution,
a diet low in fruits and high in sodium (stomach cancer), and low physical activity (colon and
rectum cancers). India fares worse than China when it comes to mortality due to female cancers.
The age-standardized mortality rates from breast and cervical cancer are approximately three
times higher in India than in China (Ferlay et al., 2013).1

In light of the large and growing health burdens of NCDs in China and India, we review some
NCD-related policies and their potential health implications. Table 2 shows some of the WHO
“best buys”—a set of interventions designed to reduce NCD mortality and morbidity, and
identified as being highly cost-effective and feasible to implement given the constraints of many
low- and middle-income country health systems (Bloom et al., 2011b, 2011c; World Health
Organization, 2011b). The first three sets of interventions address risk factors and the final two

1
 Age-standardized mortality rates for breast cancer and cervical cancer are 5.7 and 4.3 per 100,000 population in
China and 11.1 and 15.2 per 100,000 population in India, respectively.


                                                           8
sets focus on the medical management of NCDs. Here we discuss China and India’s current
policies on tobacco control and cardiovascular disease therapy, since these are the most effective
of the identified best buys in terms of preventing avoidable deaths.

                    Table2: “Best Buy” interventions for reducing NCDs




There has been mixed progress on tobacco control in China. Ma et al. (2010) explain that some
local governments have implemented smoking bans in public places, such as hospitals, schools,
and public transportation, but that compliance remains low. China increased the excise tax on
tobacco products in 2009, but Gao, Zheng, and Hu (2012) find that because the Chinese State
Tobacco Monopoly Administration (STMA) determines prices, this tax increase has not raised
retail prices or decreased tobacco consumption, as has occurred in many market economies that
adopted higher excise taxes on tobacco. Although there is a ban on tobacco advertising on
television, radio, and in newspapers, there is not currently a restriction on other sponsorship
activities. Tobacco sponsorship and advertising in schools and libraries therefore remains




                                                 9
strong.2 While China’s cigarette packages are required to provide a general warning that smoking
is harmful for health, these warnings are small and ineffective and do not provide specific
information or images about the health risks of smoking. Wan et al. (2012) suggest that conflict
of interest, where the STMA is both the tobacco industry and its regulator, prevents effective
implementation of tobacco control measures.

There is a similar situation with regard to tobacco control in India. India signed and ratified the
global Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, but compliance in terms of smoking bans in
public places and restrictions on advertisements remains poor (Goel, Ravindra, Singh, & Sharma,
2013; John, et al. 2010). There has been some recent progress; for example, in April 2013, the
Government of India enacted “The Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of
Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution)
Act, 2003” (COTPA 2003), which requires all tobacco products to carry pictorial health
warnings (Press Information Bureau, 2013). In June 2013, Karnataka became the 26th Indian
state to ban the manufacture and sale of tobacco-containing gutka and pan masala (Express News
Service, 2013).

Another major policy challenge is improving medical management of chronic conditions. This is
also known as secondary prevention (i.e., methods to diagnose and treat existing disease before it
causes significant morbidity). A major barrier to secondary prevention is the poor availability of
NCD medicines in low- and middle-income countries, including China and India (van Mourik,
Cameron, Ewen, & Laing, 2010; Mendis, 2007). Many times, basic medications such as insulin
to manage diabetes, antihypertensive drugs, or aspirin for heart attack fatality reduction, which
can hugely impact the course of NCDs, are not available from local pharmacies, or are only
available at a prohibitive price. Health systems can fail at many points: surveillance, diagnosis,
access to medicines, and patient adherence (Gu et al., 2002). China and India have the potential
to improve access to NCD medications, with a growing healthcare workforce and a growing
pharmaceutical industry. India has recently taken steps to improve access to essential medicines.
The Government of India announced that it will implement a price ceiling on all drugs on the
national essential medicines list and, as part of its goal to increase public healthcare spending,


2
 For more information on tobacco’s role in sponsoring schools, see: http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-09-
20/china-endorsing-tobacco-in-schools-adds-to-10-trillion-gdp-cost.html


                                                     10
will provide these drugs for free to government-run hospitals and clinics in a 75%-25% cost-
sharing arrangement with the states (Baja, 2012; Singha, 2012). Following the example of Tamil
Nadu, a central procurement agency will be developed, and the government expects generic
manufacturers to supply the drugs.

Furthermore, China and India will need to build infrastructure to deal with the aging population.
While recent research suggests that China’s efforts to expand insurance coverage have reached a
substantial proportion of the over-45 age group, further action is needed to fully cover these
individuals and protect them from impoverishing out-of-pocket spending (Strauss et al., 2012).
Research from India cites low levels of access to insurance for the older population and a great
need for building up the capacity to deliver geriatric care across the country (Dey et al., 2012;
Evans et al., 2011).

3. Model and data

Several modeling approaches have been used to estimate the aggregate economic impact of
disease (World Health Organization, 2009). A common methodology is the cost-of-illness or
human capital approach, which combines 'direct costs' (medical care, travel costs, etc.) and
'indirect costs' (the value of lost production because of reduced working time) into an overall
estimate of economic impact on society, often expressed as a percentage of current GDP.
Although the cost-of-illness approach focuses on the societal impact of disease or injury, it
provides only a partial picture of the true macroeconomic impact of disease, and fails to consider
the contribution of depleted capital accumulation, investment in human capital, and demographic
change to diminished economic growth.

Another popular alternative is the use of the value of statistical life (VSL) approach. This
approach is based on the application of willingness-to-pay methods to estimate the overall
welfare impact of disease, including both market and non-market effects. VSL models can be
seen to complement cost-of-illness estimates as they incorporate a more comprehensive measure
of the benefits of living in good health, which includes the value of non-market production and
consumption, non-labor income, leisure time, and any premiums attached to the avoidance of
pain and suffering. Nonetheless, a number of important restrictions limit the applicability of VSL
models, particularly in the case of NCDs, including that: (a) the key parameter (the VSL itself) is



                                                11
not observable and subject to extensive debate; (b) the methodology is more readily applicable to
mortality as opposed to morbidity impacts; and (c) the economic impact estimates are not
bounded and can generate extreme results with difficult interpretation.

An augmented Solow model, which assumes that national income depends on the capital stock,
the labor force size, and aggregate measures of human capital, is the basis for the WHO EPIC
model applied in this paper. EPIC treats health, as indicated by NCD prevalence, as a central
component of human capital, relying on estimates of the impact of NCDs from microeconomic
studies and using them to calibrate the size of the effects at the aggregate level (Bloom &
Canning, 2008). This approach is very flexible and suitable for applications with limited data
availability. Moreover, since it is based on structural production functions it avoids many of the
issues that affect other empirical models of economic growth. The results can also be used to
decompose the differences in GDP across countries into input factors as implied by the aggregate
production function.

3.1.   Pathways for the impact of NCDs on GDP

Dynamic macroeconomic models usually represent the economy as a system of complex
interactions between three main types of agents: households, firms, and the government, where
the last is often omitted for the sake of analytical tractability and a clearer exposition. Economic
growth depends on the key production factors, capital, labor, and technology, that affect the flow
of income between the agents within the system. If injections of these production factors are
greater (or conversely, smaller) than leakages like depreciation, then total output increases (or
decreases). In the equilibrium of a simple closed economy model without government, aggregate
income of all economic agents is equal to aggregate expenditure plus aggregate savings.

In such a framework, NCDs affect economic growth through three main channels (World Health
Organization, 2009). First, NCDs can increase health expenditures for all three types of agents.
For households, NCD treatment and care expenses can force them to reduce consumption of non-
health items as well as savings and investment. This is especially the case in developing
countries with limited systems of health coverage and where household consumption is often
quite close to subsistence level. For firms, NCDs can affect the amount of available income,




                                                12
given the need to pay for premiums and social insurance contributions to protect the wellbeing of
their workers.

The second channel of NCDs’ macroeconomic impact operates through labor and productivity
losses. The direct labor supply impact reduces the number of working-age individuals, due to
both increased mortality and reduced on-the-job productivity for the sick. If employees die or
suffer from a disease that reduces their productivity, then their corresponding contribution to
total output is lost for the economy. By contrast, if people who do not work (retirees, children,
etc.) suffer from the same illnesses, total output stays unaffected. 3 Therefore it is important to
know the extent to which employees are differentially affected by the corresponding illnesses.
Indirect productivity impacts can take the form of reduced cognitive abilities and increased
absenteeism and worker turnover. Both direct and indirect impacts can also lead to ripple effects,
such as reduced household earnings and firms’ reluctance to invest in workers’ training and
capacity development, which can in turn further hinder economic growth.

Finally, NCDs affect the incentives for savings and for investment in both physical and human
capital. NCDs can force people into early retirement, therefore reducing overall labor market
participation and increasing the ratio of dependents to workers. The individuals forced into early
retirement often require special medical care and specialized services, which reduce the amount
of resources that can be employed in productive activities and exert cost pressures on those firms
that provide retiree health care or health insurance. People leaving the workforce must be
replaced by new workers, which raises firms’ hiring and training costs. Furthermore, the
expectation of shorter post-retirement life expectancy can lead to lower savings during active
life, which in turn contributes to reducing the stock of physical capital per worker. A related
effect reduces incentives to invest in training, education, and other forms of human capital due to
shorter payoff periods in the labor market.

3.2.    EPIC model structure, operation, and key parameters

The modern macroeconomic literature on growth began with Solow (1956), who provides a
framework for considering the growth path of national income as explained by physical capital
accumulation and exogenously given technological progress. The model was the first to explain
3
 Simple accounting shows the following: when an employee dies, per capita GDP shrinks, whereas when a retiree
dies, per capita GDP rises. However, we do not make any statements about per capita GDP.


                                                      13
convergence, that is, the empirical regularity that, among countries that share similar structural
characteristics (institutions, preferences, etc.), those that are poorer tend to grow faster (c.f.
Kaldor, 1957; Barro & Sala-i-Martin, 1992). The crucial mechanism is the following: in poor
countries the capital stock is low and consequently the marginal product of capital is high.
Therefore, capital accumulation contributes substantially to economic prosperity in earlier stages
of development and during the transition towards being an industrialized, knowledge-based,
modern economy.4 In developed countries, by contrast, the physical capital stock is already large
and its marginal product is therefore low. Physical capital accumulation is thus not the main
driving force of growth in this situation. This role is rather assumed by technological progress,
which was first endogenously explained within a general equilibrium framework by the seminal
contributions of Romer (1990), Grossman and Helpman (1991), and Aghion and Howitt (1992).5

Jones (2002) and Keller (2009) emphasize that the G-7 countries were responsible for 84 percent
of worldwide R&D spending in 1995. It is therefore most likely that the research frontier is
pushed forward by these countries, and knowledge diffuses from them to poorer ones that did not
spend that much on R&D in the past. When modeling the impact of non-communicable diseases
in China and India, we therefore assume that technological progress is exogenous and mainly
focus on its influence on the working-age population and physical capital accumulation.

Following Solow (1956), aggregate output in country at time is given by




where     is an exogenously evolving productivity parameter measuring efficiency in production,
that is, the technological level of country        at time ,      is the aggregate physical capital stock
(i.e., it represents all the machines and buildings used in the production process),           is the stock of
labor in the economy (i.e., it represents all individuals supplying their skills on the labor
market),and       denotes the elasticity of final output with respect to capital. The productivity
parameter       and the elasticity of final output with respect to capital,                 alpha, are both
independent of NCDs. The former grows at an exogenously given rate.


4
 For a discussion of convergence dynamics, see McQuinn and Whelan, 2007.
5
 These endogenous growth models were refined in the next two decades by e.g. Jones (1995), Segerstrom (1998),
Peretto (1998), Howitt (1999) and Strulik (2005).


                                                      14
Various extensions have been proposed, such as endogenizing technology (Romer, 1990), and
the addition of human capital (Mankiw, Romer, & Weil, 1993). We adopt the EPIC model
developed in Abegunde and Stanciole (2006), and Bloom et al. (2011b). This augments the
Solow model by allowing health to impact economic growth via the two paths described above,
namely the accumulation of physical capital and the supply of labor.6

3.2.1.   Capital accumulation

First, health care spending diverts resources from productive investment in capital. The
aggregate physical capital stock in an economy can then be written as




where      represents the savings rate (i.e., the fraction of final output invested in the creation of
new capital),       represents the treatment costs of the disease,                is the fraction of these costs
financed out of an individual’s savings, and             is the rate of depreciation. This equation describes
the evolution of the aggregate capital stock, which positively depends on the savings rate and
negatively depends on the costs of curing the illness under consideration as well as on the
fraction of these costs paid out of savings.

3.2.2.   Evolution of the supply of labor

Second, labor supply is affected by age-specific disease mortality, so higher prevalence is
associated with reductions in the numbers of workers in a particular cohort. The evolution of the
labor force is given by the equation




where      refers to age,       represents the cohort specific mortality rate of individuals at age ,
is the cohort size of individuals at age ,                  represents the birth rate at time                and     is
the retirement age. Note that it is assumed that only individuals who are older than 15 years
actively participate in the labor market. The first term of this equation represents the evolution of

6
 The term “physical” is used to distinguish it from human capital. There is no “financial” capital in the Solow-EPIC
model because it is assumed that capital is the only savings vehicle and there is efficient and immediate allocation of
household savings toward their most productive uses.


                                                          15
the workforce for all persons who belonged to it in the previous time period and the second term
represents the cohort size of the young who are entering the workforce at time . The term in the
product adjusts for deaths of children and adolescents up to the age of 15 when the young enter
the labor market. NCD-related mortality enters the cohort-specific death rates and therefore
exerts its impact on the economy via this second channel. The magnitude of this effect will
depend on the structure of mortality rates. The greater the extent to which employees are
differentially affected, the more adverse the consequences for GDP per capita (see discussion in
section 3.1).

We assume that the world technology frontier grows by 1 percent every year. Consequently, for
given capital and labor input, the next year’s output will be higher by 1 percent. 7 The level of the
technology parameter has been obtained by calibrating the predicted output of the model for
given capital and labor inputs to the actual output in the corresponding country.

The use of an economically founded and accepted framework to assess the macroeconomic
impact of non-communicable diseases has some advantages as compared with other standard
techniques like the cost-of-illness approach (see Currie, Dymond Kerfoot, Donaldson, &
Macarthur, 2000; Rice, 2000 for its advantages and disadvantages) or the estimation and
aggregation of the value of a statistical life – VSL (Viscusi & Aldy, 2003). First, it takes into
account the adjustment mechanisms and dynamics by which economies are characterized. For
example, if people die because of a certain disease, this does not lead to a one-for-one drop in
output as the cost-of-illness approach and the VSL approach assume. The reason is that other
workers (coming either from the pool of unemployed people or from other jobs) and/or capital
can be used to substitute for the loss of labor, at least up to a certain extent. Furthermore, as the
Solow (1956) model is dynamic in nature, the economic impact of diseases can easily be traced
over time, once the mortality patterns as well as the effects of treatment costs on savings are
known. Finally, as compared with the VSL approach, the simulation of the Solow (1956) model




7
 The EPIC model abstracts from the barriers to technology adoption and diffusion. The model assumes that there is
immediate diffusion of new technology (i.e., the parameter A in China grows by the same absolute amount as it
grows in the rest of the world), while the level differences in the parameter persist indefinitely.


                                                       16
abstracts from subjective costs and feelings regarding death and thus allows for focus solely on
the economic dimension.8




3.3.    Data sources

The estimates are based on WHO projections of the mortality trajectory associated with these
five conditions, as well as on WHO estimates of labor force participation rates and imputed rates
of technological progress constructed as part of this project.

Data on economic variables were obtained from Abegunde and Stanciole (2006), the World
Development Indicators & Global Development Finance database, the IMF’s Global Economic
Outlook database, and the Penn World Tables. Demographic and health variables were obtained
from UN data on population, and the Global Burden of Disease (GBD) database of WHO.

Results are presented for five conditions in the model (ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular
disease, diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and breast cancer), which are
then scaled up using WHO data on DALYs to reflect the four NCDs that are the focus of the UN
(cardiovascular diseases, cancers, chronic respiratory diseases, and diabetes). The scaling is
implemented by calculating the proportion of DALYs in a particular domain (e.g., cancer) that
are accounted for by the relevant disease in EPIC (breast cancer in this instance). If breast cancer
accounts for 10 percent of the total DALYs lost to cancer, the scaling factor applied to the EPIC
results for breast cancer to obtain a result for all cancers is 0.1. Scaling factors are calculated for
each country. Similarly, we use WHO data on mental illness DALYs to include estimates of
economic losses from mental health conditions. The mental health scaling factor is calculated by
obtaining the ratio of DALYs accounted for by the four NCD domains to DALYs accounted for
by mental health conditions.


8
  The transitional dynamics of the Solow (1956) model and its steady-state properties carry over to the EPIC
framework. The only difference from the standard Solow (1956) model is that the savings rate and the population
growth rate are now time-varying because they depend on the prevalence of the diseases under consideration. The
standard diagram used to characterize the dynamics of the capital stock per unit of effective labor in the Solow
(1956) model can be applied with the feature in mind that the curves describing savings on the one hand and
depreciation and dilution of capital on the other would not be fixed but move according to the impact of the
analyzed NCDs.



                                                        17
4. Results

This section presents results from the EPIC model for China and India and the results we find by
scaling up to disease categories of the five NCD domains. We examine the time period 2012-
2030 for each country and estimate the cumulative lost economic output from diabetes,
cardiovascular diseases, chronic respiratory diseases, cancers, and mental health. We then
compare the estimated losses for the two countries. Results are presented on a disease- and
country-specific basis in 2010 USD.

4.1.     China

Table 3 presents the raw output from the EPIC model for China. The EPIC model evaluates the
output losses from five specific diseases for the period 2012-2030, namely diabetes, ischemic
heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and
breast cancer. The results are shown in 2010 USD. Of the individual diseases, cerebrovascular
disease is the most costly, associated with a loss of almost 2010 USD 4.7 trillion. This is
followed closely by COPD at 2010 USD 4.0 trillion. The total (undiscounted) loss associated
with these illnesses is USD 11.0 trillion over the whole period.9

                   Table 3.Output losses, 2012-2030, model raw output for China

                                    Disease                             Loss, 2010 USD
                                                                            (trillions)
                   Diabetes                                                     0.49
                   Ischemic heart disease                                       1.63
                   Cerebrovascular disease                                      4.66
                   COPD                                                         4.03
                   Breast cancer                                                0.19
                   TOTAL                                                        11.0



9
  This exercise compares the outcomes for an economy under two scenarios, with and without the effect of NCDs,
and reports the difference in output, summed over a 19-year period. Discounting would affect the amount of the
losses from NCDs, but not the fact that the losses would still be substantial. Very roughly, using a 3% discount rate,
the losses reported in the paper would be about 66% as large as those we report. In the Discussion, where we
compare the losses to current outlays that could help avert these losses, we address this issue again.


                                                          18
Table 4 presents results from scaling up these individual diseases to obtain the estimated impact
of the five major domains that are the main focus of the recent UN summit on NCDs: diabetes,
cardiovascular disease, respiratory disease, cancer, and mental health. We use estimates of
DALYs, which allows us to assess the contribution of each disease in the EPIC model to each of
these five types of NCD. The scaling factors reflect country-specific estimates from the Global
Burden of Disease 2004 Update study (World Health Organization, 2008).10

The first column shows each of the five WHO-defined disease domains, while the second shows
the diseases addressed by the EPIC model. The third shows the raw output for physical illness.
The contributions of ischemic heart disease and cerebrovascular disease are summed to obtain
the burden associated with cardiovascular disease. Next, the burdens for the four main NCD
disease domains are obtained by applying the scaling factors associated with each individual
NCD in column 4 to the totals in column 3. The final column shows the scaled raw output.
Finally, the mental health burden is obtained by applying the DALY-derived scaling factor to the
scaled total of the four physical health conditions. The total losses associated with physical
disease and mental health are USD 18.4 trillion and USD 9.4 trillion, respectively.




10
  See the Appendix for early estimates of output losses using the 2010 update of GBD. Notably, the 2010 data
suggest lower losses from mental health than we present in the body of this paper.


                                                       19
                        Table 4. Scaling of EPIC output for 2012-2030
                         to match five WHO NCD domains for China
                                      (trillions of 2010 USD)




                                                   EPIC Raw          Disease Scaling        Scaled Raw
    WHO Disease             EPIC Disease
                                                      Output             Factor               Output
       Diabetes                Diabetes                0.49           Diabetes/1.00             0.49
   Cardiovascular
                                                                    (IHD+CBD)/0.76              8.25
        disease
                            Ischemic Heart
                                                       1.63
                               Disease
                           Cerebrovascular
                                                       4.66
                               Disease
 Respiratory disease            COPD                   4.03            COPD/0.71                5.71
       Cancer                                                       Breast cancer/0.05          3.97
                             Breast cancer             0.19
    Total physical                                                                             18.41
    Mental health                                                  Total physical * 0.51        9.43
     Overall total                                                                             27.84



Figure 6 shows the contribution of each of these domains to the total for the same period. Mental
health is the largest category, followed by cardiovascular diseases and respiratory disease. The
economic costs of diabetes are estimated to be relatively small (2 percent), perhaps because
diabetes leads to other conditions (e.g., cardiovascular disease) that are ultimately recorded as the
cause of missed work and death. It is important to note that although small relative to the others,
the absolute losses associated with diabetes and cancer are very high.




                                                 20
            Figure 6. Contribution of each disease to overall lost output for China




                                      2%



                 34%                                    30%
                                                                  Diabetes
                                                                  Cardiovascular disease
                                                                  Respiratory disease
                                                                  Cancer
                                                                  Mental health



                       14%                        21%




4.2.   India

Table 5 presents results for the raw output of the EPIC model for India. Ischemic heart disease is
estimated to be the single most costly NCD, followed by COPD. The total loss associated with
the five specific diseases is USD 2.6 trillion.

                Table 5.Output losses, 2012-2030, model raw output for India

                                Disease                       Loss, 2010 USD
                                                                (trillions)
                Diabetes                                           0.15
                Ischemic heart disease                             1.21
                Cerebrovascular disease                            0.49
                COPD                                               0.71
                Breast cancer                                      0.02
                TOTAL                                              2.58




                                                  21
Table 6 shows the results from scaling up each disease in the EPIC model to the five WHO
categories. The scaling factors reflect results from the Global Burden of Disease 2004 Update
study on India (World Health Organization, 2008). The total losses associated with physical
disease and mental health are USD 3.9 trillion and USD 2.3 trillion, respectively.


                        Table 6. Scaling of EPIC output for 2012-2030
                         to match five WHO NCD domains for India
                                     (trillions of 2010 USD)




                                                  EPIC Raw         Disease Scaling       Scaled Raw
    WHO Disease             EPIC Disease
                                                     Output             Factor            Output
       Diabetes               Diabetes                0.15          Diabetes/1.00           0.15
   Cardiovascular
                                                                   (IHD+CBD)/0.76           2.25
       disease
                           Ischemic Heart
                                                      1.21
                               Disease
                           Cerebrovascular
                                                      0.49
                               Disease
 Respiratory disease           COPD                   0.71           COPD/0.61              1.17
       Cancer                                                     Breast cancer/0.08        0.31
                            Breast cancer             0.02
    Total physical                                                                          3.87
    Mental health                                                Total physical * 0.59      2.28
     Overall total                                                                          6.15



Figure 7 shows the relative contribution of each disease domain to the total figure.
Cardiovascular disease is the largest category, closely followed by mental health and then
respiratory disease. The losses attributable to diabetes and cancer are relatively small in
comparison.




                                                22
            Figure 7. Contribution of each disease to overall lost output for India


                                      2%




                37%                                               Diabetes
                                                        37%
                                                                  Cardiovascular disease
                                                                  Respiratory disease
                                                                  Cancer
                                                                  Mental health



                      5%
                                      19%



4.3.   Comparison of China and India

Figure 8 presents results comparing the estimated losses for each disease in China and India for
the period 2012-2030. The cost associated with each domain is substantially higher for China
than India. These disparities arise largely due to the difference in the initial level of GDP in the
two countries and secondarily to the projected difference in GDP through 2030 (which are based
on IMF estimates). This is due to the structure of the model, in which reductions in labor supply
or capital formation are most costly at higher levels of GDP. For a comparison of the economic
burden of disease in high-, middle-, and low-income countries, see Bloom, et al. (2011b).




                                                23
             Figure 8. Comparison of lost output for China and India, 2012-2030

                                     10
                                      9
              2010 USD (Trillions)
                                      8
                                      7
                                      6
                                      5
                                      4
                                      3
                                                                                   China
                                      2
                                      1                                            India
                                      0




In both countries, the economic costs of diabetes are estimated to be a very small fraction of the
total losses from NCDs. However, it is important to note that the absolute losses associated with
all five of these disease categories are high in both China and India. Furthermore, the values for
diabetes are understated since it is not typically fatal on its own, but often leads to cardiovascular
disease and other health problems that carry a high burden of mortality, such as kidney disease.

5. Discussion

The results from the EPIC model suggest that the magnitude of the losses associated with non-
communicable diseases is significant for India, and even more so for China. However, these
figures refer to the economic costs over the course of a 19-year period, and therefore it is
important to put these numbers in context. Bearing in mind that the estimates made in this report
are intended to give only a very rough sense of the economic burden, we can compare the
estimates to the approximate total health expenditure in the two countries during the previous 19-
year period. For China, we estimate the total economic burden, from 2012-2030, to be 27.8
trillion (in 2010 USD). This figure swamps the total health expenditure in China during the




                                                 24
previous 19 years, which was approximately USD 2.2 trillion. For India, the corresponding
figures are USD 6.2 trillion and USD 710 billion.11

In economic terms, the savings from reducing the incidence of NCDs could be substantial.
Bloom et al. (2011c) find that implementation of these “best buy” interventions for reducing
NCDs in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) could lead to a 10-15 percent reduction in
premature death from NCDs (and in their economic costs). Using as an example a 12.5 percent
reduction in mortality from ischemic heart disease and stroke in LMICs, Bloom et al. (2011c)
find that economic savings would be USD 25 billion per year over the period 2011-2025. If the
same 12.5 percent reduction in mortality (and costs) is assumed for all four disease categories
covered in the report (diabetes, cardiovascular disease, respiratory diseases, and cancer), the
annual savings would equal roughly USD 50 billion.

The same reasoning can be extended to China and India. Applying the 12.5 percent reduction
assumption used in the report, China could expect to decrease its economic losses from
cardiovascular disease over the period 2012-2030 by USD 1.03 trillion, or USD 54 billion per
year. If the same calculation is applied to all of the NCD categories (with the exception of mental
health, because the “best buys” do not address mental health), the reduction in losses would be
USD 2.3 trillion in total, or 121 billion per year. For India, cardiovascular disease savings would
be USD 15 billion per year, and total savings would be USD 25 billion per year. For China, the
cost of implementing these best buys is approximately USD 4 billion per year; the corresponding
cost for India is USD 1.7 billion. (The cost data are from Bloom et al., 2011c.) For both
countries, these rough estimates of benefit-cost ratios are extremely favorable and well in excess
of 10.12 Thus, WHO’s best buys are expensive to implement, but more expensive not to
implement.

6. Conclusion

This paper summarizes the economic costs associated with NCDs in China and India over the
period 2012-2030. Results are obtained using EPIC, which augments the standard Solow


11
   Data     on    health    expenditures    are    from      the    World      Bank       Development        Indicators:
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator.
12
   If we used discounted figures, which would be required in a benefit-cost analysis, the benefit-cost ratios would be
lower, by roughly 66%.


                                                          25
economic growth model to incorporate health effects into national income via mortality effects
on cohort size and the diversion of savings from productive capital formation into unproductive
health care spending. Models of the economy are simulated in which we forecast future disease
prevalence on the basis of current trends. This projection is then compared to a scenario in which
disease prevalence is reduced to zero. Comparing the differences in output between these two
scenarios allows for the estimation of the costs of a particular disease. Results are obtained for
five domains, based on scaling from the WHO Global Burden of Disease database:
cardiovascular diseases, cancers, chronic respiratory diseases, diabetes, and mental health.

We find that the costs associated with NCDs in both China and India are substantial, both in
absolute terms and relative to other indicators such as the flow of expenditure on health care in a
given year in each country. For China, the cumulative cost associated with each of the five
domains (cardiovascular disease, cancer, chronic respiratory disease, diabetes, and mental health)
is USD 27.84 trillion; for India, the cumulative cost is USD 6.15 trillion (both figures in USD
2010). The larger result for China reflects the facts that China has an older population and that in
general losses are greater when GDP is higher. The most important NCD for each country is
cardiovascular disease.

The EPIC tool captures two very important channels by which mortality in general and non-
communicable diseases in particular can affect the economic performance of a country. The first
channel is represented by the adverse effect of treatment costs on savings and thereby on capital
accumulation, while the second channel is represented by the impact of disease-specific
mortality on the effective labor force of a country. Since understanding both the development of
the workforce and the evolution of the capital stock of a country are crucial to assessing its
medium- and long-run economic performance, the current framework represents a step toward a
more economically founded assessment of the macroeconomic impact of diseases than the
standard cost-of-illness approach or the VSL approach.

Nevertheless, we acknowledge that there is room for further improvements and refinements. For
the sake of tractability we abstracted from more complex models of the economy, and other
important channels by which diseases can exert their influence. To mention only the most
important ones: diseases can affect schooling attendance and performance and thereby human
capital accumulation, which is itself an important driving force of economic growth (cf. Lucas


                                                26
1988, Mankiw et al., 1993); diseases can also hamper the ability of an economy to benefit from
international knowledge spillovers (cf. Parente & Prescott, 1994); furthermore, a fraction of the
treatment costs of illnesses might be financed by the government via distortionary taxation. In
addition, by focusing on total NCD prevalence, the model estimates how much economic benefit
could be derived from completely eliminating the diseases. In reality, the gradual nature of NCD
development and the difficulty in reversing long-term trends in risk factors, among other things,
put a limit on how much of the economic impact can be avoided. Thus the magnitude of the
impact estimated through the model should be considered only indicative. More appropriate
estimates to guide policy decisions, probably based on measures of avertable incidence, need to
be developed.

An additional limitation of the model is that, in addition to mortality, it does not explicitly
address the impact of NCDs on morbidity. Currently, the model simply assumes that sick
individuals either do not work or die instantaneously; there is no spectrum of productivity
associated with the severity or type of illness. A possible solution might involve the use of
disability weights as a way to control for NCDs’ productivity impact on labor supply (Weil,
2010). A related issue is whether the relative financial cost of an illness in a particular category
(e.g., cancer) can be accurately captured using the DALY weights. For example, if breast cancer
represents 10 percent of the total DALYs associated with cancer, we assume that it represents 10
percent of total cancer costs. This is potentially problematic, but is necessary as we currently
only have cost of treatment information for a limited number of conditions. Obtaining more
comprehensive data on health care costs should be a priority for future research. Extending the
model to allow examination of the distribution of NCD costs would also be useful.




                                                27
References

Abegunde, D., & Stanciole, A. (2006).An estimation of the economic impact of chronic
       noncommunicable diseases in selected countries. World Health Organization,
       Department of Chronic Diseases and Health Promotion.

Abegunde, D. O., Mathers, C. D., Adam, T., Ortegon, M., & Strong, K. (2007).The burden and
       costs of chronic diseases in low-income and middle-income countries. The Lancet,
       370(9603), 1929-1938.

Aghion P., & Howitt, P. (1992).A model of growth through creative destruction. Econometrica,
       60(2), 323-351.

Baja, V. (2012, July 7). India’s poor to benefit from free drugs; Government to propose
       distribution of generics, a blow to big companies, International Herald Tribune.

Barro, R. J., & Sala-i-martin, X. (1992).Convergence. Journal of Political Economy,100(2),
       223–251.

Becker, G. S., Philipson, T. J., & Soares, R. R. (2005).The quantity and quality of life and the
       evolution of world inequality. The American Economic Review, 95(1), 277-291. doi:
       10.2307/4132680

Bloom, D. E., Canning, D., & Sevilla, J. (2004). The effect of health on economic growth: A
       production function approach. World Development, 32(1), 1-13. doi:
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2003.07.002

Bloom, D. E. & Canning, D. (2008).Population health and economic growth. Background paper
       for the Commission on Growth and Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Bloom, D. E., Canning, D., Hu, L., Liu, Y., Mahal, A., & Yip, W. (2010).The contribution of
       population health and demographic change to economic growth in China and India.
       Journal of Comparative Economics, 38(1), 17-33. doi: 10.1016/j.jce.2009.11.002

Bloom, D. E. (2011a).7 billion and counting. Science, 333(6042), 562-569. doi:
       10.1126/science.1209290



                                                28
Bloom, D. E., Cafiero, E.T., Jané-Llopis, E., Abrahams-Gessel, S., Bloom, L. R., Fathima, S.,
       Feigl, A.B., Gaziano, T., Mowafi, M., Pandya, A., Prettner, K., Rosenberg, L., Seligman,
       B., Stein, A., and Weinstein, C. (2011b).The global economic burden of
       noncommunicable diseases. Geneva: World Economic Forum.

Bloom, D. E., Dan Chisholm, Eva Jané-Llopis, Klaus Prettner, Adam Stein, and Andrea Feigl.
       (2011c). From burden to “Best Buys”: Reducing the economic impact of non-
       communicable diseases in low- and middle-income countries. Geneva: World Economic
       Forum.

Bloom, D.E., Canning, D., & Fink, G. (in press). Disease and Development Revisited .Journal of
       Political Economy.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013, July 9). Smoking and Tobacco Use: Bidis
       and Kreteks. Retrieved from:
       http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/tobacco_industry/bidis_kreteks/

Currie, G., Dymond Kerfoot, K., Donaldson, C., & Macarthur, C. (2000). Are cost of injury
       studies useful? Injury Prevention, 6, 175-176.

Dey, S., Nambiar, D., Lakshmi, J. K., Sheikh, K., & Reddy, K. S. (2012). Health of the Elderly
       in India: Challenges of Access and Affordability. In .P. Smith and M. Majmundar, (Eds.),
       Aging in Asia: Findings from new and emerging data initiatives(pp. 371-386).
       Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

Dudeja V., Misra A., Pandey R.M., Devina G., Kumar G., & Vikram N.K. (2001). BMI does not
       accurately predict overweight in Asians in northern India. British Journal of Nutrition,
       86, 105–12.

Dwyer, D. S., & Mitchell, O. S. (1999). Health problems as determinants of retirement: Are self-
       rated measures endogenous? Journal of Health Economics, 18(2), 173-193. doi:
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0167-6296(98)00034-4




                                               29
Express News Service. (2013, June 1). Karnataka becomes 26th state to ban gutkha, The New
       Indian Express. Retrieved from http://newindianexpress.com/states/karnataka/Karnataka-
       becomes-26th-state-to-ban-gutkha/2013/06/01/article1615107.ece

Evans, J.M., Kiran, P.R., & Bhattacharyya, O.K. (2011).Activating the knowledge-to-action
       cycle for geriatric care in India. Health Res Policy Syst. 9:42. doi: 10.1186/1478-4505-9-
       42.

Ferlay, J., Shin, H.R., Bray, F., Forman, D., Mathers, C, & Parkin, D.M. (2013).
       GLOBOCAN 2008 v2.0, Cancer Incidence and Mortality Worldwide: IARC Cancer Base
       No. 10 [Internet].Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer. Retrieved
       from: http://globocan.iarc.fr, accessed on 2/7/13.

Gao, S., Zheng, R., & Hu, T. (2012). Can increases in the cigarette tax rate be linked to cigarette
       retail prices? Solving mysteries related to the cigarette pricing mechanism in China.
       Tobacco Control, 21, 560-562.

Goel, S., Ravindra, K., Singh, R. J., & Sharma, D. (2013). Effective smoke-free policies in
       achieving a high level of compliance with smoke-free law: Experiences from a district of
       North India. Tobacco Control, 1-4. Retrieved from:
       http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23322311.

Grossman G. M., & Helpman, E. (1991). Quality ladders in the theory of economic growth.
       Review of Economic Studies,58(1), 43-61.

Gu, D., Reynolds, K., Wu, X., Chen, J., Duan, X., Muntner, P., ...& He, J. (2002). Prevalence,
       awareness, treatment, and control of hypertension in China. Hypertension, 40(6), 920-
       927. Retrieved from:
       http://hyper.ahajournals.org/cgi/doi/10.1161/01.HYP.0000040263.94619.D5.

Howitt, P. (1999). Steady endogenous growth with population and R&D inputs growing. Journal
       of Political Economy,107(4), 715-730.

Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. (2013a). Global Burden of Disease Country Profiles:
       China. Retrieved from:



                                                30
       http://www.healthmetricsandevaluation.org/sites/default/files/country-
       profiles/GBD%20Country%20Report%20-%20China.pdf

Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. (2013b). Global Burden of Disease Country
       Profiles: India. Retrieved from:
       http://www.healthmetricsandevaluation.org/sites/default/files/country-
       profiles/GBD%20Country%20Report%20-%20India.pdf

International Institute for Population Sciences. (2005-2006).National Family Health Survey
       (NFHS-3).Retrieved from: http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNADK385.pdf

John, R. M., Rao, R. K., Rao, M.G., Moore, J., Deshpande, R. S., Sengupta, J., ... & Jha, P.
       (2010).The Economics of Tobacco and Tobacco Taxation in India.Retrieved from:
       http://global.tobaccofreekids.org/files/pdfs/en/India_tobacco_taxes_report_en.pdf.

Jones, C. I. (1995). R&D-based models of economic growth. Journal of Political
       Economy,103(4), 759-783.

Jones, C. I. (2002). Sources of U.S. economic growth in a world of ideas. American Economic
       Review, 92(1), 220-239.

Kaldor, N. (1957). A model of economic growth. The Economic Journal,67(268), 591-624.

Kearney, P. M., Whelton, M., Reynolds, K., Muntner, P., Whelton, P. K., & He, J. (2005).Global
       burden of hypertension: Analysis of worldwide data. The Lancet, 365(9455), 217-223.
       doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(05)17741-1.

Keller, W. (2009).International trade, foreign direct investment, and technological spillovers
       (Working Paper No. 15442). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Liu, B. Q., Peto, R., Chen, Z. M., Boreham, J., Wu, Y. P., Li, J. Y., ... & Chen, J. S. (1998).
       Emerging tobacco hazards in China: 1. Retrospective proportional mortality study of one
       million deaths. BMJ: British Medical Journal, 317(7170), 1411.

Lopez-Casasnovas, G., Rivera, B., & Currais, L. (2005).Health and economic growth: findings
       and policy implications. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.



                                                 31
Lozano, R., Naghavi, M., Foreman, K., Lim, S., Shibuya, K., Aboyans, V., ...& Murray, C.J.L.
       (2012). Global and regional mortality from 235 causes of death for 20 age groups in 1990
       and 2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. The
       Lancet, 380(9859), 2095-2128.

Lucas, R. (1988). On the mechanics of economic development. Journal of Monetary
       Economics,22(1), 3-42.

Ma, J., Apelberg, B. J., Avila-Tang, E., Yang, G., Ma, S., Samet, J. M., & Stillman, F. A. (2010).
       Workplace smoking restrictions in China: results from a six county survey. Tobacco
       control, 19(5), 403-409.

Mankiw, N. G., Romer, D., & Weil, D. N. (1992).A contribution to the empirics of economic
       growth. The quarterly journal of economics, 107(2), 407-437.

Marrero, S. L., Bloom, D. E., & Adashi, E. Y. (2012). Noncommunicable diseases: A global
       health crisis in a new world order. The Journal of the American Medical Association,
       307(19), 2037-2038.

McGarry, K. (2004). Health and retirement: Do changes in health affect retirement expectations?
       Journal of Human Resources, 39(3), 624.

McQuinn, K.,& Whelan, K.(2007).Conditional convergence and the dynamics of the capital-
       output ratio. Journal of Economic Growth,12(2), 159-184.

Mendis, S. (2007). The availability and affordability of selected essential medicines for chronic
       diseases in six low- and middle-income countries. Bulletin of the World Health
       Organization,85(4), 279–288. Retrieved from:
       http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/85/4/06-033647.pdf.

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. (2008). Bidi Smoking and Public Health. New Delhi:
       Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India.

Murray, C. J. L., Ezzati, M., Flaxman, A. D., Lim, S., Lozano, R., Michaud, C., …& Lopez, A.
       D. (2012a). GBD 2010: Design, definitions, and metrics. The Lancet, 380(9859), 2063-
       2066. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61899-6


                                                32
Murray, C. J., Vos, T., Lozano, R., Naghavi, M., Flaxman, A. D., Michaud, C., ...& Brooker,
       S.(2012b). Disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) for 291 diseases and injuries in 21
       regions, 1990-2010: A systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010.
       The Lancet, 380(9859), 2197-2223.

National Sample Survey Organisation. (2006). Morbidity, Health Care and the Condition of the
       Aged. National Sample Survey, 60th Round, (Report no. 507 (60/25.0/1).New Delhi:
       Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Government of India.

Parasuraman S., et al. (2005-2006).A Profile of Youth in India. National Family Health Survey
       (NFHS-3). Mumbai:International Institute for Population Sciences.

Parente, S. L., & Prescott, E. C. (1994).Barriers to Technology Adoption and Development.
       Journal of Political Economy,102(2), 298-321.

Peretto, P.F. (1998).Technological change and population growth. Journal of Economic
       Growth,3(4), 283-311.

Popkin, B. M., Horton, S., Kim, S., Mahal, A., & Shuigao, J. (2001). Trends in diet, nutritional
       status, and diet‐related noncommunicable diseases in China and India: The economic
       costs of the nutrition transition. Nutrition Reviews,59(12), 379-390. Retrieved from:
       http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11766908

Press Information Bureau. (2013, July 2). Health Warnings on Tobacco
       Products.[Pictorial/Graphic.ID :95088]. New Delhi: Government of India. Available
       from: http://pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=95088

Rice, D.P. (2000). Cost of illness studies: What is good about them? Injury Prevention, 6, 177-
       179.

Romer, P. (1990).Endogenous technological change. Journal of Political Economy,98(5), 71-
       102.

Salomon, J. A., Wang, H., Freeman, M. K., Vos, T., Flaxman, A. D., Lopez, A. D., & Murray, C.
       J. L. (2012). Healthy life expectancy for 187 countries, 1990-2010: A systematic analysis
       for the Global Burden Disease Study 2010. The Lancet, 380(9859), 2144-2162.


                                                33
Segerstrom, P.M. (1998). Endogenous growth without scale effects. American Economic Review,
       88(5), 1290-1310.

Singha, K. (2012, September 28). Government to bring essential medicines under price control,
       The Times of India.

Solow, R. M. (1956). A contribution to the theory of economic growth. The Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 70(1), 65-94.

Strauss, J., Hong, H., Lei, X., Li, L., Park, A., Yang, L., & Zhao, Y. (2012). Healthcare and
       insurance among the elderly in China: Evidence from the CHARLS pilot. In .P. Smith
       and M. Majmundar, (Eds.), Aging in Asia: Findings from new and emerging data
       initiatives(pp. 342-370). Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

Strulik, H. (2005). The role of human capital and population growth in the theory of economic
       growth. Review of International Economics,13(1), 129-145.

Van Mourik, M. S., Cameron, A., Ewen, M., & Laing, R. O. (2010). Availability, price and
       affordability of cardiovascular medicines: A comparison across 36 countries using
       WHO/HAI data. BMC Cardiovascular disorders, 10(1), 25. Retrieved from:
       http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=2898673&tool=pmcentrez&r
       endertype=abstract.

Viscusi, W. K., & Aldy, J. E. (2003). The value of a statistical life: A critical review of market
       estimates throughout the world. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 27(1), 5-76.

Wan, X., Ma, S., Hoek, J., Yang, J., Wu, l., Zhou, J. & Yang, G. (2012).Conflict of interest and
       FCTC implementation in China. Tobacco Control, 21, 412-5.

Weil, D. (2010). Endemic diseases and African economic growth: Challenges and policy
       responses. Journal of African Economies, 19(AERC Supplement 3), iii81-iii109.doi:
       10.1093/jae/ejq018.

Williams, R.,& Krakauer, R,. (2011).The challenge of non-communicable diseases and geriatric
       conditions.In Global Populatin Ageing: Peril or Promise?Geneva: World Economic
       Forum.


                                                 34
Wolf, C., Dalal, S., DaVanzo, J., Larson, E. V., Akhmedjonov, A., Dogo, H., & Montoya, S.
       (2011). China and India, 2025: A comparative assessment. RAND.

World Health Organization. (2008). The global burden of disease: 2004 update. Geneva: World
       Health Organization.

World Health Organization. (2009). WHO guide to identifying the economic impact of disease
       and injury. Geneva: World Health Organization.

World Health Organization. (2011a). Global status report on alcohol and health 2011.Geneva:
       World Health Organization.

World Health Organization. (2011b). Global status report on noncommunicable diseases 2010.
       Geneva: World Health Organization.

World Health Organization. (2011c). WHO NCD Country Profiles. Geneva: World Health
       Organization.

World Health Organization. (2011d). [Graph illustration of percentage of all NCD deaths
       occurring under the age of 70, 2008].WHO Global Health Observatory. Retrieved from
       http://gamapserver.who.int/gho/interactive_charts/ncd/mortality/premature/atlas.htm

Zhao, Y., Park, A., Strauss, J., Giles, J., Mao, S., Crimmins, E., …& Yin, X., (2013). Challenges
       of population aging in China: Evidence from the national baseline survey of the China
       Health and Retirement Longitudinal Study (CHARLS). Beijing: National School of
       Development, Peking University.




                                               35
Appendix

Tables A-1 and A-2 provide a preliminary alternate scaling of the EPIC Output for 2012-2030
based on the new GBD 2010 data. Country-level data are not yet available,13 so the values for
East Asia and South Asia are used to construct the scaling factors from the output of the EPIC
model to the overall burden of WHO NCD domains. It is apparent from Tables A-1 and A-2 that
the conclusion that NCDs will impose a sizable economic burden on both China and India
remains robust to this change in data source. One potentially notable difference is the larger
burden of cancer for China in this estimate, which likely reflects the fact that breast cancer (the
EPIC measurement that was scaled up) is a smaller proportion of total cancer in East Asia due to
the high prevalence of smoking in comparison to all upper-middle-income countries. A larger
difference worth noting is that the GBD 2010 data yield a substantially lower estimated burden
for mental health, which likely reflects changes in GBD measurement and weighting rather than
changes in the actual burden of mental illness.




13
     Country-level GBD 2010 data will be made available in September 2013


                                                        36
       Table A-1. Scaling of EPIC Output for 2012-2030
            to Match Five WHO NCD Domains for China
                                GBD 2010
                       (trillions of 2010 USD)
                                  EPIC                        Scaled
  WHO                             Raw      Disease Scaling     Raw
  Disease       EPIC Disease     Output        Factor         Output
 Diabetes         Diabetes         0.49     Diabetes/1.00      0.49
  Heart                                    (IHD+CBD)/0.82      7.63
  disease
               Ischemic Heart      1.63
                  Disease
               Cerebrovascular     4.66
                  Disease
Respiratory        COPD            4.03      COPD/0.84         4.81
  disease
  Cancer                                       Breast          5.51
                                            cancer/0.034
                Breast cancer      0.19
   Total                                                      18.43
 physical
  Mental                                   Total physical *    4.49
  health                                         0.24
  Overall                                                     22.92
   total




                                   37
       Table A-2. Scaling of EPIC Output for 2012-2030
            to Match Five WHO NCD Domains for India
                                GBD 2010
                       (trillions of 2010 USD)
                                  EPIC                        Scaled
  WHO                             Raw      Disease Scaling     Raw
  Disease      EPIC Disease      Output        Factor         Output
 Diabetes         Diabetes         0.15     Diabetes/1.00      0.15
  Heart                                    (IHD+CBD)/0.77      2.22
  disease
               Ischemic Heart      1.21
                  Disease
               Cerebrovascular     0.49
                  Disease
Respiratory        COPD            0.71      COPD/0.70         1.01
  disease
  Cancer                                       Breast          0.25
                                             cancer/0.08
                Breast cancer      0.02
   Total                                                       3.62
 physical
  Mental                                   Total physical *    1.15
  health                                         0.32
  Overall                                                      4.77
   total




                                   38
