NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CARBON TAXES VS. CAP AND TRADE:
A CRITICAL REVIEW
Lawrence H. Goulder
Andrew Schein
Working Paper 19338
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19338
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

We are grateful to Terry Dinan, Dennis Ellerman, David Harrison, Ken Judd, Suzi Kerr, Charles McLure,
Gib Metcalf, Richard Newell, Paul Schwartz, Robert Stavins, Jon Strand, and Michael Wara for helpful
suggestions and to Anuradha Sivaram and Xiaoling Zhou for research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Lawrence H. Goulder and Andrew Schein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Carbon Taxes vs. Cap and Trade: A Critical Review
Lawrence H. Goulder and Andrew Schein
NBER Working Paper No. 19338
August 2013
JEL No. H23,Q50,Q54
ABSTRACT
We examine the relative attractions of a carbon tax, a “pure” cap-and-trade system, and a “hybrid”
option (a cap-and-trade system with a price ceiling and/or price floor). We show that the various options
are equivalent along more dimensions than often are recognized. In addition, we bring out important
dimensions along which the approaches have very different impacts. Several of these dimensions
have received little attention in prior literature.
A key finding is that exogenous emissions pricing (whether through a carbon tax or through the hybrid
option) has a number of attractions over pure cap and trade. Beyond helping prevent price volatility
and reducing expected policy errors in the face of uncertainties, exogenous pricing helps avoid problematic
interactions with other climate policies and helps avoid large wealth transfers to oil exporting countries.
Lawrence H. Goulder
Department of Economics
Landau Economics Building 328
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
goulder@stanford.edu
Andrew Schein
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
andrew.schein@gmail.com

1. Introduction

In response to mounting scientific evidence that human activities are contributing
significantly to global climate change 1, decision makers are devoting considerable attention
to public policies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and thereby prevent or reduce such
change. In the U.S., there currently is little action on climate change policy at the
Congressional level, but such policy is being actively conducted by the Executive Branch –
by the U.S Environmental Protection Agency under the auspices of the Clean Air Act. 2 In
addition, climate change policy is being pursued through various initiatives by several U.S.
states. In other countries, significant efforts include the national cap-and-trade systems of
Australia and New Zealand, carbon tax programs in various European and Scandinavian
countries, a carbon tax introduced in the Canadian province of British Columbia, the capand-trade program to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by the nations involved in the
European Union’s Emissions Trading Scheme, a pilot cap-and-trade scheme in seven cities in
China, and a range of efforts undertaken by nations that have signed on to the Kyoto
Protocol.
The policies span a range of regulatory approaches, including technology mandates,
performance standards, and emissions pricing. A main theoretical attraction of emissions
pricing – which includes carbon taxes and “cap and trade” (a system of tradable emissions
allowances) – is its potential to achieve emissions reductions at lower cost than is possible
under direct regulations such as mandated technologies or performance standards.
While there is wide agreement among economists as to the potential advantages of
emissions pricing, there is much debate as to which particular form – carbon taxes or cap and
1

For a compilation of current scientific evidence, see Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007).

2

EPA action is called for as a result of the 2006 U.S. Supreme Court decision in Massachusetts v. EPA, the
Obama administration’s subsequent “endangerment finding” that carbon dioxide (and other greenhouse gases)
endanger public health and welfare, and the consequent designation in 2010 of carbon dioxide as a pollutant for
regulatory purposes under the Clean Air Act both for stationary and mobile sources.

trade – is the better climate policy option. Academic researchers offer varying perspectives.
For example, Keohane (2009) and Stavins (2007) favor cap and trade, while Metcalf (2007)
and the “Pigou Club” formed by Harvard’s Greg Mankiw 3 prefer a carbon tax.
Disagreements as to the relative merits of the two options can hamper efforts to introduce
any form of greenhouse gas emissions pricing in the U.S.
Until recently, cap and trade commanded most of the attention in policy circles. But
interest in the carbon tax seems to be on the rise, in the U.S at least. Many U.S. policy
makers, discouraged with the inability to pass federal cap-and-trade legislation, are now
setting their sights on the carbon tax. In addition, decision makers are attracted to the
possibility of introducing a carbon tax as part of broader tax reform or as a source of new
revenue to reduce budget deficits. 4
This paper takes stock of the relative attractions and disadvantages of these policy
alternatives. It reviews and interprets previous findings and offers some new insights as well.
Several analyses have claimed that a carbon tax is superior to cap and trade in terms of the
ability to achieve a fair distribution of the policy burden between polluters (firms) and
consumers, to preserve international competitiveness, or to avoid problems associated with
the verification of “emissions offsets.” This paper indicates that these arguments are
unfounded: that if properly designed, the two approaches have equivalent potential along
each of these dimensions. 5 The performance of the two approaches depends critically on
specifics of design. Indeed, the design of the instrument may be as important as the choice
between the two instruments.
Along other dimensions, however, the alternatives have different impacts. Cap and
trade has advantages along some dimensions, carbon taxes along others. Yet despite the
many dimensions involved and variety of impacts, some general findings emerge. One is
that policies that specify emissions prices exogenously have several attractions relative to
policies that do not. Emissions prices are exogenous under the carbon tax: the specified
carbon tax rate is the emissions price. A hybrid system – that is, a cap-and-trade system that
3

The Pigou Club is named after the renowned early 20th century tax and welfare economist Alfred Pigou. It
includes a large number of eminent economists, including three Nobel prize winners. See
http://gregmankiw.blogspot.com/2006/09/rogoff-joins-pigou-club.html.
4

For example, see Morris (2011) and Resources for the Future (2011).

5

Weisbach’s (2009) analysis yields similar conclusions.

2

establishes a ceiling and/or floor price – also has exogenous prices when the floor or ceiling
price is in effect. Exogenously specified prices confer several attractions. One is that they
prevent emissions price volatility. Another is that they are likely to minimize expected
policy errors in the face of uncertainties about benefits and costs. These attractions have
already gained some recognition. Two additional and important attractions – which have
received relatively little attention – are that exogenous prices help avoid problematic
interactions with other climate policies, and avoid large wealth transfers to oil exporting
countries. We consider these and other important dimensions below.
An alternative to both the carbon tax and the pure form of cap and trade is a hybrid
policy – a cap-and-trade program accompanied by a price floor, price ceiling, or both. We
show that most of the attractions of pure cap and trade are also enjoyed in large part by the
hybrid and that, given the hybrid’s additional attractions, it is easier to make the case for the
hybrid than for pure cap and trade. Many of the hybrid’s attractions stem from the
exogeneity of allowance prices that arises when its price ceiling or floor is engaged.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The next section presents dimensions
along which carbon taxes and cap-and-trade systems, if well designed, are equivalent.
Section 3 concentrates on dimensions along which the two options perform differently. The
final section integrates the information from the previous two sections to arrive at an overall
assessment of the relative attractions of the different policy instruments.

2. Dimensions along Which the Options Are Equivalent (Despite
Suggestions to the Contrary)
By establishing a price for emissions of carbon dioxide, carbon taxes and cap-andtrade systems (as well as the hybrid) encourage firms to alter their production processes so as
to reduce emissions per unit of output. 6 These policies also affect consumers’ decisions by

6

Emissions pricing programs such as a carbon tax or cap and trade can be applied not only to CO2 but also to
other greenhouse gases such as methane, nitrous oxide, fluorinated gases and sulfur hexafluoride. Here we
focus on policies that impose prices only on CO2 emissions. The conclusions drawn tend to apply equally to
policies that price the other greenhouse gases.

3

causing the prices of carbon-intensive goods (for example, electricity, aluminum, and
gasoline) to rise relative to those of other goods. They thereby encourage shifts in
consumption patterns toward less carbon-intensive goods, which implies lower output by
carbon-intensive industries and further emissions reductions.
The different instruments establish the prices in different ways, however. Under a
carbon tax, the price of carbon (or of CO2 emissions) is set directly by the regulatory
authority – this is the tax rate. In contrast, under a (pure) cap-and-trade system, the price of
carbon or CO2 emissions is established indirectly: the regulatory authority stipulates the
allowable overall quantity of emissions; this then yields a price of carbon or CO2 emissions
through the market for allowances. The provision for allowance trading is a critical element
of cap and trade, as it promotes the emergence of a single market price for emissions faced
by all market participants at any given time.
Thus, under both the carbon tax and cap and trade, the covered firms – those that are
subject to the carbon tax or that are required to submit emissions allowances – face the same
price of emissions. If covered firms are cost-minimizing, they will reduce emissions up to
the point where, at the margin, the cost of emissions abatement equals the common emissions
price. The two policies thus tend to bring about equality of marginal abatement costs across
emitters, a condition for cost-minimization. The ability to bring marginal abatement costs to
equality is the central advantage of the two market-based approaches over direct regulations
such as mandated technologies or plant- or firm-level emissions quotas. In general,
regulators do not have sufficient information about individual firms’ marginal abatement cost
schedules to specify a set of emissions quotas or technologies that lead to equality of
marginal abatement costs. 7
7

Prior studies indicate that under direct regulation, marginal abatement cost can differ substantially, so that
market approaches can have a large cost advantage. The South Coast Air Quality Management District
estimated, for example, that the RECLAIM cap-and-trade program in Los Angeles would reduce costs by 46
percent relative to the costs of achieving the same aggregate reductions under the prior air quality management
program, which involved fixed emissions caps (no trades). Carlson et al. (Carlson, et al., 2000) estimated that
the sulfur dioxide allowance trading under Title IV of the Clean Air Act offered potential cost savings of $700$800 million per year compared to an “enlightened” command-and-control program characterized by a uniform
emissions rate standard. A review by Chan et al. (2012) of various analyses indicates that sulfur dioxide
allowance trading under the Clean Air Act yielded cost savings in the range of 15 to 90 percent relative to the
costs under various conventional forms of regulation. Still, direct regulation sometimes can have advantages.
In situations where emissions are difficult to monitor, for example, it may be less costly to control emissions by
requiring the installation of a particular type of equipment and monitoring its use than by aiming to monitor
emissions directly.

4

Although they have much in common, carbon taxes and cap and trade differ in
important ways. Yet several of the perceived differences are not real. Here we point out four
dimensions along which, contrary to frequently made claims, the two approaches are
equivalent.

a. Incentives to Reduce Emissions: Carbon Taxes versus Freely Allocated Allowances

Under cap and trade, the allowances can be introduced into the system either by
auction or through free allocation. A concern sometimes leveled against cap and trade is that
free allocation eliminates the recipient’s incentive to reduce emissions. But theory suggests
otherwise. Even when allowances are received for free, each additional unit of emissions
carries an opportunity cost: one more unit of pollution either reduces the number of
allowances the covered firm can sell, or it raises the number of allowances the firm must
purchase to remain in compliance. The carbon tax and cap and trade thus offer equivalent
incentives to reduce emissions, regardless of whether the allowances are introduced through
auction or free provision. Table 1 records this conclusion.

b. Flexibility in Compensating for Uneven Distributional Impacts

The distribution of the regulatory burden is obviously an important policy
consideration, for reasons of fairness and political feasibility. Emissions pricing can lead to
a very uneven distribution of costs across producing sectors, or between producers and
consumers. Some analysts have suggested that the ability to allocate allowances for free is an
especially useful device for achieving desired distributional outcomes (or avoiding
undesirable ones), and that a carbon tax has no comparable feature. Since allowances are
valuable, free allocation can indeed alter the distributional impact. However, in principle any
distributional outcome under cap and trade can be matched via a carbon tax. As we show
below, the same redistribution brought about through free allocation of allowances can be
produced through the granting of partial or full exemptions to the carbon tax.
Figure 1 illustrates the idea. The figure indicates the impacts of the two forms of
emissions pricing on producer surplus for a polluting industry in a setting of pure

5

competition. In the absence of emissions pricing, the output price and quantity produced are
p0 and Q0, respectively. Consider first the impacts of a cap-and-trade program covering this
industry. Firms in this industry will incur costs of c per unit of output from induced
changes in their input mix and/or adoption of end-of-pipe treatment. The cost per unit of
remaining emissions—the allowance price multiplied by emissions per unit of output—is r.
Thus, the policy drives a wedge of c+r between the resulting consumer price p1C and
producer price p1P, and reduces output to Q1.
The distribution of the burden between firms and the taxpaying public depends on
how the allowances are introduced. If they are introduced through a competitive auction, the
policy will generate no rents: rents are bid away through competitive bidding for allowances.
In this case, the loss of producer surplus is trapezoid fgih, while the loss of consumer surplus
is abgf. The rectangular area abed represents the revenue that the government would receive
from the allowance auction. This revenue benefits the general public, since it can be used
either to finance cuts in other taxes or to pay for additional public goods and services.
The impacts of cap and trade differ when the allowances are introduced via free
provision. In this case, the rectangle abed represents rents to producers rather than revenues
to the government. Freely allocated allowances mitigate the burden of reducing emissions. 8
Now consider the impacts of a carbon tax of equivalent stringency, that is, a carbon
tax at a rate equal to the market price of allowances under the cap-and-trade program. This
tax’s impact on producer and consumer surplus is identical to those in the case of cap and
trade with auctioning: again firms pay the price of emissions (the carbon tax rate in this
case) for every unit of pollution generated (or carbon supplied), and the loss of producer
surplus given by the trapezoid fgih.
8

Studies of NOx allowance trading under the U.S. Clean Air Act (Bovenberg et al. (2005)) and of potential
carbon dioxide allowance trading in the United States (Bovenberg and Goulder (2001), Smith et al. (2002), and
Goulder, Hafstead, and Dworsky (2010)), suggest that the rents from 100 percent free allocation would
substantially overcompensate firms for the costs they would otherwise face under these programs. In fact, these
studies show that a fairly small share of the allowances – generally less than 30 percent – need to be freely
allocated in order to provide sufficient rents to prevent an overall decline in firm equity values. In the first
phase of the European Union’s emissions trading scheme (EU ETS), over 95 percent of the allowances were
given away for free. In keeping with the analysis above, this generated windfall profits to many of the regulated
firms. Partly in reaction to this result, there has been a distinct shift towards greater emphasis on the auctioning
of allowances in the recently established Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative in the northeast U.S. and in
various climate bills recently introduced in the U.S. Congress. It should be noted, however, that both cases
involve relatively modest emission reductions. Phase III of the EU ETS will allocate a much greater percentage
of allowances through auctioning (Harrison et al. 2011).

6

A point less recognized is that the carbon tax can also mimic the outcome when the
cap-and-trade program involves free allocation of allowances. This is a carbon tax system
that grants a tradable tax exemption for a certain amount of emissions – that is, the tax
applies only to emissions in excess of a certain quantity. 9 For a given emitting firm, this
carbon tax policy has an impact identical to a cap-and-trade system in which the firm is
freely granted emissions allowances authorizing emissions of that same quantity.
Thus we conclude that there is no inherent difference in distributional impacts of the
two approaches. We indicate that conclusion in Table 1. Still, carbon taxes are generally
perceived to be more burdensome to firms. Most likely this is because there has been little
consideration of the possibility of using tax exemptions under a carbon tax policy to cushion
or eliminate adverse profit impacts.
It is worth noting that both cap and trade and the carbon tax can address distributional
issues through another channel – the recycling of policy-generated revenues. Revenues from
auctioned allowances or from the carbon tax can be used to finance tax cuts or lump-sum
transfers to firms or households that otherwise would suffer disproportional losses from
emissions pricing. 10

c. Safeguarding International Competitiveness

A region or nation that moves ahead of its neighbors on climate policy can potentially
put its own carbon-intensive firms at a disadvantage. This is a major policy concern.
California policy makers continue to contemplate how the state’s climate policies will affect
the ability of in-state firms to maintain market share with competitors elsewhere. Likewise,
decision makers at the federal level in the U.S. are concerned with the impact of a national
9

This would allow entities that receive more exemptions than they wish to use to sell the exemptions to other
entities, whose allowable emissions would be expanded according to the number of exemptions purchased.

10

Work by Dinan and Rogers (2002), Parry (2004), and Metcalf (2007) indicates that a U.S. cap-and-trade
system with freely allocated allowances would impose a disproportionately large economic burden on lowincome individuals. For this reason a number of citizens’ groups prefer cap and trade with auctioning (which
allows for revenue-recycling) to cap and trade with free allocation. Hoerner and Robinson (2008) endorse a
“cap and dividend” policy involving auctioned allowances, with all auction revenues recycled to households on
a per capita basis, and a “climate asset plan,” in which revenues are targeted for relief to low and moderate
income households, the financing of investments in energy efficiency and renewable energy, and other tax
reductions.

7

policy on the international competitiveness of U.S. firms. Border adjustments can offset
potential adverse impacts on international competitiveness. Such adjustments would serve to
offset the price advantage that goods imported to the U.S. might otherwise enjoy, or the price
handicap that U.S. exports might otherwise suffer. Border adjustments can include taxes or
allowance requirements applied to imports of fuels and carbon-intensive products, and
exemptions for exported fuels or goods. 11
Border adjustments pose huge implementation challenges. No regulator will have
sufficient information to identify the border tax or allowance requirements that would
perfectly prevent any tilting of the playing field. And border adjustments can easily become
administratively very complex.12
Does one policy have an advantage over the other in terms of either the need for
border adjustments, or the ease of introducing such adjustments, assuming they are needed?
It has been argued that a cap-and-trade system can be introduced downstream, and that this
implies less need for border adjustments. A downstream cap-and-trade system is one in
which the points of regulation (the entities that must submit carbon allowances) are at the
point of combustion. Under such a system, domestic producers of fuel would not be at a
competitive disadvantage relative to foreign suppliers of fuels. The allowance price would
lead to reductions in demand for both the domestic and foreign fuels earlier in the supply
11

The instrument chosen for the border adjustment need not match the instrument applied to domestic firms.
That is, one could accompany a domestic carbon tax with either a tax on carbon-intensive imports or limits on
the quantities of such imports, based on their carbon content. Similarly, if an upstream cap-and-trade system
were introduced, one could address imports either by including imported carbon within the system (that is,
requiring importers to submit allowances in keeping with the carbon content of the imports) or by taxing
imports.
12
Consider in particular the difficulties of determining the needed border adjustments related to U.S. imports.
To prevent any adverse competitiveness effect, border adjustments would need to undo the price advantages
that imported goods would otherwise enjoy as a result of a domestic climate policy. It is impossible to
eliminate this advantage perfectly. Nations that export goods to the U.S. differ dramatically in the stringency of
their climate policies. Moreover, the technologies employed to produce goods for export to the U.S. differ
across countries and differ from U.S. production methods. To discern the price advantage, one would need to
know the production technologies employed at each stage of production, since these technologies affect the
ultimate direct and indirect carbon associated with production. No U.S. regulator will have the information to
determine the necessary adjustment applicable to each good arriving at the U.S. border. Moreover, beyond the
information problem, any “perfect” border adjustments would be extremely complex, distinguishing imports by
type of good and country of origin. Recognizing these administrative constraints, proposed policies have
involved far simpler border adjustment schemes that involve imposing border taxes or applying emissions
allowances only for imported fossil fuels and, in some cases, for some refined fuels and highly carbon-intensive
products like steel and aluminum

8

chain. In contrast, under an upstream systems (where the entities that must submit
allowances are at or nearer to the point of supply of carbon-based fuels), domestic producers
would face a disadvantage since (absent border adjustments) purchases of imported fuels
would not carry an obligation to purchase emissions allowances associated with the carbon
content of those fuels. In the absence of border adjustments, an upstream system would
likely cause users of carbon-based fuels to shift their demands toward imports. This would
imply emissions leakage: higher CO2 emissions from the increased imports would offset the
reduced domestic emissions. 13 Preserving environmental effectiveness and international
competitiveness would require border adjustments.
The argument that a downstream system reduces the need for border adjustments is
valid. However, the potential for downstream implementation is not exclusively enjoyed by
cap and trade: a carbon tax system can also be introduced downstream. Although
downstream implementation might have some attractions in terms of reducing the need for
border adjustments, it does not favor cap and trade over a carbon tax.
A further tool to safeguard international competitiveness is the use of output-based
updating, a particular form of allowance allocation in cap-and-trade systems. The potential
success of output-based updating has been viewed as a distinct attraction of cap and trade.
Output-based updating is equivalent to the combination of an emissions tax and subsidy to
the recipient firm’s production or output. This combination can avoid an adverse
competitiveness impact, since the subsidy helps reduce or avoid the emission pricing
system’s impact on firms’ output prices. At the same time, it preserves firms’ incentives to
reduce emissions per unit output, since the marginal cost of emitting continues to be the
allowance price. However, as shown by Fowlie (2012), output-based updating can reduce
the cost-effectiveness of a cap-and-trade program because it effectively mandates additional
emissions reductions by sources deemed ineligible for the extra allowances. (Put differently,
updating may lead to inequality of marginal abatement costs across emitters.)
Output-based updating is a feature of California’s AB 32 and was an important
component of the American Clean Energy and Security Act, which was passed by the U.S.

13

See Bushnell and Mansur (2011) for further discussion of the interaction between leakage and the
upstream/downstream issue.

9

House of Representatives in 2009. 14 In both of these efforts, firms in industries deemed
especially carbon-intensive and trade-exposed enjoyed output-based allocations of
allowances.
Output-based updating has some significant attractions. 15 However, it does not imply
an advantage of cap and trade over a carbon tax. Although seldom recognized, a carbon tax
could similarly protect domestic firms in industries that are especially carbon-intensive and
trade-exposed. It could do this by conferring to these firms tradable exemptions for a certain
amount of emissions, with the scale of the exemptions to a firm based on the firm’s level of
output. This is functionally identical to output-based updating under cap and trade.
Based on these considerations, we find that a carbon tax and cap and trade have
similar options for addressing international competitiveness, and that the ease of
implementing those options is similar under both types of policies. This conclusion is
recorded in Table 1.

d. The Connection with Offsets

An offset is a credit for emissions reductions achieved by an entity in a sector that is
not covered by a given cap-and-trade system. By encouraging emissions reductions in areas
or sectors outside the cap-and-trade program, offsets broaden the reach of the program and
help promote the achievement of overall emissions-reduction goals at lower cost.
Many policy analysts are critical of offsets because of the problem of “additionality:”
it is difficult to discern whether a credited reduction truly constitutes a reduction relative to
what would have been the case under business as usual, that is, relative to what would have
occurred if provisions for offsets had not been in place. 16
Some analysts claim that cap and trade is a faulty system because of the potential
difficulties with offsets. 17 However, these difficulties do not constitute a weakness of cap
and trade relative to the carbon tax alternative. Offsets are not an inherent feature of cap and
14

The ACES Act never came up for a vote in the U.S. Senate and thus never became law.

15

See Fischer and Fox (2007) for conditions under which output-based updating is an efficient policy tool.

16

For example, see Wara and Victor (2008).

17

For example, see Hansen (2009).

10

trade: one can include or exclude offsets from cap-and-trade systems. 18 Moreover, just as
with cap and trade, it is possible to include or exclude offsets as part of a carbon tax
program. 19 Thus, as acknowledged in Table 1, considerations relating to offsets have no
bearing on the choice between cap and trade and the carbon tax.

3. Where the Choice between the Instruments Makes a Difference
We now consider dimensions along which the carbon tax and cap and trade (and the
hybrid) produce different outcomes, even when comparably designed. We contrast the
approaches according to their ability to: minimize administrative costs, address uncertainties
about damages from emissions and costs of emissions abatement, control volatility of
emissions prices, avoid “emissions leakage,” avoid large international wealth transfers,
achieve budget discipline, achieve useful linkages across jurisdictions, achieve broad sector
coverage (and related cost-effectiveness), and gain political support.

a. Administrative Ease

The costs of administering an emissions pricing policy depend on the number of
sources that must be evaluated and monitored. Some analysts have criticized the cap and
trade system as being far more costly to administer than a carbon tax. But several of these
claims stem from the assumption that a carbon tax would be introduced “upstream” (at our
near the point where carbon first enters the economy) while the cap-and-trade program would
be applied further downstream (at or near the ultimate point of combustion of the carbonbased fuels). 20 As indicated in Table 2, an upstream program involves far fewer covered
entities. The table, adapted from Cambridge Energy Research Associates (2006) and Stavins

18

For example, South Korea’s proposed cap-and-trade program bans the use of international offsets, while New
Zealand’s cap-and-trade program allows unlimited use of offsets.
19

For example, Australia’s emissions pricing program allows the use of some offsets even during its “fixed
price period” from 2012 to 2014 (during which the program is essentially a carbon tax).
20

For example, Sachs (2009).

11

(2007), indicates that an upstream system might involve some 2000 energy supply companies
as points of regulation. In contrast, a fully downstream system – one that considered only the
ultimate emitters of CO2 – would involve millions of points of regulation since it would need
to include furnaces and automobile emissions of every household. Thus, the administrative
costs associated with monitoring emissions can be considerably lower under an upstream
system. 21 However, both a carbon tax and a cap-and-trade program can be implemented
upstream or further downstream. 22, 23 Hence this particular claim as to the greater
administrative ease of a carbon tax is not valid.
Still, the overall costs of administration might be somewhat higher under cap and
trade. The reason is that cap and trade imposes an additional administrative responsibility:
the regulator must not only monitor emissions but also establish a registry for allowances and
keep track of allowance trades and the associated changes in ownership of allowances. Table
3 records the idea that cap and trade might involve higher costs of administration.

b. Volatility of Emissions Prices

Emissions price volatility is not a problem for a carbon tax. Under that policy, the
emissions price is the tax rate, and presumably the time-profile of tax rates imposed by policy
21

Bushnell and Mansur (2011) note that the upstream-downstream question is related to the issue of leakage,
where emissions pricing policy (either carbon tax or cap and trade) causes an increase in emissions elsewhere,
such as by foreign firms. In measuring cost-effectiveness of a downstream vs. upstream system, it is thus not
only the number of covered sources that matters but also the extent to which the point of regulation influences
leakage.
22

For non-CO2 greenhouse gases, downstream approaches mainly apply, since for these gases there is no simple
proportionality between the chemical composition of the fuel and ultimate emissions. For these gases the ratio
of emissions per unit of fuel depends on the production process involved. Metcalf and Weisbach (2008) discuss
potential methods for incorporating some of these other gases in a U.S. carbon tax system.
23

Given that administrative costs are smallest under an upstream approach, one might expect wide support for
such an approach, regardless of whether the policy involved is a carbon tax or cap and trade. This is not the
case. Many proponents of cap and trade favor the (practical) downstream approach, claiming that it produces
greater incentives by downstream entities to reduce emissions. However, an upstream approach still generates
incentives for emissions reductions downstream, as upstream producers pass through the policy-induced
increases in cost. Some interested parties are skeptical as to whether this would yield comparable reductions,
however. To illustrate: in 2006 the California EPA set up a 14-member Market Advisory Committee of outside
experts to arrive at recommendations for the design of a cap-and-trade system for the state. Most members of
the Committee favored the downstream approach, claiming that it would make the constraints on emissions and
consequently lead to more effective emissions-reductions that would compensate for potentially higher
administrative costs. All of the economists on the committee, however, favored an upstream approach.

12

makers involves relatively smooth changes rather than sudden jumps or ups and downs. But
volatility is an issue for a cap-and-trade system, where the emissions price is the allowance
price. Under cap and trade, the supply of allowances is perfectly inelastic. Hence shifts in
demand can cause significant price changes – and irregular shifts in demand can produce
price volatility. Nordhaus (2007) notes that demand for allowances is also likely to be highly
inelastic in the short run, leading to even greater potential for high price volatility. He argues
that allowance trading programs’ price volatility represents a reason to favor carbon taxes
over cap and trade. 24
Some existing cap-and-trade systems have in fact displayed considerable allowance
price volatility. The energy supply crisis in California in the summer of 2000 gave power
companies incentives to bring online some older power generators in the Los Angeles region.
This led to a significant increase in the demand for NOx emissions allowances under the
Regional Clean Air Incentives Market (RECLAIM) program, since allowances were needed
to validate the emissions produced by these generators. As a consequence, NOx allowance
prices rose from about $400 per ton to an average in the year 2000 of over $40,000 per ton
(with the average allowance price reaching $70,000 in the peak month of 2000) (Ellerman
(2008)).
Prices were volatile as well in the first phase of cap and trade under the European
Union’s Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS). About a year after its implementation,
emissions allowance prices dropped dramatically with the release of information that
indicated that the ETS Phase I permit allocations were very generous in the sense that they
did not much constrain the covered sources. The December 2008 futures prices fell from
€32.25 to €17.80 between April 19 and May 12, 2006. There was even greater volatility for
the Phase I permit prices contained in December 2007 contracts. These prices dropped from
€31.65 on April 19, 2006 to €11.95 on May 3, 2006. In the year 2008, the December 2009
futures prices ranged from €13 per ton (January) to €30 per ton (June).
Phase II of the ETS began in 2008, and while price instability has still been a
problem, the swings have been less frequent and intense, including a stretch of almost two
24

A few analysts have suggested that the endogeneity of emissions prices under cap and trade may have a
virtue: namely the ability to respond positively to business-cycle changes. In particular, during economic
downturns, the demand for allowances may fall. The associated decline in allowance prices could ease the
burden on producers during these more difficult economic periods.

13

years (roughly mid-2009 to mid-2011) with very stable prices hovering between about €15
and €20. Since then, a surplus of permits equivalent to 1.5 billion to 2 billion tons of carbon
has led to steady drop in prices, falling as low as €5 a tonne in early 2013 (The Economist,
April 20th, 2013).
One way to reduce potential price volatility is to allow for intertemporal banking and
borrowing of allowances. With intertemporal borrowing, firms can apply toward present
emissions the allowances allocated to them for future time periods. Similarly, with
intertemporal banking, firms can apply to future periods the allowances they do not use in the
current period. Such intertemporal flexibility makes the current supply of allowances more
elastic and thereby can damp price volatility.
Stavins (2007) and Ellerman et al. (2003) point out that much of the allowance price
volatility experienced by RECLAIM was due to the absence of provisions for banking. And
volatility in allowance prices for Phase I of the EU ETS has been attributed in part to the fact
that the program prevented banking of allowances from the first phase to the second (Market
Advisory Committee, (2007)). Nearly unlimited banking in the SO2 Trading Program is
generally agreed to have been a successful design feature of that program, as it mitigated
issues of price volatility and led firms to achieve SO2 reductions faster than they would have
without banking (Ellerman and Buchner (2008)).
Still, allowing intertermporal banking is not a panacea. Nordhaus (2007) finds that
SO2 allowance prices between 1995 and 2006 were about as volatile as oil prices and more
volatile than prices of stocks, other assets such as houses, and most consumer goods. SO2
allowance prices were particularly volatile in the late-2000s, as a series of court and
regulatory decisions changed expectations about the future stringency of the cap (Palmer and
Evans (2009), Bravender (2009)).
Another way to address volatility is to incorporate within a cap-and-trade system an
allowance price floor, allowance price ceiling, or both. 25 The “hybrid” referred to above is a
cap-and-trade system with one or both of these features. The hybrid was a feature of several

25

For a detailed discussion, see Pizer (2002), Jacoby and Ellerman (2004), Burtraw and Palmer (2006), and
Wood and Jotzo (2011).

14

significant climate policy bills introduced in the 110th Congress. 26 Many economists endorse
the hybrid approach, believing that it reduces potential price volatility while retaining several
attractions (discussed below) that are not enjoyed by pure cap and trade. Table 3 records as
an attraction of the hybrid its ability to reduce potential price volatility.
To impose a ceiling on allowance prices, the regulator may (1) introduce into
circulation additional allowances whenever the stipulated ceiling price is reached so as to
prevent allowance prices from rising further, or (2) allow firms to pay a set fee to emit
instead of submitting allowances, if allowance prices reach a threshold (usually set at the
same price as the fee itself). 27 To enforce a price floor, the regulator may 1) buy up (remove
from circulation) allowances whenever the floor price is reached, thereby preventing prices
from falling further, 28 or 2) set a fee that purchasers must pay in addition to the allowance
price when allowance prices drop below the stipulated floor level. 29 Various cap-and-trade
programs, such as the one recently set up in California, use an auction reserve price. 30
Burtraw, Palmer and Kahn (2006) assert that having both a floor and ceiling is
superior to a ceiling alone. Their numerical simulations suggest that the implementation of a
price ceiling without a corresponding price floor will have the unintended consequence of
lowering the expected allowance price and the overall expected return on low-emissions
26

Senate Bill 1766, sponsored by Jeff Bingaman (D-NM) and Arlen Specter (R-PA), and Senate Bill 2191,
sponsored by Joseph Lieberman (I-CT) and John Warner (R-VA) – contained a price ceiling. The Carbon
Limits and Energy for America’s Renewal, or CLEAR, Act of 2009 (S. 2877), had both a price ceiling and
floor. The American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009 (H.R. 2454), the Clean Energy Jobs and American
Power Act (S. 1733), and the American Power Act of 2010 (APA) would have established a price floor by
withholding allowances from auction if their price fell below a given amount.
27

RECLAIM regulators improvised a set-fee “price ceiling” in the California energy crisis in the summer of
2001.
28
Many analysts, including EU climate commissioner Connie Hedegaard, regard the EU ETS permit prices as
problematically low (Carrington, 2013). The EU ETS has temporarily dealt with this issue by issuing plans to
delay the release of permits for 900m tonnes of carbon (Carrington, 2013), a step akin to removing permits from
circulation. European Parliament members are still in the process of discussing longer-term structural reforms,
including the possible inclusion of a permanent price floor (The Economist, April 20th, 2013).
29

Wood and Jotzo (2011) note that the fee-based approach to enforcing a price floor might be viewed more
favorably by those concerned about “budget discipline,” since this approach yields government revenue while
buying up allowances requires government outlays.
30

Auction reserve prices set initial price floors. Subsequent trading may lead to allowance prices below the
auction reserve price. California’s auction reserve price was $10 in the first auction (November 2012) and is
stipulated to rise each year by the rate of inflation plus five percent (for 2013, the auction reserve price is
$10.71).

15

technology. This is true whether or not the price ceiling is binding. In the absence of a price
ceiling, investors take risks on low-carbon investments given expectations over a distribution
of potential payoffs for their investment. A price ceiling truncates that distribution, limiting
the upside of low-emissions investments. A price floor makes the truncation two-sided,
limiting the downside of these same investments. 31

c. Addressing Uncertainty

As discussed above, a carbon tax and a cap-and-trade program address uncertainty
differently. The carbon tax stipulates the price of emissions, while leaving uncertain the
aggregate emissions level. Cap and trade stipulates aggregate emissions, leaving the price
uncertain.
For some environmental groups, the fact that a carbon tax does not guarantee that
emissions will be kept within a given limit is a crucial liability. Under a carbon tax it
remains possible that emissions will significantly exceed the levels these groups prefer. At
the same time, some business groups abhor the fact that cap and trade leaves prices uncertain.
They emphasize that uncertainty about emissions prices (under cap and trade) constrains the
business community’s ability to respond to climate policy: changing the input mix (for,
example, engaging in fuel substitution) and investing in research toward new technologies is
more risky when future allowance prices are uncertain.
At least two arguments underlie environmental groups’ opposition to emissions
uncertainty and their support of fixed quantity limits under cap and trade. One is that
specifying a given quantity limit on emissions is consistent with the intent of many types of
climate legislation, which stipulate given emissions targets. Imposing cap and trade (with no
price ceiling) helps assure adherence to this goal. California’s Global Climate Solutions Act
of 2006 (AB 32) commits the state to reducing greenhouse gases to 1990 levels by the year

31

Price floors and price ceilings have potentially problematic interactions with the other set of price
stabilization measure discussed in this section, namely allowing firms to bank and borrow allowances. See
Elmendorf (2009), Dinan (2010), and Stocking (2012) for examples. Their analyses suggest that in light of
these problematic interactions, it would be prudent to allow banking and borrowing in pure cap-and-trade
programs but not in hybrid ones.

16

2020. Environmental groups argue that a cap-and-trade system best assures that this target is
not exceeded. 32
A second argument is that leaving the emissions level uncertain risks greater harm to
society than allowing uncertainty about emissions prices. If the relationship between
emissions and environmental damage is highly nonlinear, then allowing emissions to exceed
given levels might pose significant risks. This tends to favor setting a limit on emissions
quantities. On the other hand, setting such a limit would compel firms to reduce emissions to
a given level no matter what their costs of abatement turn out to be. If abatement costs are
highly nonlinear, rising sharply with the amount of abatement, there’s a risk that abatement
costs could become very large. The important contribution of Weitzman (1974) provides
insights relevant to this issue. It compared the expected efficiency gains under uncertainty of
a price-based approach (as with carbon taxes) and a quantity-based approach (as with cap and
trade). The relative advantage depends on the slopes of the functions that express marginal
environmental damages and marginal costs as functions of emissions. The quantity-based
approach emerges as superior when the marginal damage function is relatively steep;
otherwise the price-based approach is more attractive. Several recent studies apply a
Weitzman-type framework to climate policy. 33 These analyses tend to suggest that a relevant
marginal abatement cost function is steeper than the relevant marginal environmental damage
function.

Hence they tend to support the carbon tax.

The Weitzman framework is most relevant to situations where the policy objective is
net benefit maximization: achieving the level of emissions reductions that maximize the
benefits from the reductions minus the costs of achieving those reductions. For many climate
policy efforts – particularly those at the state or regional levels – the objective is instead costeffectiveness: the achievement of some previously established level of emissions reductions

32

It is worth noting that a California cap-and-trade system would not embrace all emitting sources in the state.
Hence the state’s adoption of cap and trade would not guarantee that statewide emissions stay within the
stipulated target: it would only assure that, with proper enforcement, emissions from sources covered by the
system are constrained to the level given by the system’s aggregate cap.
33

See Pizer (2002), Hoel and Karp (2002), Newell and Pizer (2003), and Karp and Zhang (2005). The finding
that, as a function of emissions, the marginal damage schedule is relatively flat reflects the facts that marginal
damages depend directly on atmospheric concentrations and that changes in emissions in a given period do not
substantially alter the atmospheric concentrations.

17

at minimum cost. When the objective is achieving a given emissions target, cap and trade
gains favor, since the target is given by the aggregate cap.
The hybrid policy also introduces uncertainty about emissions levels: enforcing the
ceiling implies the introduction of extra allowances, while enforcing the floor can imply
removal of some allowances that were in circulation. 34 Stavins (2008) dismisses concerns
about the emissions uncertainty arising under the hybrid. He notes that the uncertainty about
emissions quantities under the hybrid can be reduced or eliminated if policy makers pledge to
invest in other, offset projects to compensate for whatever increase in emissions would
otherwise occur as a result of enforcing the price ceiling. Revenues from emissions
allowances sold could be used to finance some or all of these offset projects. 35
Murray, Newell, and Pizer (2008) address a different aspect of the uncertainty issue.
They argue that a cap-and-trade system (or the hybrid) with intertemporal banking of
allowances has more ability to adjust to new information in the presence of uncertainty than
does the carbon tax. Their argument relies on the fact that under a carbon tax, current
marginal abatement costs are largely determined by the carbon tax rate in place today. In
contrast, under a pure or hybrid cap-and-trade system with intertemporal borrowing and
banking, the current cap on allowances does not fully determine current marginal abatement
costs: changes in expectations about future policy will lead to adjustments in current
abatement decisions. This greater ability to respond to changing expectations gives cap and
trade an advantage over the carbon tax in smoothing emissions prices over time.
These considerations suggest that the uncertainty dimension does not clearly favor
any single emissions pricing approach. When the objective is net benefit maximization, the
carbon tax or hybrid seem to have an advantage, given the implications of the Weitzman
framework when the marginal damage function is relatively flat. On the other hand, the
hybrid or pure cap and trade program could have an edge over the carbon tax along the lines

34

As mentioned above, the price floor can be enforced through a supplemental fee rather than the removal of
allowances. Regardless of how the price floor is implemented, a binding price floor will lead to more extensive
emissions reductions than originally implied by the cap.
35

Stavins makes this point in reference to the hybrid, but it applies equally to concerns about uncertain
emissions from a carbon tax.

18

considered by Murray, Newell and Pizer – attaining flexibility to adjust to new information –
as long as the price ceiling is not binding. These points are recorded in Table 3. 36

d. Interactions with Other Climate Policies

Relatively recently some analysts have pointed out a potentially important advantage
of a carbon tax over cap and trade. Burtraw and Shobe (2012), Fischer and Preonas (2010),
and Goulder and Stavins ((2012) have shown that, in the presence of a cap-and-trade
program, introducing an additional GHG-reducing policy such as a performance standard
might yield no further reductions in overall emissions. The reason is that overall emissions
are determined by the overall cap or number of allowances in circulation. To the extent that
the additional policy yields reductions in emissions by some facilities, the demand for
emissions allowances falls. This causes the price of allowances to fall until all the
allowances in circulation are again demanded. 37 Overall emissions do not change. 38
In contrast, introducing an additional GHG-reducing policy in the presence of a
carbon tax can lead to a reduction in overall emissions. In this case the price of emissions –
tax – does not change when the supplementary policy causes a reduction in emissions. For
this reason the reduction caused by the supplemental policy does not lead to “emissions
leakage,” that is, an offsetting increase in emissions elsewhere. Overall emissions fall. Thus,
as recorded in Table 3, carbon taxes (or, more generally, policies with exogenous emission
prices (including the hybrid if the floor is engaged) have an advantage over cap-and-trade
(policies with exogenous emissions quantities) in that they allow supplementary policies to
generate larger reductions in emissions.

36

It is possible to design a more complex hybrid that addresses both price and emissions uncertainty. See
Murray, Newell, and Pizer (2008).
37

In the extreme, allowance prices could fall to zero, so that the cap no longer binds. This result was
approximated at one time under the U.S. SO2 trading program. Federal regulations mandated reductions in SO2
emissions beyond the cap in place, and SO2 allowances prices settled near zero (Chan et al. (2012)).
38

The sequencing of regulatory efforts is relevant here. If a cap-and-trade program is already in place, then
adding additional regulations within the sectors already covered by cap and trade might not lead to additional
reductions. In contrast, if certain sectors are currently regulated, then introducing cap and trade may well cause
a further reduction in emissions.

19

This issue came to life when the United Kingdom recently decided to impose a tax on
CO2 emissions by electric power generators in the country. For each unit of emissions, these
generators would need to pay this tax in addition to the price that they paid for EU ETS
emissions allowances. Although the tax will likely cause greater abatement by generators
within the UK, it would not cause greater overall abatement in Europe, since overall
European abatement is determined by the Europe-wide cap under the EU ETS. The UK
initiative will reduce the UK’s demands for emissions allowances from the EU ETS, putting
downward pressure on allowance prices and prompting increased emissions in the rest of
Europe.

e. Wealth Transfers to Oil Exporting Countries

Under cap and trade, the intended economic rents to domestic firms or households
can be lost to energy-exporting countries. This can occur when a cartel or government in an
energy-exporting country responds strategically to the domestic cap-and trade policy. This
transfer of wealth does not arise under a carbon tax.
Perhaps the first analysis of this issue was provided by Berger et al. (1992). They
showed that when the supply side of fossil fuel markets is imperfectly competitive, cap and
trade could lead to the transfer of policy-generated rents from the domestic economy to
fossil-fuel-exporting countries. More specifically, they indicated that, when treating fossil
fuels as a single good (such as oil) produced by a single monopolist or cartel (such as OPEC),
the cartel could exploit a system of cap and trade by reducing oil quantity and raising oil
prices until allowance prices were zero. Subsequent analyses by Judd (2008), Strand (2011,
2013), Wirl (2012) and Karp et al. (2013) offer broadly similar results.
Judd illustrates the wealth-transfer issue in a simplified setting where the only carbonbased fuel is oil. Suppose that in the absence of cap and trade, the equilibrium price of oil on
the world market, given by the (fixed) world supply and the world demand is p0. Now
suppose a cap-and-trade program is introduced. The price of oil now rises to consumers,
since oil users must now face an allowance price. Let z represent the cost of allowances

20

needed per unit of oil. 39 The new equilibrium is established where the quantity of oil
demanded is Q1 and the price of oil inclusive of the allowance cost is p0 + z, as in the lefthand portion of Figure 2. The rectangular area between p0 and p0 + z and extending up to
the quantity Q1 is the value of the allowances. This value accrues either as rents to domestic
firms or as revenue to the Treasury and the public, as discussed in subsection 2b above.
As Judd’s analysis indicates, oil exporters could exploit this situation: they could
reduce supply and cause world oil prices to rise to p1 (or the original p0 + z) without suffering
any loss of revenue. In fact, the exporters would gain revenue from doing so! How is this
possible? If the oil exporters reduced supply to S’ while the cap and trade system was in
place, as long as the allowance price z remained positive the quantity of oil demanded
would be less than Q1 . For in this case the price to consumers would be p1 + z, above the
price that yields a quantity demanded of Q1. This would not be a sustainable equilibrium,
however. So long as the quantity of oil consumed fell short of Q1, emissions would be below
the amount “targeted” by the supply of allowances. (Recall that the supply of allowances
was such as to bring oil demand down to Q1 when the oil supply was S.) So now the demand
for allowances would fall short of the supply, and the price of allowances would fall. Indeed,
the price of allowances would continue to fall until the overall price of oil to consumers
(including the component due to the allowance price) was p1. But given that the oil exporters
have reduced the supply to S’, this requires that the allowance price z fall to zero.

Any

positive price of allowances would imply a price of oil to consumers above p1, a quantity
demand of oil below Q1, and a demand for allowances below supply. Hence the reduction in
the world supply of oil brings oil demand (and emissions) down by exactly the amount
otherwise reduced through scarce allowances. Hence the new equilibrium is as on the righthand portion of Figure 2. The allowances are no longer necessary: their price goes to zero.
Importantly, what was rent or revenue to domestic firms or the domestic Treasury now
becomes revenue to the oil exporters. In this analysis, the cap-and-trade program becomes
considerably more costly than the comparable carbon tax, whose revenues are retained
domestically.

39

This cost is positive whether or not the firm obtains the allowances free, since there is an opportunity cost
from using an allowance rather than selling it.

21

Two qualifications to these results are in order. First, the wealth transfer is muted
once one accounts for the fact that oil is not the only fuel that would be covered by cap and
trade. The CO2 allowance price is determined not simply by the demand for oil but by the
demands for other carbon-based fuels (coal and natural gas) as well. 40 As a result, if oil
exporters raised the world price, CO2 emissions would fall less than in proportion to the
reduction in oil quantity demanded, since higher oil prices would induce substitutions to
other carbon based fuels and associated increases in emissions from these other fuels. This
means that the allowance price would not fall one-for-one with the increase in the world oil
price. This in turn reduces the extent of the international wealth transfer. In this more
realistic setting, by increasing world oil prices the oil exporting countries transfer wealth to
owners of competing fuels as well as to themselves. 41 The more competitive fossil fuel
markets are, the more muted is the vulnerability of a cap and trade program to manipulation
by fossil fuel exporters. Fossil fuel markets are not, in fact, characterized by totally
monopolistic production.
Second, the result depends on the extent of market power by the oil-exporting
nations. The oil market comprises not only a cartel but also a competitive fringe of pricetaking suppliers. The presence of the competitive fringe reduces the market power of the
cartel and thereby lowers the magnitude of the wealth transfer induced by the cartel’s
strategic behavior. 42
These qualifications soften but do not refute the ability of oil-exporting nations to
capture the rents generated by cap and trade remains. Under a carbon tax, the wealth transfer
does not occur since the price of emissions is exogenous. Hence the carbon tax has an
advantage in this dimension. This is recorded in Table 3. This is another case where the

40

In 2003, oil accounted for about 43 percent of the carbon in U.S. fossil fuels consumed. It might account for
a roughly similar percentage of emissions under a climate policy.
41

Judd suggests that the main result from his analysis is that cap and trade makes consumer demand for oil
inelastic. The present paper suggests that in fact the crucial finding is that cap and trade gives oil exporters the
ability to convert allowance revenues or rents into revenues for the oil-exporting countries. Also, it might be
noted that Judd’s result does not apply in the case of a hybrid cap-and-trade program in which the price floor is
binding; in this case, the program is analogous to a carbon tax, and the strategic behavior by oil exporters
outlined above would not work.
42

See Berger et al. (1992) for an analysis of this issue.

22

exogeneity of emissions prices under a carbon tax confers some advantages over the
endogenous prices under cap and trade.

f. Budget Discipline and Tax Reform

Several studies have shown that the costs of emissions pricing policies can be kept to
a minimum if the policies yield government revenue and the revenue is used to finance
reductions in the marginal rates of pre-existing distortionary taxes such as income and sales
taxes. 43 In particular, the costs of a carbon tax are lower when its revenues are devoted to
financing marginal rate cuts, as opposed to lump-sum transfers (as would be the case if the
revenues finance rebate checks to households. Similarly, a cap-and-trade program in which
allowances are auctioned and the revenues finance marginal rate cuts will involve lower
economy-wide costs than a program in which allowances are given out free (and thus no
revenue is raised) or in which the auction revenues are recycled as lump-sum payments to
citizens. In the U.S., the idea of financing broader tax reforms with revenues from an
emissions pricing policy has gained considerable support.
However, Metcalf (2007) suggests that in the U.S. it might be more difficult to
achieve the revenue-recycling benefit under cap and trade than under a carbon tax. He points
out that the revenues from a carbon tax would fall under the domain of the House Ways and
Means Committee and Senate Finance Committee, and that coordination across these two tax
committees has a long history; and he indicates, in contrast, that disbursement of revenues
from auctioned allowances under a cap-and-trade system would likely involve not only these
committees but also the House Energy and Commerce and Senate Energy and Natural
Resources committees. Metcalf suggests that the latter committees might be predisposed
toward using the revenues to finance environmental projects and be less inclined toward
recycling the revenues. Thus, to the extent that revenue-neutrality is considered a critical
feature of climate policy, this can be seen as a potential disadvantage of a cap-and-trade
program (and of a hybrid program as well) in the United States. 44 Table 3 records this idea.
43

See, for example, Goulder (1995), Parry (1995), and Parry and Williams (2013).

44

In the U.S., there has been considerable discussion of using revenue from a carbon tax to help finance broader
tax reform. There has been much less discussion of using revenue from auctioned emissions allowances under

23

g. Potential for Linkages across Jurisdictions

Initially separate cap-and-trade systems can be linked, and previously distinct carbon
tax systems can be harmonized (that is, the rates can be set equal). Linkage and
harmonization can yield cost savings. Linking separate emissions pricing programs yields
greater abatement effort in the region with the initially lower emissions price and less
abatement effort in the region with the initially higher emissions price, thus spurring equal
abatement at overall lower costs. Linking once-separate cap-and-trade programs allows for
further (cross-jurisdictional) reallocations of abatement effort and thereby yields further cost
reductions beyond those generated by separate programs.
Linkage can be difficult when the programs being linked have design differences.
For example, linking an upstream program with a downstream one is problematic. This can
lead to the double-counting or the absence of counting of emissions. 45
How do these considerations affect the choice between carbon taxes and cap-andtrade? The fact that other nations have already committed to cap and trade might seem to
weigh in favor of a U.S. cap-and-trade system over a U.S. carbon tax, since opportunities
exist for linking a U.S. cap-and-trade program with such programs elsewhere, whereas there
seems to be less room, at present at least, for tax harmonization. 46

cap and trade for this purpose. These differences might reflect a recognition of the greater institutional
difficulties of coordinating cap and trade with tax reform.
45

To illustrate, consider an example adapted from Metcalf and Weisbach (2008). Suppose that Country 1 (C1)
and Country 2 (C2) have linked their cap-and-trade systems, but that C1 has an upstream program, while C2 has
a downstream one. If a fossil fuel is produced in C1, it will require submission of allowances there; if it is then
exported to C2, it will again be subject to C2’s cap-and-trade program when it is consumed there. This will lead
to double-counting of emissions. Alternatively, if the same fuel is produced in C2 and exported to C1, it will not
require allowances for its production or its consumption. This will lead to non-counting of emissions. The
same argument applies to harmonizing carbon taxes, where firms pay taxes for emissions instead of submitting
allowances for them.
46

While advocates of cap and trade point out this advantage, carbon tax proponents argue that current (and
possibly transitory) international commitments toward cap and trade should not carry great weight in a U.S.
decision about a long-term climate policy. Moreover, analysis by Metcalf and Weisbach (2012) suggests that it
is possible to link effectively a new carbon tax system with existing cap-and-trade systems, so commitment
history need not influence what new system is introduce. Successful linkage of differing systems could be
accomplished by both systems accepting “credits” from some source, with the credits serving as allowances
under one jurisdiction’s cap-and-trade program or as a method of tax payment in the other jurisdiction’s carbon
tax program.

24

A second consideration is the magnitude of international revenue flows and
associated macroeconomic impacts. A potential difficulty associated with internationally
linked cap-and-trade programs is the potential for very large revenue flows from the nations
purchasing allowances to the nations selling them. The potential for large international
revenue flows under cap and trade raises concerns about exchange rate and other
macroeconomic effects. 47 In contrast, an internationally harmonized carbon tax does not
directly produce any international revenue flows. However, experience to date with the
European Union’s Emissions Trading Scheme yields no evidence of adverse exchange rate or
macroeconomic consequences from trade-induced revenue flows.
The potential for large international revenue flows is especially pronounced when one
of the nations employs a hybrid policy involving a (relatively low) ceiling price for
allowances. If the ceiling price is low relative to initial marginal abatement costs in other
countries, covered firms in other countries will want to purchase allowances from the country
with the ceiling price. However, since the ceiling price is fixed, the magnitude of these
purchases will not be stemmed by increases in the allowance price. Hence the potential for
large international revenue flows is significant. As pointed out by Stavins (2007), other
nations may be unwilling to link with a nation that utilizes a ceiling price, given the
possibility of very significant revenue outflows. This suggests a tension between the goals of
price stability (addressed through a price ceiling) and cost-effectiveness (addressed through
international linkages).
At the same time, arriving at a uniform international carbon tax raises practical
difficulties. Various nations may claim that they already tax carbon through existing taxes
on individual fossil fuels or on refined fuels (gasoline, home heating oil, etc.). Arriving at a
uniform international tax on carbon would in theory require knowledge of the incidence of a
wide range of existing energy taxes – in practice this can only be approximated. Individual
nations might well manipulate the calculations so as to suggest they are already paying
significant taxes on carbon and thereby avoid much of an increase as part of an international
effort to obtain a uniform international tax rate.

47

See, for example, McKibbin and Wilcoxen (1997).

25

Thus, there are significant challenges involved in linking systems internationally, no
matter whether the systems involved involve cap and trade or carbon taxes. The discussion
above suggests that some considerations favor cap and trade while others favor the carbon
tax. Thus, as acknowledged by the question marks in Table 3, it is not clear that the linkage
issue significantly works in favor of one system or the other.

h. Potential for Greater Cost-Effectiveness from Broad Sectoral Coverage

Stavins (2007) claims that the political dynamics surrounding a carbon tax and cap
and trade are likely to be very different, carrying important implications for costeffectiveness. Pointing to historical experience, he argues that as a carbon tax moves from
initial proposal toward implementation, various industries will seek, and some will win,
exclusions from the tax. This would make the carbon tax less cost-effective: any given
target for emissions reductions will be reached at a higher cost, the narrower the set covered
pollution sources.
He contrasts this result with what has occurred historically as the details of a cap-andtrade system get defined prior to implementation. He points out that stakeholders struggle
less for outright exclusions than for a larger share of the stock of freely allocated emissions
allowances. Stavins concludes that, in light of political considerations, cap and trade has a
greater ability to achieve broad sectoral coverage and the cost-effectiveness associated with
it.
It is important to recognize, however, that gaining broader coverage through free
allocation can also involve an offsetting element that sacrifices of cost-effectiveness. To the
extent that the government auctions the allowances, it brings in revenues and thereby reduces
its reliance on other revenue sources for financing given expenditures. As a result, the
government’s budgetary needs can be met with lower marginal tax rates for existing taxes
such as income, sales, or payroll taxes. As mentioned in subsection f above, , lower marginal
rates imply lower efficiency losses (or excess burden) from these taxes. Thus, even if cap
and trade has an advantage over a carbon tax in terms of the potential for broad sector
coverage, it is not clear whether this implies an overall benefit in terms of cost-effectiveness.
The method of achieving the broader coverage – free allocation – could imply a significant

26

loss of cost-effectiveness. Thus, while cap and trade might have greater potential for broad
coverage, the benefits of the broader coverage in terms of cost-effectiveness are ambiguous.
The question marks in Table 3 attest to this ambiguity.
It is also important to recognize that a carbon tax also has its own version of (partial
or full) free allocation in the form of tradable tax exemptions for a certain amount of
emissions. Historically, inframarginal exemptions are more common under cap and trade
(and the hybrid) than under the carbon tax, but the reasons are not related to inherent
constraints or features of the three policies. We do not regard any of the three policies as
clearly having a greater ability to reduce costs through broader sectoral coverage. This
conclusion is reflected in Table 3.

i. Perceptions and Political Feasibility

Political winds can change suddenly and unexpectedly. In the U.S., until recently cap
and trade seemed to have more political support than a carbon tax. The major state-level
climate change efforts – the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative in the Northeast and
California’s AB 32 – selected cap and trade as the major instrument for achieving emissions
reductions. The various climate-policy bills introduced in the U.S. Congress featured cap
and trade as the principal vehicle for reducing emissions. This includes the American Clean
Energy and Security Act (or Waxman-Markey bill), the only recent proposal to gain a
majority of votes in the U.S. House of Representatives.
Recently, however, cap and trade seems to have lost political ground. The fact that
the Waxman-Markey bill never attained a vote by the Senate might have caused some
legislators to focus more on alternatives. In addition, to many U.S. politicians, cap and
trade’s appeal stemmed from the fact that it was viewed as something quite different from a
tax, and supporting cap and trade seemed as politically safer than showing support for a tax.
Over time, politicians increasingly have recognized (correctly) that cap and trade functions
much like a tax. Indeed, as mentioned earlier, a cap-and-trade policy involving auctioned
allowances has the same impact as a carbon tax, assuming the revenues from the two policies
are used in the same way. This recognition may have eroded some of the support for cap and
trade. Furthermore, as discussed in subsection f above, there is increasing attention to using

27

revenues from a carbon tax – but not from a cap-and-trade system – to help finance a broader
tax reform effort. In the U.S. neither market-based approach has a clear political advantage
at present.
In other nations, the relative popularity of the two approaches seems to vary by
country or region. Cap and trade has been implemented in the European Union’s Emissions
Trading Scheme and in New Zealand and Australia. South Korea plans to implement such a
program, and China has initiated test programs in seven cities. Carbon taxes are in effect in
Sweden, Norway, Finland, Denmark, the UK, and in the Canadian province of British
Columbia.
If cap and trade once had a political advantage, this advantage is no longer so clear.
This ambiguity is acknowledged in Table 3.

5. How It Adds Up
In debates about the relative attractiveness of carbon taxes, a cap-and-trade system, or
a hybrid of the two, some commentators have supported one option or another based on
claimed differences in their incentives for reducing emissions, capabilities for addressing
distributional impacts, options for employing or avoiding offsets, and potential for
safeguarding international competitiveness. We show that these dimensions do not
discriminate between the options. When comparably designed, a carbon tax, cap-and-trade
system, and hybrid policy yield very similar incentives to reduce emissions. Comparably
designed systems imply the same distribution of policy costs (or policy-generated windfalls)
across households or firms; the relevant design features are the extent to which firms are
allowed inframarginal emissions without charge and the way that revenues from auctioned
emissions allowances or a carbon tax are spent. In addition, each of the policy tools may
include or exclude offsets. And the different policy tools have similar capabilities for
mitigating potential adverse impacts on the international competitiveness of carbon-intensive
domestic firms. This depends on whether the policies are introduced upstream or
downstream, and the extent to which provisions for border adjustments or output-based
subsidies are included; the three policies have equal potential along these lines. Thus, the

28

incentives for emissions abatement, the distributional impacts, the connection with offsets,
and the ability to safeguard international competitiveness depend primarily on the specifics
of design, not on the general instrument type.
On other important dimensions, however, the alternatives perform quite differently.
The check marks in Table 3 indicate that no approach dominates. One’s overall ranking of
the different options will depend on the weights one applies to the different dimensions –
weights that are inherently subjective. Still, it is noteworthy that the carbon tax or hybrid
seem to score better along the dimensions where the advantages or disadvantages are
unambiguous.
Many of the attractions of the carbon tax and the hybrid (when the hybrid’s floor or
ceiling is engaged) stem from the exogeneity of the allowance prices. Exogenously specified
prices confer several attractions. They prevent emissions price volatility (assuming that the
specified prices themselves do not display a volatile pattern). In addition, they may imply
smaller expected policy errors in the face of uncertainties about the marginal benefits and
marginal costs of emissions reductions. These attractions are fairly well known. There are
other, less obvious, attractions as well: as discussed above, they help avoid an important
form of emissions leakage and they avoid significant wealth transfers to oil-exporting
countries.
Although debates are likely to continue as to the relative virtues of the carbon tax,
cap-and-trade, and hybrid approaches, it is worth recognizing a virtue shared by all three.
Each approach is a form of emissions pricing and, as such, each provides flexible and
permanent incentives for emissions abatement that are absent in other forms of regulation.
All three approaches have the potential to bring about greenhouse gas emissions reductions
in a way that is cost-effective and equitable as well as environmentally successful.

29

References
Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Lawrence H. Goulder, 2001. "Neutralizing the Adverse Industry
Impacts of CO2 Abatement Policies: What Does It Cost?" In Behavioral and
Distributional Effects of Environmental Policy, ed. C. Carraro and G. Metcalf.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 45-85.
Bovenberg, A. Lans, Lawrence H. Goulder, and Derek J. Gurney, 2005. "Efficiency Costs
of Meeting Industry-Distributional Constraints under Environmental Permits and
Taxes." RAND Journal of Economics, Winter.
Bravender, Robin, 2009. "Acid Rain Credits Nosedive on CAIR Concerns." Greenwire,
March 27, 2009. www.eenews.net/public/Greenwire/2009/03/27/4?page_type=print.
Burtraw, Dallas, Danny Kahn, and Karen Palmer, 2006. "CO2 Allowance Allocation in the
Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative and the Effect on Electricity Investors." The
Electricity Journal, March.
Burtraw, Dallas, and Karen Palmer, 2006. "Dynamic Adjustment to Incentive Based
Environmental Policy to Improve Efficiency and Performance." Discussion Paper,
Resources for the Future, Washington, D.C.
Burtraw, Dallas, and William Shobe, 2012. "Rethinking Environmental Federalism in a
Warming World." Climate Change Economics, forthcoming.
Bushnell, James B., and Erin T. Mansur, 2011. "Vertical Targeting and Leakage in Carbon
Policy." American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 101(3): 1-8.
Cambridge Energy Research Associates, 2006. "Design Issues for Market-Based
Greenhouse Gas Reduction Strategies." Washington, D.C.
Carlson, Curtis, Dallas Burtraw, Maureen Cropper, and Karen Palmer, 2000. "Sulfur
Dioxide Control by Electric Utilities: What Are the Gains from Trade?". Journal of
Political Economy 108: 1292-317.
Chan, Gabriel, Robert N. Stavins, Robert Stowe, and Richard Sweeney, 2012. "The SO2
Allowance Trading System and the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990: Reflections
on Twenty Years of Policy Innovation." Faculty Research Working Paper Series,
John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University.
Dinan, Terry, 2010. Managing Allowance Prices in a Cap-and-Trade Program, United
States Congressional Budget Office.
Dinan, Terry M., and Diane L. Rogers, 2002. "Distributional Effects of Carbon Allowance
Trading: How Government Decisions Determine Winners and Losers." National Tax
Journal LV: 199-222.
Ellerman, A. Denny, and Barbara Buchner, 2008. "Over-Allocation or Abatement: A
Preliminary Analysis of the EU ETS based on the 2005-06 Emissions Data."
Environmental and Resource Economics.
Ellerman, A. Denny, and Paul L. Joskow, 2008. "The European Union's Emissions Trading
System in Perspective." Report Prepared for the Pew Center on Global Climate
Change, Washington, D.C., May.
Ellerman, A. Denny, Paul L. Joskow, and David L. Harrison, Jr., 2003. "Emissions Trading:
Experience, Lessons, and Considerations for Greenhouse Gases." Washington, DC:
Pew Center on Global Climate Change.

30

Elmendorf, Douglas W. 2009. "Flexibility in the Timing of Emission Reductions under a
Cap-and-Trade Program." Statement before the Committee on Ways and Means, U.S.
House of Representatives.
Fischer, Carolyn, and Alan K. Fox, 2007. "Output-Based Allocation of Emissions Permits
for Mitigating Tax and Trade Interactions." Land Economics 83: 575-99.
Fischer, Carolyn, and Louis Preonas, 2010. "Combining Policies for Renewable Energy: Is
the Whole Less Than the Sum of Its Parts?". International Review of Environmental
and Resource Economics 4: 51-92.
Fowlie, Meredith, 2012. "Updating the Allocation of Greenhouse Gas Emissions Permits in
a Federal Cap-and-Trade Program." In The Design and Implementation of U.S
Climate Policy, eds. Don Fullerton and Catherine Wolfram. Chicago: Univeristy of
Chicago Press.
Goulder, Lawrence H., 1995. "Environmental Taxation and the 'Double Dividend:' A
Reader's Guide." International Tax and Public Finance 2(2): 157-83.
Goulder, Lawrence H., Marc A. C. Hafstead, and Michael Dworsky, 2010. "Impacts of
Alternative Emissions Allowance Allocation Methods under a Federal Cap-and-Trade
Program." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 60(3): 161-81.
Goulder, Lawrence H., and Robert N. Stavins, 2012. "Interactions of State and Federal
Climate Change Policies." In The Design and Implementation of U.S. Climate Policy,
eds. Don Fullerton and Catherine Wolfram. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
forthcoming.
Hansen, James. 2009. "Cap and Fade." The New York Times, July 23, 2013.
Hoel, Michael, and Larry S. Karp, 2002. "Taxes Versus Quotas for a Stock Pollutant."
Resource and Energy Economics 24: 367-84.
Hoerner, J. Andrew, and Nia Robinson, 2008. A Climate of Change: African Americans,
Global Warming, and a Just Climate Policy for the U.S. Oakland, Calif.: Redefining
Progress.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007. Climate Change 2007: Synthesis
Report. Geneva.
Jacoby, H. D., and A. D. Ellerman, 2004. "The Safety Valve and Climate Policy." Energy
Policy 32(4): 481-91.
Judd, Kenneth L., 2008. "Climate Policies and Oil Producer Market Power." In Working
paper: Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., April.
Karp, L., S. Siddiqui, and J. Strand, 2013. "Climate Policy with Dynamic Fossil Fuel
Markets: Prices versus Cap-and-Trade." Working paper, The World Bank.
Karp, Larry S., and Jiangfeng Zhang, 2005. "Regulation of Stock Externalities with
Correlated Abatement Costs." Environmental and Resource Economics 32: 273-99.
Keohane, Nathaniel, 2009. "Cap and Trade, Rehabilitated: Using Tradable Permits to
Control U.S. Greenhouse Gases." Review of Environmental Economics and Policy
3(1): 42-62.
Market Advisory Committee to the California Air Resources Board, 2007.
"Recommendations for Designing a Greenhouse Gas Cap-and-Trade System for
California."
McKibbin, Warwick, and Peter Wilcoxen, 1997. "A Better Way to Slow Global Climate
Change." Brookings Policy Brief No. 17, Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.

31

Metcalf, Gilbert E., 2007. "A Proposal for a U.S. Carbon Tax Swap: An Equitable Tax
Reform to Address Global Climate Change." Hamilton Project Discussion Paper
2007-12. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution.
Metcalf, Gilbert E., and David Weisbach, 2008. "The Design of a Carbon Tax." Working
paper, Tufts University, December.
———, 2012. "Linking Policies When Tastes Differ: Global Climate Policy in a
Heterogeneous World." Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 6(1): 11029.
Morris, Adele, 2011. "Thoughts on a Carbon Tax." In Brookings Institution Up Front:
http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/up-front/posts/2011/11/07-carbon-tax-morris
Murray, Brian C., Richard G. Newell, and William Pizer, 2008. "Balancing Cost and
Emissions Certainty: An Allowance Reserve for Cap and Trade." Working Paper No.
14258, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Newell, Richard G., and William Pizer, 2003. "Regulating Stock Externalities under
Uncertainty." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 45: 416-32.
Nordhaus, William D., 2007. "To Tax or Not to Tax: Alternative Approaches to Slowing
Global Warming." Review of Economics and Policy.
Palmer, Karen, and David A. Evans, 2009. "The Evolving SO2 Allowance Market: Title
IV, CAIR, and Beyond." Resources for the Future Weekly Policy Commentary.
Parry, Ian W. H., 2004. "Are Emissions Permits Regressive?". Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 47: 364-87.
———, 1995. "Pollution Taxes and Revenue Recycling." Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 29(3): S64-S77.
Parry, Ian W. H., and Roberton C. III Williams, 2013. "Efficiency and Distributional TradeOffs in Recycling Carbon Cap-and-Trade Revenues." B.E. Journal of Economic
Analysis & Policy.
Pizer, William A., 2002. "Combining Price and Quantity Controls to Mitigate Global
Climate Change." Journal of Public Economics 85: 409-34.
Resources for the Future, 2011. "Fiscal Reform and Climate Protection: Considering a U.S.
Carbon Tax." Joint RFF/Peterson Institute for International Economics Workshop.
http://www.rff.org/Events/Pages/Fiscal-Reform-and-Climate-Protection-Consideringa-US-Carbon-Tax.aspx.
Sachs, Jeffrey D., 2009. "Putting a Price on Carbon: An Emissions Cap or a Tax?". Yale
Environment 360. http://e360.yale.edu/content/feature.msp?id=2148#sachs.
Smith, Anne E., and Martin T. Ross, 2002. "Allowance Allocation: Who Wins and Loses
under a Carbon Dioxide Control Program?". Discussion Paper, Charles River
Associates, Washington, D.C.
Stavins, Robert N., 2008. "A Meaningful U.S. Cap-and-Trade System to Address Climate
Change." Harvard Environmental Law Review 32(2): 293-371.
———, 2007. "A US Cap-and-Trade System to Address Global Climate Change."
Hamilton Project Discussion paper 2007-13. Washington, DC: The Brookings
Institution.
Stocking, Andrew, 2012. "Unintended Consequences of Price Controls: An Application to
Allowances Markets." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 63(1):
120-36.

32

Strand, J., 2013. "Strategic Climate Policy with Offsets and Incomplete Abatement: Carbon
Taxes versus Cap-and-Trade." Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, forthcoming.
———, 2011. "Taxes and Caps as Climate Policy Instruments with Domestic and Imported
Fuels." In U.S. Energy Policy, ed. Gilbert Metcalf. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Wara, Michael, and David G. Victor, 2008. "A Realistic Policy on International Carbon
Offsets." Program on Energy and Sustainbale Development Working Paper No. 74,
Stanford University.
Weisbach, David, 2009. "Instrument Choice Is Instrument Design." John M Olin Law and
Economics Working Paper No. 490, Harvard University.
Weitzman, Martin L., 1974. "Prices vs. Quantities." Review of Economic Studies 41: 47791.
Wirl, F., 2012. "Global Warming: Prices versus Quantities from a Strategic Point of View."
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 64(2): 217-29.
Wood, Peter J., and Frank Jotzo, 2011. "Price Floors for Emissions Trading." Energy
Policy 39(3): 4921-32.

33

Table 1
Equivalences between Carbon Taxes and Cap and Trade

Issue

Incentives to Reduce
Emissions

Comment

Marginal incentives are the same.
This applies even in the case where allowances are freely
allocated under cap and trade.

Distribution of Burden
across Industries and
across Household Groups

Depends on:
(1) extent of free emissions
(2) disposition of policy revenues
Cap and trade and carbon tax have the same options along
these dimensions.

International
Competitiveness

Depends on:
(1) opportunities for border adjustments
(2) mechanisms for subsidizing carbon-intensive tradeexposed industries.
Cap and trade and carbon tax have similar opportunities along
these dimensions.

Connection with Offsets

Under a carbon tax or a cap-and-trade program, provisions for
offsets may be added or left out.

34

Table 2
Alternative Points of Regulation
For a U.S. Carbon Tax or Cap and Trade System

----- Fossil Fuel Category ----Point of
Regulation
Upstream
Midstream

Downstream

Coal

Oil

Mining and imports (500
companies
Rail, barge, and trucking
operations (numbers not
estimated)

Production wells and
imports (750 companies)
Refining (200 refineries)

Electric power plants
(500 plants)

Mobile sources, industrial
boilers, and electric power
plants (millions of sources)

Source: Adopted from Cambridge Energy Research Associates (2006).

35

Natural Gas
Production wells and
imports (750 companies)
Pipelines and processing
(200 pipelines, or 1,250
local distribution
companies and 500
liquified natural gas
plants)
Industrial boilers,
commercial and
residential furnaces, and
electric power plants
(millions of sources)

Table 3
Relative Advantages of Carbon Tax, Hybrid, and Cap and Trade

(check marks indicate relative advantage;
question marks indicate that the relative advantage is uncertain)

(Pure)
Carbon
Hybrid Cap and
Tax
Trade

Issue

Minimize Administrative Costs



Avoid Price Volatility



*





Address Uncertainty
Weitzman issue (price vs. emissions
uncertainty)
Murray-Newell-Pizer issue
(flexibiity to respond to new
information)





Avoid Leakage from "Nested"
Regulation



*

Avoid Large Wealth Transfers to OilExporting Countries



*

Achieve Revenue-Neutrality, Promote
Broader Tax Reform



Achieve Linkages across Jurisdictions

?

?

?

Achieve Benefits from Broad Sectoral
Coverage

?

?

?

Achieve Greater Political Support

?

?

?

* applicable when the price ceiling or floor is engaged

36

Figure 1
Impacts of Cap & Trade and Carbon Tax
On Producer and Consumer Surplus

p1C

a

b

r
d

p0

f

p1P

h

S

e

g

c
i

D

Q1

Q0
industry output

37

Figure 2
Potential for Wealth Transfers to Oil Exporting Countries
Under Cap and Trade

S

S’

p0+z

S

p1
Allowance
Value

p0

p0

Transfer to
Oil
Exporters

D

Q1

Q0

D

Oil

38

Q1

Q0

Oil

