                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    GLOBAL IMBALANCES AND STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN THE UNITED STATES

                                      Timothy J. Kehoe
                                         Kim J. Ruhl
                                     Joseph B. Steinberg

                                     Working Paper 19339
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w19339


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          August 2013, Revised February 2018




We thank David Backus, David Strauss, Harald Uhlig, Frank Warnock, Kei-Mu Yi, Vivian Yue,
Jing Zhang, and four anonymous referees for helpful discussions and suggestions. Kehoe and
Ruhl gratefully acknowledge the support of the National Science Foundation under grant
SES-0962993. We are grateful to Jack Rossbach for extraordinary research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The
data used here are available at http://www.econ.umn.edu/~tkehoe.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2013 by Timothy J. Kehoe, Kim J. Ruhl, and Joseph B. Steinberg. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Imbalances and Structural Change in the United States
Timothy J. Kehoe, Kim J. Ruhl, and Joseph B. Steinberg
NBER Working Paper No. 19339
August 2013, Revised February 2018
JEL No. E13,F34,O41

                                          ABSTRACT

Since the early 1990s, as the United States borrowed heavily from the rest of the world,
employment in the U.S. goods-producing sector has fallen. We construct a dynamic general
equilibrium model with several mechanisms that could generate declining goods-sector
employment: foreign borrowing, nonhomothetic preferences, and differential productivity growth
across sectors. We find that only 15.1 percent of the decline in goods-sector employment from
1992 to 2012 stems from U.S. trade deficits; most of the decline is due to differential productivity
growth. As the United States repays its debt, its trade balance will reverse, but goods-sector
employment will continue to fall.

Timothy J. Kehoe                                 Joseph B. Steinberg
University of Minnesota                          University of Toronto
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
1925 Fourth Street South                         150 St George Street
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0462                       Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G7
and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis          Canada
and also NBER                                    joseph.steinberg@utoronto.ca
tkehoe@umn.edu

Kim J. Ruhl
Department of Economics
Pennsylvania State University
Kern Building
University Park, PA 16802
kjr42@psu.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19339
1. Introduction
Between 1992 and 2012, the U.S. net international investment position deteriorated by $4 trillion
as households and the government in the United States borrowed from the rest of the world. During
this same period, the goods-sector share of total employment fell sharply. Economic theory
predicts that trade deficits drive employment out of domestic goods-producing sectors, and a
commonly held view in policy circles, expressed, for example, in Scott (2015), is that U.S. trade
deficits generated by this borrowing have played an important role in the decline in U.S. goods-
sector employment and that rebalancing U.S. trade will reverse a large part of this trend. In this
paper, we provide the first model-based estimates of the impact of trade deficits on U.S. goods-
sector employment.
      We use a dynamic general equilibrium model of the United States and the rest of the world
to address the questions: To what extent are trade deficits responsible for the loss of U.S. goods-
sector employment? Will employment return to goods-producing sectors when U.S. borrowing
ends and trade deficits become trade surpluses?
      Our framework combines an open-economy model of intertemporal trade with a model of
structural change — the secular shift of employment from goods-producing industries to services-
producing industries. Our model features two main ingredients from the structural change
literature: income effects from nonhomothetic preferences, and faster labor productivity growth in
the goods-producing sector compared with the services sector combined with a low elasticity of
substitution between goods and services. Typically, structural change has been studied in closed-
economy settings; we extend the analysis to an open economy with unbalanced trade.
      The key open economy feature in our model is the saving glut — increased demand for
saving by the rest of the world — which we calibrate to match the U.S. trade balance. We use our
model to quantitatively assess the contributions of traditional structural change forces and the
saving glut to the decline in U.S. goods-sector employment. Contrary to assertions by analysts
such as Scott (2015), who writes that “trade [deficits], not productivity, is the culprit [behind
goods-sector job loss],” we find that the saving glut only explains between 11 and 20 percent of
the decline in U.S. goods-sector employment; our preferred estimate is 15.1 percent.
      We calibrate our model’s production and demand structure so that the model replicates the
1992 U.S. national accounts and a world input-output matrix we construct from the World Input-
Output Database (Timmer et al., 2015). We feed into the model two exogenous driving forces:
                                               1
labor productivity growth rates that differ across sectors and demand for saving in the rest of the
world. The equilibrium outcome of this model — our benchmark saving-glut equilibrium —
accounts for 99.2 percent of the observed decline in the goods-sector employment share from 1992
to 2012 and accounts for several other key facts about the U.S. economy during this period.
      We then compare this equilibrium with one in which foreign demand for saving is constant
— our no-saving-glut counterfactual. The counterfactual accounts for 84.1 percent of the decline
in the goods-sector employment share. The difference between these two figures, 15.1 percent, is
the contribution of the saving glut to this decline. This implies that eliminating the trade deficit
will not generate a significant increase in goods-sector employment.
      In figure 1, we plot the share of goods-producing sectors — agriculture, mining, and
manufacturing — in total employment, which has fallen as the trade deficit has grown. The
economic theory that links these data depend on imported goods being substitutable for
domestically produced goods. As the United States trades bonds for foreign goods, labor shifts
away from domestically produced goods and toward services and construction, which are less
substitutable for foreign goods. This mechanism implies that, when the debt has to be repaid, labor
will flow back into the U.S. goods sector to produce the extra goods needed to repay the debt. The
quantitative importance of this channel in driving the decline in U.S. goods-sector employment
over the past two decades is the focus of our study.
      There is ample historical evidence connecting sectoral reallocation and trade balance
dynamics. After Spain entered the European Community in 1986, its trade balance deteriorated
substantially, while the goods-sector share of Spanish GDP fell from 40 percent to less than 30
percent (Fernandez de Cordoba and Kehoe, 1999). The Baltic countries had similar experiences
after liberalizing capital markets in the 1990s (Bems and Jönsson, 2005). In emerging economies
like Mexico, “sudden stops” of the world’s willingness to lend are typically accompanied by sharp
reallocations away from services production and into goods (Kehoe and Ruhl, 2009). Although
the saving glut is not as drastic as capital account liberalization or reversals due to sudden stops, it
is plausible that 20 years of increased capital inflows could have a significant effect on goods-
sector employment.
      In constructing our model, we need to specify the driving force behind U.S. borrowing. A
common explanation is that foreign demand for saving increased, making foreigners more willing
to trade their goods for U.S. bonds. Bernanke (2005) coined the term global saving glut to refer to
                                                       2
this mechanism, and we adopt Bernanke’s global-saving-glut hypothesis. Several explanations
have been proposed for the increased demand for saving in the rest of the world, such as a lack of
financial development in the rest of the world (Caballero et al., 2008; Mendoza et al., 2009) and
differences in business cycle or structural growth properties (Backus et al., 2006; Perri and Fogli,
2010; Jin, 2012). We do not take a stand on which of these explanations are correct. Instead, we
take the saving glut as given and calibrate a process for household preferences in the rest of the
world over current versus future consumption so that our model matches exactly the path of the
U.S. trade balance during 1992–2012.
      The driving force behind structural change in the model is differential labor productivity
growth. As evident in figure 2, labor productivity in the goods sector has grown at a faster pace
than in other sectors over the past two decades. The structural change literature emphasizes
asymmetric productivity growth as an important driver of the long-run reallocation of labor across
sectors (Ngai and Pissarides, 2007). We take a similar approach in an open-economy model.
Several other recent papers study structural change in open economies (Echevarria, 1995;
Matsuyama, 1992, 2009; Sposi, 2012; Uy, Yi, and Zhang, 2013). With the exception of Sposi
(2012), these studies use models of balanced trade, abstracting from international capital flows.
Our model enriches the dynamics in Sposi (2012) by distinguishing between household and
government debt, endogenizing the investment rate, and allowing countries to hold debt on the
balanced growth path.
      Buera and Kaboski (2009) identify three sources of structural change, all of which we
include in our baseline model: differential sectoral productivity growth and a low elasticity of
substitution between sectors (Ngai and Pissarides, 2007); nonhomothetic preferences (Kongsamut
et al., 2001); and capital deepening driven by different capital shares across sectors (Acemoglu
and Guerrieri, 2008). We find that differential capital shares are not significant sources of structural
change in our model. Nonhomothetic preferences account for 5.6 percent of structural change,
consistent with Buera and Kaboski (2009), who argue that, because subsistence requirements are
most important at low income levels, income effects are unlikely to be important in explaining
U.S. structural change in recent decades. Boppart (2014) and Herrendorf et al. (2013) find larger
roles for income effects over longer time horizons.
      We include several other features in our model that make it well-suited to address our
questions. First, it includes three sectors: goods, services, and construction. Goods and services in
                                                      3
our model are both traded, in contrast to the usual convention in international macroeconomics
which assumes only goods are tradable. The usual convention is at odds with the data: services are
a large component of U.S. exports. Construction is the only purely nontradable sector and is used
entirely to produce investment goods, which means that construction is more sensitive than the
other sectors to the effects of capital flows and economic fluctuations in general. Second, our
model includes a global input-output structure. Firms use intermediate inputs of both goods and
services, produced both at home and abroad, and we distinguish between trade in final versus
intermediate goods and services. This production and demand structure allows for substitution
between domestic products and their foreign equivalents, and complementarity between products
from different sectors. We also allow for more substitution between domestic and foreign goods
than services, which allows us to match the volatilities in the goods trade balance and the services
trade balance.

2. The U.S. economy, 1992–2012
We view the massive foreign borrowing and the differences in productivity growth across sectors
as exogenous driving forces that we take as inputs into the model. We present three key facts about
U.S. data that we view as tests for our model. Our model’s ability to capture these facts in response
to the exogenous driving forces gives us confidence in using the model to perform counterfactual
experiments and make predictions about the future of the U.S. economy.

Exogenous driving force 1: Foreign borrowing increased, then decreased
Figure 3 illustrates how much borrowing households and the U.S. government have done. The
current account balance measures capital flow into the United States, but we see that the trade
balance tracks the current account balance almost exactly. Since our model is not designed to
accurately capture the difference between these two series, we use the trade deficit as our measure
of U.S. borrowing. Figure 3 shows that between 1992 and 2006, the trade deficit grew steadily,
reaching 5.8 percent of GDP, after which it began to shrink. In 2012, the trade deficit was 3.6
percent of GDP. We view the path of the trade deficit as what defines the saving glut in our model.
      Capital flows are important to our analysis in two ways. First and foremost, the U.S. trade
deficit, which is composed primarily of goods (figure 4), directly affects the need for labor to
produce goods domestically. Second, accumulated debt eventually needs to be repaid, which could
affect the employment needed to produce goods in the United States in the future. In our model,

                                                    4
cumulative trade balances are the measure of this debt, which differs from the U.S. net foreign
asset position by any revaluation effects. These revaluation effects have, at times, played a
significant role in the value of the U.S. net foreign asset position (Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, 2008;
Gourinchas and Rey, 2007). Revaluation has been in favor of the United States overall; the U.S.
net foreign asset position is smaller than cumulated trade balances in the data. This implies that
future reallocation of labor back to goods-producing sectors caused by debt repayment may be
smaller than our model predicts.

Exogenous driving force 2: Labor productivity grew fastest in the goods sector
During 1992–2012, labor productivity in the goods sector — real value added per worker — grew
at an average of 4.4 percent per year, while it grew by only 1.3 percent per year in services and
fell by 0.84 percent per year in construction. What is essential in our model is the differential
between productivity growth in goods compared with services. As the data in figure 2 show, this
differential has been close to constant since 1980, with average productivity growth of 4.3 percent
per year in goods during 1980–2012, compared with 1.1 percent in services. Except for the
productivity slowdown of the 1970s, the differential has persisted since 1960.

Fact 1: The real exchange rate appreciated, then depreciated
Figure 3 presents the first key fact that we ask our model to match. The figure shows that the U.S.
real exchange rate was volatile and tracked the trade balance closely during 1992–2012. We
construct our measure of the U.S. real exchange rate by taking a weighted average of bilateral real
exchange rates with the United States’ 20 largest trading partners, with weights given by these
countries’ shares of U.S. imports in 1992 (other weighting schemes yield similar results). The real
exchange rate appreciated by 27.9 percent between 1992 and 2002, after which it depreciated by
22.1 percent between 2002 and 2012.
      The intuition for why the real exchange rate and trade balance should move closely is
straightforward: as foreign goods and services become cheaper, U.S. households buy more of
them. Notice, however, that the timing is off: the maximum appreciation of the real exchange rate
occurred in 2002, whereas the largest trade deficit occurred in 2006. Our baseline model is unable
to replicate this pattern; we revisit it in our sensitivity analysis and concluding remarks.

Fact 2: The goods sector drove aggregate trade balance dynamics


                                                     5
Figure 4 presents our second key fact, plotting disaggregated trade balances for goods and services
separately. The goods trade balance generates most of the fluctuations in the aggregate trade
balance, while the services trade balance fluctuates between 0.5 and 1.2 percent of GDP. The
consistent U.S. services trade surplus motivates one of the key features of our modeling
framework. Standard modeling conventions in international macroeconomics lump services
together with construction into a nontradable sector, treating goods as the only sector that produces
output that can be traded internationally. By contrast, we allow both goods and services to be
traded in our model.

Fact 3: Employment in goods declined steadily; construction employment rose, then fell
Figure 5 presents our third fact: between 1992 and 2012, the fraction of total labor compensation
paid to the goods sector fell from 19.7 percent to 12.5 percent. The fraction of total labor
compensation is our preferred measure of a sector’s employment share because it maps directly
into our model, where we measure labor inputs in terms of effective hours rather than raw hours.
As figure 1 shows, this measure moves closely with more common measures such as the share of
employees in the goods sector. The construction-sector share of labor compensation rose from 4.4
percent in 1992 to 5.7 percent in 2006, as construction boomed prior to the financial crisis in 2008–
2009. Employment in construction then started to fall, and by 2012, the construction-sector share
of labor compensation was again 4.4 percent. Reallocation away from goods has, thus far, been
permanent, while reallocation into construction was temporary.

3. Model
Our model has two countries: the United States (us) and the rest of the world (rw). A period is one
year. Representative households in each country work, consume, and save to maximize utility
subject to a sequence of budget constraints. Competitive firms produce commodities that serve
final and intermediate uses both at home and abroad.
      Agents in our model have perfect foresight except for in the first period, 1992. We model
the saving glut as an unanticipated and temporary — though decades-long — change in the rest of
the world’s willingness to lend. This assumption captures our view that U.S. households in the
early 1990s did not anticipate the large trade deficits their country would run over the next two
decades.

3.1 Gross output production

                                                    6
The United States produces goods ( g ) , services ( s ) , and construction ( c ) ; the rest of the world
produces only goods and services. Gross output is produced according to a nested constant
elasticity of substitution (CES) technology that uses capital, labor, and intermediate inputs of
goods and services from both countries. As in the data, construction is not used as an intermediate
input; it is only used in the production of investment goods. We use superscripts to index countries
or final demand sectors, destination first, and subscripts to index production sectors, destination
first. To simplify exposition, we describe only the U.S. economy below. Except where noted, we
model the rest of the world analogously.
       Gross output in sector i , y itu s , is an aggregate of value added, vitus , and an intermediate

bundle, mitus ,


                                                                                              
                                                                                                1

(1)                                y 
                                    us
                                    it
                                             us
                                             i      i
                                                     us
                                                          v 
                                                             us 
                                                             it     (1   )  mi
                                                                                  us       us  
                                                                                           it        .

The parameter ius governs the share of value added in gross output, and  governs the elasticity

of substitution between value added and the intermediate input bundle.  us
                                                                         i is a constant scaling


factor used to facilitate calibration.
       Value added in sector i is a Cobb-Douglas aggregate of capital, k , and labor,  ,

                                           vitus  Aius  kitus                     
                                                                    i         us us 1i
(2)                                                                           it it        ,

where i is capital’s share of value added,  itus is labor productivity, and ui s is a constant scaling

factor. We abstract from capital in the rest of the world,
(3)                                                    vitrw  Airw itrw  ritw .

Labor productivity is exogenous and grows at different rates in each sector and country. The labor
productivity process ( itus ,  itrw ) is where we introduce our first exogenous driving force:

asymmetric productivity growth. We use bars to distinguish labor productivity and other
exogenous time-varying parameters from constant parameters and equilibrium variables.
       The composite intermediate bundle mitus is composed of intermediate purchases from each

traded sector j in each country (mijtus ,us , miujts ,rw ) ,
                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                    j 
(4)                           i  
                    mitus   us            us  us
                                                  
                                             ij  ij
                                                
                                                      mijt    
                                                         us ,us  j
                                                                     (1   us
                                                                             ij )  mijt    
                                                                                      us ,rw  j 
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                            .
                                  jg , s                                                               
                                                                       7
Intermediate goods are aggregated in two stages. First, intermediate inputs from each country are
aggregated within the goods and services sectors separately. Second, goods and services
intermediates are combined to form the aggregate intermediate bundle used in industry i .
Consider, for example, the use of tires and steel in the production of automobiles. Car producers
first combine domestic and foreign tires into a tire bundle, and do the same for steel. The tire
bundle and steel bundle are then combined to form the total intermediate bundle.
      The parameter  us
                      i  is a constant scaling factor.  ijus governs the share of sector- j

intermediates in the aggregate intermediate bundle, and ijus govern the domestically sourced share

of sector- j intermediates in the sector- i intermediate bundle.  governs the elasticity of
substitution between intermediates from different sectors, while  j governs the elasticity of

substitution between sector- j intermediates from different source countries. This specification
allows us to calibrate a production structure in which goods and services are strong complements
in intermediate production ( 1 / (1   )  0 ), but an input from the rest of the world is a substitute
for an input from the United States ( 1 / (1   j )  1 ).

      Gross output is produced by perfectly competitive firms. A representative firm in sector i in
the United States chooses capital, labor, and intermediate inputs to maximize profits,

(5)                    qitus yitus  wtus usit  rktus kitus     q
                                                                  j  g ,s
                                                                             us
                                                                             jt   mijtus ,us  q rw  us , rw
                                                                                                 jt mijt     ,
subject to nonnegativity constraints and (1), (2), and (4). The wage is wtus , rktus is the capital rental

rate, and the prices of sector-i gross output sourced from the two countries are q itu s and qitrw . Firms
in the rest of the world face a similar problem but do not use capital to produce.

3.2 Final demand
The United States has three types of final demand: private consumption (ush ) , public consumption
(usg ) , and investment (usx) . The rest of the world has only consumption. Households in both
countries and the U.S. government consume goods and services produced at home and abroad.
Investment in the United States is produced using goods and services from home and abroad, and
with local construction services.
      Similar to the aggregation scheme for intermediate inputs, final demand for output from
sector i is a composite of domestic and foreign products. To allow for differences in shares and
                                                  8
elasticities across final uses, we construct these composites separately for each category of final
demand. Household consumption of output from tradable sector i  g , s is an aggregate of

purchases from home and abroad (citush,us , citush ,rw ) ,


                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                1

(6)                      cush
                          it       ush
                                     i          i
                                                 ush
                                                       cit     
                                                         ush ,us  i
                                                                        (1     i
                                                                                   ush
                                                                                         ) cit      
                                                                                             ush , rw  i       i
                                                                                                                     .

The parameter  i governs the elasticity of substitution in final demand between domestic and

foreign products. As with intermediate inputs, we allow goods and services to have different
elasticities. The parameter iush governs the domestically sourced share of household expenditure

on sector-i output, and  ush
                          i   is a constant scaling factor. The price of sector-i household

consumption, pitush , is given by the standard CES price index.

       The government’s consumption of sector-i output, citusg , and the investment producers’ use

of sector-i output, xitusx , are constructed using analogous versions of (6), and their prices, pitusg and

pitusx , are given by the analogous constant elasticity of substitution price indices. The associated

share parameters are ( iusg , iusx ) and the scale parameters are ( usg
                                                                       i , i ) .
                                                                            usx




3.2.1 Financial assets and exchange rates
Before we can discuss investment production, households, and the government, we need to
describe the bond market. The U.S. government, households in the United States, and households
in the rest of the world have access to a one-period, internationally traded bond, bt , that is

denominated in units of the U.S. consumer price index (CPI),
                                                       pgtush cgush,1992  pstush csush
                                                                                     ,1992
(7)                                  Pt us                                                      .
                                                   pgush,1992cgush,1992  psush     ush
                                                                             ,1992 cs ,1992


U.S. households can also save by investing in the U.S. capital stock, but will be indifferent between
holding capital and bonds, as they pay the same return in equilibrium. The real interest rate in units
of the U.S. CPI is
(8)                                                    1  rt 1  Pt us / Qt ,

where Qt is the bond price. We compute the real exchange rate in our model using consumer price

indices, just as we do in the data,

                                                                               9
(9)                                                  rert  Pt rw / Pt us ,

where the rest of the world’s CPI, Pt rw , is defined analogously to the U.S. CPI in (7).

       We model a single bond, but the equilibrium of our baseline model is equivalent to one in
which both governments and households issue debt. The deterministic nature of the model gives
rise to Ricardian equivalence (except at the unexpected onset of the saving glut), so the split
between public and private debt is essentially irrelevant. We have experimented with a stochastic
version of the model in which public and private debt are distinct, but we find this change to be
quantitatively insignificant.

3.2.2 Investment
Investment is produced by perfectly competitive firms operating a constant returns to scale
technology; we focus on the representative firm. Investment is an aggregate of goods and services
composites, ( xgtusx , xstusx ) , and the output of the U.S. construction sector,


                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                              1

(10)                         xusx
                              t     E   usx        usx
                                                    g     x usx 
                                                              gt         usx
                                                                           s     x 
                                                                                  usx 
                                                                                  st         usx
                                                                                               c     y us  
                                                                                                         ct


where E usx is a constant scale factor,  iusx governs the share of goods, services, and construction in

investment expenditure, and  governs the elasticity of substitution in investment production. The
price of investment, ptusx , is given by the standard CES price index.

3.2.3 Households
Each country is populated by a continuum of identical households. We draw a distinction between
the total ( ntus ) and working-age ( tus ) populations so that our model captures the impact of
demographic changes, both within and across countries, on households’ incentives to borrow or
save. We normalize the time available for work and leisure in each period to one.
       The representative household in the United States chooses consumption of goods and
services, investment, bond holdings, and labor supply to maximize lifetime utility,
                                                                                                                              
                                                         
                                                                                               us                             
                       1  ush  cgt  cgt                                     
                                                                                                                  1 us
                                                            ush  cst  cst                          tus   ush          
                                    ush   ush                      ush      ush

                 g  n us                                                  
                     t
(11)            ush
                                                     
                                                           s                                      
                                                                                                                t
                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                   t
                                                                          us                                 us
         t 0                         t                            nt                                                   
                                                                                                                           
subject to the budget constraints and the law of motion for capital,

                                                                            10
(12)      pgtush cgtush  pstush cstush  ptusx xtusx  Qt btush
                                                             1  wt  t  Pt bt
                                                                   us ush    us ush
                                                                                     (1   kus )rktus ktus  Tt us ,

(13)                                           ktus1  (1   ) ktus  xtusx ,

appropriate nonnegativity constraints, initial conditions for the capital stock and bond holdings,
and the no-Ponzi condition. Households pay constant proportional taxes,  kus , on capital income

and receive a lump-sum tax or transfer, Tt us . The parameter  governs the elasticity of substitution

between goods and services in household consumption,  us governs the share of time devoted to

leisure, ( gush ,  sush ) govern the shares of goods and services in household consumption, and 

determines the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.
       Following Buera and Kaboski (2009) and Herrendorf et al. (2013), we use Stone-Geary
preferences to model nonhomotheticities that generate structural change. The subsistence
requirement for goods, cgtush , and the endowment of services, cstush , vary over time to ensure that

the model retains consistency with balanced growth.1
       The rest of the world’s households solve a similar but simpler problem. They choose
consumption of goods and services, labor supply, and bond holdings to maximize lifetime utility,
                                                                                                                         
                                                   
                                                                                           rw                          
                            rw  cgtrw  cgtrw                                    
                                                                                                             1 rw
           
                         1                             rw  cst  cst 
                                                             rw     rw
                                                                                                  trw   rw         
(14)         (  ) t
                 rw t rw
                              
                           g  ntrw 
                                                    s                            
                                                                                      
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                            t
                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                  t
                                                                 rw                                     rw
         t 0
                                                          nt                                                         
                                                                                                                       
subject to the budget constraints
(15)                              pgtrwcgtrw  pstrwcstrw  Qt btrw1  wtrw rw
                                                                              t  Pt bt ,
                                                                                    us rw



nonnegativity constraints, and a no-Ponzi condition. The parameter  trw , which shifts the rest of
the world’s intertemporal demand, is the second exogenous driving force in our model. We will




1
 Kongsamut et al. (2001) show that, in a closed-economy model with Stone-Geary preferences, one can ensure a
balanced growth path by choosing the subsistence requirements so that they cancel out in the household’s budget
constraint. In closed-economy models, balanced growth paths are unique. Our model has a continuum of balanced
growth paths with different relative prices, so there are no subsistence parameters that generically satisfy this knife-
edge condition. Boppart (2014) constructs a closed-economy model that generates balanced growth without this
parameter restriction. We leave extending that model to an open economy with unbalanced trade to future research.

                                                                       11
calibrate the series {trw }t2012
                              1992 so that the U.S. trade balance in our model’s saving-glut equilibrium


matches the data. After 2012,  trw gradually reverts to one,

(16)                                           trw1  trw  (1   ) .

3.2.4 U.S. government
The government in the United States levies taxes and sells bonds to finance exogenously required
consumption expenditures. The budget constraint is

                          t cgt  pst cst  Qt bt 1   k rkt kt  Tt  Pt bt .
                       pgusg usg   usg usg       usg     us us us     us   us usg
(17)

Total government consumption expenditures and debt as fractions of GDP follow exogenous time
paths, ctusg and bt usg . These paths follow the historical data for 1992–2012, and in the subsequent
years, the paths follow the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) projections (Congressional Budget
Office, 2012). We allow the lump-sum tax, Tt us , to vary as necessary to ensure that the

government’s budget constraint is satisfied. The government’s objective in each period is to choose
goods and services consumption to maximize a CES “utility function” subject to the constraint that
total consumption expenditures are at the required level,


                                                                         c  
                                                                                  1


(18)
                           max cusg ,cusg 
                                 gt   st
                                                usg
                                                g     c 
                                                       usg 
                                                       gt         usg
                                                                    s
                                                                            usg  
                                                                            st


                           subject to           pgtusg cgtusg  pstusg cstusg  ct usg GDPt us ,

where ( g ,  s ) govern the shares of goods and services in government consumption and 
         usg   usg



governs the elasticity of goods and services in government consumption. Government debt is
simply given by btusg  bt usg GDPt us .
       The lump-sum tax implies that our model exhibits near-Ricardian equivalence, which means
that the timing of taxes and government borrowing is almost irrelevant. Ricardian equivalence
breaks down only when we introduce unexpected events such as the saving glut. In our sensitivity
analysis, however, we show that deviations from Ricardian equivalence have little impact on our
results.

3.3 Market clearing




                                                                      12
Market clearing for gross output of goods and services in each country l  {us, rw} requires that

gross output, yitl , equals the sum of all intermediate and final demand (recall that we do not model

the government or the investment sector in the rest of the world),

(19)             yitl        m
                          k us ,rw j  g , s
                                                   us ,k
                                                   ijt          mijtrw,k  cush
                                                                             jt
                                                                                 ,k
                                                                                     c rw
                                                                                        jt
                                                                                           ,k
                                                                                               cusg
                                                                                                 jt
                                                                                                     ,k
                                                                                                         xusx
                                                                                                           jt
                                                                                                               ,k
                                                                                                                  , i  g , s .
Construction market clearing is trivial since construction is used only to produce investment.
Market clearing in factor markets requires

(20)                                 ust        
                                                i  g , s ,c
                                                                us
                                                                it   ,    t 
                                                                         rw    
                                                                                i g ,s
                                                                                          rw
                                                                                          it   , ktus      
                                                                                                          i  g , s ,c
                                                                                                                         kitus ,

and finally, bond markets must clear,
(21)                                                                 btush  btusg  btrw  0 .

3.4 Equilibrium and balanced growth paths
An     equilibrium              in         our            model,            given          a        sequence                of     time-varying   parameters
{trw , ctusg , bt usg ,(ntl , tl )l{us,rw} , ( itl )l{us,rw},i{g ,s,c}}t0 and initial conditions (b1992
                                                                                                           ush
                                                                                                                , b1992
                                                                                                                   usg
                                                                                                                        , k1992
                                                                                                                           us
                                                                                                                                ) , is

sequences of model variables such that: households in the United States and the rest of the world
maximize utility subject to their constraint constraints; prices and quantities satisfy marginal
product pricing conditions for all commodities; prices and quantities are such that all production
activities earn zero profits; all commodity, factor, and bond market clearing conditions are
satisfied; and the U.S. government solves its consumption allocation problem.

        When {t , ct , bt ,(nt , t )l{us,rw}}t 0 are constant, and labor productivity in each sector
                rw   usg  usg  l   l            



grows at the same constant rate, { it /  i,t 1  g }t 0 for l {us, rw} and i {g , s, c} , the model
                                     l      l           



converges to a balanced growth path. A balanced growth path in our model is an equilibrium in
which all quantities grow at the constant rate of productivity growth, g  1 (except for labor

supply, which is constant), and all relative prices are constant. Since we allow for unbalanced
trade, our model has a continuum of balanced growth paths indexed by U.S. net foreign asset
levels. The balanced growth path to which a particular equilibrium converges is determined by the
equilibrium’s initial conditions and time-varying parameters. Consequentially, solving the model
is not merely transiting between known initial conditions and a known balanced growth path. We


                                                                                               13
must solve for the transition and the balanced growth path simultaneously. This complexity
influences our calibration approach, as we describe in the next section.
      To solve the model, we require that the model converges to a balanced growth path by 2092,
100 years after our starting date. This implies that sectoral productivity growth rates must
eventually be equal, the other exogenous time-varying parameters must be constant, and household
preferences must be homothetic. We do not want these end point conditions to distort the behavior
of the model during our period of interest (1992–2012). To achieve this, we allow the time-varying
parameters to take their calibrated values during 1992–2042. For the 50 years that follow, sectoral
productivity growth rates converge to equality, the other exogenous time-varying parameters
converge to constants, and the subsistence consumption requirements converge to zero. Our results
during 1992–2012 are not sensitive to increasing the time it takes to converge to the balanced
growth path beyond 100 years.
      We construct two equilibria in our model: a benchmark in which the saving glut is followed
by a gradual rebalancing of U.S. trade and a no-saving-glut counterfactual in which the saving glut
does not occur and U.S. trade is roughly balanced forever. The differences between these two
equilibria are completely due to the paths of {trw , ctusg , bt usg }t0 ; all other parameters and the initial
conditions do not change.

4. Calibration
We calibrate the model so that the counterfactual equilibrium (the one without the saving glut)
replicates the U.S. data in 1992. Our assumption is that the saving glut was not foreseen in 1992.
We view this as the most natural exercise, but our results are not sensitive to calibrating a
benchmark equilibrium in which agents foresee the saving glut.
      We take the elasticities of substitution from the relevant literature and calibrate the remainder
of the model’s production and preference parameters so that the equilibrium replicates the 1992
world input-output matrix (table 1) we have constructed from the World Input-output Database
(WIOD). In the next section, we show that, while we have not calibrated the elasticities, the model
does a good job in matching observed changes in several key expenditure shares — evidence that
our chosen elasticities are appropriate. Table 2 summarizes the parameter values. More details are
provided in the online supplementary materials available at www.econ.umn.edu/~tkehoe.

4.1 Gross output parameters

                                                          14
We choose the scaling factors li , Ail , and  li (l  us, rw) so that U.S. GDP in 1992 is 100 and

all gross output prices in 1992 are one. Following Atalay (2014), we set the elasticity of
substitution between value added and intermediate inputs, 1/ (1  ) , to 0.05, and the elasticity of
substitution between intermediate inputs from different sectors, 1/ (1   ) , to 0.03. For the within-

sector elasticities of substitution between intermediates from different countries, 1/ (1   i ) , we

use three for goods and one for services. These choices are near the upper and lower bounds of the
aggregate Armington elasticities used in the literature. Given these values, we choose the share

parameters, ( ij ,  ij ) and (ij , ij ) , so that the equilibrium replicates the quantities in our world
               us      rw        us     rw



input-output matrix.
       We calibrate the U.S. labor productivity growth parameters,  itus , so that real value added

per worker in the model grows at the same rate as in the data for each sector. Using data on value
added and labor compensation from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) for 1992–2012, we
find that the average annual growth rates of real value added per effective worker are 4.4 percent
in goods, 1.3 percent in services, and 0.84 percent in construction. In the model’s first 50 years
(1992–2042), we set  itus so that real value added per worker in the model grows at the same rates

as in the data. Starting in 2042, all of the sectoral productivity growth rates begin to converge to 2
percent per year to ensure that the equilibrium converges to a balanced growth path.2 This
convergence process takes 25 years. Our results, which focus on the period 1992–2012, are not
sensitive to this timing assumption. For the rest of the world, we calculate growth rates of  itrw so

that the price of goods relative to services follows the same path in the rest of the world as in the
United States.

4.2 Final demand parameters
Again, we choose scaling factors li so that 1992 final demand prices are one. The WIOD data do
not distinguish between public and private consumption, so we do not have separate data on



2
 In Ngai and Pissarides (2007), when sectors differ permanently in productivity growth, long-run balanced growth is
possible if and only if the elasticity of substitution across sectors in intermediate use is one. Since we use a low
elasticity of substitution between intermediate goods and services, we assume convergence across sectors in
productivity growth rates to ensure balanced growth. This assumption has no significant impact on the equilibrium
dynamics during our period of interest, 1992–2012.
                                                            15
changes in public and private consumption expenditure shares. We therefore set both 1/ (1 )

and 1/ (1) to the estimate in Atalay (2014) of 0.65 — about halfway between the commonly
used value of 0.5 and the estimate of 0.85 by Herrendorf et al. (2013). We set the elasticity of
substitution between different commodities in investment, 1/ (1 ) , to one (Bems, 2008). The

final demand Armington elasticities, 1/ (1   i ) , are two for goods and one for services. As with

the gross output production structure, given our choice of elasticities, we choose values for the
share parameters,  il , so that the equilibrium replicates the world input-output matrix.

4.3 Household parameters
We set the share parameters,  , so that households in both countries use one-third of their time
                              l


for work. We set the U.S. and world discount factors so that the real interest rate on the balanced
growth path is 3 percent. Estimates of the real interest rate from academics and government
research groups range from 0.5 to 5 percent (McGrattan and Prescott 2000, 2005; King and Low
2014; Congressional Budget Office, 2012, 2015). Given these considerations, we chose the CBO’s
2012 projection of 3 percent because it is in line with estimates from the literature, and is consistent
with the CBO’s budget projections, which we use in modeling government spending and debt. Our
main results are not sensitive to reasonable interest rate values.
      For the demographic time series ntl and tl , we use historical data and future projections

from the World Population Prospects: 2010 Revision (United Nations, 2011). Consistent with our
measure of the real exchange rate in Section 2, we construct the rest of the world’s population as
a weighted average of the United States’ 20 largest trade partners. To ensure convergence to a
balanced growth path, we assume that populations in the United States and the rest of the world
start to converge to constant levels in 2042 and finish converging 25 years later.
      The subsistence consumption levels, ciush , are constant during 1992–2042. Herrendorf et al.

(2013) report subsistence consumption levels for 1947 and 2010. We linearly interpolate between
these dates to find the 1992 subsistence parameters for the United States, and we assume that, in
per capita terms, the rest of the world’s subsistence levels are the same as those in the United

States: ci ,1992  ( 1992 / 1992 )ci ,1992 . To ensure a balanced growth path in our model, preferences must
           rw         rw      us      ush




                                                        16
be homothetic in the long run, so we assume the subsistence parameters converge to zero during
2042–2067. We provide more details in the online supplementary materials.

4.4 Government spending and debt
We calibrate the model under the assumption that agents did not foresee the saving glut. It is likely
that the observed path of government spending in the data has been influenced by the saving glut,
so we must specify agents’ beliefs over future government actions in the absence of the saving
glut. In the no-saving-glut counterfactual, we assume that government spending remains at its 1992
level (as a share of GDP) forever and that government debt converges from 48 percent of GDP
(the observed level in 1992) to 60 percent of GDP, consistent with the 1992 CBO projections. We
set the initial value of household bond holdings, b1992
                                                   ush
                                                        , so that total net foreign assets, b1992
                                                                                             ush
                                                                                                   b1992
                                                                                                     usg
                                                                                                          ,

are −7.8 percent of GDP (Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, 2007). When we solve the model with the
saving glut, the behavior of government spending and debt will differ as discussed below.

4.5 Capital stock, capital tax, and depreciation
Using the method of Backus et al. (2007), we compute U.S. capital stocks for 1992–2012. To
calibrate the depreciation rate, we use the capital stock data, and the consumption of fixed capital,
reported by the BEA, to calculate an average annual depreciation rate of 5.3 percent. We set the
U.S. capital income tax,  kus , to 39 percent, the statutory rate reported by Devereux et al. (2002).

We set the initial capital stock, k1992 , to 278 percent of GDP, as it is in the data.

5. Quantitative results
Having calibrated the model, we now present our quantitative results. We start with a comparison
of our benchmark saving-glut equilibrium to the data, and then examine the no-saving-glut
counterfactual to answer the question: what would have happened to the U.S. economy — and
what would happen in the future — but for the saving glut?

5.1 The benchmark saving-glut equilibrium
We have calibrated the model to the no-saving-glut counterfactual — the equilibrium in which the
saving glut did not occur. We now use the calibrated model to study the impact of the saving glut.
In this equilibrium, we keep all of the model parameters as they are in the counterfactual, except
for three: We change  trw to create the saving glut, and we change government spending and debt

paths to match the observed data. We calibrate  trw so that the equilibrium replicates the aggregate
                                                       17
U.S. trade balance during 1993–2012; in the subsequent years,  trw reverts to one according to

(16). U.S. government consumption and debt (as a share of GDP) match the data for 1992–2012
and follow projections from the CBO’s 2012 Long-Term Budget Outlook, which we adjust in later
years to be consistent with balanced growth. More details on our construction of projected
government spending and debt are available in the online supplementary materials. Our results are
not sensitive to assumptions about the behavior of government spending and debt, as well as
households’ expectations about these variables.3
       To compute the equilibrium in the model with the saving glut, we use 1993 as the initial
period and use the 1993 equilibrium values of capital and bond holdings from the no-saving-glut
counterfactual as initial conditions. This specification embodies the assumption that agents in 1992
did not foresee the saving glut and were surprised by the increase in demand for saving in the rest
of the world, as well as by the increase in domestic government spending and debt that
accompanied it. Once agents learn of the saving glut, they have perfect foresight.

5.1.1 Goodness of fit: Changes in expenditure shares
Before turning to our three key facts, we compare the model with the data along several key
dimensions that were not targets of the calibration. These moments are useful in judging the
elasticities of substitution that we have chosen from the literature. We focus on changes in U.S.
expenditure shares between 1995 and 2011, which map directly to the elasticities of substitution.
We report the changes in expenditure shares in the data and the model in table 3.
       The elasticity of substitution between value added and intermediates is an important
determinant in the change in the intermediate-input share of gross output. We use the estimate
from Atalay (2014), 1 / (1  )  0.05 , which makes this share sensitive to changes in the relative
price of intermediates. As we report in table 3, the change in the intermediate-input share of gross
output between 1995 and 2011 is –1.04 percent in the data and –1.50 percent in the model. The
elasticity of substitution between intermediate inputs of goods and services affects the sensitivity
of the goods share of total intermediate use to the relative price of goods; we use the estimate from




3
 For example: If we assume government spending and debt are constant, the saving glut is responsible for 17 percent
of the decline in goods-sector employment and rises to 20 percent if we assume households perfectly foresee the actual
path of government spending and debt during the saving glut.
                                                             18
Atalay (2014), 1 / (1   )  0.03 . In the data, the goods share of total intermediate use falls by 6.8
percent, compared with 5.4 percent in the model.
      The elasticities of substitution between goods and services in public and private consumption
are 1/ (1 )  0.65 and 1/ (1)  0.65 . As shown in Herrendorf et al. (2013), these elasticities
must be consistent with the underlying model; elasticities in models of gross output are
significantly larger than those in models of value added. We use the estimate in Atalay (2014),
which is derived from a gross output model with an input-output structure and distinct elasticities
of substitution between sectoral output in final and intermediate uses. To evaluate the
appropriateness of our elasticity, we examine the change in the goods share of aggregate
consumption. In the data, this share falls by 1.7 percent, compared with 2.7 percent in the model.
      The elasticity of substitution between goods and services in investment is 1/ (1 )  1, as
found in Bems (2008). The change in the goods share of investment in the data is –0.2 percent,
compared with the unchanged share in our model.
      Lastly, the elasticities between domestic and foreign products in intermediate and final uses,
1/ (1   i ) and 1/ (1   i ) , determine the volatility of the sectoral trade balances. The standard
deviation of the goods trade balance is 1.5 in the data, compared with 1.5 in the model. The lower
elasticity of substitution between services produced at home and abroad generates less volatility
in the services trade balance, which matches the data well. The standard deviation of the services
trade balance is 0.24 in the data, compared with 0.20 in the model.

5.1.2 Goodness of fit: Replicating the three key facts
In figure 6, we plot the real exchange rate in the baseline model against the data and the no-saving-
glut counterfactual. Our model does a good job in matching the magnitude of the appreciation
during 1992–2012: The real exchange rate appreciates by 27.9 percent in the data and 27.1 percent
in the model before beginning to depreciate. The baseline model, however, fails to capture the
timing of the depreciation. In the data, the real exchange rate begins to depreciate in 2002, four
years before the trade deficit begins to shrink. In our model, the real exchange rate moves in
tandem with the trade balance; it does not begin to depreciate until 2006.
      The lag between the real exchange rate and trade balance movements in the data, often
referred to as the “J-curve” (Backus, et al., 1994), is difficult to generate in models of aggregate
trade such as ours. Alessandria and Choi (2015), for example, show that heterogeneous firms that
                                                     19
price to market and make dynamic decisions about entering and exiting the export market are
crucial elements in generating a realistic J-curve. The sort of frictions that generate J-curves at the
business cycle frequency, however, are unlikely to generate the sort of four-year lag that we see in
the U.S. data. To incorporate this lag into the model in Section 6, we mechanically introduce
wedges so that the model matches both the trade balance and real exchange rate during 1992–
2012, and show that this has little impact on our model’s predictions for sectoral labor reallocation.
      In figure 4, we plot the sector-level trade balances in the model alongside the data. The model
closely matches the trade balances for both goods and services between 1992 and 2012. This aspect
of the model’s performance is due in part to our choice of Armington elasticities. Table 3 shows
that in both the model and the data, the goods trade balance is more volatile than the services trade
balance. Had we used the same elasticities in both sectors, the goods trade balance would not have
moved enough, while the services trade balance would have been too volatile.
      In figure 5, we plot the employment shares for the goods and construction sectors in the
model alongside the data. The baseline model captures 99.2 percent of the decline in the goods-
sector employment share between 1992 and 2012. Our model’s ability to capture the full extent of
the reallocation of labor away from the goods sector makes it well suited to answering the
counterfactual question at the heart of the paper: What would have happened to the goods-sector
employment share in the absence of the saving glut?
      Figure 5 also shows that the model captures aspects of the construction-sector employment
share between 1992 and 2012. During 1993–2006, the construction-sector employment share rises
in both the model and the data, although our model generates a larger increase. The subsequent
bust is smaller in the model than in the data, primarily because we have not introduced the financial
crisis of 2008–2009 in any form other than the way in which it affected the trade balance. If we
were to introduce a more accurate model of the crisis, we would undoubtedly do better in this
regard, but this is not the focus of our study.

5.2 The impact of the saving glut
We now use the calibrated model to study the impact of the saving glut by comparing the baseline
saving-glut equilibrium with the no-saving-glut counterfactual. This comparison is informative
about the impact of the saving glut in both the past and the future.
      Our first question concerns the trade balance: What would the U.S. trade balance have been
had the rest of the world’s effective discount factor remained constant? Figure 7 shows that, in
                                                   20
the absence of the saving glut, U.S. trade would have been roughly balanced throughout the 1992–
2012 period; the entire cumulative U.S. trade deficit during this period is due to increased demand
for saving in the rest of the world. This is not an obvious or a trivial result — initial conditions and
differences in demographic and industrial structures across countries, coupled with asymmetric
productivity growth across sectors, can generate cross-country differences in saving behavior. Our
results tell us that these factors are not important in explaining the behavior of the U.S. trade
balance over the past two decades. Looking into the future, our model predicts that the trade
balance will be about 1 percent of GDP higher by 2024 than it would have been if the saving glut
had not occurred. This is driven by the repayment of the debt incurred by the United States during
the saving glut.
      Examining the counterfactual sector-level trade balances in figure 4, we see that the saving
glut’s impact on the trade balance has been concentrated in the goods sector; the services trade
balance would have been similar had the saving glut not occurred. This is also true in the future.
The trade surpluses the United States will run to pay back its saving-glut debt will come almost
entirely from the goods sector. The United States will run a surplus in services as well, but by 2024
this surplus would be the same as if the saving glut had not occurred.
      Our counterfactual real exchange rate mirrors the aggregate trade balance. As evident in
figure 6, in the counterfactual equilibrium, the real exchange rate is roughly unchanged between
1992 and 2014. Comparing the counterfactual with the baseline, we see that all of the real exchange
rate appreciation between 1992 and the mid-2000s is attributable to the saving glut, as is the
subsequent depreciation. In the future, as the United States repays its debt to the rest of the world,
its real exchange rate will depreciate above its path in the no-saving-glut counterfactual.
      Our primary interest is the impact of the saving glut on labor reallocation in the United
States: What portion of the decline in the goods-sector employment share during 1992–2012 is
attributable to the saving glut? To answer this question, we compare the drop in the goods-sector
employment share in the counterfactual equilibrium with the drop in the baseline equilibrium. We
measure both in the same units: the fraction of the decline in the goods-sector employment share
in the data. The decline in the no-saving-glut counterfactual is 84.1 percent of the observed decline,
and the decline in the baseline equilibrium is 99.2 percent. The difference between the two, 15.1
percent, is the decrease in the goods-sector employment share that is driven by the saving glut.
Looking to the future, figure 5 shows that the reversal of the saving glut will have a negligible
                                                     21
impact on goods-sector employment. The share of employment in the goods sector would be about
the same in 2024 if the saving glut did not happen; the surplus in goods trade necessary to repay
the debt will have little impact on the allocation of labor across sectors. Eliminating the U.S. trade
deficit will not bring back employment to goods production.
      Our focus is on the saving glut’s impact on structural change, but we can also measure the
impact of traditional structural change forces in our model: differential productivity growth and
nonhomothetic preferences. When we set the subsistence consumption levels to zero, so that
preferences are homothetic, the benchmark model accounts for 93.5 percent of the decline in the
goods-sector employment share, compared with 99.2 percent in the baseline model; differential
productivity growth is clearly the dominant driver of structural change in our model. Our
assumption about preferences does not change our finding regarding the saving glut. The saving
glut is responsible for 14.4 percent of the decline in the goods-sector employment share in the
homothetic model, compared with 15.1 percent in the baseline model.

6. Sensitivity analysis
We have conducted a wide range of additional experiments with our model, and we find that our
main result — the modest impact of the saving glut on U.S. structural change — is robust. We
limit our discussion here to only three sets of sensitivity analyses. The first modifies the model to
improve its ability to match the timing of the U.S. real exchange rate. In the second, we calibrate
our model to counterfactual input-output tables to shed light on the role of intermediate input
linkages in driving structural change. In the last analysis, we model trade deficits as driven by
domestic factors rather than increased demand for saving in the rest of the world. We summarize
the results of our sensitivity analysis in table 4. In the supplementary materials available online,
we demonstrate the robustness of our results to the household’s labor-leisure choice.

6.1 Trade wedges
Figure 6 shows that our model matches the magnitude of the real exchange rate appreciation and
depreciation in the data, but misses on the timing. The real exchange rate begins to appreciate in
2002, but the trade deficit does not start to shrink until 2006. To understand the importance of this
phenomenon for our results, we study a version of our model with “trade wedges” as in Alessandria
et al. (2013). In this model, shipments of goods and services from the United States to the rest of



                                                    22
the world are distorted by the time-varying factor (1   mtrw ) . Taking the trade wedges,  mrw,t as given,

producers in the rest of the world maximize profits,

(22)                 qitrw yitrw  wtrw rw
                                         it      (1  
                                                j  g ,s
                                                             rw
                                                             m ,t   )qusjt mijtrw,us  q rw  rw, rw
                                                                                         jt mijt    .
       This implies that the prices of goods and services in the rest of the world are now functions
of the trade wedges, distorting producers’ and consumers’ demand for products from the United
States. We calibrate these wedges so that the model matches exactly both the trade balance and
the real exchange rate data during 1992–2012.
       In figure 8 we plot the goods-sector employment share in the baseline model and the trade
wedge model. The two models behave almost identically between 1992 and 2002; the trade wedge
model generates less movement in the goods-employment share between 2002 and 2016, and the
two models are almost identical thereafter. The benchmark trade wedge model generates 94.6
percent of the observed decline in the goods-sector employment share between 1992 and 2012,
versus the baseline model’s 99.2 percent. The no-saving-glut counterfactual is the same in both
models. Compared with the baseline model, the trade wedge model attributes a smaller portion of
the decline in the goods-sector employment share during 1992–2012 to the saving glut, 10.6
percent compared to 15.1 percent.

6.2 The input-output structure
Input-output linkages quantitatively affect U.S. structural change in two ways. First, services are
stronger complements in intermediate use than in final use, so expenditures on intermediate goods
fall more than expenditures on final goods in response to asymmetric productivity growth. This is
evident in table 3: the goods share of U.S. intermediates fell more than the goods share of U.S.
consumption between 1995 and 2011, –6.8 percent versus –1.7 percent. Second, compared with
services, goods are used more intensively as intermediates. The ratio of gross output to value added
is 2.9 for goods and 1.7 for services. We construct two counterfactual versions of our input-output
table to illustrate the role of these two mechanisms.
       In our first counterfactual, we set all of the intermediate input requirements to zero while
keeping sectoral value added fixed. This exercise captures the full extent of the input-output
linkages’ contribution to U.S. structural change. In this production structure, sectoral output is now
value added rather than gross output, so we must adjust the elasticity of substitution between goods
and services in consumption (Herrendorf et al. 2013). We set the elasticity of substitution between
                                                  23
goods and services in consumption to 0.03, the same as our elasticity of substitution between goods
and services in intermediate use. This is very close to the suggested elasticity of 0.02 from
Herrendorf et al. (2013). In this version of the model, the benchmark equilibrium accounts for 66.2
percent of the decline in the goods-sector employment share. This is substantially less than the
baseline model’s 99.2 percent, indicating that there remains an important role for input-output
linkages in driving U.S. structural change.
      Our second counterfactual input-output table illustrates how heterogeneity in intermediate
use across sectors affects structural change. Here we retain the input-output structure, but equalize
the gross output to value added ratios in all U.S. sectors to 2.0, the aggregate gross output to value
added ratio. Our results suggest that the intensive use of goods as intermediates has hastened the
decline in goods-sector employment. This version of the model accounts for 86.1 percent of the
observed decline in the goods-sector employment share, 13.0 percent less than the baseline model.
The intuition is that when goods are used less intensively as intermediate inputs, there is less room
for expenditures on intermediate goods to fall in response to relative price changes driven by
asymmetric productivity growth.
      In all of our experiments with counterfactual input-output matrices, the saving glut accounts
for a similar portion of the decline in the goods-sector employment share as in the baseline model.
Although the input-output structure of the U.S. economy is important in explaining structural
change, it does not play an important role in the impact of trade deficits on structural change.

6.3 Global saving glut or domestic saving drought?
We have adopted the global-saving-glut hypothesis proposed by Bernanke (2005), which posits
that U.S. international borrowing since the 1990s has been driven primarily by increased demand
for saving in the rest of the world. A number of authors (Chinn and Ito, 2007; Gruber and Kamin,
2007; Obstfeld and Rogoff, 2009) argue that domestic factors such as monetary policy, housing
market policy, and innovations in financial markets were the primary causes of U.S. borrowing.
To evaluate the merits of these hypotheses, we study a version of our model in which the
preferences of U.S. households, rather than households in the rest of the world, drive the U.S. trade
balance. Following Chinn and Ito (2007), we call this the domestic-saving-drought model. In the
saving-drought model, the preferences of U.S. households take the same form as (14), and we
calibrate the U.S. preference parameters, tus , to match the U.S. trade balance.


                                                    24
      To assess which of the models is consistent with the data, we focus on investment. Figure 9
shows that, before the financial crisis of 2009, U.S. investment as a fraction of GDP rose steadily.
This is consistent with the saving-glut hypothesis: U.S. households took advantage of cheap
foreign goods to increase both investment and consumption, since the relative value they placed
on future consumption remained unchanged. If U.S. borrowing was instead driven by reduced
domestic demand for saving, U.S. households should have reduced investment in favor of
consumption. Except for 1993, the investment rate in the baseline model moves in the same
direction as the data. By contrast, beginning in 1997, the investment rate in the saving-drought
model falls dramatically, while it continues to rise in the data (except during the 2001 recession,
which we have not incorporated into our model). During the financial crisis of 2008–2009, which
we have not explicitly incorporated into our model, the investment rate falls in the baseline model
and the data, but rises in the saving-drought model. Overall, the correlation between the saving-
glut model’s investment rate and the data in first differences is 0.87; the same correlation for the
saving-drought model is –0.56.

7. Concluding remarks and directions for future research
We have developed a model of the United States and the rest of the world with two exogenous
driving forces: increased foreign demand for saving — the saving glut — and faster productivity
growth in goods compared with services and construction. The model accounts for three key facts
about the U.S. economy during 1992–2012: (1) the real exchange rate appreciated, then
depreciated; (2) the trade balance dynamics are driven almost entirely by the goods trade balance;
and (3) labor shifted away from the goods sector toward services and construction. We have used
our model to show that, while faster productivity growth in the goods sector is responsible for the
bulk of the long-run shift in employment away from that sector, the saving glut hastened this
change during 1992–2012.
      Although the saving glut’s impact on goods-sector employment is temporary, this does not
imply that the saving glut has not had an impact on the U.S. economy: The U.S. economy’s current
long-run trajectory is very different from the one it would have taken had the saving glut not
occurred. Figures 6 and 7 illustrate this point by plotting the aggregate trade balance and real
exchange rate in our benchmark saving-glut equilibrium against the no-saving-glut counterfactual.
In the counterfactual, U.S. trade is approximately balanced in the long run, since the United States
has little debt to repay. Because the saving glut did happen, however, our model predicts that the
                                                    25
United States will have to run a trade surplus of around 1 percent of GDP in perpetuity. To do so,
the U.S. real exchange rate will remain permanently depreciated by about 6 percent compared with
its path in the no-saving-glut counterfactual.
      Our analysis identifies two puzzles. Here we discuss these puzzles and point out directions
that future research could take in addressing them.
      The first puzzle is: Why did U.S. borrowing continue to increase once the real exchange rate
began to depreciate after 2002? In other words, why did U.S. purchases of foreign goods and
services continue to increase once foreign goods and services started getting more expensive
(figure 3)? A partial resolution to this puzzle might be found in the J-curve literature, in that time-
to-build and import pattern adjustment frictions can delay quantities adjusting to price changes.
This mechanism, however, is not likely to explain the substantial four-year lag. Another, perhaps
more plausible, explanation is the increase in China’s importance in U.S. borrowing during the
period. In figure 10 we decompose the U.S. real exchange rate into two components: (1) the
bilateral real exchange rate with China; and (2) the real exchange rate with the United States’ other
major trade partners. We see that the overall real exchange rate and the exchange rate with non-
China countries move closely in the early part of the period, but diverge in the latter part. Following
2002, the aggregate real exchange rate behaves more like the real exchange rate with China. To
accurately capture this, we would need to model an economy with (at least) three countries and
some sort of asset market segmentation, where countries like China choose to lend to the United
States rather than to other countries.
      The second puzzle is that, in contrast to Bernanke’s (2005) judgment, the saving glut has
had only a small effect on U.S. real interest rates in the model (see figure 11). The largest difference
between the interest rate in the benchmark saving-glut equilibrium and the no-saving-glut
counterfactual is 50 basis points. This is consistent with the findings of Warnock and Warnock
(2009) and Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2007), who have estimated that foreign lending
drove interest rates down by about 80 basis points over this period.
      In our model, the impact of the saving glut on interest rates depends on how substitutable
foreign goods are for U.S. goods. With the elasticities that we have chosen, we find that the saving
glut generates the right magnitude of the U.S. real exchange rate appreciation, as figure 6 shows,
but not the right magnitude in the drop of the U.S. real interest rate. If we make foreign goods
more substitutable for U.S. goods, we can generate a larger drop in the U.S. real interest rate during
                                                      26
2006–2012 — although still not as large as the drop observed in the data — but the model would
then predict a much smaller appreciation in the U.S. real exchange rate.
        To account for the low U.S. real interest rates in the data, we need to look elsewhere, perhaps
to the U.S. policies discussed by Obstfeld and Rogoff (2009) and Bernanke et al. (2011). It is worth
pointing out, however, that modeling the source of the global imbalances over 1992–2012 as being
generated by U.S. saving behavior does not work well. The domestic-saving-drought model we
studied in Section 6.4 is successful in generating lower U.S. real interest rates during 1993–2006,
as the dollar appreciates, but it generates higher U.S. interest rates during 2006–2012, as the dollar
depreciates. The low interest rates during the entire period pose a puzzle for theories of the saving
glut.




                                                      27
8. References
Acemoglu, D., and V. Guerrieri (2008), “Capital Deepening and Nonbalanced Economic Growth,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 116, 467–498.

Alessandria, G. and H. Choi (2015), “The Dynamics of the Trade Balance and the Real Exchange
  Rate: The J-curve and Trade Costs?” unpublished manuscript.

Alessandria, G., J. Kaboski, and V. Midrigan (2013), “Trade Wedges, Inventories, and
  International Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 60, 1–20.

Atalay, E. (2014), “How Important are Sectoral Shocks?” unpublished manuscript.

Backus, D., E. Henriksen, F. Lambert, and C. Telmer (2006), “Current Account Fact and Fiction,”
  unpublished manuscript.

Backus, D., E. Henriksen, and K. Storesletten (2007), “Taxes and the Global Allocation of
  Capital,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55, 48–61.

Backus, D., P. Kehoe, and F. Kydland (1994), “Dynamics of the Trade Balance and the Terms of
  Trade: The J-Curve?” American Economic Review, 84, 84–103.

Bems, R. (2008), “Aggregate Investment Expenditures on Tradable and Nontradable Goods,”
  Review of Economic Dynamics, 11, 852–883.

Bems, R. and K. Jönsson (2006), “Trade Deficits in the Baltic States: How Long Will the Party
  Last?” Review of Economic Dynamics, 9, 179–209.

Bernanke, B. S. (2005), “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” speech
  at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, VA, March 10.

Bernanke, B. S., C. Bertaut, L. P. DeMarco, and S. Kamin (2011), “International Capital Flows
  and the Returns to Safe Assets in the United States, 2003-2007,” Board of Governors of the
  Federal Reserve System International Finance Discussion Paper 1014.

Boppart, T. (2014) “Structural Change and the Kaldor Facts in a Growth Model with Relative Price
  Effects and Non-Gorman Preferences,” Econometrica, 82, 2167–2196.

Buera, F., and J. Kaboski (2009), “Can Traditional Theories of Structural Change Fit the Data?”
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 7, 467–477.

Caballero, R., E. Farhi, and P.-O. Gourinchas (2008), “An Equilibrium Model of ‘Global
  Imbalances’ and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, 98, 358–393.

Chinn, M. D., and H. Ito (2007), “Current Account Balances, Financial Development and
  Institutions: Assaying the World ‘Saving Glut’,” Journal of International Money and Finance,
  26, 546–569.


                                                 28
Congressional Budget Office (2012),           “The     2012   Long-Term     Budget     Outlook,”
  www.cbo.gov/publication/43288.

Congressional Budget Office (2015),           “The     2015   Long-Term     Budget     Outlook,”
  www.cbo.gov/publication/50250.

Devereux, M. P., R. Griffith, and A. Klemm (2002), “Corporate Income Tax Reforms and
  International Tax Competition,” Economic Policy, 35, 451–495.

Echevarria, C. (1995), “Agricultural Development vs. Industrialization: Effects of Trade,”
  Canadian Journal of Economics, 28, 631–647.

Fernandez de Cordoba G., and T. J. Kehoe (1999), “Capital Flows and Real Exchange Rate
   Fluctuations Following Spain’s Entry into the European Community,” unpublished manuscript.

Gourinchas, P.-O., and H. Rey (2007), “From World Banker to World Venture Capitalist: U.S.
  External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege,” in R. H. Clarida, ed., G7 Current Account
  Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, University of Chicago Press, 11–66.

Greenspan, A. (2005), “Monetary Policy Report to the Congress,” statement before the Committee
  on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, February 16.

Gruber, J. W., and S. B. Kamin (2007), “Explaining the Global Pattern of Current Account
  Imbalances,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 26, 500–522.

Herrendorf, B., R. Rogerson, and A. Valentinyi (2013), “Two Perspectives on Preferences and
  Structural Transformation,” American Economic Review, 103, 2752–2789.

Jin, K. (2012), “Industrial Structure and Capital Flows,” American Economic Review, 102, 2111–
   2146.

Kehoe, T. J., and K. J. Ruhl (2009), “Sudden Stops, Sectoral Reallocations, and the Real Exchange
  Rate,” Journal of Development Economics, 89, 235–249.

King, M. and D. Low (2014), “Measuring the ‘World’ Real Interest Rate,” NBER Working Paper
  19887.

Kongsamut, P., S. Rebelo, and D. Xie (2001), “Beyond Balanced Growth,” Review of Economic
  Studies, 68, 869–882.

Krishnamurthy, A., and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2007), “The Demand for Treasury Debt,” NBER
   Working Paper 12881.

Lane, P. R., and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2007), “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised
  and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970–2004,” Journal of
  International Economics, 73, 223–250.


                                                  29
Lane, P. R., and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2008), “Where Did All the Borrowing Go? A Forensic
  Analysis of the U.S. External Position,” IMF Working Paper WP/08/28.

McGrattan, E.R. and E.C. Prescott (2000), “Is the Stock Market Overvalued?” Federal Reserve
  Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 24, 20–40.

McGrattan, E.R. and E.C. Prescott (2005), “Taxes Regulations, and the Value of U.S. and U.K.
  Corporations,” Review of Economic Studies, 72, 767–796.

Matsuyama, K. (1992), “Agricultural Productivity, Comparative Advantage, and Economic
  Growth,” Journal of Economic Theory, 58, 317–334.

Matsuyama, K. (2009), “Structural Change in an Interdependent World: A Global View of
  Manufacturing Decline,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 7, 478–486.

Mendoza, E. G., V. Quadrini, and J.-V. Ríos-Rull (2009), “Financial Integration, Financial
  Development, and Global Imbalances,” Journal of Political Economy, 117, 371–416.

Ngai, L. R., and C.A. Pissarides (2007), “Structural Change in a Multisector Model of Growth,”
  American Economic Review, 97, 429–443.

Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogoff (2009), “Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis: Products of
  Common Causes,” CEPR Discussion Paper 7606.

Perri, F., and A. Fogli (2010), “Macroeconomic Volatility and External Imbalances,” unpublished
   manuscript.

Scott, R. E. (2015), “Manufacturing Job Loss: Trade, Not Productivity, Is the Culprit,” EPI Issue
  Brief 402.

Sposi, M. (2012), “Evolving Comparative Advantage, Structural Change, and the Composition of
  Trade,” unpublished manuscript.

Timmer, M. P., Dietzenbacher, E., Los, B., Stehrer, R., and de Vries, G. J. (2015), “An Illustrated
  User Guide to the World Input-Output Database: The Case of Global Automotive Production,”
  Review of International Economics, 23, 575–605.

United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2011), “World
  Population Prospects: The 2010 Revision, Volume I: Comprehensive Tables,”
  ST/ESA/SER.A/313.

Uy, T., K.-M. Yi, and J. Zhang (2013), “Structural Change in an Open Economy,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 60, 667–682.

Warnock, F. E., and V. C. Warnock (2009), “International Capital Flows and U.S. Interest Rates,”
  Journal of International Money and Finance, 28, 903–919.


                                                   30
                                     Table 1: 1992 Input-output matrix (U.S. GDP = 100)
                                                                                                                                                             Gross
                                  Intermediate inputs                                                          Final demand                                  output
                               USA                                ROW                                     USA                           ROW




                                                                                            Consumption




                                                                                                                                               Consumption
                                               Construction




                                                                                                            Government


                                                                                                                           Investment
                                  Services




                                                                               Services
                       Goods




                                                                 Goods
      Goods          21.52       9.96         3.14              3.10          1.14         7.66            1.91           5.26                2.72              56.41
USA   Services       11.74      39.23         2.99              0.90          1.35        54.97           13.68           3.01                0.47             128.33
      Construction    0.00       0.00         0.00              0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          10.05                0.00              10.05
      Goods           3.17       1.11         0.33             89.56      41.13            1.64            0.41           1.68             82.31               221.33
ROW
      Services        0.44       1.08         0.10             42.59      88.67            0.19            0.05           0.02            205.37               338.51
      Value added    19.55      76.96         3.50             85.18     206.22            0.00            0.00           0.00                0.00             391.40
      Gross output   56.41     128.33        10.05            221.33     338.51           64.47           16.05          20.02            290.87




                                                                         31
                                                Table 2: Calibration
 Parameter                                    Value          Target
 Gross output parameters
    1 / (1   ) , 1 / (1   )             0.05, 0.03       Atalay (2014)
              1/ (1   i )                   3.0, 1.0       International macro literature
               li , Ail ,  li           data appendix      1992 gross output, value added, intermediates
                ius , irw               data appendix      1992 value added shares in gross output

                 ijus ,  ijrw                              1992 shares of goods and services in
                                          data appendix
                                                             intermediate use
                ijus , ijrw             data appendix      1992 country shares in intermediate use
                                                             Aggregate capital share of 0.34, 1992 sectoral
                     ius                 0.33, 0.35, 0.17
                                                             labor shares
          { itus ,  itrw }t2092
                              1992       data appendix      Value added and labor compensation (BEA)
 Final demand parameters
     1/ (1   ), 1/ (1  )                0.65, 0.65       Atalay (2014)
              1 / (1   )                     1.00          Bems (2008)
             1/ (1   i )                  2.00, 1.00       International macro literature
       ush
        i , i , i , i
             usg  usx  rw
                                          data appendix      1992 final demand levels
        iush ,  iusg ,  iusx ,  irw   data appendix      1992 sectoral shares of final demand
        iush ,  iusg ,  iusx ,  irw   data appendix      1992 country shares of final demand by sector
 Household and government parameters
                 us ,  rw                 0.99, 0.99       Long-run interest rate, capital/GDP
              1 / (1  )                      0.50          Intertemporal elasticity of substitution = 0.5
                 ,
                   us        rw
                                            0.33, 0.33       1992 leisure time = 2/3
                c ,c
                   us
                   g         s
                              us
                                            1.87, 13.79      Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi (2013)
                cgrw , csrw                 8.25, 60.79      Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi (2013)
    {ntus , tus , ntrw , trw }t2092
                                  1992   data appendix      World Population Prospects: 2010 Revision
         {ctusg , bt usg }t2092
                            =1992         data appendix      BEA and CBO
 Capital formation parameters
                    us
                   k1992                       277.9         Backus, Henriksen, and Storesletten (2007)
                                              0.05          Fixed capital consumption, 1951–2004 (BEA)
                       us
                        k          0.39          Devereux, Griffith, and Klemm (2002)
Note: The data appendix can be found in the online supplementary materials.


                                                             32
                     Table 3: Model and data, non-targeted moments
Statistic                                                     Data            Model
Intermediate share of U.S. gross output, 1995                 44.71           48.24
Intermediate share of U.S. gross output, 2011                 43.68           46.75
Change                                                        –1.04           –1.50

Goods share of U.S. intermediates, 1995                       43.21            40.03
Goods share of U.S. intermediates, 2011                       36.40            34.63
Change                                                        –6.81            –5.40

Goods share of U.S. consumption, 1995                         15.30            13.73
Goods share of U.S. consumption, 2011                         13.63            11.04
Change                                                        –1.66            –2.68

Goods share of U.S. investment, 1995                          40.46            34.66
Goods share of U.S. investment, 2011                          40.26            34.66
Change                                                        –0.19             0.00

Std. dev. of U.S. goods trade balance, 1992–2012               1.54             1.45
Std. dev. of U.S. services trade balance, 1992–2012            0.24             0.20


   Table 4: Goods sector’s employment share decline in baseline model vs. alternatives
Model                                           Benchmark   No-saving-glut   Difference
                                                            counterfactual
Baseline                                          99.16          84.06         15.10

Sensitivity analyses
Trade wedges                                     94.63           84.06         10.57
Homothetic preferences                           93.53           79.10         14.42
No intermediates                                 66.16           53.40         12.75
Same GO/VA in all US sectors                     86.14           75.00         11.14
Note: GO/VA is the gross output to value added ratio.




                                                 33
Figure 1: U.S. trade balance vs. goods sector’s employment share




Figure 2: Labor productivity in goods, services, and construction




                                  34
Figure 3: U.S. trade balance, current account balance, and real exchange rate




     Figure 4: Disaggregated trade balances in baseline model vs. data




                                        35
Figure 5: Goods and construction employment shares in baseline model vs. data




         Figure 6: U.S. real exchange rate in baseline model vs. data




                                        36
          Figure 7: U.S. trade balance in baseline model vs. data




Figure 8: Goods employment share in trade wedge model vs. baseline model




                                       37
Figure 9: Investment in domestic-saving-drought model vs. baseline model




 Figure 10: U.S. real exchange rates with China and other trade partners




                                      38
Figure 11: U.S. real interest rate in baseline model vs. data




                                39
