                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ALPHA AND PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT:
         THE EFFECTS OF INVESTOR DISAGREEMENT AND HETEROGENEITY

                                            Wayne E. Ferson
                                             Jerchern Lin

                                         Working Paper 19349
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19349


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2013




Portions of this work were initially prepared as a keynote address for the 16th Annual Pacific Basin
Economics, Accounting and Management Conference and for the 2009 Northern Finance Association
Meetings. We are grateful to two anonymous referees, George Aragon, Kerry Back, Stephen Brown,
Mendel Fygenson, Derek Horstmeyer, Juna Joenvaara, Raymond Kan, Min S. Kim, Mark Kritzman,
Thierry Post, Sergei Sarkissian, Rick Sias, and to participants in workshops at the University of Arizona,
Claremont McKenna College, Erasmus University, the 2011 European Finance Association, Koc
University, the 2011 McGill Asset Management Conference, the 2011 Northern Finance Association
meetings, the University of New South Wales, the University of Southern California, the University
of Sydney, the University of Technology Sydney, the fall 2011 ICI/AIM Investment Center conference
at the University of Texas, Tilburg University, the Spring 2011 CQA Conference, the 2011 Wharton
Conference on Household and Portfolio Choice and Investment Decisions and the University of Washington
for suggestions and discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Wayne E. Ferson and Jerchern Lin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Alpha and Performance Measurement: The Effects of Investor Disagreement and Heterogeneity
Wayne E. Ferson and Jerchern Lin
NBER Working Paper No. 19349
August 2013
JEL No. G11

                                             ABSTRACT

The literature has not unambiguously established that a positive alpha, as traditionally measured, means
that an investor would want to buy a fund. However, when alpha is defined using the client's marginal
utility function, a client faced with a positive alpha would generally want to buy. When markets are
incomplete performance measurement is inherently investor specific, and investors will disagree about
the attractiveness of a given fund. We provide empirical bounds on the expected disagreement with
a traditional alpha and study the cross sectional effects of disagreement and investor heterogeneity
on the flow response to past fund alphas. The effects are both economically and statistically significant.


Wayne E. Ferson
Department of Finance
and Business Economics
University of Southern California
3670 Trousdale Parkway Suite 308
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0804
and NBER
ferson@marshall.usc.edu

Jerchern Lin
University of Buffalo
246 Jacobs Management Center
Buffalo NY 14260
jerchern@buffalo.edu
FINANCE RESEARCHERS have an easy familiarity with alpha, the most well-known measure

of the abnormal return of an investment. Studies refer to CAPM alpha, three-factor alpha

or four-factor alpha, assuming the reader hardly requires a definition. Investment

practitioners discuss their strategies in terms of the quest for alpha. Alpha can be active,

conditional or portable. The number of investment firms with alpha in their names is

truly staggering.

        Despite the apparent familiarity with alpha, the current literature too often fails to

think rigorously about how alphas can be interpreted. The contributions of this paper are

three. First, we offer extensions of existing results that motivate alpha as a guide to
investment selection. Given that markets are incomplete and investors have different

marginal rates of substitution, the conclusion is that we need to define alpha in a client-

specific manner.

        Our second contribution is an analysis of how different investor-specific alphas

are expected to be from the alphas typically used in research practice. We derive and

estimate bounds on the extent to which a client may be expected to disagree with a

measure of alpha. Our measure of disagreement integrates out and therefore does not

consider differences in beliefs. Even so, we find that disagreement with traditional alphas,

based on marginal utility alone, can be similar in importance to the choice of the

performance benchmark or to the statistical imprecision in estimates of alphas.

        Our third contribution is empirical evidence that investor disagreement and

heterogeneity are economically significant in the behavior of fund investors. Funds whose

clients’ alphas are expected to be larger than a traditional alpha have positive average

disagreement. We find that such funds experience larger inflows, controlling for the

traditional alpha, than funds with low average disagreement. Funds with a large cross-

sectional variance of investor disagreement have greater investor heterogeneity. We find
that funds with more heterogeneity across investors experience lower average flows.

These are separate effects from uncertainty due to estimation error in the traditional alpha.
                                               2


          The next section reviews the issues with traditional alphas that motivate our

analysis. Section II sets up the problem for investor-specific alphas and Section III

provides the main analytical results. Section IV discusses our approach to bounding the

extent to which clients may disagree about alpha. Section V discusses the data and Section

VI presents the empirical evidence. Section VII concludes and an Appendix provides the

proofs.
                       I. Problems with Traditional Alphas
          A Fundamental Question about the use of alphas is: Given a fund with a positive
alpha, should an investor buy the fund? While the concept of alpha may be traced in

some form back to Cowles (1933), a substantial literature grappled with this question after

alpha was developed within the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM, Sharpe, 1964) by

Jensen (1968) and others. But this work, with a few exceptions, essentially died out in the

late 1980s, leaving the Fundamental Question at best partially resolved.

          The literature does offer some hopeful examples that suggest an investor would

wish to buy a positive-alpha fund, but there are also many counterexamples. The simplest

intuition for the attractiveness of a positive alpha is taught with the CAPM, where a

combination of a positive-alpha fund, the market portfolio and cash can "beat the market"

in a mean variance sense (higher mean return given the variance). Given an arbitrary

(inefficient) benchmark, Dybvig and Ross (1985) show (their Theorem 5), that a positive

alpha measured relative to the benchmark implies that buying some of the fund at the

margin, will result in a higher Sharpe ratio than the benchmark, if the benchmark excess

return is positive.

          Jobson and Korkie (1982) showed that given an inefficient index, a portfolio with

weights proportional to the vector of assets' alphas, premultiplied by an inverse
covariance matrix (the optimal orthogonal portfolio), can be combined with the index to
                                              3


generate a mean variance efficient portfolio. The weight in the optimal orthogonal

portfolio for a positive alpha asset can be negative, and Gibbons Ross and Shanken (1989)

provide empirical examples where it is. So, even if a positive alpha is attractive at the

margin to a mean-variance investor, it might not imply buying a positive alpha fund.1

        There are many counterexamples to the attractiveness of a positive alpha. In some

examples performance within the model is neutral but alpha is not zero. Jagannathan and

Korajczyk (1986) and Leland (1999) show you can get nonzero CAPM alphas by trading

options with no special skill. Ferson and Schadt (1996) show you can record negative

alphas when performance is neutral if you don't account for public information. Roll
(1978), Dybvig and Ross (1985) and Green (1986) give examples of nearly arbitrary alphas

when there is no ability. Goetzmann et al. (2007) show how to produce positive alphas

through informationless trading. While the relevant strategies, such as options trading,

may be more common among hedge funds and fixed income funds than among the US

equity mutual funds examined here2, these examples cast doubt on the common

presumption that investors would wish to buy a positive alpha fund.

        The above examples do not consider differential information. It seems natural to

think that a portfolio manager may have better information about returns than the client

investor. With differential information the problem of alpha becomes richer (e.g., Admati

and Ross, 1985). The portfolio formed by a better-informed manager expands the

1
  In a mean variance setting, the optimal weight need not be of the same sign as the alpha
because of correlation among assets. If only a single fund is allowed, in combination with
a fixed inefficient benchmark, then the optimal combination of the two does place a
positive weight on a positive-alpha fund. Our results generalize this example, as they do
not assume that the weights on the other assets in a “market” portfolio are held fixed, do
not rely on mean-variance preferences, on a single-period model or on many other
restrictions that are imposed in earlier studies. In the simultaneous consideration of
multiple assets our results may be applied to a portfolio of the funds.
2 For example, Koski and Pontiff (1999) find only limited use of options among US equity

style mutual funds.
                                               4


opportunity set of the less-informed client, so the client would generally like to use the

managed portfolio in some way. But a positive abnormal return or alpha is neither

necessary nor sufficient to establish a positive value of the manager’s information, as

observed by Ohlson (1979) in a different setting. The problem here is, the client might

wish to short a fund even if it has a positive alpha (Chen and Knez, 1996), or buy a fund

even if it has a negative alpha (Glode, 2011). In summary, the existing literature suggests

that traditional alphas are not a reliable guide to the attractiveness of an investment.

        This paper provides conditions under which the "right" alpha, defined in terms of

the client's preferences, provides a reliable buy or sell indication. Our contributions to the
literature are both analytical and empirical. First, we derive a well-specified alpha using a

multiperiod model under general returns distributions, and show that the client-specific

alpha does provide a reliable buy or sell indication. While this is not the first paper to

argue that the limitations of alpha can be addressed by defining alpha in a client-specific

fashion (e.g. Sharpe (1982), Goetzman et. al., 2007) these earlier studies relied on a single-

period model, normality, independence of returns over time and/or specific investor

preferences. But, returns are not independently normally distributed over time, and

mean-variance preferences are not realistic. Our first contribution is to provide more

general results. The cost of this general justification for alpha is that we have to confront

investor heterogeneity.

        As our second contribution we derive bounds on the extent to which clients are

expected to disagree with a traditional measure of alpha and present evidence on the

magnitudes. Disagreement presumes that markets are incomplete, because otherwise

investors’ marginal rates of substitution would agree. Cochrane and Sáa-Requejo (2000)

study bounds on prices in incomplete markets, of payoffs that are not spanned by a set of
benchmark assets. Their pricing bounds, like our bounds on disagreement, are stated in
                                              5


terms of a maximum Sharpe ratio (Sharpe, 1992) and the volatility of a residual return in a

factor model regression. In our bounds the maximum Sharpe ratio is given by the

benchmark assets, while in their case it is exogenously specified. Our evidence suggests

that investor disagreement can be an effect of similar magnitude to benchmark choice and

to the statistical imprecision in estimates of alpha. While benchmark choice and statistical

imprecision have attracted considerable attention in the literature, the implications of

disagreement and investor heterogeneity have only begun to be explored.

        One of the problems with traditional alphas is potential biases from high

frequency trading. Goetzmann et al. (2007) propose a “manipulation proof” performance

measure (MPPM) that is immune to such biases. Investors may disagree with a traditional

alpha because it is manipulated, or because they have different beliefs or preferences.
Integrating out the differences in beliefs we find that traditional alphas differ from the

MPPM by more than the disagreement with the traditional alphas. We also infer that

investors are expected to disagree with the MPPM, at least as much as with traditional

alphas, so manipulation is not the main source of disagreement.

        The analysis in this paper is related to Glosten and Jagannathan (1994) and Chen

and Knez (1996). Glosten and Jagannathan (1994) start with the definition of alpha

studied here, based on the stochastic discount factor (SDF) implied by the client’s marginal

rate of substitution. They assume that clients' SDFs are functions only of a small set of

traded benchmark portfolios and options strategies, and focus on the resulting consensus

or representative agent valuation. Chen and Knez (1996), following Grinblatt and Titman

(1989), focus on the SDF represented by a minimum variance efficient portfolio conditional

on the client's information, and allow managers to have better information. They

characterize general classes of "admissible" and positive admissible performance
                                              6


measures, concluding that performance measurement is “essentially arbitrary.3”

        Glode (2011) also exploits our key assumption that the covariances of fund returns

with investors’ marginal utility may not be captured by standard performance

benchmarks. Glode focuses on the consensus pricing of these covariances, while our focus

is the disagreement across investors. Finally, our empirical analysis is related to many

studies of the relation between fund flows and performance, some of which are discussed

in context below.
                      II. A General Model for a Client’s Alpha
        This section revisits alpha using a natural definition based on the stochastic

discount factor. The SDF approach was proposed in some form as early as Beja (1971), but

became common in asset pricing only after the literature that tried to address the

Fundamental Question about alpha had waned. The approach offers new and general

insights. These results are based on a multiperiod model and do not require normality.

There is no need to rule out timing ability, nor is selectivity information required to be

independent of timing information, security-specific or otherwise restricted as in the

earlier literature. The client is allowed to have a general consumption response to the

managed portfolio. Finally, a mean variance efficient benchmark is not required or used.4

        Agents make consumption and portfolio choices at each date t, to maximize a

time-separable, increasing and concave lifetime utility function, represented as the indirect

value function:


3
  Our approach uses a "positive admissible" measure. Chen and Knez show that there can
be funds that have positive alphas under some positive admissible measures and negative
alphas under others. This foreshadows the results here that the "right" alpha is client-
specific, and there is likely to be disagreement across investors about alpha.
4Ferson (2012) shows that a mean variance efficient benchmark is only appropriate under
quadratic utility.
                                                7




               J(Wt,info)  Max{c,x} u(C) + E{ β J(Wt+1,st+1) |info},                      (1)

               s.t. Wt+1 = (Wt-C) x'Rt+1, x'1=1,



where Wt is the wealth at time t, C is the consumption expenditure at time t, x is the

portfolio weight, Rt+1 is the N-vector of gross (i.e., one plus the rate of) returns for the N

assets, one of which can be risk-free, and 1 is an N-vector of ones. The K-vector of state
variables in the model is st at time t and the conditioning information at time t, "info,"

takes one of two forms. The info is Zt, representing public information that includes the

current values of the state variables st and the current risk-free rate if any, when referring

to the client. The info is Ωt when referring to the better-informed manager, assuming that

Zt is contained in Ωt. The time subscripts are dropped except when needed to avoid

ambiguity.5

        Assuming that the client starts at an interior optimum in the N-asset economy, the

first order conditions to the problem imply:



               E(mR|Z) = 1, with m = β Jw(Wt+1)/uc(Ct),                                      (2)



where m is the stochastic discount factor and subscripts denote derivatives. The notation

Jw(W) suppresses but allows for the dependence of the value function on the state

variables and Zt.

        Consider now presenting the client with a new investment opportunity, the


   5 There can be another component of wealth; for example nontraded human capital, and
that component can imply hedging demands as in Grinblatt and Titman (1989) without
affecting the results.
                                              8


managed portfolio with return Rp = x(Ω)'R where x(Ω) is the vector of the informed

manager's portfolio weights. We assume that portfolio managers don't invent new

securities, just trade the existing ones using better information. 6 Define alpha for any

portfolio Rp as:

                                    αp = E(mRp|Z) - 1.                                      (3)



If the manager has no superior information in the sense that Z includes Ω, then αp is zero

by Equation (2). Let the managed portfolio return be Rp = vt+1/Pt, where Pt is the price
that the manager offers the client at time t and vt+1 is the random value one period later.

From the definition of alpha we see that (1+αp)Pt = E{vt+1m|Z}, so that if alpha is zero the

client would find the offer price "fair." A positive alpha suggests a "low" price for the value

to the client. It is shown below that this intuition holds when the client's consumption and

investments in all assets can change in response to the introduction of the managed

portfolio.
                     III. Addressing the Fundamental Question
        When faced with a new investment opportunity Rp with a nonzero alpha, the

client will adjust to new optimal consumption and portfolio choices until the alpha is zero

at the new optimum.7 Consider a situation where we allow the client to adjust current

  6 It is assumed, as is common in the literature starting with Mayers and Rice (1979), that
the manager's trading based on superior information does not affect the market prices of the
underlying assets.
  7 This is a partial normative, not a general equilibrium analysis. Berk and Green (2004)
make an argument where equilibrium adjustment comes from the flows of new cash across
funds and diseconomies of scale in fund management, which drive informed manager's
alphas to zero in equilibrium. Here, the client adjusts with new optimal portfolio and
consumption choices. This is similar in spirit to the portfolio optimization procedure in
Sharpe (1987), where the client makes discrete changes to arrive at the new optimal
portfolio.
                                                   9


consumption and to buy or sell some amount of the manager's fund. The client feels the

effects of these decisions in his future wealth, and thus the marginal utilities of current

consumption and future wealth change, and the optimal holdings of other assets may

change. We assume that the client is a price taker in the markets for investment assets and

consumption goods. Let Δ be a reduction in current consumption used to buy the fund,

leading to the random wealth at time t+1, W(Δ) = Wt+1 + ΔRp + (Wt-C)[x(Δ)-x]'R, where

x(Δ) is the new optimal portfolio weight vector for the N base assets, normalized to sum to

1.0, and x is the old optimal weight vector.8 The appendix proves:


PROPOSITION 1: Under the assumptions described above, and also assuming regular utility
functions to which the mean value theorem applies, and assuming further that the response of the
optimal portfolio weights on the original N assets satisfies
               [Rpt+1 + (Wt-Ct) (x(Δ)/Δ)'R] [Rpt+1 + (Wt-Ct) (x(Δ)-x)/Δ)'R] > 0,
Then when confronted with a new investment with an alpha equal to αp, the client will optimally
purchase the discrete amount given by:
                                 Δ = αp {uc /(-ucc* - Q)},

Where Q = E{β Jww* [Rpt+1 + (Wt-Ct) (x(Δ)/Δ)'R] [Rpt+1 + (Wt-Ct) (x(Δ)-x)/Δ)'R]}<0 and

ucc*<0.


          The sign of the optimal investment in the new fund is the same as the sign of

alpha, so the investor buys (sells) a discrete amount of the fund if alpha is positive

(negative). The optimal investment is zero when alpha is zero. The optimal investment is


8 The client divides the beginning of period wealth Wt as follows: Δ is invested in the new
fund, C-Δ is consumed and (Wt-C) is invested in the old assets. At Δ=0, W(Δ) = Wt+1 =
(Wt-C)x'R, and x(Δ)=x. The analysis can accommodate the case where the investor does not
change the current consumption, but only the portfolio weights in response to the new
investment. In this case the weights x(Δ) do not sum to 1.0 and Δ = Wt(1-x(Δ)'1).
Combinations of these two cases may also be considered.
                                              10


proportional to alpha and scaled by a term related to "risk tolerance.”

        The assumption that [Rpt+1+(Wt-Ct)(x(Δ)/Δ)'R][Rpt+1+(Wt-Ct)(x(Δ)-x)/Δ)'R]>0

says that the derivatives of the optimal portfolio weights on the N base assets are

adequately approximated by the normalized discrete changes. This holds in the limit for

small Δ. For discrete Δ the restriction holds when x(Δ) is well-approximated by a linear

function of Δ or when the relative allocation to the original assets does not change very

much. The condition should only fail if the allocations to the original assets change

drastically when the new fund is introduced.
        The client-specific alpha precludes some of the pathologies described above. For

example, we assume a monotone increasing utility function, ruling out the quadratic

utility that lies at the root of ambiguities discussed in Mayers and Rice (1979) and

Verecchia (1980). Trading within the return measurement interval, which Goetzmann et

al. (2007) illustrate with several examples, can generate spurious traditional alphas but

need not bias the SDF alpha studied here. 9 Of course, this does not rule out statistical

biases in measuring alpha. For example, return smoothing can make it difficult to

estimate alpha because the returns of the fund are not accurately measured (e.g. Asness et

al. (2001), Getmansky, Lo and Makarov, 2004).


                  IV. Disagreement and Investor Heterogeneity
       The conclusion from the last section is that a client-specific definition of alpha can


   9 The issue of bias because funds trade within the return measurement period, or interim
trading, is raised by Goetzmann, Ingersoll and Ivkovic (2000) and Ferson and Khang (2002),
and examined in detail by Goetzmann et al. (2007). However, Ferson, Henry and Kisgen
(2006) show that if the right time-aggregated SDF is used the problem is avoided. The
definition of alpha here involves the right time-aggregated SDF on the (perhaps heroic)
assumption that investors optimize as often as managers trade.
                                                  11


provide a reliable buy/sell signal. But investors will not in general agree about the right

alpha, so the same fund may look attractive to one investor but not to another. In this

section we define a measure of the expected disagreement a client will have with a

traditional alpha and derive bounds on its magnitude. We then discuss the implications

for mutual fund flows of the expected disagreement and also heterogeneity, which we

define as the variance of disagreement across investors.

       We work with excess returns, r  R-Rf, where Rf is a gross short term Treasury return.

Thus, Equation (2) implies that E(mr|Z)=0 and equation (3) implies that αp = E(mrp|Z).

Consider a regression over time of rp on the "passive" assets {rj}j in r:



                             rp = ap + Σj βj rj + εp.                                       (5)



This is a simple, unconditional regression with constant coefficients and E(εp)=E(εprj)=0.

Taking the unconditional expectation of the expression for alpha and substituting in

Equation (5) for rp, we obtain:



                      E(αp) = E(m)ap + Σj βj E(mrj) + E(mεp).                               (6)



The first term on the right hand side of (6) captures the traditional, unconditional alpha that

would be obtained if {rj}j were used as the benchmark returns in a factor model.10 Since

E(mrj|Z)=0 for the passive assets, the second term in Equation (6) is zero. The third term

can be expressed as E(mεp) = Cov(m,εp) = ρєm σ(m) σ(εp), where ρєm is the correlation


  10
     Using the SDF approach, αp is measured at the beginning of the period, like an asset
price. Using the traditional regressions of returns on factors, alpha is measured at the end of
the period, like a return. The term E(m) translates between the two dates.
                                               12


between m and εp. If the correlation is zero, the traditional alpha and the expected alpha for

the client coincide. Investor disagreement with a measure of alpha arises when the part of

the fund return that is not captured by the traditional factors is correlated with the investor's

marginal rate of substitution.

       Expanding the expectation of the product, mrj, into the product of the expectations

plus the covariance and setting the result to zero we obtain:



                     σ(m)/E(m) = (-1/ρmrj)[E(rj)/σ(rj)],                                     (7)



where ρmrj is the correlation between m and rj and σ(.) denotes the standard deviation.

Equations (6) and (7) then imply:



                     E(αp)/E(m) - ap = ρєm σ(εp) [σ(m)/E(m)]                                 (8)

                                       = ρєm σ(εp) (-1/ρmrj)E(rj)/σ(rj).



The term (-1/ρmrj)E(rj)/σ(rj) in the second line of Equation (8) is the same for all the passive

assets, so it may be replaced with (-1/ρmrj*)E(rj*)/σ(rj*), where rj* is the portfolio of the

passive assets that achieves the maximum Sharpe ratio, SRmax.



A. A Bound on Expected Disagreement

       Assuming SRmax>0, equation (8) implies:



                     E(αp)/E(m) - ap = (-ρєm /ρmrj*) σ(εp) SRmax                             (9)

                                      ≤ σ(εp) SRmax,
                                              13


where we make the assumption that (ρєm /ρmrj*) ≤ 1. Since the return rj* maximizes the

Sharpe ratio, it maximizes the correlation to m, and this assumption should be innocuous in

most cases.11

       The first line of Equation (9) defines the expected disagreement of the client with a

traditional measure of alpha that uses the passive returns rj as the factors. The second line

expresses an upper bound on the expected disagreement that we can estimate using data.

The upper bound depends on the volatility of the fund’s residuals, σ(εp), and on the

maximum Sharpe ratio available in the passive returns. When the maximum Sharpe ratio is

higher the disagreement is higher because the volatility of a client’s marginal rate of

substitution is higher. A fund with a low σ(εp) is a fund whose return variation is largely

captured by the passive benchmark assets. For such a fund there can be little disagreement

about its performance.

        The maximum Sharpe ratio in Equation (9) should reflect the maximum taken

over all of the assets for which the client is at an interior optimum. In empirical practice

we can only use small subsets of the possible assets. We consider alternative groups of

benchmark assets, in order to assess the sensitivity of the results. Since the maximum

Sharpe ratio in the universe of many assets is likely to be larger than on the subsets we

examine, our upper bounds on disagreement are conservative from this perspective.

       The expected disagreement in (9) depends on the unobserved correlation, ρєm. If that


11This is an assumption on an unobservable that cannot be verified directly. There could
be some mutual fund clients whose marginal utilities are not highly correlated with the
passive asset returns and yet are highly correlated with fund residuals. This can occur, as
Kerry Back points out in private communication, if both fund payoffs and marginal
utilities are highly nonlinear functions of benchmark variables. The assumption can fail in
such instances. We then interpret the bounds as applying only to the subset of clients for
which the assumption holds. Below we introduce an empirical proxy for state-level client
heterogeneity and find correlations consistent with the assumption that (ρєm/ρmrj*)<1 in
most cases.
                                               14


correlation is zero there is no disagreement with the traditional alpha. But the evidence

below suggests that the correlation is not zero. The second line of Equation (9) suggests that

disagreement will be closer to the upper bound for clients with ρmrj* far below 1.0. Investors

whose marginal utility fluctuations are not well captured by the traditional benchmarks will

disagree more with traditional alphas.

       It is important to note that we have taken the unconditional expectation of the client’s

conditional expectation to arrive at these results. The expected alpha should be interpreted

as the “econometrician’s” expectation of the client’s alpha. Clients have different beliefs

when they hold different Zs, and their different consumption and portfolio choices lead to

different marginal rates of substitution. Applying iterated expectations, we derive

implications of investor disagreement that can be represented using the unconditional

expectations. Our measure of disagreement is probably conservative on this dimension,

because differences in investors’ beliefs present another potential source of disagreement

about alpha.12



B. Disagreement and Fund Flows

       Proposition I determines the amount of fund p that investor i would purchase as Δip =

αip Ai, where Ai >0. With no restrictions on this latent demand, the net flow to a mutual

fund is Fp = Σi Δip. The flow is positively related to the traditional alpha and a risk-tolerance-

weighted average of investors’ disagreements with alpha:


  12 Taking the conditional expectation of the client’s alpha delivers the expected alpha. The
investor’s information set is still reflected in the expected alpha to the extent that different
information sets lead clients to different consumption and portfolio policies, and thus
different marginal rates of substitution. The analysis also applies to conditional moments
given public information known by all clients, in which case E(.), ρ and the σ's refer to these
conditional moments.
                                                15




            Fp/E(m) = Σi Ai[(-ρєm /ρmrj*) σ(εp) SRmax] + (Σi Ai) ap,                   (10)



where the term in brackets [.] is the disagreement from Equation (9). Thus, for a given

traditional alpha, ap, we expect higher flows when the weighted average disagreement is

higher. We present empirical proxies below for ρєm and ρmrj*, and we proxy for the average

disagreement with ADISp, the unweighted average of the term in brackets. Our first testable

prediction is that funds with larger ADISp should experience larger flows of investor funds,

controlling for the traditional alpha.
        We can’t observe the risk tolerances Ai that weight the disagreements, so our

empirical measures do not address heterogeneity in risk tolerance across investors. The sign

of ADISp and the risk tolerance weighted average should typically be the same for a given

fund, but if there are large covariances between investors’ risk tolerances and disagreement

and they differ across funds, this presents a source of measurement error that we would

expect to weaken our empirical results.13

        Most of the empirical literature and our evidence below uses the percentage flows to

mutual funds. In our model flows are in the units of the numeraire for consumption, and

thus arbitrary in scale. The investor’s problem makes no reference to the size of a mutual

fund. Empirically, the levels of mutual fund dollar flows are highly persistent and may be

nonstationary. We therefore follow the literature and use percentage flows in our empirical

work, and we include a control variable for the size of the fund.




13 Because A>0 and E{AD} = E(A)E(D) + Cov(A,D), the covariance between disagreement
D and risk tolerance A would have to be large and of the opposite sign as E(D) in order for
E{AD} to be different in sign from E(D). If Cov(A,D) is similar in magnitude across funds,
it is approximately a cross sectional constant in our analysis.
                                              16


C. Heterogeneity and Fund Flows

       We define the heterogeneity for a fund p as the variance of the disagreement across

investors. In general, the effect of heterogeneity on fund flows is ambiguous. If the cross-

sectional variance of the latent demand increases in a mean-preserving spread, for example

there could be no effect on the expected flow. However, heterogeneity likely affects fund

flows when constraints inhibit investors’ demands, even when the latent demand is

unaffected by the heterogeneity.
       For many reasons, the full range of latent demands will not be expressed in fund

flows. For example, investors cannot sell short mutual funds. Chen, Massa and Zhang (2012)

describe how this affects flows when investors have different beliefs. Costs like load fees,

transactions charges and unrealized capital gains also impede fund flows. Investors’

learning about funds and other participation costs (Sirri and Tufano (1998), Huang, Wei and

Yan, 2007) also likely impede fund flows. We therefore consider the effects of heterogeneity

in the presence of restrictions on the latent demands.14

       For simplicity, assume that the realized flow is truncated, reflecting only the latent

demands Δip above some lower boundary values, ΔiL. For example, a no-short-selling

constraint implies ΔiL=0 for investors not currently holding the fund.       In general the

truncation point will vary across funds and investors as functions of the characteristics of

both funds and investors. In this example heterogeneity can have both a level effect and

interaction effects on fund flows.15

14
   Our definition of alpha is connected to constraints. If we include the fund p among the
base assets, with the constraint that the investor may not hold the fund, then the shadow
price of the constraint is proportional to the alpha of Proposition I multiplied by the
marginal utility of consumption.
15 Related arguments about constraints, although not stated in terms of our version of

heterogeneity, appear in Sirri and Tufano (1998), Jain and Wu (2000), Massa (2003), Nanda
et al. (2004), Huang et al. (2007) and Cheng, Massa and Zhang (2012). In the latter, a
negative level effect of heterogeneity arises from managers’ equilibrium response to
                                               17


       The level effect of heterogeneity on fund flows should be negative for a given average

latent demand, because in funds with more heterogeneity more investors’ demands will fall

below ΔiL and be restricted. This negative level effect is our first testable prediction about

heterogeneity.

       Heterogeneity should also act to modify the relation between fund flows and

performance. A fund with no heterogeneity would have no flow response to performance

below ΔL, and in our model the response would be linear, with a slope determined by risk

tolerance, to performance above ΔL. The flow-performance graph would resemble a hockey

stick. With heterogeneity investors will be restricted from responding at different levels of

performance, with more investors restricted at lower levels of performance. Fewer investors

will be restricted at higher levels of performance, and for very high levels flows should be

nearly linear in performance. The flow-performance graph would resemble the sum over

many hockey sticks, with different slopes, placed at various points relative to the x-axis.

        Our analysis does not model trading costs and taxes, although constraints on

latent demands likely depend on these and other costs. Some frictions such as taxes may

operate at the higher performance levels. Some costs differ across investors and may

imply additional investor heterogeneity that we do not capture. Tax-induced

heterogeneity, for example, is likely to be greater in funds that have recently experienced

more volatile returns. In our empirical analysis we control for recent fund return

volatility and other fund characteristics that are likely to be related to errors in the

specification.
                                    V. The Data

A. Fund Returns

We study monthly returns on actively managed US equity mutual funds from January


convexity in the flow-performance relation.
                                             18

1984 to December 2012, from the CRSP mutual fund database. We remove sector funds,

balanced funds and funds other than diversified, US equity funds.16 We combine share

classes for each fund into a total net asset weighted average.

       We examine in some experiments, institutional and retail share classes, aggregating

the two share classes separately.17 We remove index funds from the active fund sample,

and use them as benchmarks. Index funds are identified by matching fund names with a

list of text strings from Busse and Tong (2012, footnote 1). We also check manually that

the index funds are correctly identified.

       Fama and French (2010) point out a selection bias due to missing returns from

about 15% of the funds on CRSP before 1984. Evans (2010) documents that incubated

mutual funds overstate average performance due to backfilling. We therefore remove



16We select funds as follows. CRSP uses Policy and Wiesenberger objective codes
(WB_OBJ) prior to 1993. Strategic Insight Objective codes (SI_OBJ) cover from 1993 to
September, 1998 and Lipper Objective codes (Lipper_OBJ) and Lipper Class codes
(Lipper_CLASS) are used up to 2008. Most recent funds are classified by Thomson Reuters
Objective codes (TR_OBJ). Mid cap funds are coded as GMC in WB_OBJ, MC in
Lipper_OBJ, MCCE, MCGE, MCVE in Lipper_CLASS, or MID in TR_OBJ. Small cap
funds are coded as SCG in WB_OBJ, MR, SG in Lipper_OBJ, SCCE, SCGE, SCVE in
Lipper_CLASS, or SMC in TR_OBJ. Aggressive growth funds are coded as AG, AGG in
WB_OBJ, AGG in SI_OBJ, or AGG in TR_OBJ. Growth funds are coded as G, LTG in
WB_OBJ, GRO in SI_OBJ, G in Lipper_OBJ, or GRD in TR_OBJ. Growth and income funds
are coded as GI, GCI in WB_OBJ, GRI in SI_OBJ, GI in Lipper_OBJ, or GCI in TR_OBJ.
Equity income funds are coded as EI, IEQ in WB_OBJ, EI in Lipper_OBJ, EIEI in
Lipper_CLASS, or EQI in TR_OBJ. Our “Other” funds category comprises Leverage and
short mutual funds, coded as HEDGE in Policy, OI in WB_OBj, OPI in SI_OBJ, CA, DL,
DSB, LSE in Lipper_OBJ, or ELCC, SESE in Lipper_CLASS.

17 Share classes are first identified by fund names and cross checked with the MFLINKS
tables in CRSP, which provide Wharton Financial Institution Center Numbers (WFICN) to
suggest what funds should be aggregated based on common holdings. Institutional share
classes are filtered by the institutional fund flag in CRSP, and fund names are matched
                                              19

fund returns before the date of fund organization, remove the first year of each fund’s

returns and remove funds with less than 5 million dollars of assets under management at

the end of the previous year. Funds that invest more than 25% in bonds plus cash at the

end of previous year are also screened out (30% produces similar results). These screens

leave us with a sample of 144 active equity funds in the first year, 1984, growing to 4595

funds in the final year, 2012. We apply the same screens to the index funds as to the active

equity funds. This leaves us with 8 index funds in 1984, growing to 1412 in 2012.



B. Benchmark Returns

       Since our bounds are relative to a traditional alpha based on a given set of

benchmark returns, we include benchmarks that have been common in the literature, and

other benchmarks that represent realistic alternative investment choices. We vary the

number of benchmarks in the factor model to assess the sensitivity of the results to the

number. Our benchmarks are: (1) a broad stock market portfolio, (2) the three Fama and

French (1993) factors, (3) a set of six indexes formed from index mutual funds with

different strategies, and (4) a set of five exchange traded funds (ETFs).

       The proxy for the market portfolio is the CRSP value-weighted index of NYSE

stocks. The Fama and French factors are the market excess return, SMB, and HML. SMB

and HML measure the excess returns of small caps over big caps and of value stocks over

growth stocks, respectively. These data are from Ken French’s website18. We assume that



with “institutional”, Inst, Y, I, Class I, Class Y, CL I, and CL Y.
18 http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html.
                                              20

the alphas are zero, from the client’s perspective, on the benchmark assets rj. It seems

plausible that the investor would be at an interior optimum relative to his allocation to a

broad market index, and thus the alpha of the market index would be zero. The assumption

of zero alphas is less plausible for benchmarks like the Fama and French (1993) factors, given

the highly tilted small and value stock positions they embed and the short positions they

imply.19

       While active funds may have alphas, it seems plausible to assume that investors

would agree that index funds and passively-managed exchange traded funds (ETFs) have

zero, or nearly zero, alphas. We therefore examine index funds and ETFs as benchmarks.

We form six equally-weighted portfolios of index funds, based on their stated benchmarks

as reported by Morningstar Direct. The Categories are: S&P500, S&P Midcap, Small cap,

Russell, MSCI US and Others.

       Exchange traded funds (ETFs) now cover a wide array of asset classes and

strategies. We select the following five ETFs based on their passive management, high

trading volume and market sector coverage: SPY (S&P 500), MDY (S&P Mid-cap 400), IJR

(S&P Small-cap 600), QQQ (Nasdaq 100 Index), and IYR (Dow Jones US Real Estate

Index).




19
  If the benchmark assets have nonzero alphas from the client’s perspective then the second
term of Equation (6) is not zero. Our bounds on disagreement should then include a
weighted average of these unobservable client benchmark alphas. The weights are the active
fund’s betas on the benchmark assets. The weighted average of the alphas of the
benchmarks may be close to zero, but our results should be interpreted with caution in view
of this issue.
                                                21

C. Proxies for Disagreement

         Investor disagreement differs across funds, according to our model, in proportion to

the product (-ρєm /ρmrj*) σ(εp). We estimate σ(εp) from the mutual fund and benchmark

returns data, but ρєm and ρmrj* are more challenging. We construct proxies for these

correlations following Da and Yun (2010), who find that electricity consumption works

better than nondurables plus services consumption expenditures in consumption-based

asset pricing models. We use annual electricity consumption growth, measured for the 50

states and the District of Columbia during 1984-2012.20 We take the cross-state variation in

the time-series correlations between a fund’s residual return, εp, and the state electricity

consumption growths as a proxy for the variation in ρєm across “clients.” Of course, the

electricity growth correlations do not provide a direct link to marginal utility, so this

proxy for the variation in disagreement is crude. Perhaps, better measures can be

developed in future work using micro level data.21




20   We are grateful to Zhi Da and Hayong Yun for allowing us to use their data.
21
  We consider two additional proxies for investor heterogeneity based on the various
share classes issued by a fund. We separate out “institutional” share classes on the
assumption that individuals are more heterogeneous than institutional investors. We also
use the number of share classes as a proxy for the degree of heterogeneity in the investor
base. Both proxies are correlated with greater heterogeneity using our main measure, but
we find that neither proxy is associated with significantly different flows for a given
performance measure. In hindsight, this may not be too surprising. Multiple share classes
might increase flows because they offer a heterogeneous menu of cost structures, and this
can reduce constraints on some investors’ latent demands, thus offsetting the greater
heterogeneity. Institutional flows are likely determined in large part by considerations
outside the scope of our model, such as the special features of 401(k) accounts.
                                             22

D. Summary Statistics

      Table I presents summary statistics for the monthly returns of the equity funds and

the benchmark factors. The index funds have mean returns around one half percent per

month and standard deviations around five percent. The monthly Sharpe ratios vary

between 0.078 and 0.125. The ETFs display more dispersion, with mean returns between

0.28% and 0.87%, standard deviations between 4.3% and 8.0%, and Sharpe ratios between

0.034 and 0.150. With more disperse assets, a benchmark should generate higher

maximum Sharpe ratios and higher correlations with a maximum correlation portfolio.

These have offsetting effects on the magnitude of disagreement according to Equation (9).

The autocorrelations are small for all the benchmarks, with none above 0.15.

      The statistics for the mutual fund returns in Panels B and C summarize the cross-

section by sorting the individual funds and reporting the values at various fractiles of the

cross-sectional distribution. Each column is sorted separately on the statistic shown. The

median fund with at least 12 monthly observations returns 0.48% per month more than a

Treasury bill over our sample period, and ten percent of the funds have excess returns of

1.2% or more per month. The median standard deviation is 5.0%, but 10 percent of the

funds have standard deviations below 3.6% and ten percent are above 6.8%. Ex post, at

least, the universe of funds presents a wide range of investment outcomes. Our question is

whether investors will disagree about the attractiveness of these investments.

      Panel C of Table I presents a comparison sample where only two months of return

data are required for inclusion. This shows that requiring 12 months of data, as we do in
                                               23

the subsequent analyses, has an impact on the distribution of the average returns. This is

a form of sample selection-induced survivorship bias. The surviving funds in the left tail

do better, and the 12-month survivors have a more compact distribution of average

returns. At the one percent left tail the mean return values are -2.53% in the longer-

surviving subset, versus -3.41% in the broader sample. The effects on the standard

deviations are smaller. Our measures of disagreement and heterogeneity use funds’

(residual) standard deviations. Survivor selection seems to slightly inflate the left tail of

the standard deviation distribution (1.93% versus 1.57% at the 1% tail). This suggests that

our upper bounds on investor disagreement may be slightly too high for the low-volatility

funds, in view of survivor selection.

       Panel D of Table I summarizes correlations of the electricity growths with the

mutual fund residual returns, ρεm. The table summarizes results for the average fund. For

the average fund the differences between the maximum and minimum values across the

states ranges from 0.09 for the index mutual fund benchmark to 0.19 for the CAPM. There

is much more variation in the correlations across funds. The bottom rows present

correlations using the standard growth rates of US per capita consumption of nondurables

plus services. For most of the models (except the FF3 factors) the correlation is similar to

that for the median state.

       The electricity correlations present indirect evidence in support of the assumption

that (-ρєm /ρmrj*) <1, which was used to derive the upper bound on disagreement. The ratios

of the correlations using the electricity growth rates are below one in every state for three of

the benchmark choices, and the ratio is less than one in more than 76% of the states for the
                                                24

CAPM. The ratios for the aggregate consumption are also below 1.0.


                              VI. Empirical Results

        We first present some statistics about traditional estimates of alpha that we use to

inform our interpretation of the bounds on disagreement. Estimates of the bounds are

then presented. Finally, we examine the cross-sectional implications of disagreement and

heterogeneity for the flow of investor funds.



A. Traditional Alphas

        Table II summarizes estimates of alphas using various benchmarks. The alphas are

the intercepts time-series regressions of fund excess returns on the benchmark excess

returns. (Conditional alphas are discussed in a later section.) The benchmarks are the

market portfolio proxy (Mkt), the three Fama-French factors (FF3) and the vectors of index

mutual funds (Idx MFs) or ETFs. We also include the “manipulation proof” (MPPM)

performance measure of Goetzmann et al. (2007). This is an SDF alpha for a power utility

function of the market portfolio return, with a relative risk aversion set equal to 3.0. A

similar measure is advocated by Leland (1999), based on the earlier work of Rubinstein

(1976). The cross-section is summarized, as in Table I, by sorting the funds on the value of

each statistic and presenting the cutoff values for various fractiles. The statistics include

the point estimates of alpha, its standard error and the residual standard deviation of the

regression.

       Distributions of alpha estimates under the null of zero alphas are generated by
                                               25

simulation in several recent studies. We compare the cross-sectional distribution of the t-

ratios in our data to simulations under the null from Fama and French (2010, Table III) for

1984-2006. Consistent with their findings, there is more dispersion in the distribution of

performance than expected under the null of zero alphas. In particular, the left tail of the

cross-sectional distribution is thicker than is expected if the alphas were zero.

        The residual standard deviations are used in our measures of disagreement. The

mean residual standard deviation varies from 1.3% using the vector of ETFs or index

funds, to 1.9% using the single market index. There is substantial variation in the

estimated σ(єp) across funds: the interquartile range under the CAPM is 1.1-2.3% per

month. This suggests variation in the disagreement across funds, as the residual risk is the

risk that investors may disagree about in their evaluation of mutual funds.

        The statistics in Table II allow rough calculations about the likely magnitudes of

investor disagreement. In the CAPM for example, the median residual volatility is 1.6%

per month. The monthly maximum Sharpe ratio is about 0.13, suggesting an upper bound

on the expected disagreement of about 0.21% per month, or 2.5% per year for the median

fund. The median standard error of the CAPM alpha is 0.21% or about 2.5% per year, so

the magnitude of the expected disagreement with the CAPM could be on the order of

about one standard error of estimation uncertainty.


        Panel B of Table II provides another point of comparison. The first column shows
the range of traditional alpha estimates across the four benchmark models. For each fund,

the range is the difference between the largest and the smallest alpha, and the distribution
of the range is summarized across the funds. The median range of alphas across the
                                              26


models is 0.20% per month, or about 2.4% per year. This suggests that the magnitude of

expected investor disagreement could be on the same order of magnitude as the

ambiguity associated with the choice of a benchmark model.

        The right hand column of Panel A summarizes estimates of the MPPM alphas for

mutual funds. The mean and median values are lower than the other alphas, consistent

with manipulation that inflates the traditional alphas. The right-hand column of Panel B

reports the range of alphas across the four benchmark models and the MPPM. The range

is inflated, compared with the range using the four models, illustrating that the MPPM
differs substantially from the traditional alphas for many funds. This raises the question

of whether disagreement with a traditional alpha could arise from manipulation.



B. Disagreement with Alphas

        Table III summarizes measures of investor disagreement with the traditional

alphas and the MPPM. Regressions of the excess fund returns on the benchmark excess

returns deliver the alphas and the regression residuals, εp. We use the electricity growth

data to obtain estimates of the average disagreement for each fund. Panel A summarizes

the average disagreement, E[(-ρєm /ρmrj*) σ(εp) SRmax], where E[.] is the sample average

across the 51 “states” for a given fund p, -ρєm is the correlation between a fund’s residual

return and a state’s electricity consumption growth and ρmrj* is the correlation with the

maximum correlation portfolio of the benchmarks. The cross-sectional distributions are

summarized as before. The upper bounds at the bottom of the panel are calculated as the

product σ(εp) SRmax, where σ(εp) is the standard deviation of εp and SRmax is the maximum

Sharpe ratio in the benchmark assets.

        It is well known that estimates of maximum Sharpe ratios are upwardly biased in
finite samples (e.g. Jobson and Korkie, 1982). We adjust the maximum Sharpe ratio
                                              27


estimates for finite sample bias following Ferson and Siegel (2003).22

        The average disagreement is close to zero for the average fund, but there seems to

be substantial heterogeneity across funds. The 10% tail values in the FF3 model, for

example, are -0.29% and +0.34% per month, and they are much larger for the CAPM. We

exploit this variation across funds in our analysis of the flow-performance relation. The

mean and median upper bounds on disagreement, which do not rely on the electricity

data, are shown in the bottom rows of Panel A. The mean upper bound varies across the

benchmarks from 0.21-0.38% per month, or about 2.5-4.5% per year. Thus, even for the
average fund disagreement with the traditional alphas may be substantial.

        Table III allows us to refine the rough calculations above for the economic

magnitudes of disagreement. The average upper bound is comparable in magnitude to

the ambiguity in traditional alphas associated with the choice of benchmark. A

representative example is the FF3 benchmark. Here the median upper bound on

disagreement is 0.25% per month. In comparison, for the median fund, the range of

alphas across the four benchmark models is 0.20% per month in Table II. The average

investor disagreement could be comparable in magnitude to the effect of benchmark

choice. The average upper bound is also comparable in magnitude to the effect of

estimation uncertainty in the traditional alphas. For example, for the median fund the

standard error of the CAPM alpha in Table II is 0.21%. In Table III the median upper

bound on disagreement relative to the CAPM is also 0.21% per month. Thus, investors

may disagree on the performance of the median fund, as measured by the CAPM, by an




22
  The adjusted measure is [(T-N-2)/T] SRmax2 – N/T, where N is the number of benchmark
assets, T is the length of the time series and SRmax2 is the maximum likelihood estimate of
the maximum squared Sharpe ratio under normality. We do not apply the correction
when N=1.
                                              28


amount similar to the standard error of the traditional alpha.23

        Panel B of Table III summarizes measures of disagreement with the MPPM. We

take the average disagreement with a traditional alpha, estimated as described above. We

subtract from this the difference between the MPPM and the traditional alpha. The result is

an indirect measure of average disagreement with the MPPM. As the indirect measure

depends on the traditional alpha, we show results for the different benchmark models.

        For each model except the ETF benchmark, Panel B shows that the average

disagreement with the MPPM for the mean and median funds is larger than the average

disagreement with the traditional alphas. This is consistent with manipulation that makes

the traditional alphas “too large.” The numbers also suggest that the range of average

disagreement with the MPPM is substantially greater than it is for the traditional alphas,

with the exception of the ETF benchmark. Of course, the measures of disagreement with the

MPPM involve a more complex calculation with more estimated values, and are thus likely

to be noisier. However, the figures suggest that investors are likely to disagree with the

MPPM, just as they do with the traditional alphas, and possibly to an even greater extent.

Thus, manipulation is not likely to be the main source of investor disagreement with

traditional alphas. In the next section we compare the information in these measures for the


23
  One might ask if there are any mutual funds whose traditional alphas are so large that
they swamp the disagreement, and we would expect all investors to agree that they are
positive. Fama and French (2010) find insignificant traditional alphas for net returns, in
both the positive and negative tails of the cross-sectional distribution of equity funds in
their more recent subperiod. If the largest traditional alphas are insignificantly different
from zero, they will not be significantly larger than zero plus our bounds on
disagreement. While it is conceivable that most investors could disagree with a traditional
alpha in the same direction (e.g., the CAPM alphas for small stocks are too low), this
suggests systematic missing factors in the model. Absent such factors there are unlikely to
be many funds where all investors agree that the alpha is positive (or negative), consistent
with the large dispersion of average disagreement in Panel A of Table III. Thus, investor
disagreement is likely to be important in the evaluation of almost all mutual funds.
                                                  29


flow of investor funds.



C. Cross-sectional Implications of Disagreement

       Our first prediction is that we should find a positive level effect of average

disagreement on fund flows, controlling for a traditional alpha. Mutual fund flows are

measured in the usual way as:



                      Flowp,t = [TNAp,t – TNAp,t-1 Rpt]/ TNAp,t-1,                        (11)



where TNA is the total net assets of the fund and Rpt is one plus the rate of return. Fund

flows are measured quarterly and the unit of analysis is the fund quarter.

       Our proxy for the average disagreement is ADISp = E[(-ρєm /ρmrj*) σ(εp) SRmax], as in

Table III. However, in exploring the cross-sectional implications of disagreement and

heterogeneity, we must be cognizant of the close relation of ADISp to the standard error of

the traditional alpha estimate for a fund. Both depend on σ(εp), the residual volatility of the

fund’s return. We do not want to confuse the cross sectional effects of disagreement with

the effects of imprecision in estimates of the traditional alpha. We therefore orthogonalize

ADISp to the standard errors. For each period we run a cross-sectional regression of the

ADISp‘s on heteroskedasticity-consistent standard error estimates for funds’ alphas, and

take the intercept plus residuals of these regressions as the orthogonalized measure, ODISp.

       Our first flow performance regression addresses the level effect of average

disagreement in a pooled panel regression:



           Flowp,t+1 = b0 + b1 ap,t + b2 ODISpt + controlst + up,t+1.                     (12)
                                               30


The traditional alphas for a given quarter, ap,t, are estimated using 36 months of past data (a

minimum of 12 months are required) for each fund.

           The control variables include the lagged volatility of the fund’s return over the

previous 36 (minimum of 12) months. This can be motivated by previous empirical work

(e.g. Sirri and Tufano, 1998), as a proxy for uncertainty about managerial ability or to soak

up heterogeneity in fund investors’ tax bases. We include the funds’ size (log of TNA), age

(the log of 1 + number of months since fund inception) and the expense ratio (plus 1/7 of the

load fee, if any). Chen, Goldstein and Jiang (2010) find that funds holding more liquid assets
experience stronger flows in relation to performance.        We therefore include a simple

measure of liquidity: the first order autocorrelation of the fund’s reported return over the

past 36 (minimum of 12) months, as suggested by the model of Getmansky, Lo and Makarov

(2004). Two variables control for fund family membership: a dummy variable for whether

the fund is in a family, and an index for the number of funds in the family.

           In the left hand columns of Table IV include year dummies in the controls and thus

identify the coefficients mainly from the cross-section. The aggregate quarterly flows to the

fund sector replace the time dummies in the right hand columns. Because the residuals are

likely to be correlated within fund styles, we cluster the standard errors by time and by fund

style.24

           Panel A of Table IV presents results using ADISp as the disagreement measure and

Panel B uses the orthogonalized measure, ODISp. There is a large and significant positive

relation between the alphas and the subsequent flows of investor funds, consistent with


24
   The style clusters are mid cap, small cap, aggressive growth, growth, growth and
income, equity income and other, where the allocation of funds to the strategies are
determined as described in footnote 16. This scheme assumes no correlation of the style-
level flows over time. We examine the sample correlations and find them to be
insignificant.
                                                   31


previous studies. The signs on most of the control variables are consistent with previous

work. For example, the coefficient on fund size is negative and significant. Larger mutual

funds experience smaller percentage flows for a given performance measure.

       Our main focus is the average disagreement, which has a positive coefficient in each

flow regression. The t-ratios of the coefficients are larger than two in five of the six examples.

The coefficients are similar using the ADIS and the ODIS measures, and they are relatively

insensitive to the controls. The coefficients are in the range 2.7 to 4.0. This says that the flow

of new money to the average fund is 2.7% to 4% smaller when the average investor thinks

that the FF3 alpha is 1% too high. Using the standard deviation of the ADIS variable and the

coefficients in Panel A, the typical fund flow is about 1.0-1.6% higher in a given quarter

when ADIS is one standard deviation above its mean (using the cross-sectional variance of

ADIS, the figure is slightly higher). For ODIS, the flow is about 1.1-1.3% higher when ODIS

is one standard deviation above its mean. In comparison, the unconditional mean flow in

our sample is 2.9% per quarter (the median is -1.1%), so the disagreement effect appears to

be economically significant.



D. Cross-sectional Implications of Heterogeneity

       We predict a negative level effect of heterogeneity on fund flows for a given latent

demand. We use different performance measures for the latent demand. One is the sum of

a traditional alpha and its associated average disagreement, denoted as Δp. We proxy for

investor heterogeneity using the standard deviation across the 51 states, of the disagreement

measure: HETp = Std[(-ρєm /ρmrj*) σ(εp) SRmax], where Std[.] is the sample standard deviation

taken across the states. We orthogonalize the heterogeneity measures to the standard errors

of alpha, using the same approach described above.             We denote the orthogonalized
heterogeneity measure as OHETp.
                                               32


        Table V presents the results of the flow performance regressions focusing on the level

effects of heterogeneity. Three sets of columns are shown in each panel, with different

subsets of the control variables. The coefficients on the alphas are positive and significant,

with magnitudes similar to those in Table IV. The coefficients on Δp are slightly smaller, but

strongly statistically significant. The coefficients on the MPPM are the smallest, but they are

still statistically significant.

        Our main focus is the coefficients on OHET, which are strongly significant and

negative in each regression. The coefficients on OHET are slightly larger when using the

latent demand Δp, compared with using the raw alphas or the MPPM. The coefficients vary

across the experiments from -9.5 to -13.5. This says that a fund with 1% more heterogeneity

in its investor base experiences about 10% less in future fund flows, other things equal.
        Using the standard deviation of the OHET variable and the coefficients in Panel A,

the typical fund flow is about 3.2.-3.8% lower in a given quarter when OHET is one

standard deviation above its mean. When the FF3 alpha is the performance measure in

Panel B, the typical flow is about 2.7.-3.2% lower in a given quarter when OHET is one

standard deviation above its mean, and when the MPPM is the measure in Panel C, the

figures are 2.8-3.4%. These are about twice as large as the disagreement effects in Table IV.

Thus, the effect of heterogeneity is likely of great economic significance.25



E. Conditional Models

         Conditional performance evaluation, as introduced by Ferson and Schadt (1996),

attempts to obtain better measures of manager skill by stripping out the effects of public

information. However, Del Guercio and Tkac (2002) find that individual investors do not

25In a previous version of this paper we study the interaction effects of heterogeneity with
regressions and graphs, and find patterns broadly consistent with our discussion of the
interaction effects in Section IV.B. These results are available by request.
                                                33


respond to complex performance measures as much as to simpler measures. We examine

a number of conditional models to assess the sensitivity of the disagreement measures.

(Tables are available by request.) The first example follows Ferson and Schadt (1996), with

constant alphas and time-varying conditional betas, modeled as linear functions of lagged

instruments for public information.26

        The conditional models generally find larger bounds on disagreement. The effects

of the smaller residual standard deviations (which reduce disagreement) are more than

offset by the larger maximum Sharpe ratios in models with a larger effective number of

benchmarks. For example, in the FF3 factor benchmark, the median estimate of the upper
bound is 0.52% in the Ferson and Schadt model, compared with the 0.21% we found in

Table III. At the same time the range of the alpha estimates across the benchmarks is

slightly narrower, so the disagreement bound now exceeds the range of alphas across the

benchmark models at each fractile of the distribution of funds. Disagreement now

appears even more important relative to the effects of benchmark choice and to the

statistical imprecision of the alpha estimates.

        We allow for the possibility of time-varying conditional alphas, modeling them as

linear functions of the lagged instruments, following Christopherson et al. (1998).27 We

examine the alphas in NBER recession and non recession periods. The CAPM alphas are

slightly larger in recession periods, consistent with previous studies, although we do not


26
   We use the one-month Treasury bill yield from CRSP, a yield spread between Moody’s
Baa-rated and Aaa-rated corporate bonds, and yield difference between a constant
maturity 10-year Treasury bond and the 3-month Treasury bill and the sum of the
dividends paid on the S&P500 index over the past 12 months divided by the level of the
index as lagged instruments. The data are from CRSP and DRI Basic Economics.
27
   We also examine models with time-varying conditional volatility using a GARCH(1,1)
model. If the fund residual is conditionally heteroskedastic, then its volatility, σ(εp|Z), varies
over time with Z and the expected bound is E{σ(εp|Zt) SRmax(Zt)}, allowing for a covariance
between the two terms.
                                              34


find this to be the case for the FF3 model alphas.28 The standard errors of the alpha

estimates in the two subsamples are larger and the range of alphas across the models is

greater, reflecting the smaller sample sizes. The inferences about the magnitudes of the

disagreement are generally similar to those from the constant alpha models.


                                     VII. Conclusions
The ambiguities in the interpretation of alpha as a normative investment signal are largely

resolved when alpha is defined relative to the client's preferences; and, assuming
incomplete markets, performance evaluation is inherently client specific. In evaluating

managed portfolios, one size does not fit all. Investors will not in general agree about

alphas, and the same fund will look attractive to one investor but not to another. We

evaluate the effects of investor disagreement and heterogeneity on investment

performance measurement and find that the effects are statistically and economically

significant. This has important implications for the existing literature, for practical

investment evaluation and for future research.

        We infer that the expected disagreements of investors with traditional alphas are

likely comparable in magnitude to the impacts of benchmark choice and estimation errors.

Benchmark choice and statistical imprecision have received a great deal of attention in the

literature on performance measurement, but investor heterogeneity has hardly begun to

be explored. We find that when measures of the average disagreement across investors

indicate that traditional alphas are too low, funds enjoy larger flows of new money for a

given traditional alpha. When a fund faces greater heterogeneity, defined as the variance

of disagreement across investors, it experiences less flow for a given performance level.

28
  Studies finding that mutual funds perform better in recessions include Ferson and Qian
(2004), Kowsowski (2011), Moskowitz (2000), and Kacperczyk, Niewerburgh and Veldkamp
(2012). These results are criticized by De Souza and Lynch (2012) for ex post conditioning.
                                                   35


These effects are separate from uncertainty about the true value of the traditional alpha.

           While our analysis indicates that investor disagreement and heterogeneity are

economically significant, we likely understate the case. We use iterated expectations to

integrate out clients’ different beliefs about traditional alphas. We do not consider taxes

or transaction costs. These are additional sources of potential disagreement about alpha

across investors.

           The implications of our results for the practical evaluation of investments are

important. One client is likely to view the performance of a given fund differently from

another client. If the client’s life situation is idiosyncratic, he is likely to view the

performance of a fund as idiosyncratically different. Our results also suggest an
important avenue for new research on investment performance evaluation. If the client-

specific nature of alpha is important, then studies should develop clientele-specific

measures of fund performance.


                                            Appendix
A. Proof of Proposition 1:

The first order condition for an optimal response Δ that maximizes the lifetime utility

implies:



           - uc(Ct-Δ) + E{βJw(W(Δ)) [Rpt+1 + (Wt-Ct) (x(Δ)/Δ)'R] |Zt} = 0.                 (A1)



Assuming regular utility functions, we use the mean value theorem to represent



                  uc(Ct-Δ) = uc(Ct) - ucc* Δ and                                             (A2)
                  Jw(W(Δ)) = Jw(Wt+1) + Jww* [W(Δ)-Wt+1],
                                                  36




where * indicates that the functions are evaluated at points in the intervals (Ct-Δ,Ct) and

(W(Δ),Wt+1) respectively. Substituting (A.2) into (A.1) yields:



    uc(Ct) -ucc*Δ=E{β [Jw(Wt)+Jww* (W(Δ)-Wt+1)] [Rp,t+1 + (Wt-Ct)(x(Δ)/Δ)'R]}.        (A3)



Substituting in (W(Δ)-Wt+1) = ΔRp + (Wt-Ct)[x(Δ)-x]'R, where x(Δ) is the new optimal

portfolio weight vector for the N base assets, normalized to sum to 1.0, and x is the old

optimal weight vector, and using the first order condition E{β Jw(Wt) R}=1uc(C) and the
fact that x(Δ)'1=1 implies (x(Δ)/Δ)'1=0, and using the definition of αp, (A.3) reduces to:



                        uc(Ct) - ucc*Δ = (1+αp)uc(Ct) + Δ Q,                            (A4)

        Q = E{β Jww* [Rpt+1 + (Wt-Ct) (x(Δ)/Δ)'R] [Rpt+1 + (Wt-Ct) (x(Δ)-x)/Δ)'R]}.



Solving for the optimal Δ we have:

                      Δ = αp {uc /(-ucc* - Q)},                                         (A5)

and the conditions of the theorem guarantee that Q<0, which establishes the result. QED.
                                             37


                                      References

Admati, A. and S.A. Ross, 1985, Measuring performance in a rational expectations
equilibrium model, Journal of Business 58(11), 11-26.

Asness, Clifford, Robert Krail, and John Liew, 2001, Do hedge funds hedge? Journal of
Portfolio Management 28,6-19.

Beja, Avraham, 1971, The structure of the cost of capital under uncertainty, Review of
Economic Studies 4, 359-369.

Berk, Jonathan and R.C. Green, 2004, Mutual Fund flows in Rational Markets, Journal of
Political Economy 112, 1269-1295.

Busse, Jeffrey A. and Q. Tong, 2012, Mutual fund industry selection and persistence,
Review of Asset Pricing Studies 2, 245-274.

Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, 2010, Payoff complementarities and financial
fragility: Evidence from mutual fund outflows, Journal of Financial Economics 2010, 239-262.

Chen, Z., and P.J.Knez, 1996, Portfolio performance Measurement: theory and
applications, Review of Financial Studies 9, 511-556.

Chen, Si, and Massimo Massa, and Hong Zhang, 2012, Short-sale constraints and the
pricing of managerial skills: The case of Mutual Funds, Working Paper, National
University of Singapore.

Christopherson, Jon A., Wayne Ferson, and Debra A. Glassman, 1998, Conditioning
manager alpha on economic information: Another look at the persistence of performance,
Review of Financial Studies 11, 111-142.

Cochrane, John H. and Jesús Sáa-Requejo, 2000, Beyond Arbitrage: Good-deal asset price
bounds in incomplete markets, Journal of Political Economy 108, 79-119.

Cowles, A., 1933, Can stock market forecasters forecast? Econometrica 1(3), 309-325.

Da, Zhi and Hayong Yun, 2010, Electricity consumption and asset prices, working paper,
Notre Dame University.

Del Guercio, Diane, and Paula A. Tkac, 2002, The determinants of the flow of funds of
managed portfolios: Mutual funds vs. pension funds, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 37, 523-557.
                                              38

De Souza, André, and Anthony W. Lynch, 2012, Does mutual fund performance vary over
the business cycle? Working Paper, Fordham University.

Dybvig, Philip H., and Ross, Stephen A. 1985. Performance Measurement Using
Differential Information and a Security Market Line. Journal of Finance 40: 383-99.

Evans, Richard B., 2010, Mutual Fund Incubation, Journal of Finance 65(4), 1581-1611.

Fama Eugune F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on
stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2010, Luck versus Skill in the Cross-section of
Mutual Fund Returns, Journal of Finance, 65, 1915-1948.

Ferson, W., 2012, Investment performance: A review and synthesis, the Handbook of
Economics and Finance, edited by George Constantinides, Milton Harris and Rene Stulz
(forthcoming)

Ferson, Wayne and K. Khang, 2002, Conditional Performance Measurement Using
Portfolio Weights: Evidence for Pension Funds, Journal of Financial Economics 65, 249-282.

Ferson, W., Tyler Henry and Darren Kisgen, 2006, Evaluating Government Bond Fund
Performance with Stochastic Discount Factors, Review of Financial Studies 19, 423-456.

Ferson, Wayne, and Meijun Qian, 2004, Conditional performance evaluation revisited, in
Research Foundation Monograph of the CFA Institute (formerly, AIMR), ISBN 0-943205-
69-7, 84 pages.

Ferson, W., and Rudi Schadt. 1996. "Measuring Fund Strategy and Performance in
Changing Economic Conditions." Journal of Finance, 51: 425-462.

Ferson, Wayne, and Andrew Siegel, 2003, Stochastic discount factor bounds with
conditioning information, Review of Financial Studies 16(2), 567-595.

Getmansky, Mila, Andrew W .Lo, and Igor Makarov, 2004, An econometric model of
serial correlation and illiquidity in hedge fund returns, Journal of Financial Economics 74,
529-609.

Gibbons, Michael R., Stephen A. Ross, and Jay Shanken, 1989, A test of the Efficiency of a
Given Portfolio, Econometrica 57, 1121-1152.

Glode, Vincent, 2011, Why mutual funds underperform, Journal of Financial Economics 93,
546-559.
                                             39



Glosten, L. and R. Jagannathan, 1994, A contingent claim approach to portfolio evaluation,
Journal of Empirical Finance 1, 133-160.

Goetzmann, W., Ingersoll J., Ivkovic Z., 2000, Monthly measurement of daily timers,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35, 257-290.

Goetzmann, W., Ingersoll, J., Spiegel, M., and Welch, I, 2007, Portfolio performance
manipulation and manipulation-proof measures, Review of Financial Studies 20, 1503-1546.

Green, R.C., 1986, Benchmark portfolio inefficiency and deviations from the security
market line, Journal of Finance 41 (2), 295-312.

Grinblatt, Mark and Titman, Sheridan. 1989. Portfolio Performance evaluation: old issues
and new insights. Review of Financial Studies 2: 393-422.

Huang, Jennifer, Kelsey D. Wei, and Hong Yan, 2007, Participation costs and the
sensitivity of fund flows to past performance, Journal of Finance 62, 1273-1311.

Jagannathan, Ravi, and Robert Korajczyk, 1986, Assessing the market timing performance
of managed portfolios, Journal of Business 59(2), 217-235.

Jain, Prem C., and Joanna Shuang Wu, 2000, Truth in mutual fund advertising: Evidence
on Future Performance and Fund Flows, Journal of Finance 55, 937-958.

Jensen, M. 1968. "The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945 -1964." Journal of
Finance, 23: 389-46.

Jobson, J.D., and Bob Korkie, 1982, Potential performance and tests of portfolio efficiency,
Journal of Financial Econometrics 10(4), 433-466.

Kacperczyk, Marcin T., Stijn Van Niewerburgh, and Laura Veldkamp, 2012, Time-varying
fund manager skill, Working Paper, New York University.

Kosowski, R., 2011, Do mutual funds perform when it matters most to investors? US
mutual fund performance and risk in recessions and expansions, Quarterly Journal of
Finance 2011, 607-664.

Koski, Jennifer Lynch, and Jeffrey Pontiff, 1999, How are derivatives used? Evidence from
the mutual fund industry, Journal of Finance 54, 791–816.

Leland, Hayne, 1999, Performance beyond mean-variance: Performance measurement in a
nonsymmetric world. Financial Analysts Journal 55: 27-36.
                                             40



Massa, Massimo, 2003, How do family strategies affect fund performance? When
performance-maximization is not the only game in town, Journal of Financial Economics 67,
249-315.

Mayers, D. and E. Rice, 1979, Measuring portfolio performance and the empirical content
of asset pricing models, Journal of Financial Economics 7(1), 3-28.

Moskowitz, Tobias J., 2000, Discussion, Journal of Finance 55, 1695-1703.

Nanda, Vikram, Jay Wang, and Lu Zheng, 2004, Family values and the star phenomenon:
strategies of mutual fund families, Review of Financial Studies 17(3), 667-698.

Moskowitz, Tobias J., Mutual fund performance: an empirical decomposition into stock-
picking talent, style, transaction costs, and expenses: Discussion, Journal of Finance 2000
55(4), 1695-1703.

Ohlson, James A., 1979, Residual (API) Analysis and the private value of information,
Journal of Accounting Research 17, 506-527.

Roll, Richard, 1978, Ambiguity when performance is measured by the security market
line. Journal of Finance 33: 1051-1069.

Rubinstein, Mark, 1976, The valuation of uncertain income streams and the pricing of
options, Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science 7, 407-425.

Sharpe, William. F., 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under
conditions of risk, Journal of Finance 19, 425-42.

Sharpe, William F., 1982, Security Codings: Measuring Relative Attractivenes in Perfect
and Imperfect Markets, in Financial Economics: Essays in Honor of Paul Cootner, (Prentice
Hall, Engelwood Cliffs, NJ., 216-229.

Sharpe, William F., 1987, An algorithm for portfolio improvement, Advances in
Mathematical Programming and Financial Planning, vol. 1 (Greenwich, CT: JIA Press Inc.)

Sharpe, William F., 1992, The Sharpe ratio, Journal of Portfolio Management, Winter, 7-19.

Sirri, Erik R., and Peter Tufano, 1998, Costly search and mutual fund flows, Journal of
Finance 53,1589–1622.

Verrechia, R., 1980, The Mayers-Rice conjecture: A counterexample, Journal of Financial
Economics 8, 87-100.
                                                 41

                                            Table I
                                     Summary Statistics
The data are from January 1984 through December 2012. The benchmark assets include a
stock market portfolio (market), the Fama French three factors (FF 3 Factors), six equal-
weighted portfolios of index mutual funds (Index MFs) and a set of five ETFs: SPY (large
cap), MDY (mid cap), IJR (small cap), QQQ (Nasdaq 100), IYR (Mortgage/Real Estate).
Mean is the sample mean, Std Dev is the standard deviation, Min is the minimum, Max is
the maximum, AR1 is the first order autocorrelation and SR is the sample Sharpe ratio.
All statistics are computed on excess returns measured net of the one month return on a
three-month Treasury bill. Columns for the mutual funds are sorted separately on each
statistic shown in Panels B and C. Monthly percentage figures are reported in the first four
columns. In panel D, ρєm is the correlation between state level electricity consumption
growth and the residual from regressing the fund’s return on the benchmarks, and ρmrj* is
the correlation with the maximum correlation portfolio of the benchmark returns.


                         Panel A: Summary Statistics for Benchmarks


                 Mean      Std Dev       Min           Max      AR1      SR


FF 3 Factors
Market           0.584       4.559     -23.077        12.416    0.087   0.128
SMB              0.068       3.156     -16.390        22.000   -0.034   0.022
HML              0.293       3.070     -12.600        13.840    0.143   0.095

Index MFs
S&P 500          0.557       4.450     -22.083        15.718   0.046    0.125
S&P MidCap       0.679       4.868     -21.900        16.041   0.124    0.140
SmallCap         0.454       5.861     -20.270        18.922   0.080    0.078
Russell          0.416       5.319     -31.829        13.609   0.136    0.078
MSCI US          0.492       5.256     -32.640        14.052   0.156    0.094
Others           0.559       4.835     -19.073        14.289   0.078    0.116

ETFs
IJR              0.656       5.717     -19.798        18.071   0.087    0.115
IYR              0.873       6.639     -31.352        29.605   0.073    0.132
MDY              0.786       5.255     -21.584        14.765   0.125    0.150
QQQ              0.275       8.011     -26.599        23.046   0.104    0.034
SPY              0.488       4.329     -16.555        10.914   0.089    0.113
                                                            42

   Panel B: Summary Statistics for Mutual Fund Returns with At Least 12 Months’ Data

Fractile             Mean        Std Dev            Min              Max        AR1       SR


Bottom 1%            -2.534         1.931         -32.402            3.364     -0.322   -0.326
Bottom 10%           -0.293         3.652         -22.441            7.550     -0.120   -0.055
Bottom 25%            0.169         4.379         -19.184           10.185     -0.036    0.033
Median                0.482         5.054         -14.342           12.255      0.075    0.097
Top 25%               0.820         5.812          -9.077           14.922      0.159    0.175
Top 10%               1.201         6.861          -7.313           19.059      0.232    0.251
Top 1%                2.034        12.595          -3.708           36.050      0.419    0.436

    Panel C: Summary Statistics for Mutual Fund Returns with at Least 2 Month’s Data

Fractile             Mean        Std Dev            Min              Max        AR1       SR


Bottom 1%            -3.409         1.565         -31.925            0.850     -0.625   -0.510
Bottom 10%           -0.438         3.414         -22.237            6.088     -0.148   -0.082
Bottom 25%            0.140         4.315         -18.842            9.632     -0.044    0.028
Median                0.478         5.017         -13.069           12.005      0.069    0.097
Top 25%               0.845         5.804          -8.603           14.737      0.159    0.181
Top 10%               1.279         6.908          -6.377           18.669      0.236    0.268
Top 1%                2.839        12.734          -0.804           35.833      0.475    0.747

                       Panel D: Electricity Growth Correlations for the Average Fund

Fractile                  CAPM              FF3       Idx MFs         ETFs

Min State ρєm                 -0.096   -0.047             -0.026      -0.066
Median State ρєm               0.017    0.017              0.030       0.004
Max State ρєm                  0.096    0.079              0.063       0.090

Min State ρmrj*               0.001     0.062               0.204      0.335
Median State ρmrj*            0.110     0.337               0.664      0.704
Max State ρmrj*               0.449     0.560               0.927      0.925

Fraction with                  76.5         100              100         100
|ρєm/ ρmrj*|<1

Aggregate Cons:
Median Fund ρєm               0.021     0.081               0.036      0.014
ρmrj*                         0.190     0.332               0.673      0.581
                                                   43

                                               Table II
Mutual Funds’ Alphas and Residual Volatilities Using Various Factor
                            Models
This table summarizes the cross-sectional distribution of alpha estimates, their standard
errors, and the volatility of the idiosyncratic residuals for actively managed mutual funds.
CAPM denotes the Capital Asset Pricing Model, FF3 denotes the three Fama-French
factors, Idx MFs are the six equal-weighted portfolios of index mutual funds, ETFs are a
set of five ETFs. The symbols rp and rj denote the fund excess returns and the vector of
benchmark excess returns, respectively. All figures are in monthly percentage units. The
sample period is January, 1984 through December, 2012. The alphas are the intercepts in
the following regression:

              rp = ap + Bp’ rj + εp.

Std is the White (1980) standard error of the alpha and σ(εp) is the standard deviation of
the fund residual. The regressions use actively managed mutual funds with at least 12
monthly returns. The last column reports manipulation-proof performance measures
(MPPM) proposed by Goetzmann et al. (2007) with a risk aversion coefficient of 3. In each
column funds are sorted on the indicated statistic.


       Panel A: Summary Statistics for Traditional Mutual Fund Alphas and the MPPM


                            CAPM                                   FF3             MPPM


                  Alpha         Std    σ(εp)              Alpha     Std    σ(εp)   Alpha


Bottom 1%        -1.271        0.062   0.426              -1.239   0.052   0.358   -4.309
Bottom 10%       -0.452        0.106   0.746              -0.441   0.090   0.636   -0.689
Bottom 25%       -0.247        0.144   1.079              -0.246   0.120   0.887   -0.350
Median           -0.070        0.205   1.608              -0.087   0.165   1.264   -0.105
Top 25%           0.102        0.289   2.301               0.051   0.229   1.818    0.140
Top 10%           0.307        0.411   3.225               0.194   0.339   2.474    0.478
Top 1%            0.869        1.087   6.747               0.630   0.897   4.856    1.131

Mean             -0.079        0.249   1.872              -0.116   0.204   1.475   -0.205
                                               44




                            Idx MFs                           ETFs


                 Alpha          Std    σ(εp)        Alpha      Std      σ(εp)


Bottom 1%         -1.584       0.039   0.254        -2.063    0.035     0.277
Bottom 10%        -0.456       0.088   0.520        -0.579    0.085     0.559
Bottom 25%        -0.227       0.118   0.731        -0.320    0.111     0.765
Median            -0.059       0.161   1.105        -0.140    0.151     1.089
Top 25%            0.091       0.228   1.673         0.013    0.213     1.555
Top 10%            0.255       0.339   2.322         0.150    0.316     2.124
Top 1%             0.775       0.919   4.699         0.566    0.879     4.517

Mean              -0.119       0.202   1.326        -0.215    0.189     1.296


                           Panel B: Range of Alphas Across Models


             Four Benchmarks           Five Models Including the MPPM


Bottom 1%              0.027                          0.044
Bottom 10%             0.069                          0.110
Bottom 25%             0.119                          0.176
Median                 0.202                          0.304
Top 25%                0.358                          0.550
Top 10%                0.603                          0.967
Top 1%                 2.143                          4.338

Mean                   0.344                          0.546
                                                45

                                           Table III
                         Investor Disagreement Measures
Measures of disagreement with alphas using various benchmarks are summarized.
CAPM uses the market portfolio, FF3 uses the three Fama French factors, Idx MFs uses the
the index funds and ETFs uses are a set of five ETFs as the benchmarks. The symbols rp
and rj denote the fund excess returns and the vector of benchmark excess returns,
respectively. The regression is:

             rp = ap + Bp’ rj + εp

The upper bounds are calculated as the product σ(εp) SRmax., where σ(εp) is the standard
deviation of εp and SRmax is the maximum Sharpe ratio in the benchmarks, adjusted for
finite sample bias following Ferson and Siegel (2003). The average disagreement is
calculated as the average of (-ρєm /ρmrj*) σ(εp) SRmax across the 51 “states” for a given
benchmark choice and fund. ρєm is the correlation between state level electricity
consumption growth and the residual from regressing the fund’s return on the benchmarks,
and ρmrj* is the correlation between the electricity consumption growth and a maximum
correlation portfolio of the benchmark returns. Panel B shows disagreement with the
manipulation proof performance measure, MPPM. The figures are in monthly percentage
units for 1984-2012.


                      Panel A: Disagreement with Traditional Alphas


Fractile           CAPM       FF3     Idx MFs        ETFs


Bottom 1%          -7.302    -0.697   -0.567     -0.393
Bottom 10%         -2.602    -0.290   -0.222     -0.166
Bottom 25%         -1.141    -0.137   -0.114     -0.094
Median              0.042     0.028   -0.015      0.001
Top 25%             1.255     0.195    0.082      0.098
Top 10%             2.569     0.343    0.178      0.168
Top 1%              6.111     0.893    0.433      0.384

Mean               -0.008     0.035   -0.021         0.002

Upper Bounds:

Mean                0.240     0.248    0.379         0.210
Median              0.206     0.212    0.316         0.176
                                           46



                      Panel B: Disagreement with the MPPM


             CAPM     FF3      Idx MFs   ETFs


Bottom 1%    -6.824   -1.438    -1.439   -1.777
Bottom 10%   -2.218   -0.526    -0.508   -0.625
Bottom 25%   -0.877   -0.206    -0.182   -0.279
Median        0.143    0.036     0.028   -0.039
Top 25%       1.214    0.296     0.220    0.151
Top 10%       2.549    0.651     0.522    0.398
Top 1%        7.209    4.046     3.428    3.807

Mean          0.154   0.135     0.058    -0.015
                                                          47


                                                     Table IV
      Quarterly Panel Flow-performance Regressions using Average
                Disagreement and Three-Factor Alphas
The data cover January, 1984 through December, 2012. The net flow, Flowp,t+1, is defined
as the quarter-to-quarter growth in total net assets (TNA) in excess of fund returns. Three-
factor alphas, ap,t, are estimated using 36 months of past data on excess returns (a minimum
of 12 months are required) and the Fama-French factors as follows:

              rp,  a p,t  mkt rmkt ,   smbrsmb,   hml rhml,   p, ,   t  36,..., t  1.

We then run the following quarterly pooled panel regressions for 1985-2012:

              Flowp,t+1 = b0 + b1 ap,t + b2 ADISp,t + controlst + up,t+1,

              Flowp,t+1 = b0 + b1 ap,t + b2 ODISp,t + controlst + up,t+1,

The proxy for average disagreement is:

              ADISp = E[(-ρєm /ρmrj*) σ(εp) SRmax],

where ρєm is the time-series correlation between a fund’s residual return and a state’s
electricity consumption growth and E[.] denotes the cross-sectional average across the 50
states and the District of Columbia. The symbol rj* denotes the maximum correlation
portfolio in a given set of benchmark returns and σ(εp) is fund p’s residual volatility. SRmax
is the maximum Sharpe ratio, adjusted for finite sample bias following Ferson and Siegel
(2003). We also orthogonalize ADISp to the cross section of standard errors of the
traditional alphas each quarter, and take the intercept plus residuals of these regressions as
the measure ODISp. The control variables include the lagged age (the natural logarithm of
months since inception, AGEt), the lagged size (the natural logarithm of TNA, SIZEt), the
expense ratio plus one-seventh of the front-end load (EXPENSEt), the aggregate flow into
the fund style category (SECFLOWt), the lagged fund total return volatility (TVOLt) and
the lagged first order fund return autocorrelation, estimated over the past 36 months
(ARt). DFAMt is a dummy variable equal to one if a fund has other funds in the same
family, and zero otherwise. NFAMt indicates the number of funds greater than one in the
same family, and is zero if there is only one fund in the family. The year fixed effects are
year dummies. The standard errors are clustered by year and fund style.
                                       48




                         Panel A: Fund Flows and ADIS


                      Coeff     Std    Coeff       Std    Coeff     Std

a pt                 14.298   4.424   12.362     3.433   12.890   3.450
ADISpt                2.965   1.784    3.958     1.820    3.959   1.756
AGEt                  0.093   0.049    0.077     0.046    0.082   0.046
SIZEt                -0.088   0.042   -0.082     0.041   -0.085   0.042
EXPENSEt             -4.691   4.100   -4.120     3.628   -3.661   3.391
TVOLt                -1.621   0.710   -1.832     0.768   -2.004   0.769
ARt                   0.068   0.046    0.130     0.026    0.124   0.012
SECFLOWt                               1.224     0.518    1.488   0.807
DFAMt                                                     0.037   0.077
NFAMt                                                     0.001   0.001
Year Fixed Effects     Yes                  No               No


                         Panel B: Fund Flows and ODIS


                      Coeff     Std    Coeff       Std    Coeff     Std

a pt                 14.325   4.431   12.363     3.425   12.860   3.466
ODISpt                3.428   1.712    2.954     1.312    2.695   1.366
AGEt                  0.093   0.049    0.076     0.046    0.080   0.046
SIZEt                -0.088   0.042   -0.081     0.041   -0.085   0.042
EXPENSEt             -4.623   4.117   -4.010     3.663   -3.557   3.427
TVOLt                -1.488   0.712   -1.624     0.752   -1.793   0.760
ARt                   0.066   0.045    0.119     0.038    0.114   0.030
SECFLOWt                               1.261     0.497    1.521   0.798
DFAMt                                                     0.039   0.076
NFAMt                                                     0.001   0.001
Year Fixed Effects     Yes                  No               No
                                                          49


                                                      Table V
     Flow-performance Regressions using Heterogeneity and Three
                         Factor Alphas
The data cover January, 1984 through December, 2012. The net flow, Flowp,t+1, is defined
as the quarter-to-quarter growth in total net assets (TNA) in excess of fund returns. Three-
factor alphas, ap,t, are estimated using 36 months of past data (a minimum of 12 months are
required) and the Fama-French factors as follows:

              rp,  a p,t  mkt rmkt ,   smbrsmb,   hml rhml,   p, ,   t  36,..., t  1.

We then run the following quarterly pooled panel regressions for 1985-2012:

             Flowp,t+1 = b0 + b1 Δp,t + b2 OHETp,t + controlst + up,t+1,

             Flowp,t+1 = b0 + b1 ap,t + b2 OHETp,t + controlst + up,t+1,

             Flowp,t+1 = b0 + b1 MPPMp,t + b2 OHETp,t + controlst + up,t+1,

The proxy for investor heterogeneity is based on: HETp = Std[(-ρєm /ρmrj*) σ(εp) SRmax],
where ρєm is the time-series correlation between a fund’s residual return and a state’s
electricity consumption growth and Std[.] denotes the cross-sectional standard deviation
across the 50 states and the District of Columbia. The symbol rj* denotes the maximum
correlation portfolio in a given set of benchmark returns and σ(εp) is fund p’s residual
volatility. SRmax is the maximum Sharpe ratio, adjusted for finite sample bias following
Ferson and Siegel (2003). We orthogonalize HETp to the cross section of standard errors of
the three-factor alphas each quarter, and take the intercept plus residuals of these
regressions as the orthogonalized measure, OHETp. Δp is the sum of the three-factor alpha
and its average disagreement, ADISp = E[(-ρєm /ρmrj*) σ(εp) SRmax]. MPPM is the
manipulation-proof performance measure.

The control variables include the lagged age (the natural logarithm of months since
inception, AGEt), the lagged size (the natural logarithm of TNA, SIZEt), the expense ratio
plus one-seventh of the front-end load (EXPENSEt), the aggregate flow into the fund style
category (SECFLOWt), the lagged fund total return volatility estimated over the past 36
months (TVOLt) and the lagged first order autocorrelation of the fund return estimated
over the last 36 months (ARt). DFAMt is the dummy equal to one if a fund has other funds
in the same family, and zero otherwise. NFAMt indicates the number of funds greater
than one in the same family, and is zero if there is only one fund in a family. The year
fixed effects are year dummies. The standard errors are clustered by year and fund style.
                                             50




                      Panel A: Fund Flows, OHET and Latent Demands


                            Coeff      Std        Coeff     Std    Coeff      Std

Δpt                         10.179   3.846     8.194      2.717     8.311   2.801
OHETpt                     -13.546   4.784   -11.462      3.741   -11.499   3.642
AGEt                         0.111   0.074     0.099      0.070     0.108   0.070
SIZEt                       -0.124   0.049    -0.120      0.047    -0.128   0.048
EXPENSEt                    -6.470   4.296    -6.416      4.175    -5.594   3.938
TVOLt                       -3.003   1.373    -2.944      1.184    -2.908   1.173
ARt                          0.164   0.111     0.180      0.116     0.145   0.106
SECFLOWt                                       1.608      1.133     1.847   1.263
DFAMt                                                               0.009   0.101
NFAMt                                                               0.003   0.001
Year Fixed Effects            Yes                   No                 No


                     Panel B: Fund Flows, OHET and Three-factor Alphas


                            Coeff      Std        Coeff     Std    Coeff      Std

a pt                        15.358   5.281    11.855      3.433   12.014    3.581
OHETpt                     -11.269   3.973    -9.549      3.117   -9.553    3.020
AGEt                         0.115   0.074     0.100      0.070    0.109    0.069
SIZEt                       -0.126   0.049    -0.121      0.047   -0.129    0.048
EXPENSEt                    -6.218   4.295    -6.058      4.103   -5.219    3.852
TVOLt                       -2.235   1.046    -2.567      1.023   -2.528    1.008
ARt                          0.163   0.105     0.162      0.110    0.127    0.100
SECFLOWt                                       1.666      1.145    1.905    1.278
DFAMt                                                              0.017    0.102
NFAMt                                                              0.003    0.001
Year Fixed Effects            Yes                   No                No
                                        51




                    Panel C: Fund Flows, OHET and the MPPM


                       Coeff      Std        Coeff     Std   Coeff      Std

MPPM pt                 7.928   3.156     6.010      2.692    6.375   2.833
OHETpt                -12.165   4.753   -10.093      3.387   -9.923   3.224
AGEt                    0.118   0.077     0.103      0.074    0.114   0.073
SIZEt                  -0.129   0.051    -0.124      0.050   -0.133   0.051
EXPENSEt               -7.196   4.732    -6.692      4.451   -5.824   4.151
TVOLt                  -0.316   1.143    -1.705      0.983   -1.574   0.937
ARt                     0.119   0.096     0.117      0.104    0.078   0.094
SECFLOWt                                  1.495      1.002    1.726   1.129
DFAMt                                                         0.007   0.105
NFAMt                                                         0.003   0.002
Year Fixed Effect        Yes                   No                No
