NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RISK-ADJUSTING THE RETURNS TO VENTURE CAPITAL
Arthur Korteweg
Stefan Nagel
Working Paper 19347
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19347

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

We thank Susan Woodward at Sand Hill Econometrics for providing access to data, and John Cochrane,
Bob Hodrick, Steve Kaplan, Morten Sørensen, and Stanford finance brown bag participants for valuable
comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Arthur Korteweg and Stefan Nagel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Risk-Adjusting the Returns to Venture Capital
Arthur Korteweg and Stefan Nagel
NBER Working Paper No. 19347
August 2013
JEL No. G12,G32
ABSTRACT
Performance evaluation of venture-capital (VC) payoffs is challenging because payoffs are infrequent,
skewed, realized over endogenously varying time horizons, and cross- sectionally dependent. We show
that standard stochastic discount factor (SDF) methods can be adapted to handle these issues. Our
approach generalizes the Public Market Equivalent (PME) measure commonly used in the private-equity
literature. We find that the abnormal returns from both VC funds and VC start-up investments are
robust to relaxing the strong distributional assumptions and implicit SDF restrictions from the prior
literature: VC start-up investments earn substantial positive abnormal returns, and VC fund abnormal
returns are close to zero. We further show that the systematic component of start-up company and
VC fund payoffs resembles the negatively skewed payoffs from selling index put options, which contrasts
with the call option-like positive skewness of the idiosyncratic payoffs. Motivated by this finding,
we explore an SDF that includes index put option returns. This results in negative abnormal returns
to VC funds, while the abnormal returns to start-up investments remain large and positive.

Arthur Korteweg
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
korteweg@stanford.edu
Stefan Nagel
Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER

Venture capital (VC) investments play an important role in supporting the formation of
young enterprises in the economy. Assessing the risk and return from this type of investments
has thus far proven diﬃcult for a number of reasons: Payoﬀs are infrequent, realized over
multiple periods with varying and possibly endogenous time horizons, highly skewed, and
cross-sectionally dependent. Furthermore, available data sets are plagued by selection biases
and other problems.
Leaving aside selection bias issues for a moment, risk-adjustment of such payoﬀs is conceptually straightforward. Arbitrage-free stochastic discount factors (SDF) implied by standard
asset-pricing models price highly skewed (“option-like”) payoﬀs just like any other payoﬀ.
For example, a large class of models implies an SDF in exponential-aﬃne form,
Mt+1 = exp(a − bft+1 ).

(1)

One special case is the log-utility Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) with a = 0, b = 1,
and f the log return on wealth. A more general version of the CAPM arises with power utility
and IID consumption growth in an endowment economy, where f is the log return on wealth,
b equals the relative risk aversion coeﬃcient, and a is a function of relative risk aversion,
the time preference parameter, and mean consumption growth. Additional risk factors, such
as those of Fama and French (1993), could be added as well. Multi-period valuation is also
straightforward as these single-period SDFs compound to multi-period SDFs in a natural
way.
We use this approach to value payoﬀs of VC-backed start-up companies and VC funds
(collectively referred to as VC payoﬀs). In our baseline speciﬁcation, we use the public equity
market portfolio log return as the risk factor, f , and we choose the SDF parameters a and b
to exactly ﬁt the average public equity market and Treasury bill returns during our sample
period. We then apply this SDF to VC payoﬀs. In doing so, we are eﬀectively asking whether
the VC payoﬀs are comparable—when matched by their systematic risk—to those available
in public equity and Treasury bill markets as summarized by the SDF. More precisely, if each
1

VC payoﬀ could be replicated with a levered portfolio in the public equity market (where
the degree of leverage pins down the level of systematic risk), the application of this method
would deliver a pricing error of zero.
We show that this approach generalizes the Public Market Equivalent (P M E) measure of
Kaplan and Schoar (2005). While Kaplan and Schoar (2005) provide a heuristic motivation
of their measure as one that compares private equity payoﬀs with those in public markets
under the assumption of a beta coeﬃcient of one, we show that their measure is actually
an implementation of a standard SDF valuation in the special case of log-utility (a = 0
and b = 1) that does not imply any assumptions about beta. Thus, with regards to how it
accounts for systematic risk, the P M E measure is actually more general than the literature
has assumed. However, the P M E method is restrictive on a diﬀerent dimension: It implicitly
assumes that the equity premium (and hence the incremental risk premium for an additional
unit of beta exposure) is equal to the variance of the market return. Our approach, which we
label Generalized Public Market Equivalent (GP M E), avoids this restriction by relaxing the
assumption that a = 0 and b = 1. This allows for a more accurate risk-matched comparison
of start-up company payoﬀs with the investment opportunities available in the public markets
during the same time period.
In our approach, the endogenous payoﬀ horizon problem is not an issue as long as ﬁnal
outcomes are observed. The applicability of the SDF valuation formula does not depend
on how the timing of the payoﬀ was generated—all that matters is when the payoﬀ occurs.
However, in our start-up company data set we do have to address the problem that some
ﬁnal outcomes are unobserved, depending on the start-up’s performance (Cochrane (2005)
and Korteweg and Sorensen (2010)). We deal with this problem by showing results for a
variety of assumptions about the unobserved end-of-round ﬁrm values.
To empirically implement our GP M E measure, we propose a GMM method to conduct
statistical inference in a way that is robust to cross-correlation between VC payoﬀs. While
it is common in the literature to assume that payoﬀs are uncorrelated between start-up

2

companies or funds (or, in the case of P M E, to not report standard errors), changes in startup company valuations between funding rounds or the cash ﬂows of VC funds over the fund
life are overlapping in time to varying degrees, and are likely subject to similar common factor
shocks and, hence, cross-sectional correlation. To account for this cross-sectional correlation,
we borrow methods from the spatial GMM literature and treat the degree of overlap between a
pair of observations as analogous to a spatial distance that determines the level of correlation.
We apply our method to a data set of VC funds from 1985 to 2012 and a data set of
start-up company ﬁnancing rounds from 1987 to 2005. The VC fund payoﬀs are measured
net of fees, whereas the payoﬀs in the start-up company data reﬂect the gross returns from
VC investments, before any fees and carried interest. In the VC fund data, we ﬁnd (equallyweighted) abnormal returns close to zero when we use the public equity market return as the
single risk factor in equation (1). In contrast, we ﬁnd strongly positive abnormal returns of
VC investments in start-up companies. Both ﬁndings are broadly in line with prior work in
this area.1
To some extent, however, the similarity of our ﬁndings and prior work is a coincidence. For
example, in the start-up company sample, it turns out not to make much diﬀerence whether
one uses the P M E, i.e., with the SDF restriction a = 0 and b = 1, or the GP M E that leaves
these parameters unrestricted. The reason is that an exact matching of the average public
market equity and T-Bill returns in our sample period yields parameter estimates that are
very close to a = 0 and b = 1. This is good news for existing work in this area, because it
means that results based on P M E in the literature that are based on data over a similar
time period, may not have been aﬀected all that much by the restriction that the P M E
calculation implicitly imposes on the equity premium. However, it is important to keep in
1

Ljunqvist and Richardson (2003), Kaplan and Schoar (2005), Woodward (2009), Robinson and Sensoy
(2011), Stucke (2011), and Ewens, Jones, and Rhodes-Kropf (2013) report VC fund returns that are equal to
or slightly above the return on the market portfolio. Conversely, Phalippou and Zollo (2005), Phalippou and
Gottschalg (2009), and Driessen, Lin, and Phalippou (2012) ﬁnd below-market returns. Harris, Jenkinson,
and Kaplan (2013) report that VC funds outperformed public equities in the 1990s but underperformed in
the 2000s. Cochrane (2005), Hall and Woodward (2007), and Korteweg and Sorensen (2010) ﬁnd positive
abnormal round-to-round returns (gross of fees) from VC investments in start-up companies.

3

mind that the similarity is sample-speciﬁc. In the VC funds sample, which is more heavily
concentrated in a later time period than the start-up company sample, we ﬁnd that the SDF
parameters are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from log-utility. The wedge between the P M E and
GP M E estimates for VC funds is consequently larger than in the start-up company sample.
This underscores the importance of allowing for more general utility functions than log-utility
in the SDF speciﬁcation.
With regards to the skewness of VC payoﬀs, the skewness typically emphasized in the
literature is their call -option-like nature: Returns to individual start-up company investments
lead to a small number of enormous successes and a large number of failures. Yet, as we
show, the systematic risk proﬁle of VC payoﬀs exhibits a very diﬀerent type of optionality:
VC payoﬀs are far more sensitive to market downturns than to market upturns. As a result,
the systematic risk of venture capital investments to some extent resembles the systematic
risk from selling stock market index put options.
This short index-put option feature of VC payoﬀs raises the question whether publicmarket investment opportunities that we summarize in the SDF should perhaps also include
the payoﬀs available in equity index option markets. Option payoﬀs may oﬀer risk premia
that are not captured in public equity market returns (see, e.g., Bollerslev and Todorov
(2011)). For this reason, we also explore an expanded speciﬁcation of the SDF in which we
add an index put option return series as a risk factor to the SDF.2 Doing so has little eﬀect
on our conclusions about the GP M E, and hence abnormal returns, of start-up company
investments. However, abnormal returns of VC funds turn negative once we include the
index put option returns in the SDF. In other words, VC fund returns look less attractive
once the short-put option feature of their payoﬀs is taken into account.
In comparison to the prior literature, it is also useful to emphasize that our approach
2

The skewness of VC payoﬀs also implies that it may be undesirable to work with linearized versions of (1)
of the form Mt+1 ≈ ã − b̃ exp(ft+1 ). Approximating the SDF in this fashion yields a convenient beta-pricing
expression for expected returns, but there is a concern that the approximation error could be substantial
when such a linearized SDF is applied to highly skewed payoﬀs. This is one of several reasons (multi-period
compounding is another) why we prefer to work directly with (1) rather than its linear approximation.

4

avoids the strong distributional assumptions in some earlier work. For example, to deal with
the multi-period nature of payoﬀs and the endogenous selection of payoﬀ horizons by venture
capitalists or start-up ﬁrms, Cochrane (2005) and Korteweg and Sorensen (2010) assume
a log-normal process for start-up company values combined with a selection model. An
implicit assumption in this log-normal model is that the variance of the ﬁrm value changes
grows proportionally with the time horizon over which the return is measured (between
funding rounds, or from funding round to an exit event). In contrast, we ﬁnd in the data
that the relationship is much ﬂatter: Returns over short horizons are more volatile, and
returns over long horizons are much less volatile than implied by the log-normal model. This
is an important issue because volatility determines the magnitude of the Jensen’s inequality
adjustment in calculations of implied arithmetic average abnormal returns within the lognormal model. The selection models in Cochrane (2005) and Korteweg and Sorensen (2010)
help match this rather ﬂat variance-horizon relationship through endogenous timing of the
ﬁnancing rounds or exit events. The approach we take here avoids the need to take a stand
on a highly parameterized selection model.
In independent and contemporaneous work, Sorensen and Jagannathan (2013) also point
out the log-utility assumption behind P M E. Compared to their paper, we generalize P M E
to allow for utility functions other than log-utility, we deﬁne GP M E in a way that avoids
a Jensen’s Inequality problem with ratios of present values in small samples, we develop a
GMM estimator that allows for cross-sectional correlation, and we take the method to the
data.
The methodology that we present in this paper can be extended to allow for other risk
factors, such as size, book-to-market and liquidity factors (for the importance of liquidity
in private equity, see Longstaﬀ (2009), Franzoni, Nowak, and Phalippou (2012), Sorensen,
Wang, and Yang (2013)). Furthermore, our method can be applied to other infrequently
traded asset classes with highly levered or option-like returns, such as leveraged buyouts or
real estate. Our approach also has implications for the risk and reward to entrepreneurs

5

(Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002)), and the performance of diﬀerent types of limited
partners (Lerner, Schoar, and Wongsunwai (2007)) or general partners (Ewens and RhodesKropf (2013)) in private equity investments.
The paper is organized as follows. Section I outlines our SDF pricing approach to riskadjusting VC returns. Section II presents our VC fund results. Section III presents our
start-up company results, and Section IV concludes.

I. Risk-Adjusting Venture Capital Returns
The fundamental challenge in VC performance evaluation is the valuation of the cash ﬂows
between individual start-up companies and their investors, or, alternatively, the cash ﬂows
into and out of VC funds. Evaluation of these cash ﬂows involves discounting. Various
approaches to this problem exist in the literature, often with rather strong assumptions on
the benchmark model or on the distribution of payoﬀs. Our objective here is to develop a
more general and robust approach.
We work with a standard asset-pricing approach. Throughout the paper we use lower
case letters for logs. For example Rt is an arithmetic return, and rt is a log return. The
time-t value of an asset, Vt , that pays a single cash ﬂow at time t + 1, is the expected value
of the cash ﬂow, Ct+1 , discounted with a stochastic discount factor (SDF), Mt+1 ,
Vt = Et [Mt+1 · Ct+1 ].

(2)

If the asset has a continuation value, Vt+1 , at time t + 1,
Vt = Et [Mt+1 · (Ct+1 + Vt+1 )] .

(3)

Dividing both sides of the above equation by Vt yields the pricing relation in returns space,
1 = Et [Mt+1 · Rt+1 ],
6

(4)

where Rt+1 ≡ (Ct+1 + Vt+1 ) /Vt .
Our speciﬁcation of the single-period SDF is exponentially-aﬃne,
Mt+1 = exp(a − bft+1 ).

(5)

This speciﬁcation subsumes many standard asset-pricing models as special cases. For example, the log-utility Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) is the special case with a = 0,
b = 1, and ft+1 equal to the log return on aggregate wealth from t to t + 1. A more general
version of the CAPM arises with power utility and IID consumption growth in an endowment
economy, where a = 0, b = γ (i.e., relative risk aversion), and ft+1 is the log return on wealth.
Additional risk factors, such as the case of Epstein and Zin (1989) preferences or the Fama
and French (1993) risk factors, can be added easily, but to keep notation simple, we discuss
the single-factor case here.
One particularly pressing problem with payoﬀs on non-public equity and illiquid asset
classes more generally is the multi-period nature of the payoﬀs. Cash ﬂows of VC funds
occur at irregularly spaced time points throughout the life of the fund. The timing of funding
rounds and exit events of VC-backed start-up companies (at which valuation estimates are
available) is similarly irregular. The exponentially-aﬃne SDF setup is particularly well-suited
for multi-period payoﬀs measured over varying time horizons, because the pricing relation
holds for longer horizons
h
Vt = Et [Mt+h
· Ct+h ],

(6)

h , the multi-period SDF from t to t + h, simply compounds the single-period
where Mt+h

discount factors
h
Mt+h
≡

h
∏

Mt+i

(7)

i=1
h
= exp(ah − bft+h
),

7

(8)

where
h
ft+h
≡

h
∑

ft+i .

(9)

i=1

A. The Generalized Public Market Equivalent Measure
Currently, the most widely used measures of private equity performance are the internal rate
of return (IRR), total value to paid-in capital (TVPI), and the public market equivalent
(P M E) measure developed by Kaplan and Schoar (2005). IRR and TVPI are problematic
as they do not account for risk (nor for timing in the case of TVPI). The P M E measure is
traditionally deﬁned as the sum of a private equity fund’s cash outﬂows (i.e., distributions to
Limited Partners (LPs)) discounted at the realized public market return, divided by the sum
of all cash inﬂows (i.e., takedowns: contributions from LPs to the fund), also discounted at
the realized public market return.
We slightly modify the classic P M E deﬁnition. We work with the diﬀerence between
discounted values of inﬂows and outﬂows, rather than their ratio as in the original Kaplan
and Schoar deﬁnition. Asset pricing theory implies that the expected diﬀerence (the net
present value) is zero, but when inﬂows are stochastic there are no clear predictions about
the expected ratio because of a Jensen’s inequality eﬀect.3 Working with the diﬀerence also
simpliﬁes the econometrics. From here on, when we write P M E we mean this redeﬁned
P M E. For fund i the (redeﬁned) P M E is thus the sum of all discounted cash ﬂows to and
from the fund
P M Ei ≡

J
∑

1

h(j)
j=1 Rm,t+h(j)

· Ci,t+h(j) ,

(10)

where t is the date of the ﬁrst cash ﬂow, and Ci,t+h(j) is the net cash ﬂow (distributions minus
takedowns) for fund i at date t + h(j). The number of cash ﬂows, J, and the initial cash ﬂow
date, t, vary by fund, but we suppress dependence on i for notational simplicity.
3
If there is only one initial investment that occurs at the time of the valuation (as in the case of roundto-round returns of start-up companies) the initial inﬂow is non-stochastic, and hence the Jensen’s inequality
problem does not arise. In the case of VC funds, however, investors typically make multiple capital contributions during the life of the fund, and the amounts and timing are initially uncertain, making this a relevant
problem.

8

The common interpretation is that a fund with a P M E greater (less) than zero has
outperformed (underperformed) the market, and the P M E therefore imposes a CAPM β
equal to one.4 Robinson and Sensoy (2011) explore the robustness of P M E by levering up
the public market return used to discount fund cash ﬂows using beta assumptions diﬀerent
from one. However, assuming β = 1 corresponds to discounting the expected fund cash ﬂows
at the expected market return, which is diﬀerent from discounting realized cash ﬂows with
realized market returns as in the P M E calculation. We show that in fact the P M E of Kaplan
and Schoar (2005) does not restrict beta, but rather assumes log-utility preferences.
To see the intuition, consider the expected P M E:

E [P M Ei ] =

J
∑
j=1




E

1
h(j)
Rm,t+h(j)

· Ci,t+h(j)  ,

(11)

which is estimated by averaging P M Ei across funds.5 Equation (11) shows that the P M E
h
h
calculation is the special case of SDF pricing under log-utility, i.e. Mt+h
= 1/Rm,t+h
, and

expected P M E should equal zero if this is the correct speciﬁcation of the SDF, such that
the net present value of the fund is zero. The P M E thus fully accounts for the systematic
risk of the cash ﬂows being valued, and funds can even have varying degrees of systematic
risk exposure. The P M E approach is therefore more general than the literature has thus far
assumed.
The true restriction implicitly imposed by the P M E calculation is a diﬀerent one. The
log-utility CAPM assumes a relative risk aversion coeﬃcient of one and it implies that the
(instantaneous) equity premium is equal to the variance of the market return. We can
illustrate this assumption most clearly in the case of round-to-round returns of start-upcompany investments. Applying the P M E calculation to returns, i.e, the t + h value divided
4

Kaplan and Schoar (2005), for example, describe their P M E analysis as follows (p. 1797): “If private
equity returns have a beta greater (less) than 1, P M E will overstate (understate) the true risk-adjusted
returns to private equity.”
5
As we discuss in detail further below, for this average to be well behaved, there must be some variation
across funds in the time periods during which they are alive.

9

by the value at the time of the prior funding round at t, yields
[
E [P M Ei ] = E
[
=E
=

]

1
h
Rm,t+h

1
h
Rm,t+h

h
E[Ri,t+h
]

RF

h
· Ri,t+h
−1

(12)

]

(
h
E[Ri,t+h
] + Cov

(

+ Cov

1
h
Rm,t+h

)

1
h
Rm,t+h
)

h
, Ri,t+h

h
, Ri,t+h

−1

(13)

− 1,

(14)
[

since under log-utility the unconditional h-period risk-free rate is RF = 1/E
ing β ≡ −

h
h )
Cov (1/Rm,t+h
,Rt+h
h
Var (1/Rm,t+h
)

]
1
h
Rm,t+h

. Deﬁn-

, we get6

h
E[Ri,t+h
]

RF

(
)
h
− 1 = E [P M Ei ] + βVar 1/Rm,t+h
.

(15)

Under the null hypothesis that P M E = 0, the ﬁrst term drops out and we obtain the familiar
CAPM-type pricing model. If P M E is larger (smaller) than zero, then we realize positive
(negative) risk-adjusted excess returns. Thus, the calculation of P M E takes systematic risk
into account (β is not restricted) but it restricts the equity premium. In the continuous-time
limit, the equity premium in this model is equal to the instantaneous variance of the market
return. This implied assumption is restrictive, and we relax it with our more general SDF
speciﬁcation (5), which we use to compute a Generalized P M E (GP M E) as

GP M Ei ≡

J
∑

h(j)

Mt+h(j) · Ci,t+h(j) .

(16)

j=1

If there is no mispricing, i.e., venture investment payoﬀs are not abnormal relative to the
public markets benchmarks captured by the SDF, then expected GP M E = 0.
6

Note the negative sign in β because we are looking at covariance with the inverse of the market here and
the negative sign ensures that this beta has the same interpretation as the traditional beta in a linearized
CAPM.

10

B. Non-linear Payoﬀs and Linearized Factor Models
A common approach in the VC and Private Equity area is to work with linearized versions
of the SDF, which imply a linear beta-pricing relationship (see, for example, Ljunqvist and
Richardson (2003), Hall and Woodward (2007), Driessen, Lin, and Phalippou (2012), Ewens,
Jones, and Rhodes-Kropf (2013)). Performing a ﬁrst-order Taylor approximation of (8)
h = 1 and h = 1 yields
around Ft+h

fh ≈ exp(a) · [1 − b(F h − 1) + a(h − 1)].
M
t+h
t+h

(17)

fh ≈ c + ã · h − b̃(F h − 1),
M
t+h
t+h

(18)

Redeﬁning parameters,

which implies a linear beta-pricing speciﬁcation for expected returns,
[
]
h
h
E[Ri,t+h
] − RFh = β h bVar (Ft+h
)RFh ,
where β h ≡

h
h )
Cov (Ri,t+h
,Ft+h
h )
Var (Ft+h

(19)

.

As will become clear, there is not really any need to linearize the model, and the linearized
model is cumbersome for multi-period payoﬀs, as it loses the nice compounding properties
of the exponential-aﬃne model. Linearized approximations like (18) (and hence linear betapricing formulations for expected returns) could also lead to speciﬁcation errors because it is
possible to have negative realizations of the SDF, implying that some states of nature have
negative state prices, which is inconsistent with the absence of arbitrage opportunities. This
is especially problematic for assets with highly non-linear payoﬀs such as options.
Payoﬀs of venture investments are known to have option-like features. The optionality
that is typically emphasized is the out-of-the money call option nature of venture investments:
Individual start-ups fail with a high probability, but when they succeed, the returns can be

11

astronomical. As a result, most of the return generated by a portfolio of VC investments
comes from a few spectacular successes while the large majority of start-up companies fail.
In our empirical section below, we highlight a second type of payoﬀ optionality that has
not yet been noted in the literature: the relationship between public stock market returns
and VC payoﬀs is concave, somewhat akin to the return from selling index put options.
The highly nonlinear nature of venture investments therefore suggests that linear approximations of the SDF are best avoided. The SDF approach behind the valuation in (16) can
handle arbitrary payoﬀ non-linearities, and the exponentially-aﬃne speciﬁcations of SDFs
that we examine here are strictly positive and hence consistent with the absence of arbitrage
opportunities. Thus, these SDFs can price any payoﬀ, including option payoﬀs.

C. Endogenous Payoﬀ Horizons and Sample Selection
Thus far we have treated the payoﬀ horizon, h, as given. In reality, start-ups endogenously
decide when to raise new ﬁnancing, and venture funds have the option to extend their life
for several years beyond the ten-year limit, making h an endogenous variable. For example,
projects that are more successful may come back to investors for a new ﬁnancing round
sooner, in order to scale up the business model. Thus, the return horizon is endogenous in
the sense that it is correlated with the unexpected degree of success of the project or the
fund.
For valuation purposes within the SDF framework, this endogeneity does not present a
problem, as long as the realized payoﬀs are ultimately observed. What matters for valuation
in the SDF framework is (a) the payoﬀ in each state of the world (b) the value of the SDF in
those states of the world. The endogeneity of h can generate a particular state-dependence
through the actual timing of the cash ﬂow, but this is not a problem as the appropriate
valuation (state price) for the endogenously generated payoﬀ in a certain state is the product
of the state’s probability and the SDF in that state. The endogeneity concerns that remain
relevant in our approach are those that may cause: i) a right-censoring problem, and; ii)

12

a sample selection problem. We discuss in the data section below how we deal with these
remaining problems.

D. GMM estimation
For the start-up companies data, we pool the data across ﬁrms and funding rounds. For
h
each round-to-round observation i = 1, ..., N we observe returns, Ri,t+h
, between t and t + h,
h ,
where t and h can be diﬀerent for each i. We match each return with factor returns, Ft+h
h
and the return of Treasury Bills, Rf,t+h
, over the valuation horizon from t to t + h.7 Thus,
h
h , Rh
′
we work with N observations of Yi = (Ri,t+h
, Ft+h
f,t+h ) . Let θ denote the parameters of

the SDF, and deﬁne the vector
h
ui (θ) ≡ Mt+h
(θ) · Yi − 1.

(20)

The ﬁrst element of ui is the GP M Ei of equation (16) for funding round i. In other words,
it is the net present value of investing $1 in round i.
In the VC funds data, we observe J cash ﬂows to and from each fund i = 1, ..., N , and
possibly a ﬁnal net asset value (NAV) if the fund is not yet liquidated. The ﬁrst cash ﬂow of
the fund occurs at date t. As before, we suppress the dependence of t and J on i for notational
h(j)

simplicity. We match each cash ﬂow with with factor returns, Ft+h(j) , and the return of
h(j)

Treasury Bills, Rf,t+h(j) over the valuation horizon from t to t + h(j). For each matched
observation, we construct the vector Yi,t+h(j) = (Ci,t+h(j) , [Ft+h(j) − 1]/J, [Rf,t+h(j) − 1]/J)′ ,
h(j)

and we deﬁne
ui (θ) ≡

J
∑

h(j)

Mt+h(j) (θ) · Yi,t+h(j) .

h(j)

(21)

j=1

We take care to construct the elements of Yi,t+h(j) in a way that ensures that estimates
are well-behaved and interpretable. The ﬁrst element of Yi,t+h(j) is the fund net cash ﬂow
7

We use subscript t + h for the Treasury Bill return, not t, as one typically would with a conditionally
risk-free asset, because it is the return on rolling over short-term Treasury Bills from t to t + h, and hence the
return is not known until t + h.

13

Ci,t+h(j) , normalized by the fund’s size. This normalization gives each fund equal weight
when we average across the ﬁrst elements of ui . The ﬁrst element of ui is the GP M Ei of
equation (16) (i.e., the net present value) for an investment with a total commitment of $1.
The division by J of the factor returns and the T-Bill return in Yi,t+h(j) means that for
each fund i, the series of J discounted factor returns and T-Bill returns add up to a price of
$1. Thus, similar to the VC fund cash ﬂows, the factor and T-Bill payoﬀ series matched with
each fund i represent a total $1 “commitment” to investing in each of these public market
assets. As a consequence, when we estimate the SDF parameters to set the averages of the
second and third element of ui (θ) to exactly zero, we give equal weight to the factor and
T-Bill return series corresponding to each fund.8 This particular weighting helps with the
interpretability of the results, because if the VC fund payoﬀs were perfectly replicable as
linear combinations of the factor and T-Bill returns, the GP M E estimate would be exactly
zero, even in a ﬁnite sample. Of course, as the size of the dataset grows, these weighting issues
become irrelevant as large-sample estimates should be the same regardless of the weighting
scheme.
For both the VC fund and start-up company data, we employ the GMM estimator
(
θ̂ = arg min
θ

)′ (
)
1 ∑
1 ∑
ui (θ) W
ui (θ) .
N
N
i

(22)

i

Our objective is to evaluate how venture investment payoﬀs compare, on a risk-adjusted basis,
to investments in publicly traded securities. Consistent with this objective, we estimate the
SDF parameters, θ, from public capital market data alone. More precisely, we choose as a
weighting matrix a diagonal matrix with entries of zero for the element corresponding to VC
payoﬀs (the ﬁrst element in ui ), and ones for the remaining elements. This leads to exact
identiﬁcation and parameter estimates that allow the SDF to exactly match the unconditional
average of the factor and T-Bill returns in our sample with zero sample pricing errors.
8

Without dividing factor and T-Bill returns by J, the estimation of SDF parameters would give more
weight to the factor and T-Bill series matched to funds with a greater number of cash ﬂows

14

For inference, we want to assess the magnitudes of the pricing errors, i.e., the GP M E,
associated with the venture investment payoﬀs. A key ingredient of the standard GMM
formulas is the spectral density matrix

S=

+∞
∑

E[ui u′k ]

(23)

k=−∞

The complication here is that there is likely to be substantial correlation between ui and
uk if they are measured over fully or partly overlapping time periods. Earlier work in the
existing literature either does not report P M E standard errors, or assumes uncorrelatedness
across funds, or across start-up ﬁrms. In our framework, standard GMM techniques allow
us to avoid this assumption in a relatively simple way. We assume that the correlation of
payoﬀs i and k depends on the degree of overlap of the time windows over which these payoﬀs
are measured. In analogy to spatial GMM methods (Conley (1999)), we treat the degree of
overlap as a measure of distance, assuming that correlation declines with distance. Let t(i)
and t(k) be the start, and t(i) + h(i) and t(k) + h(k) be the end of the time windows for
observation i and k, respectively. Deﬁne the distance as
d(i, k) ≡ 1 −

min[t(i) + h(i), t(k) + h(k)] − max[t(i), t(k)]
.
max[t(i) + h(i), t(k) + h(k)] − min[t(i), t(k)]

(24)

If the return measurement windows exactly overlap, then d(i, k) = 0, if they are adjacent,
but non-overlapping then d(i, k) = 1, and d(i, k) > 1 if there is a gap between them. Our
estimator for S uses Bartlett-type weights for observations that decline with greater distance,
N N
1 ∑∑
¯ 0)ui u′ ,
Ŝ =
max(1 − d(i, k)/d,
k
N

(25)

k=1 i=1

where d¯ is a constant. In our empirical work, we set d¯ = 1.5, which means that observationpairs with a gap between return measurement time windows still get some weight in the
calculation of Ŝ.

15

With Ŝ in hand, we can use standard GMM formulas to compute a J-statistic for a test
that the pricing error for venture investment payoﬀs (the ﬁrst element of ui ) is zero, which
is equivalent to a test that GP M E = 0, taking into account the estimation error in the
SDF parameters. Since the SDF parameters are estimated using only information on pricing
factor and T-Bill returns, but not venture investment payoﬀs, this J-statistic has a χ2 (1)
distribution.
Finally, it is important to point out that identiﬁcation of the SDF parameters, θ, and
estimation of GP M E requires time variation. For example, if we were to observe many
round-to-round returns over exactly the same time window, there would be no variation in
the T-Bill and factor returns to identify the SDF parameters. Moreover, even with the SDF
parameters given, if all returns were observed over the same time-window, the realization of
the SDF would be exactly the same for each cross-sectional unit. Asset-pricing theory does
not predict that the cross-sectional average of returns multiplied by this single realization of
the SDF value equals one; instead it predicts that the expected cross-product of the SDF and
the return equals one. Estimation of this expected value requires variation over time. Thus,
for the estimation of GP M E to work well, the data set needs to have suﬃcient variation in
the time-windows over which the payoﬀs of the cross-sectional units, i, are realized. More
formally, application of the usual asymptotic results for GMM estimation requires large T ; a
large number of cross-sectional units alone is not suﬃcient.

E. Factor returns
The estimation of GP M E requires data on a risk-free rate proxy and risk factor returns.
We obtain one-month Treasury bill returns and excess returns on the CRSP value-weighted
market index from Ken French’ website.
To the extent that VC returns indeed resemble option-like payoﬀs, they may carry risk
premia that are not captured by the public market returns (see, e.g., Bollerslev and Todorov
(2011)). Therefore we also compute a return series of a strategy that buys short-maturity,

16

at-the-money put options on the S&P 500. This put strategy invests in a portfolio with a
10% weight on (long) S&P500 index futures put options, and a 90% weight on one-month
Treasury bills at the beginning of each month, with a one-month holding period. For the
most part, the put option return series is from Broadie, Chernov, and Johannes (2009),
supplemented with Optionmetrics data where observations are missing, and is constructed
from a rolled-over position in one-month at-the-money put options, held until expiration.9
In a small number of cases, Optionmetrics returns are missing, and we use returns of the
closest moneyness category (the average of the next highest and lowest if equidistant) as a
substitute.
Finally, to construct a potentially closer public-market analogue to VC returns than the
value-weighted market index, we compute the daily return on a value-weighted portfolio of
micro-cap stocks. On June 30 of each year, we select the smallest 1 percent of stocks in the
CRSP universe of stocks, and compute the daily return of a portfolio of these stocks over the
next year, with weights proportional to the market capitalization at the close of the prior
trading day.

II. VC Funds
A. Data
We use a large sample of international VC fund cash ﬂows between 1985 and 2012, obtained
from Preqin.10 The data contain capital takedowns by the fund from LPs (i.e., cash ﬂows
into the private equity partnership), cash distributions from the fund to LPs, and quarterly
Net Asset Values (NAVs). Following Kaplan and Schoar (2005), we eliminate funds with
committed capital below $5 million, in 1990 dollars. Table I shows descriptive statistics for
9

We thank Mark Broadie, Michael Chernov, and Michael Johannes for generously sharing their options
data
10
Results in Harris, Jenkinson, and Kaplan (2013) suggest that Preqin is the best publicly available dataset
for private equity funds, especially when compared to VentureXpert (from Thomson Venture Economics),
which has important updating problems in its post-2001 funds data (see also Stucke (2011)).

17

Table I
Summary Statistics: VC Fund Data
Descriptive statistics for the sample of VC funds from Preqin over the period 1985 to 2012, eliminating
funds with committed capital below $5 million in 1990 dollars. Fund size is the total commitment to
the fund, in millions of dollars. Fund vintage year is the calendar year in which the fund is raised.
Fund eﬀective years is the time between the ﬁrst and the last observed cash ﬂow of a fund. The fund
IRR is computed using the ﬁnal observed Net Asset Value (NAV) of the fund. TVPI stands for total
value to paid-in capital, and is computed as the sum of cash distributions to Limited Partners plus
ﬁnal NAV divided by the sum of cash takedowns by the fund from LPs.

# Funds
# VC ﬁrms
# Funds / VC ﬁrm
Fund size ($m)
Fund vintage year
Fund eﬀective years
# Cash ﬂows / fund
IRR (%)
TVPI

mean
692
356
1.94
374.86
2001.76
8.68
10.52
0.07
1.46

st.dev

10

quantile
50

90

1.48
477.59
6.46
4.80
11.11
0.35
2.02

1.00
65.00
1993.00
2.13
0.00
-0.15
0.55

1.00
235.00
2002.00
8.63
8.00
0.04
1.11

4.00
777.00
2009.00
14.63
24.00
0.28
2.25

the sample of funds.
The median VC ﬁrm in our sample raised one fund, with a total commitment of $235
million. There is a long right tail of older VC ﬁrms that have raised more than one fund, and
these ﬁrms tend to raise funds that are increasingly larger. The median fund has 8 unique
cash ﬂows (both capital calls and distributions) during the sample period. The time between
the ﬁrst and last observed cash ﬂow for the median (average) fund is 8.63 (8.68) years. With
respect to performance, the median (average) fund has an IRR of 4% (7%) and a total value
to paid-in capital (TVPI) of 1.11 (1.46), where TVPI is computed as the cumulative cash
distributions plus ﬁnal NAV divided by cumulative takedowns. Untabulated results for the
subsample of 88 fully liquidated funds (funds that Preqin reports as liquidated, or with a
reported end-of-sample NAV of zero) shows better performance, with a median (average)
IRR of 10% (23%) and a TVPI of 1.44 (2.56). This is in part because most distributions
arrive at the end of a fund’s life, but also because the fully liquidated funds tend to have
18

been raised before the turn of the new millennium, when times were relatively good for VC.
This also suggests that it is important to check the robustness of our results in the sample
of fully liquidated funds.
Our performance statistics are generally in the ballpark of other studies. For comparison,
Kaplan and Schoar (2005) report a median (mean) IRR for 577 liquidated VC funds between
1980 and 1994 of 11% (17%), and TVPI of 1.75 (2.42), close to our liquidated funds sample.
Harris, Jenkinson, and Kaplan (2013) report a median (mean) IRR for 775 VC funds between
1984 and 2008 of 11.1% (16.8%), higher than our full sample but also close to our liquidated
funds sample. Our performance statistics are also close to Robinson and Sensoy (2011), who
report median (mean) IRR of 1% (8%), and TVPI of 1.03 (1.38) for 295 VC funds from a
large institutional LP between 1984 and 2009. For 192 fully liquidated funds in their sample
the IRR is 2% (9%) and the TVPI is 1.05 (1.44). Finally, Ewens, Jones, and Rhodes-Kropf
(2013) use a sample of 1,040 VC funds between 1980 and 2007, and report median (mean)
IRR of 6.4% (15.3%).

B. A First Look at the Systematic Risk of Venture Capital Funds
Before analyzing the GMM estimates in detail, we ﬁrst take an informal look at the systematic
risk proﬁle of VC fund payoﬀs. Figure 1 presents a scatterplot of the VC fund payoﬀs and the
public equity market returns measured, roughly speaking, over the same horizon. As each
fund’s history features a series of cash ﬂows, summarizing the payoﬀs and market returns
over the fund life time in one number requires some further assumptions. We make these
assumptions only here for the purposes of illustrating the systematic risk proﬁle, not in the
GMM estimation that follows.
We deﬁne fund payoﬀs as the present value of cash distributions (including the ﬁnal NAV
if non-zero), discounted at the risk-free rate (approximated by compounded T-Bill returns).
To bring payoﬀs of diﬀerent funds to the same scale, we divide this number by the present
value of capital calls. For the purpose of making the fund horizons somewhat similar for this

19

Figure, we limit the sample to funds with life-times of at least 5 years but less than 15 years
(our GMM estimation does not impose this restriction). To summarize the public equity
market payoﬀs during the fund’s life time, we take the stock market gross returns matched to
each fund cash ﬂow (measured from the start date of the fund to the date of the cash ﬂow),
and discount them, also, at the risk-free rate. When summing the discounted stock market
returns, we weigh each return by the proportion of each matched fund cash disbursement in
the total present value of the fund’s cash disbursements. For example, suppose a fund started
in December 1995 and made cash disbursements in many months, including December 2005.
Suppose further that the cash disbursement made in December 2005 accounts for 15% of the
present value of all cash disbursements. Then we assign a weight of 0.15 to the discounted
stock market return from December 1995 to December 2005 when we compute the matched
public equity market payoﬀ. This way, we construct a public market equity payoﬀ that is
approximately duration-matched to the fund’s cash disbursements.
In addition to the scatterplot of fund payoﬀs against public equity market returns, Figure
1 also shows a nonparameteric regression estimate of their relationship, estimated with local
linear regression that is robust to outliers. A rather surprising pattern in Figure 1 is that
the VC fund payoﬀs resemble the returns to a short index put option (plus a bond position)
rather than a long call option. Common wisdom dictates that start-up companies behave
much like real call options, where the investor loses most or all of the investment the majority
of the time, but when successful, the payoﬀ can be very large. It is often one such “home-run”
investment that makes a fund stand out. But this call option type feature does not show up
in Figure 1. The reason is that this call-option like risk is likely not systematic, but rather
idiosyncratic to the start-up company: The chance that a new technology works, or that
demand for a certain product exists, is relatively independent from the state of the market.
One possible explanation for the concave, short put option-like systematic component
of the payoﬀs with regards to public equity market movements relates to the endogeneity of
ﬁnancing rounds, and in particular exits. Suppose that the investors in a start-up seek an exit

20

3

2.5

VC fund payoff

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

Market payoff

Figure 1. Relationship Between VC Fund Payoﬀs and Stock Market Returns.
Scatterplot of the VC fund payoﬀs on the vertical axis versus the stock market return on the
horizontal axis. VC fund payoﬀs are measured as the present value (discounting with Rf )
of cash disbursements to investors divided by the present value of capital calls. For funds
that are not yet liquidated by the end of the sample, the ﬁnal NAV is treated as a cash
disbursement. Stock market returns are measured from the start date of the fund to the
date of each cash disbursement, and their present values (discounted by Rf ), weighed by the
proportion of the present value of the matched fund cash disbursement in the total present
value of disbursements. The sample is limited to funds with at least 5 years of data and
life-times less than 15 years. The points labeled with ‘+’ show a robust local linear regression
ﬁt.

21

(going public or looking for an acquirer) as soon as they reach a target return. The observed
returns are thus capped when the market is doing well, and exits are easy to realize. However,
when times are bad, exits are more diﬃcult to achieve, valuations are lower, and investors
prefer to wait, if possible. The returns that do realize when the market is performing poorly
are then very low, and as a result, VC returns are concave in the market return.
The SDF approach that we take in this paper can price option-like payoﬀs like the one in
Figure 1. Still, to capture any risk premia of option returns that are not captured by public
equity market returns (see for example, Bollerslev and Todorov (2011)), we also consider a
speciﬁcation that includes option strategy returns as a risk factor in the SDF.

C. GMM Results
Table II shows the GP M E estimates for various speciﬁcations of the SDF. First, we consider
the log-utility model, i.e., the standard P M E measure, but expressed as a diﬀerence between
in and outﬂows rather than a ratio. The P M E estimate is 0.031, which is statistically
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero, as indicated by the p-value of the J-test. This means that
on a $1 fund commitment, the abnormal proﬁt is 3.1 cents, or 3.1%. Note that this is the
present value of the abnormal cash ﬂow for the fund, i.e., the net present value, and not an
annualized number. Our estimate is comparable to reported P M Es in the literature: the
mean P M E is 0.96 in Kaplan and Schoar (2005), 1.36 in Harris, Jenkinson, and Kaplan
(2013) (0.91 for their 2000s subsample of 423 funds), and 1.06 in Robinson and Sensoy (2011)
(1.03 for their subsample of fully liquidated funds). Remember that these traditional P M Es
should be benchmarked to one, so numbers slightly above one are comparable to our estimate
that is slightly above zero.
The second column in Table II shows the estimates for the more general SDF in equation
(1). The GP M E estimate of −0.036 is statistically not distinguishable from zero, but this
is driven by higher standard errors: the point estimate is similar in absolute magnitude to
the P M E in column (i). The reason for the higher standard errors is that the more general

22

speciﬁcation requires estimation of the SDF parameters, whereas in the log-utility case of the
traditional P M E they are exogenously ﬁxed. The estimated SDF parameters in column (ii)
are statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from log-utility. In particular, the coeﬃcient on the
market return is −1.638 (with a standard error of 0.437). The negative sign results from the
fact that the VC fund payoﬀs in our sample are concentrated in the post-2000 period in which
the realized equity premium was negative. This implies that during the sample the realized
compensation for systematic exposure to equity market risk was negative. Our GP M E
measure compares the realized VC fund payoﬀs to the realized public equity market payoﬀs in
a way that accounts for the negative realized systematic risk compensation in public markets
during the same time period. In contrast, the P M E approach, by ﬁxing b1 = 1 imposes a
positive systematic risk compensation. This would tend to push the abnormal payoﬀ to be
lower (negative) in the P M E approach in our sample. There is, however, a second diﬀerence.
The log-utility model underlying the P M E approach also imposes a restriction on the riskfree rate, while the GP M E approach in column (ii) uses an SDF that perfectly ﬁts the
average T-Bill payoﬀ in the sample. A higher b under log-utility compared to our estimate of
−1.638 from GP M E implies a lower risk-free rate under log-utility. Both eﬀects combine to
give rise to a lower discount rate under log-utility, compared to our more general exponentialaﬃne SDF. With capital calls occurring early in the fund’s life while distributions occur later,
a lower discount rate results in a higher P M E in column (i), compared to the GP M E in
column (ii).
In economic terms, generalizing the utility function from log-utility reduces the GP M E
by 0.067 (from 0.031 to −0.036), or 6.7 cents on a $1 commitment. This non-negligible
diﬀerence underscores the importance of allowing for more general utility functions.
In the third column of Table II we add long put option returns to the speciﬁcation of
the SDF, to capture risk premia that are not present in public market returns (see, e.g.,
Bollerslev and Todorov (2011)). This lowers the GP M E to −0.223, a statistically signiﬁcant
diﬀerence from zero. The SDF loads signiﬁcantly on option returns with a coeﬃcient of 5.042.

23

Table II
Generalized Public Market Equivalents for VC Funds
For a VC fund with cash ﬂows starting in period t, we match each subsequent cash ﬂow in t + h with
h
the return of the CRSP value-weighted index (rm,t+h
in logs) from t to t + h, the return from rolling
over 1-month Treasury Bills, the return on a portfolio that buys at-the-money put options on the
S&P500 index, and the return on a microcap portfolio. We estimate the Generalized Public Market
Equivalent (GP M E) by discounting the fund cash ﬂows with the stochastic discount factor
h
h
h
Mt+h
= exp(ah − b1 rm,t+h
− b2 rx,t+h
),

summing each fund’s discounted cash ﬂows, and averaging across all funds. The log-utility CAPM
special case in column (i) with a = 0, b1 = 1, and b2 = 0 corresponds to the Public Market Equivalent
h
of Kaplan and Schoar (2005). In columns (iii) and (iv), the second factor, rx,t+h
, is the log return of
the put option or microcap portfolio, respectively. The SDF parameters in columns (ii) to (iv) are
estimated, with exact identiﬁcation, to ﬁt the average return of T-Bills and the returns on the SDF
risk factors. The J-statistic tests the null hypothesis GP M E = 0. The spectral density matrix used in
the computation of the J-statistic takes into account error dependence arising from overlapping fund
life times as described in the text. Standard errors of the SDF parameter estimates are in parentheses.

(i)
Log-utility
CAPM
GP M E
J-test p-value

(ii)
CAPM

(iii)
CAPM
augm. w/ puts

(iv)
CAPM
augm. w/ micaps

Panel A: Evaluation of VC fund returns
0.031
-0.036
-0.223
0.000
0.187
0.000
Panel B: SDF parameters

a

0

b1

1

b2

-

0.032
(0.026)
-1.638
(0.437)
-

24

0.558
(0.028)
11.935
(1.101)
5.042
(0.339)

0.005
0.953
0.019
(0.027)
-1.480
(0.438)
-0.097
(0.191)

The implied risk premia for systematic exposure to option-like risks cannot easily be read oﬀ
from the SDF coeﬃcient estimates, though, because they depend on the covariance of the
put option and market factors, and the introduction of the put option factor also changes
the coeﬃcient on the market factor. But the results clearly show that including put option
returns in the SDF substantially lowers the attractiveness of VC fund payoﬀs vis-a-vis the
public market investment opportunities summarized by the SDF.
In the last speciﬁcation of Table II we add microcap returns to the SDF. The motivation
for doing so is that VC-backed start-up companies are most similar to this segment of public
equity markets. Hence, to the extent that microcaps earn risk premia that are not well
captured by our SDFs in columns (ii) and (iii), the inclusion of a microcap return in the SDF
might help price VC fund payoﬀs. The GP M E is 0.005, and the estimate is not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from zero. Since the loading on the microcap factor is economically small and
statistically insigniﬁcant, it is not surprising that these results are close to the speciﬁcation
in column (ii) that does not include the microcap factor.

D. Robustness
Our VC fund sample includes many funds that are not liquidated yet at the end of the sample
period. These funds self-report a Net Asset Value (NAV) at the end of the sample period.
These NAVs are known to be conservative and stale (e.g., Woodward (2009) and Phalippou
and Gottschalg (2009)). In our baseline estimates we followed Kaplan and Schoar (2005) and
treated the NAVs as a ﬁnal cash ﬂow. We check the robustness of our results to using the
subsample of 88 fully liquidated funds, as well as funds with end-of-sample NAVs less than
5% (135 funds) and 10% (159 funds) of the initial commitment. To eliminate funds that have
recently been raised but not yet invested, we require that the funds have been at least 50%
invested at some earlier date in order to be included in these subsamples.11
11
Other approaches in the literature have been to write oﬀ the ﬁnal observed NAVs for funds that are more
than 10 years old and for funds that show no signs of recent activity (Phalippou and Gottschalg (2009)), or
to model the NAVs as a function of fund size and other covariates Driessen, Lin, and Phalippou (2012).

25

Re-estimating the SDF with the market factor as in column (ii) of Table II for the fully
liquidated funds sample yields a GP M E estimate of 0.160 with a J-test p-value of 0.120.
These estimates are fairly close to those in Table II. In contrast, if one applies the log-utility
model as in column (ii) of Table II to the fully liquidated funds sample, one obtains a P M E
estimate of 0.405 with a zero p-value, which is substantially higher than the P M E estimate in
Table II. This illustrates again the advantage of allowing the SDF parameters to be estimated
over the sample corresponding to the fund cash ﬂows rather than ﬁxing them at log-utility
values. This helps obtain more stable estimates of abnormal returns.
The GP M E with the put-option and microcap factors in the SDF for the fully liquidated
funds sample are −0.246 and 0.154, respectively, and both are not statistically diﬀerent from
zero at a 5 percent signiﬁcance level. Using the samples with end-of-sample NAVs less than
5% and 10% of the initial commitment instead of the fully liquidated fund sample produces
estimates that are in between the fully liquidated sample ones and those in Table II.
Overall, restricting the fund sample to those that are fully, or almost fully liquidated does
not produce substantially diﬀerent GP M E estimates as long as one applies our more general
method and estimates the SDF parameters from public markets data.

III. VC-backed Start-up Companies
A. Data
We use data of ﬁnancing rounds for VC-backed start-up companies, provided to us by Sand
Hill Econometrics (SHE). SHE has combined two commercially available databases, VentureXpert (from Thomson Venture Economics) and VentureSource (formerly Venture One),
and invested substantial time and eﬀort to ﬁll in missing ﬁnancing rounds12 , and to ensure
accuracy of the data by removing duplicate investment rounds, adding missing rounds, and
consolidating rounds, such that each round corresponds to a single investment by one or more
12

Gompers and Lerner (1999) and Kaplan, Sensoy, and Strömberg (2002) ﬁnd that missing investments in
VentureXpert are predominantly smaller and more idiosyncratic ones.

26

VCs.
The full SHE dataset contains 61,356 ﬁnancing rounds for 18,237 unique start-ups between
1987 and 2005. Of these start-ups, 1,891 (10.4%) ultimately went public in an IPO, 4,271
(23.4%) were acquired, and 2,892 (15.9%) were liquidated. The ultimate outcome for the
remaining 9,183 ﬁrms (50.4%) was unknown by the end of the sample. Some of these ﬁrms
were still operating as private ﬁrms, but many of them have likely been liquidated (the socalled “zombie” ﬁrms). For these ﬁrms, the average (median) time since the last ﬁnancing
round was 57 (41) months by the end of the sample. Of the 52,302 rounds in which new
venture capital was raised (i.e., non-IPO, non-acquisition, non-liquidation rounds), 1,393
(2.7%) were seed rounds, 34,066 (65.1%) were early rounds, 16,466 (31.5%) were late rounds,
and 377 (0.7%) were designated as mezzanine rounds.13
We construct round-to-round returns as the change in valuation of the start-up from the
post-money valuation in a given round to the pre-money valuation in the subsequent round.
Post-money is a term used in the VC industry to denote the value of the start-up including
the new investment. Pre-money is deﬁned as the post-money valuation minus the amount
invested in that round. With consecutive ﬁnancing rounds at time t and t + h, the return is,

h
Rt+h
=

P RE
Vt+h

VtP OST

,

(26)

where VtP RE is the pre-money valuation for a ﬁnancing round that takes place at time t,
and VtP OST is the post-money valuation of that same round. The return to a buy-and-hold
investor who holds on to her initial investment, and does not invest any additional money in
future rounds, is simply the compounded return across rounds.14
13

The label “early” versus “late” is somewhat subjective, and the mezzanine round designation is even more
fuzzy. Typically a mezzanine round is the ﬁnancing round that bridges the 6 to 12 month gap to a liquidity
event—IPO, or sometimes acquisition—but sometimes refers to the round between the early and late stage.
14
Consider a simple example of a buy-and-hold investor. Suppose an investor invests $40 into a series A
round, for 100 shares of stock, representing 40% of the equity of the ﬁrm, implying a post-money valuation
of $100. In the next, series B round, another investor purchases 150 shares of new stock (i.e., a stake of
150/(250+150) = 37.5%) at $1 per share, for a total investment of $150. The post-money B-round valuation
is $400 (400 shares at $1 each), and the pre-money round B valuation is $400-$150=$250. The return to our
buy-and-hold investor from round A to B is $250/$100 = 2.5 (of course we could more easily compute the

27

Not all rounds have valuations ﬁlled in, so we can compute round-to-round returns for
only a subset of the data. We observe 6,861 round-to-round returns (after dropping one
return that was less than -100%) for 3,497 unique ﬁrms. Table III reports summary statistics
for this sample.
This sample suﬀers from two potential forms of selection bias, which are both ultimately
related to the endogeneity of ﬁnancing rounds. First, there could be a right-censoring problem. For ﬁrms started towards the end of our sample, we only observe ﬁnancing rounds for
a relatively short time period until the end of the sample. Since the most successful ﬁrms
are likely those that proceed most quickly through the VC funding process towards exit, we
are more likely to observe the eventual outcomes for these successful ﬁrms. Less successful
ﬁrms might not have a ﬁnal valuation available, and the one from the last available ﬁnancing
round before the end of the sample might be out of date. To mitigate the censoring problem,
we treat unobserved ﬁnal valuations as liquidations, and we explore how our results depend
on the assumed liquidation return. As this assumption may understate VC payoﬀs, we also
do robustness checks where we include only round-to-round returns where the initial round
occurs early enough so that we are conﬁdent that we have seen most of the horizons by the
end of the sample.
Second, data is missing for reasons that are likely to be related to performance. The ﬁrst
row in Panel B in Table III shows observed frequencies of diﬀerent investment and outcome
stages (Seed, Early, Late, Mezzanine, Acquisition, IPO, or Liquidation) without correcting
for the missing outcomes. However, for a substantial number of ﬁrms, their eventual fate
is unknown (these ﬁrms are also known as “zombie” ﬁrms). These tend to be companies
with bad outcomes: unsuccessful start-ups do not return for new ﬁnancing rounds. As a ﬁrst
step to deal with the missing data problem, we treat zombie rounds (where the ﬁnal observed
round for a ﬁrm is not an exit, i.e., an IPO, acquisition, or known liquidation) as liquidations.
return from the share prices, but these are usually not reported in the SHE data). Now suppose the start-up
is acquired a few months later, at a share price of $2. The return for round B to IPO is $2 · 400 / $400 = 2.
Our buy-and-hold investor initially bought her shares at $0.40/share, and she realized a total return on her
investment of $2/$0.40 = 5. This exactly equals the compounded return over the rounds, 2.5 times 2.

28

Table III
Summary Statistics: VC Rounds Data
Descriptive statistics for the sample of VC ﬁnancing rounds of start-up companies from Sand Hill
Econometrics over the period 1987 to 2005. Panel A reports statistics for the sample of round-toround returns. The top row of Panel B shows the sampling frequencies by funding stage for the
sample of round-to-round returns. The second and third rows show the frequencies for the sample
where companies with unobserved exits are assumed to be liquidated, where the second row uses the
full sample regardless of the availability of returns, and the third row uses the sample of round-toround returns. Panel C shows the mean gross round-to-round returns in the resampled sample that
matches the frequencies in the second row of panel B (see the text for details), where the unobserved
liquidation returns are assumed to be -90% (ﬁrst row), -70% (second row), and -50% (third row). Panel
D reports the mean gross return on investments in the CRSP value-weighted index that are matched
in time to the resampled round-to-round returns, and Panel E shows the mean return horizons (in
years), by funding stage.

quantile
mean st.dev
10
50
90
Panel A: Raw VC ﬁnancing rounds data (rounds with a return)
# Rounds
6,861
# Start-up companies
3,497
# Rounds / company
2.96
1.30
2.00
2.00
5.00
Time between rounds (yrs)
1.01
0.83
0.25
0.83
1.92
Panel B: Sampling frequencies
Seed

Early

Late

Mezz

Acq

IPO

Liq

Observed end-of-round event
0.005 0.414 0.363 0.008 0.099 0.044
Unobserved end-of-round event treated as liq. 0.004 0.341 0.299 0.007 0.082 0.036
Observed return (incl. assumed liq. return)
0.001 0.325 0.217 0.017 0.048 0.094
Panel C: Mean gross round-to-round returns (in resampled sample)
Ass. liq.ret. = -90%
1.256 2.389 1.710 2.410 3.190 3.331
Ass. liq.ret. = -70%
1.256 2.389 1.710 2.410 3.190 3.331
Ass. liq.ret. = -50%
1.256 2.389 1.710 2.410 3.190 3.331
Panel D: Time-matched payoﬀs on CRSP value-weighted index (in resampled sample)

0.067
0.231
0.297

Mean gross return

1.189

1.191

1.056

2.166

Mean (in years)

1.110 1.138 1.125 1.203 1.221
Panel E: Round-to-round time horizon (in resampled sample)
0.589 0.955 0.916 1.076 1.675

29

0.101
0.301
0.501

The observed frequencies for the resulting sample are shown in the second row of Panel B in
Table III.
Furthermore, 14,738 companies in the raw data do not have enough valuation data to
calculate even one round-to-round return. In fact, out of the 3,497 companies for which
we observe one or more returns, we have the full return history (i.e., where we observe
valuations for every single round) for only 742 ﬁrms. Again, the missing outcomes tend to
be the bad ones: of the 742 ﬁrms with a full return history, 524 ultimately went public, and
218 were ultimately acquired, and none were liquidated. This is due to the fact that IPO
and acquisitions data tend to be more widely publicized and thus easier to ﬁnd and backﬁll
(for example in S-1 registration statements). As shown in the third row of Panel B of Table
III, the observed frequencies for the subsample of rounds where we observe a round-to-round
return are not quite the same as those in the second row. We correct for this selection
bias by resampling (with replacement) round-to-round returns (including their time-matched
risk-factor payoﬀs) to match the distribution across investment stages of the full sample that
includes the missing liquidation returns in the second row of Panel B of Table III.
The mean gross returns per funding round category are shown in Panel C of Table III.
For robustness, we estimate the GP M E in our analysis below assuming that liquidations
with unknown returns (including the zombie rounds) can have a -90%, -70% or -50% return.
The ﬁnal column of Panel C in Table III shows how this aﬀects the average return in the
liquidation category.

B. A First Look at Systematic Risk of VC-backed Start-Up Companies
As we did for the VC funds data, we take a ﬁrst look at the systematic risk proﬁle of start-up
company investments with some simple scatterplots before proceeding to the GMM estimation. Figure 2 plots VC round-to-round returns against the stock market return measured
over the same horizon, both in excess of the risk-free rate (approximated by discounting by
the compounded T-Bill returns). To compare investments with roughly comparable invest-

30

ment horizons, we group all round-to-round returns into four categories based on percentiles
of the return horizon. Round-to-round returns measured over the shortest (longest) horizon
are shown in the top left (bottom right) quadrant. In addition to the scatterplot of start-up
company payoﬀs against public equity market returns, Figure 1 also shows a nonparametric
regression estimate of their relationship, estimated with local linear regression that is robust
to outliers.
The plots show a broadly similar pattern to the VC fund data: The investment payoﬀs
from VC-backed start-up companies in all four quadrants resemble the returns from a short
index put option position (plus a bond position). As in the funds sample, we therefore also
apply an SDF with an index put option returns factor to the start-up company data.
The round-to-round returns in these scatterplots are based on an assumed liquidation
return of −90%. The clustering of liquidation returns is visible just above the x-axis in these
plots. The payoﬀ concavity result is, however, robust to using -70% or -50% as the assumed
liquidation return.

C. GMM Results
Table IV reports the GP M E estimates for a variety of models. The standard P M E estimate
from the log-utility model is 0.526 under the assumption that liquidation returns are -90%.
For higher liquidation returns of -70% and -50%, we ﬁnd P M E estimates of 0.572 and 0.617,
respectively. One reason why these estimates are higher than the P M Es for VC funds is
that we are looking at the returns gross of fees to General Partners (management fees and
carried interest), whereas fund-level P M Es are net of fees. Another reason is that the start-up
company sample is weighed more towards earlier years, when VC performed better, compared
to the funds data, which has a higher proportion of observations after the year 2000 when
VC returns were poor (see for example, Korteweg and Sorensen (2010), Harris, Jenkinson,
and Kaplan (2013).
Relaxing the log-utility assumption to the more general utility model of equation (1)

31

30−50 pctile horizon
6

5

5

4

4

VC payoff

VC payoff

10−30 pctile horizon
6

3
2
1
0

3
2
1

0.8

1
Market payoff

1.2

0

1.4

6

5

5

4

4

3
2
1
0
0.5

1
1.2
Market payoff

1.4

1.6

70−90 pctile horizon

6

VC payoff

VC payoff

50−70 pctile horizon

0.8

3
2
1

1
1.5
Market payoff

2

0
0.5

1
1.5
Market payoff

Figure 2. Relationship Between Start-Up Company Round-to-Round Returns
and Stock Market Returns. Scatterplot of round-to-round gross return from the resampled sample (assuming that the return upon liquidation is -90%, see the text for details) on
the vertical axis, and the time-matched gross market return on the horizontal axis. Both returns are divided by the time-matched gross compounded T-Bill return. The round-to-round
returns are grouped into four categories by percentiles of the return horizon, with each panel
of the Figure representing one of the groups. The points labeled with ‘+’ show a robust local
linear regression ﬁt.

32

2

Table IV
Generalized Public Market Equivalents for VC Round-to-Round Returns
We match each start-up company round-to-round gross return, measured over horizon h from time t
h
to t + h, with the return of the CRSP value-weighted index (rm,t+h
in logs) from t to t + h, the return
from rolling over 1-month Treasury Bills, the return on a strategy that buys at-the-money put options
on the S&P500 index, and the return on a microcap portfolio. We estimate the Generalized Public
Market Equivalent (GP M E) by discounting the round-to-round gross returns with the stochastic
discount factor
h
h
h
Mt+h
= exp(ah − b1 rm,t+h
− b2 rx,t+h
)
and averaging across all observations. The log-utility CAPM special case in column (i) with a = 0,
b1 = 1, and b2 = 0 corresponds to the Public Market Equivalent of Kaplan and Schoar (2005). In
h
columns (iii) and (iv), the second factor, rx,t+h
, is the log return of the put option or microcap portfolio,
respectively. The SDF parameters in columns (ii) to (iv) are estimated, with exact identiﬁcation, to
ﬁt the average return of T-Bills and the returns on the SDF risk factors. The J-statistic tests the null
hypothesis GP M E = 0. The spectral density matrix used in the computation of the J-statistic takes
into account error dependence arising from overlapping round-to-round return measurement periods
as described in the text. Standard errors of the SDF parameter estimates are in parentheses.

(i)
Log-utility
CAPM

(ii)
CAPM

(iii)
CAPM
augm. w/ puts

(iv)
CAPM
augm. w/ micaps

Panel A: Evaluation of VC round-to-round returns
Ass.: Unobserved
GP M E
J-test p-value
Ass.: Unobserved
GP M E
J-test p-value
Ass.: Unobserved
GP M E
J-test p-value

liquidation returns = -90%
0.526
0.499
0.561
0.000
0.001
0.005
liquidation returns = -70%
0.572
0.548
0.610
0.000
0.000
0.002
liquidation returns = -50%
0.617
0.598
0.659
0.000
0.000
0.001
Panel B: SDF parameters

a

0

b1

1

b2

-

0.027
(0.096)
1.384
(1.216)
-

33

0.133
(0.151)
-1.624
(2.288)
-1.069
(0.886)

0.548
0.000
0.595
0.000
0.642
0.000
0.031
(0.104)
0.292
(1.451)
1.075
(0.492)

lowers the GP M E by about 0.02. Relative to the magnitude of the GP M E point estimate,
this is a small decrease. However, in terms of absolute economic magnitudes this is actually
a signiﬁcant reduction. A reduction of the pricing error by 0.02 for investments that have
a roughly one-year horizon on average corresponds roughly to a reduction of the annual
abnormal return by about 2 percentage points.
The reason why the GP M E and P M E results are not all that diﬀerent is that an exact
matching of the average public market equity and T-Bill returns in our sample period yields
parameter estimates that are very close to a = 0 and b = 1. This is in contrast to the VC
funds sample, where we ﬁnd signiﬁcantly diﬀerent SDF parameters and consequently a larger
diﬀerence between GP M E and P M E estimates. The diﬀerence between the two samples
is primarily due to the the fact that they are concentrated in diﬀerent time periods. It is
therefore important to stress that one cannot always rely on the log-utility model of column
(i) to produce similar estimates as the more general approach in column (ii) of Table IV.
Adding index put option returns to the SDF in column (iii) raises the GP M E by roughly
0.06 compared with column (ii). Thus, after allowing for exposure to the option risk factor,
the start-up company payoﬀs look even more abnormally positive. The impact of put option
returns is somewhat smaller here (in absolute value) compared to the VC funds, because the
loading on put options in the SDF is closer to zero (−1.069 here versus 5.042 for the VC
funds sample)
The eﬀect on the GP M E estimate of adding the microcap returns to the SDF in column
(iv) is roughly comparable to the eﬀect of adding the put option returns in column (iii).
Across all speciﬁcations, the J-test rejects the null hypothesis that the GP M E is zero in all
cases at a 1% signiﬁcance level.
To explore robustness with regards to our treatment of the right-censoring issue, we rerun these tests on a sample that includes only round-to-round returns where the initial round
occurs earlier than 2003, so that it is highly likely that we would get an observation of a
subsequent ﬁnancing round or exit event if the ﬁrm remains a viable project (rather than a

34

“zombie”). Imposing this requirement on the sample raises the GP M E, but only slightly,
and hence it does not lead to substantially diﬀerent conclusions.
Overall, the positive abnormal returns from VC-backed start-up company investments
found in the literature (Cochrane (2005) and Korteweg and Sorensen (2010)) seem robust.
Relaxing the implausible restrictions of the log-utility model on the equity premium, or
introducing put option and microcap returns as factors in the SDF does not change the basic
conclusion that the payoﬀs from start-up company investments are substantially higher than
risk-matched payoﬀs from public market investments.
These magnitudes of the GP M E estimates are big, but they are roughly consistent with
the arithmetic alphas that Cochrane (2005) (32% annualized) and Korteweg and Sorensen
(2010) (3.5% monthly) obtain by combining a log-normal model with a selection model for
endogenous funding and exit events. The approach that we propose here, however, obtains
these results in a much simpler and more robust fashion without the need for the speciﬁc
distributional assumptions and the rather cumbersome estimation involved with a selection
model. Without correcting for selection, Cochrane (2005) and Korteweg and Sorensen (2010)
obtain much higher estimates of arithmetic alphas. We obtain a similar result below if we
use a standard log-normal model in which variance grows proportionally with horizon.

D. Comparison with Log-Normal Model
In order to deal with both the multi-period nature of payoﬀs and the sample selection problem
in the round-to-round returns, an alternative approach in the earlier literature (e.g., Cochrane
(2005) and Korteweg and Sorensen (2010)) makes strong distributional assumptions that lead
to a linear factor model in logs that can be paired with a selection model, and estimated with
maximum likelihood (ML) methods. We now turn to a brief comparison of our approach
with this alternative method.
If asset returns, Rth , and the risk factor, Ft , are IID jointly log-normal, the pricing restriction (16) with SDF (1), under the null hypothesis GP M E = 0, and applied to multi-period

35

returns, yields
h
E[rt+h
] − rfh +

(
)
h 2
h
h
σ = β E[ft+h
] − rfh + σf2 ,
2
2

(27)

where β ≡ Cov (rt+1 , ft+1 )/σf2 and σ 2 ≡ Var (rt+1 ). Allowing for a pricing error, β can be
estimated with the regression
h
h
rt+h
− rfh = g(h) + β(ft+h
− rfh ) + εht+h ,

(28)

where comparison with (27) shows that the abnormal return due to the pricing error is
h 2
(σ − βσf2 )
2
h
= g(h) + (σε2 + β(β − 1)σf2 ).
2

αh = g(h) +

(29)
(30)

However, the null hypothesis gives no guidance about the speciﬁcation of the intercept term
g(h) in (28). Cochrane (2005) and Korteweg and Sorensen (2010) assume g(h) = γh, which
accumulates nicely over time as longer horizon returns are simply summations of shorterhorizon returns, but it is not obvious that this is the correct speciﬁcation.15 A perhaps
equally plausible alternative speciﬁcation of randomness in start-up company investments is
that nature initially draws whether a project is a success or not. This initial draw ﬁxes the
(initially unobserved) abnormal return of the project. Projects diﬀer in the amount of time
it takes for the project value to be revealed, but a longer horizon does not imply that more
abnormal return will be accumulated, nor that idiosyncratic variance is higher, let alone that
it grows linearly in the horizon. Instead, g(h) = γ and the variance of εt+h is constant, σε2
(which is why we drop the h-superscript), yielding
h
h
rt+h
− rfh = γ + β(ft+h
− rfh ) + εt+h ,

(31)

15
Driessen, Lin, and Phalippou (2012) do not assume log-normality, but use a similar compounding of the
intercept in a linear factor model.

36

and
1
αh = γ + (σε2 + β(β − 1)hσf2 ).
2

(32)

The ad-hoc assumptions about g(h) and σε can have a large impact on the empirical
estimates. For example, if the process for a start-up’s valuation is closer to (31) than to
(28) with g(h) = γh, this could lead to a large upward bias in the estimate of the arithmetic
alpha in a sample with heterogeneous payoﬀ horizons. To see this, suppose the alternative
log-normal model (31) is the true model. For a simple illustration, consider the special case
h
where β = 0 and rf = 0 so that rt+h
= γ + εt . We are interested in the arithmetic alpha for

an investment with horizon h = 1, which, in this β = 0 case, is simply
1
α1 = γ + σε2 .
2

(33)

If the log-normal model (28) with the (false) assumption g(h) = γh is employed, the ML
estimator of γ 16 in a large sample is γ̂ = γ/E[h], which implies an arithmetic annualized
alpha of
(
)2 
h
√
rt+h
1
α̂1 = γ̂ + E  √
− γ̂ h 
2
h
[ ]
( [ ]
)
1 2
1
1
1
γ
2
+ σ E
+γ E
−
,
=
E[h] 2 ε
h
h
E[h]

(34)
(35)

which is not generally equal to α1 . The multiplication of γ and σε2 in the ﬁrst two terms
by 1/E[h] and E[1/h], respectively, arises because application of the false model (28) with
g(h) = γh scales the alpha by horizon, which is not consistent with the true model (31). For
example, if all payoﬀs have h > 1, the application of the false model scales the arithmetic
alpha towards zero, because the model assumes that g(h) and volatility would be smaller in
magnitude at the shorter horizon of h = 1. Thus, the eﬀect of the ﬁrst two terms in (35)
√
√
h
In this case, the ML estimator is equivalent to the OLS slope estimator in a regression of rt+h
/ h on h
without intercept.
16

37

depends on the characteristics of the data. In our data we have 1/E[h] < 1, γ < 0, and
E[1/h] > 1 in terms of sample equivalents, which suggests a positive inconsistency. The third
term is always positive, which adds to the positive inconsistency, and it is bigger the greater
the dispersion of h in the data. Taken together, if (31) is true, but the econometrician applies
(28) with the assumption g(h) = γh in estimation, the arithmetic alpha estimates could be
substantially inconsistent.
In the log-normal model, the payoﬀ endogeneity discussed above leads to an additional
inconsistency because of the additional restrictive assumptions about the process of a venture’s value. The endogeneity implies that εht+h in (28) is negatively correlated with h, as
more successful ﬁrms are more likely to proceed quickly to the next funding round or exit. As
a consequence, if estimation proceeds under the assumption g(h) = γh, the estimate of γ will
be inconsistent (but not in the alternative log-normal model (31) where the intercept term
does not depend on h). The selection models in Cochrane (2005) and Korteweg and Sorensen
(2010) help ameliorate this potential shortcoming of the log-normal model by specifying the
probability of a new funding round or an exit event as a function of the value of the start-up
company. As the ﬁrm value rises, the probability of obtaining a new funding round or a
successful exit rises as well. This limits the extent to which the ﬁrm value within a funding
round can grow with h, which gets the model closer to (31). These selection models, however,
require rather strong assumptions.
In comparison, our SDF approach circumvents the need to make strong distributional
assumptions. This avoids the inconsistency that can arise from misspeciﬁcation of these
assumptions. Nevertheless, to facilitate comparison with the prior literature, we estimate the
log-normal model (28) on our data. We estimate both the speciﬁcation with g(h) = γh, and
the alternative model (31) where g(h) = γ. Comparing these speciﬁcations helps us assess
which stochastic process best describes start-up company project values and how to think
about the economics of entrepreneurial ventures. In each case, we convert the alpha to a
GP M E measure as GP M E = exp(αh ) − 1, averaged across all round-to-round observations

38

(which diﬀer in h).
Table V shows the results for the log-normal model. The ﬁrst three speciﬁcations use the
assumption g(h) = γh from Cochrane (2005) and Korteweg and Sorensen (2010), while the
last three speciﬁcations use the alternative assumption, g(h) = γ.
Across in columns (i) to (iii) in all panels, the β estimates are between 1.8 and 3.5, and
this range partly overlaps with recent estimates in the literature (Gompers and Lerner (1997)
estimate betas from 1.1 to 1.4, Peng (2001) ﬁnds 1.3 to 2.4, Woodward (2009) ﬁnds 2.2, Korteweg and Sorensen (2010) ﬁnd 2.8, Driessen, Lin, and Phalippou (2012) ﬁnd 2.7, and Ewens,
Jones, and Rhodes-Kropf (2013) ﬁnd 1.2). The implied GP M Es are considerably higher than
what we ﬁnd with the SDF approach that does not make strong distributional assumptions.
Evidently, relying on the log-normal model without combining it with a selection model leads
to implausibly large positive abnormal returns.
Changing the assumption about the horizon-dependence of abnormal return and volatility
leads to more plausible estimates. In the alternative log-normal model in columns (iv) to (vi),
the GP M Es for liquidation returns of -70% and -50% are comparable to those from the SDF
model. This result suggests that the alternative model does a better job describing the data
compared to the distributional assumptions in columns (i) to (iii).
Note that in Table V the arithmetic alpha shrinks as we increase the assumed liquidation
return. This counter-intuitive feature appears to be driven by the eﬀect that a higher liquidation return lowers the volatility (and hence the Jensen’s inequality adjustment term) and
dominates the positive eﬀect of the higher liquidation return on γ.
The results in this section demonstrate some of the diﬃculties that can arise when applying
an approach with strong distributional assumptions. How to model the randomness in startup companies’ value processes is an interesting question for further research. At this point,
however, without extensive evidence on this issue, it is diﬃcult to set up the log-normal
model in a way that is consistent with important features of the data. Our SDF approach
circumvents the need to take a stand on these issues.

39

Table V
Results from a Log-Normal Model for VC Round-to-Round Returns
We match each start-up company round-to-round gross return, measured over horizon h from t to
h
t + h, with the return of the CRSP value-weighted index (rm,t+h
in logs) from t to t + h, the return
from rolling over 1-month Treasury Bills, the return on a strategy that buys at-the-money put options
on the S&P500 index, and the return on a microcap portfolio. We estimate a linear regression in logs
h
h
h
h
h
rit+h
− rfht+h = g(h) + βm (rm,t+h
− rf,t+h
) + βp (rp,t+h
− rf,t+h
) + εht+h ,

with OLS, where g(h) = γh in columns (i) to (iii) and g(h) = γ in columns (iv) to (vi). The standard
errors in parentheses are calculated assuming independent errors, in line with common practice based
on this model in the existing literature. The annualized arithmetic alpha is calculated from γ with
a Jensen’s inequality adjustment. The calculation of variance for this adjustment assumes that the
variance of εht+h is proportional to h in columns (i) to (iii), and constant in columns (iv) to (vi).
The number reported in the table is the average of these arithmetic alphas across the whole sample.
The implied GP M E is calculated for each observation as the arithmetic alpha for the observation’s
horizon, αh , as GP M E = exp(αh ) − 1, and then averaged across the whole sample.

(i)

g(h) = γh
w/ puts w/ micaps
(ii)
(iii)

Assumed unobserved liquidation returns
γ
-0.355
(0.010)
βm
3.123
(0.079)
βp

= -90%
-0.340
(0.021)
3.257
(0.202)
0.052
(0.064)
Annualized arithmetic alpha
0.666
0.682
Implied GP M E
1.362
1.410
Assumed unobserved liquidation returns = -70%
γ
-0.130
-0.079
(0.008) (0.018)
βm
2.236
2.669
(0.061) (0.172)
βp
0.168
(0.054)
Annualized arithmetic alpha
0.563
0.613
Implied GP M E
1.068
1.206
Assumed unobserved liquidation returns = -50%
γ
-0.025
0.042
(0.008) (0.017)
βm
1.824
2.396
(0.056) (0.163)
βp
0.222
(0.052)
Annualized arithmetic alpha
0.582
0.647
Implied GP M E
1.119
1.306

40

(iv)

-0.339
(0.011)
3.423
(0.092)
-0.264
(0.044)
0.678
1.399

-0.373
(0.014)
1.313
(0.090)

-0.116
(0.009)
2.497
(0.073)
-0.229
(0.038)
0.574
1.098

-0.109
(0.011)
0.997
(0.064)

-0.012
(0.008)
2.066
(0.067)
-0.212
(0.036)
0.592
1.148

0.014
(0.010)
0.850
(0.054)

0.591
0.809

0.455
0.577

0.464
0.589

g(h) = γ
w/ puts w/ micaps
(v)
(vi)
0.022
(0.016)
5.530
(0.114)
1.163
(0.029)
0.697
0.937

-0.318
(0.014)
2.248
(0.090)
-0.746
(0.039)
0.687
1.041

0.166
(0.012)
3.928
(0.089)
0.809
(0.023)
0.536
0.653

-0.071
(0.011)
1.653
(0.067)
-0.523
(0.029)
0.524
0.715

0.232
(0.011)
3.183
(0.083)
0.644
(0.020)
0.531
0.649

0.044
(0.010)
1.376
(0.059)
-0.420
(0.025)
0.520
0.700

IV. Conclusions
We propose a stochastic discount factor approach to valuation of payoﬀs in private equity
markets. This approach is an alternative to existing methods in this area that are either
heuristically motivated or heavily parameterized. Our approach
• is robust in that it avoids strong distributional assumptions.
• compares payoﬀs in private equity markets with payoﬀs in public equity markets that
are matched by systematic risk.
• is suited for multi-period, skewed, and endogenously timed payoﬀs.
• generalizes existing approaches based on the Public Market Equivalent (P M E) by
leaving the equity premium unrestricted.
• allows for statistical inference that takes into account cross-sectional dependence.
In our empirical application with an exponentially-aﬃne version of the CAPM, we ﬁnd
substantial positive abnormal returns from VC investments in start-up companies and close
to zero abnormal returns for VC funds. We also ﬁnd that the relationship between VC
investment payoﬀs and public equity market returns exhibits a pronounced concavity, similar
to the payoﬀ from selling index put options. To account for this feature, we expand the set of
public market instruments that we use for comparison with VC payoﬀs to include put option
returns. Doing so raises the positive abnormal return of start-up company investments, while
it pushes the abnormal return from VC funds into negative territory.
In this paper we have focused on the risk and return to Venture Capital. Our methodology
can also be applied to other infrequently traded assets, in particular those with highly levered
or option-like returns, such as real estate or leveraged buyouts.

41

References
Bollerslev, T. and V. Todorov (2011). Tails, Fears, and Risk Premia. Journal of Finance 66 (6), 2165–2211.
Broadie, M., M. Chernov, and M. Johannes (2009). Understanding index option returns.
Review of Financial Studies 22 (11), 4493–4529.
Cochrane, J. H. (2005). The Risk and Return of Venture Capital. Journal of Financial
Economics 75 (1), 3 – 52.
Conley, T. (1999). GMM Estimation With Cross Sectional Dependence. Journal of Econometrics 92 (1), 1 – 45.
Driessen, J., T.-C. Lin, and L. Phalippou (2012, 5). A New Method to Estimate Risk
and Return of Nontraded Assets from Cash Flows: The Case of Private Equity Funds.
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 47, 511–535.
Epstein, L. and S. Zin (1989). Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of
Consumption and Asset Returns: An Theoretical Framework. Econometrica 57, 937–
969.
Ewens, M., C. M. Jones, and M. Rhodes-Kropf (2013). The Price of Diversiﬁable Risk in
Venture Capital and Private Equity. Review of Financial Studies 26 (8), 1854–1889.
Ewens, M. and M. Rhodes-Kropf (2013). Is a VC Partnership Greater than the Sum of its
Partners? Working Paper, Carnegie Mellon University and Harvard University.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1993). Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and
Bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 33, 23–49.
Franzoni, F., E. Nowak, and L. Phalippou (2012). Private Equity Performance and Liquidity Risk. The Journal of Finance 67 (6), 2341–2373.
Gompers, P. and J. Lerner (1999). An Analysis of Compensation in the US Venture Capital
Partnership. Journal of Financial Economics 51 (1), 3–44.
42

Gompers, P. A. and J. Lerner (1997). Risk and reward in private equity investments: The
challenge of performance assessment. The Journal of Private Equity 1 (2), 5–12.
Hall, R. E. and S. E. Woodward (2007). The Incentives to Start New Companies: Evidence
from Venture Capital. Working Paper, NBER.
Harris, R. S., T. Jenkinson, and S. N. Kaplan (2013). Private Equity Performance: What
Do We Know? Working Paper, University of Chicago, University of Virginia, and
University of Oxford.
Kaplan, S. N. and A. Schoar (2005). Private Equity Performance: Returns, Persistence,
and Capital Flows. The Journal of Finance 60 (4), 1791–1823.
Kaplan, S. N., B. A. Sensoy, and P. Strömberg (2002). How Well do Venture Capital
Databases Reﬂect Actual Investments. Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Korteweg, A. and M. Sorensen (2010). Risk and Return Characteristics of Venture CapitalBacked Entrepreneurial Companies. Review of Financial Studies 23 (10), 3738–3772.
Lerner, J., A. Schoar, and W. Wongsunwai (2007). Smart Institutions, Foolish Choices:
The Limited Partner Performance Puzzle. The Journal of Finance 62 (2), 731–764.
Ljunqvist, A. and M. Richardson (2003). The Cash Flow, Return and Risk Characteristics
of Private Equity. Working Paper, NYU Stern.
Longstaﬀ, F. A. (2009, September). Portfolio Claustrophobia: Asset Pricing in Markets
with Illiquid Assets. American Economic Review 99 (4), 1119–44.
Moskowitz, T. J. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2002). The Returns to Entrepreneurial Investment: A Private Equity Premium Puzzle? American Economic Review 92 (4), 745–778.
Peng, L. (2001). Building a Venture Capital Index. Working Paper, University of Colorado,
Boulder.
Phalippou, L. and O. Gottschalg (2009). The Performance of Private Equity Funds. Review
of Financial Studies 22 (4), 1747–1776.

43

Phalippou, L. and M. Zollo (2005). What Drives Private Equity Fund Performance? Working Paper, Wharton Working Paper 05-42.
Robinson, D. T. and B. A. Sensoy (2011). Cyclicality, Performance Measurement, and Cash
Flow Liquidity in Private Equity. Working Paper, Ohio State and Duke University.
Sorensen, M. and R. Jagannathan (2013). The Public Market Equivalent and Private Equity Performance. Working Paper, Columbia University and Northwestern University.
Sorensen, M., N. Wang, and J. Yang (2013). Valuing Private Equity. Working Paper,
Netspar discussion paper 04/2012-041.
Stucke, R. (2011). Updating History. Working Paper, University of Oxford.
Woodward, S. (2009). Measuring Risk for Venture Capital and Private Equity Portfolios.
Working Paper, Sand Hill Econometrics.

44

