                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     OPTIMAL PRIMARIES

                                         Patrick Hummel
                                         Richard Holden

                                       Working Paper 19340
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19340


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2013




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Patrick Hummel and Richard Holden. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Primaries
Patrick Hummel and Richard Holden
NBER Working Paper No. 19340
August 2013
JEL No. D47,D71,D72,K19

                                             ABSTRACT

We analyze a model of US presidential primary elections for a given party. There are two candidates,
one of whom is a higher quality candidate. Voters reside in m different states and receive noisy private
information about the identity of the superior candidate. States vote in some order, and this order is
chosen by a social planner. We provide conditions under which the ordering of the states that maximizes
the probability that the higher quality candidate is elected is for states to vote in order from smallest
to largest populations and most accurate private information to least accurate private information.


Patrick Hummel
Google Inc.
phummel@google.com

Richard Holden
Australian School of Business
University of New South Wales
Room 470B
Sydney, NSW, 2052, AUSTRALIA
and NBER
richard.holden@unsw.edu.au
                                     OPTIMAL PRIMARIES

                          PATRICK HUMMEL∗ AND RICHARD HOLDEN∗∗



        Abstract. We analyze a model of US presidential primary elections for a given party.
        There are two candidates, one of whom is a higher quality candidate. Voters reside in
        m different states and receive noisy private information about the identity of the superior
        candidate. States vote in some order, and this order is chosen by a social planner. We provide
        conditions under which the ordering of the states that maximizes the probability that the
        higher quality candidate is elected is for states to vote in order from smallest to largest
        populations and most accurate private information to least accurate private information.
           Keywords: Optimal primaries; Order of states; Social planning




                                           1. Introduction

    A striking and unusual feature of American politics is the presidential primary election
system. This system involves elections by 50 states, where the states vote in some pre-
determined order over the course of several months. The order of the primaries is, for a
given party, largely determined by the national party in question.1 As this nomination
system has played a crucial role in determining the president of the United States, it seems
important to understand how to design an optimal presidential primary. In this paper, we
make a contribution towards this question.
    Most people involved in professional politics believe that the order of the states in the
primaries matters. Participants seem unanimous in the view that strong results in early states
create momentum and lead to an information cascade whereby voters in later states become
more likely to vote for candidates who were successful in early states. Theoretical models
∗
  Corresponding author. Google Inc., 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA, E-mail
address: phummel@google.com
∗∗
   University of New South Wales, Room 470B, Australian School of Business, Sydney, NSW, 2052, Australia,
E-mail address: richard.holden@unsw.edu.au.
1
  The by-laws committees set the rules for primaries and states are expected to comply–which they generally,
but do not always, do.
                                                      1
such as Ali and Kartik (2012) show that such behavior has a rational basis.2 Moreover,
there is significant empirical support that these momentum effects play an important role in
elections (e.g. Bartels (1985, 1988), Kenney and Rice (1994), Knight and Schiff (2010), and
Popkin (1994)).3
    The possibility of momentum in presidential primaries leads many states to seek oppor-
tunities to have an early influence on the campaign. Residents of Iowa and New Hampshire
cherish their early role–sometimes being described as “the presidential wine-tasters of Amer-
ica”.4 Mayer and Busch (2004) notes that since 1988 states have been engaging in a process
known as “front-loading”, in which states attempt to hold their elections earlier and earlier
in the campaign season. As a result, roughly 70 percent of delegates are decided by March 2
today compared to 10 percent in 1976 (Redslawk et al., 2011). And in the 2008 presidential
primary, a number of states sought to hold their primaries so early that these states were
forced to have half of their delegates to the nominating convention stripped as a consequence.
    Candidates also relish the opportunity to try to capture victories in early states. Brams
and Davis (1982) notes that candidates in the 1976 and 1980 US presidential primaries
heavily emphasized spending in states that held their primaries early. Norrander (1992)
notes that even the introduction of Super Tuesday and the large number of votes it made up
for grabs on a single day was not sufficient to deter candidates from focusing their resources
on the early states. And the emphasis candidates place on early states has persisted in the
most recent presidential primaries. For instance, in the 2008 presidential primary, Barack
Obama focused the bulk of his resources to New Hampshire, John Edwards did the same in
Iowa, and Chris Dodd moved his family to Iowa two years prior.



2
  In addition, classic papers on social learning such as Banerjee (1992) and Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer and
Welch (1992) have shown that information cascades can be rational in a variety of other economic contexts,
and Ottaviani and Sørensen (2001) has studied the question of how one should order a group of speakers
to best extract information when the speakers have a desire to appear well-informed. For further work on
sequential voting, see Battaglini (2005), Callander (2007), and Dekel and Piccione (2000).
3
  For example, Bill Clinton swept to the nomination from seeming obscurity in 1992 as the result of an
unexpectedly strong finish in New Hampshire, and John Kerry demolished the field in 2004 after wins in
New Hampshire and Iowa.
4
  As quoted in The West Wing.
                                                    2
  It is not only the participants who should care about the order of the primaries. Each
major party wants to field the strongest possible candidate in the general election, and the
order of the states can affect whether that candidate is the nominee. And voters in aggregate
want to elect the best possible president, and hence should also care.
  Moreover, there has been substantial criticism of the existing order of primaries. As the
New York Times editorial page put it in September 2008: “The presidential primary system
is broken. For years, the nominating process has unfolded in an orderly, if essentially unfair,
way. The schedule has worked very nicely for early-voting states, which have had a steady
stream of would-be presidents knocking on their doors, making commitments on issues like
the Iowa full-employment program, also known as the ethanol subsidy. The losers have been
states like New York and California, which have often gotten to vote only when the contests
were all but decided. Issues that matter to them, like mass transportation, have suffered.”
  In this paper we take a mechanism design approach to the question of the optimal order of
primaries. One may view our mechanism designer either as a self-interested political party
who wants to nominate the best possible candidate, or a benevolent social planner who wants
to maximize the total utility of the voters in the primary. Voters in our model draw rational
inferences about the identity of the superior candidate from the results of primaries in early
states, and this in turn can lead to momentum and information cascades. The planner seeks
to design a primary that maximizes the probability that the higher quality candidate is
elected when the order of the states may affect the information cascades that take place.
  Our model allows for heterogeneity at the individual, state, and national levels. Individual
voters may differ in their own private preferences by having biased preferences for a candidate.
States may differ in their size, the precision of the information their voters receive about
the candidates, and how representative their voters are of the country as a whole. And
nationally voters as a whole will have different preferences depending on which candidate is
the higher quality candidate.
  We derive conditions under which a social planner can maximize the probability that
the higher quality candidate is elected by ordering the states from smallest to largest (i.e.

                                               3
allowing the smallest state to vote first and the largest state to vote last). We also show
that allowing states where voters receive more accurate private information to vote earlier
typically maximizes the probability that the higher quality candidate is elected. Finally, we
discuss the robustness of the results when we explicitly model the possibilities that voters
in different states might care about different issues and when candidate strategies are an
endogenous function of the order in which the states vote.
    The intuition behind the optimal ordering of the states is as follows. Voters in later states
will be able to use the information about how early states voted to get a better sense of which
candidate is the best candidate. Thus having larger states vote later enables a larger number
of people to use the information from the results of early states, which in turn means that
more people will be able to make a more well-informed decision when they vote. Similarly,
allowing states with well-informed voters to vote earlier means that voters in less informed
states will be able to use the information about how well-informed voters voted, which again
means people will be able to make more well-informed decisions when they vote.
    The results are significant because they suggest a possible rationalization for why one might
wish to allow small states such as Iowa and New Hampshire to vote early in a presidential
primary. Ordering the states from smallest to largest can increase the probability that the
best candidate is elected. Similarly, the result that it is advantageous to allow states with
better informed voters to vote earlier also suggests a reason why it may be advantageous
to allow states such as Iowa and New Hampshire to vote early. For one, better educated
voters tend to have more well-informed opinions about the abilities of the candidates, and
US Census Data from the past few decades reveals that the percentage of residents over the
age of 25 in Iowa and New Hampshire who have graduated from high school is consistently
among the few highest of all the states in the country.5
    Furthermore, when candidates campaign in small states, voters are more likely to be
able to meet the candidates individually and obtain precise information about their quality.
Roughly two months before the 2008 Iowa caucus, nearly two-thirds of voters in Iowa had
5
 See, for instance, US Census Bureau, 1990 Census of Population, CPH-L-96 and US Census Bureau, 2000
Census of Population, P37.
                                                 4
already had an opportunity to meet a candidate.6 And a few weeks before the 1996 New
Hampshire Republican primary, approximately 20 percent of people polled by a WMUR-
Dartmouth College survey said they had met or seen in person a candidate in the primary
(Buhr, 2000). By contrast, in a large state such as California, it would be infeasible for such
a large percentage of voters to meet a candidate before the election.7 Vavrek et al. (2002)
provides both reduced form and causal evidence that such meetings enable voters to receive
precise information about the candidates, stating: “Meeting the candidates face-to-face,
receiving direct mail, and getting phone calls on behalf of candidates all have systematic
effects on voters’ uncertainty, knowledge, and attitudes about candidates. Voters’ personal
interactions with candidates are most important in reducing their uncertainty about how to
rate candidates.”8
    This paper contributes to a literature on the optimal way to design a primary election.
Other work on optimal primaries such as Callander (2007), Deltas et al. (2012), and Hummel
and Knight (2012) has addressed questions related to whether a social planner should prefer
simultaneous elections to sequential elections. However, although there is already a developed
literature on whether simultaneous elections should be preferred to sequential elections, there
has been very little work that addresses the question of the optimal way to order states in a
presidential primary, given that this primary will be held using a sequential election. This
is the subject of the current paper.




                                            2. The Model

    There are two candidates, A and B, and m states S1 , . . . , Sm . Each state Sj has a contin-
uum of voters of measure λj and may allocate a total of λj delegates to the candidates. The

6
  This was noted in a November 2007 CBS News/New York Times Poll.
7
  Redslawk et al. (2011) attributes the fact that so many voters in Iowa are able to meet the candidates in
person to Iowa’s small size and Vavrek et al. (2002) claims that New Hampshire’s small size creates ideal
opportunities for voters to interact with the candidates.
8
  Jones (1998) and Shaw (1999) also offer evidence that the number of visits to a state is related to total
votes received.
                                                    5
candidate who receives the most delegates wins the election and ties are broken randomly.
We consider two possible ways that states may allocate their delegates to the candidates.
  The first method we consider is one in which states allocate their delegates to candidates
in direct proportion to the number of votes each candidate received. Under this method, a
candidate wins the election if and only if the candidate received a majority of votes. Thus
if yj denotes the fraction of voters that votes for candidate A in state Sj , then candidate
                 Pm             1
                                  Pm                                                      1
A is elected if    j=1 y j λj > 2   j=1 λj , both candidates are elected with probability 2 if
Pm             1
                 Pm
   j=1 yj λj = 2  j=1 λj , and candidate B is elected otherwise.

  The second method we consider is a scenario in which a state allocates all of its delegates
to the candidate who received the most votes in that state. We consider both of these
possibilities because some states allocate all of their delegates to the candidate who received
the most votes in that state, and other states allocate their delegates in close proportion to
the number of votes each candidate received in the state.
  There are two states of the world, a and b. If the state of the world is a, then candidate
A is the higher quality candidate, and if the state of the world is b, then candidate B is the
higher quality candidate. In each state Sj , a fraction κj of the voters observe the state of the
world directly, and the remaining voters do not observe the state of the world directly. These
remaining voters each share a common prior that the probability the state of the world is a
is φ for some φ ∈ (0, 1).
  If the state of the world is a, then each imperfectly informed voter in state Sj receives a
private signal that is an independent and identically distributed draw from a distribution
                                                    1
that takes on the value α with probability pj >     2
                                                        and the value β with probability 1 − pj .
And if the state of the world is b, then each imperfectly informed voter in state Sj receives
a private signal that is an independent and identically distributed draw from a distribution
                                                    1
that takes on the value β with probability pj >     2
                                                        and the value α with probability 1 − pj .
We assume that pj > max{φ, 1 − φ} for all j to ensure that a voter will initially believe it is




                                                6
more likely that candidate A is a better candidate after receiving the signal α and candidate
B is a better candidate after receiving the signal β.9
  There are three possible types of voters in the population. The first possibility is that a
voter is an A-partisan and always obtains utility 1 from electing candidate A and utility 0
from electing candidate B. A second possibility is that a voter is a B-partisan and always
obtains utility 1 from electing candidate B and utility 0 from electing candidate A. And a
last possibility is that a voter is a neutral. A neutral obtains utility 1 from electing candidate
A in state a, utility 0 from electing candidate B in state a, utility 1 from electing candidate
B in state b, and utility 0 from electing candidate A in state b.10 Throughout we let πjA
denote the fraction of voters in state Sj who are A-partisans, πjB denote the fraction of voters
in state Sj who are B-partisans, and πjN = 1 − πjA − πjB denote the fraction of voters in state
Sj who are neutrals.
  While voters in a given state Sj all vote at the same time, different states vote at different
times, and some states vote after observing how voters in other states have voted. We assume
that all voters in state S(1) vote without observing how voters in other states have voted,
and that voters in state S(j) vote after observing how voters in states S(1) , . . . , S(j−1) have
voted.11 Throughout we also assume that all voters vote sincerely by voting for the candidate
they like best given their current information.12 Thus A-partisans vote for candidate A, B-
partisans vote for candidate B, and a neutral voter votes for candidate A if and only if this
                                                                                         1
voter believes the probability the state of the world is a is greater than               2
                                                                                             at the time the
voter votes.


9This  condition is automatically satisfied if φ = 21 .
10Our   model is relevant in cases where a general election follows the primary election if some voters are
partisans who are uninterested in candidate quality, while other neutral voters make their decisions, in part,
based on the electability of the candidates.
11In principle, voters may also observe the results of pre-election polls from earlier states before they vote.
However, the information contained in the election results from these states will overwhelm the information
from pre-election polls, so we can focus without loss of generality on what happens when voters only observe
the election results from earlier states.
12This assumption implicitly rules out the possibility that voters might abstain from voting. Such strategic
abstention has been analyzed formally by Battaglini (2005) in a model of costly voting. While strategic
abstention is interesting, our model is reasonable in cases where there is some exogenous abstention rate and
we then only focus on the voters who are voting in the election.
                                                      7
  We consider the problem of a social planner who wishes to select the order in which the
states vote, S(1) , . . . , S(m) , to maximize the probability that the higher quality candidate is
elected. This is a sensible objective for the social planner because, for example, if the majority
of voters are neutrals, then maximizing the probability the higher quality candidate is elected
also maximizes the welfare of the majority of the voters in the primary. While the planner
and the voters know the values of πjN , we assume that the planner and the voters do not
know the values of πjA and πjB at the time that the planner chooses the order of the states.
Instead the planner and the voters only know that each value of πjA is an independent draw
from a continuous cumulative distribution function Fj with support equal to some subset of
the interval [0, 1 − πjN ] and corresponding density fj .13

Discussion of the Model. Before proceeding to the analysis, we pause briefly to discuss
some of our modeling assumptions. The most notable simplifications are the restriction to
elections with two candidates and the fact that we allow for only a few types of voters. The
restriction to elections with two candidates is almost universal in formal theory literature
on sequential voting and presidential primaries (Ali and Kartik, 2012; Battaglini, 2005;
Battaglini et al., 2007; Brams and Davis, 1982; Callander, 2007; Dekel and Piccione, 2000;
Klumpp and Polborn, 2006; Strumpf, 2002), and we do not believe that it is consequential
for the results. In particular, the the overall intuition for the results mentioned in the
introduction is an intuition that we would expect to continue to hold even when there are
multiple candidates. Furthemore, presidential primaries with multiple candidates typically
narrow down to the two most serious candidates very quickly (Abramson et al., 1992; Aldrich,
1980; Bartels, 1988; Matthews, 1978; Popkin, 1994), so the analysis we present is quite
relevant for the critical final phase of presidential primaries with multiple candidates.
  It is also worth noting that the assumption that a voter obtains utility 1 from the election
of her preferred candidate and 0 from her less preferred candidate has no effect on the analysis
13Selman  (2010) analyzes a model of optimal primaries that differs from ours in that the values of           πjA
      B
and πj in each state are common knowledge. In such a model, voters can deduce the identity of                 the
superior candidate with virtual certainty after the election in the first state. By contrast, in our model,   the
uncertainty about the values of πjA and πjB means that there may be uncertainty about the identity of         the
superior candidate even after several states hold their elections.
                                                      8
since, for example, if the A-partisans differed in the intensities of their preferences over the
two candidates, such voters would still vote the same way as before.
  We also note why we believe it is appropriate to consider uncertainty in the fraction
of partisans rather than uncertainty in the fraction of neutrals. Had we considered an
analogous model in which the relative fraction of A-partisans and B-partisans in each state
were known, but the fraction of neutrals were uncertain, a voter would typically be able
to infer which candidate is the higher quality candidate with certainty from the results of
one state’s election simply by noting whether the fraction of the vote A received in the
state was greater or less than the known fraction of A-partisans in the state. However,
incorporating uncertainty about the fraction of partisans makes the model more interesting
because if a candidate does well, there can be uncertainty about whether the candidate did
well because there were many partisan supporters for the candidate or if the candidate did
well because the candidate was actually a higher quality candidate. Since uncertainty about
the fraction of partisans enables voters to update their beliefts about the candidates in a
realistic manner, but uncertainty about the fraction of neutrals does not, there is little that
is gained by incorporating uncertainty about the fraction of neutrals, and we prefer to model
this by incorporating uncertainty about the fraction of partisans but not about the fraction
of neutrals.



                                           3. Results

  Suppose that all neutral voters in state Sj who receive a private signal α vote for A
and all neutral voters in state Sj who receive a private signal β vote for B. Then if the
state of the world is a, the fraction of voters that votes for candidate A in state Sj is
πjA + (pj (1 − κj ) + κj )πjN , and if the state of the world is b, the fraction of voters that votes
for candidate A in state Sj is πjA + (1 − pj )(1 − κj )πjN .
  Thus if yj denotes the fraction of voters that votes for candidate A in a state Sj where all
neutral voters vote according to their private signals, then either the state of the world is a
and πjA = yj −(pj (1−κj )+κj )πjN or the state of the world is b and πjA = yj −(1−pj )(1−κj )πjN .
                                                  9
From this it follows that if all neutral voters in states S(1) , . . . , S(j−1) vote according to their
private signals and φ(j) denotes the probability with which an imperfectly informed outside
observer believes the state of the world is a after states S(1) , . . . , S(j−1) have voted, then

                                                φ(j−1) f(j−1) (w(j−1) )
                       φ(j) =                                                           ,
                                φ(j−1) f(j−1) (w(j−1) ) + (1 − φ(j−1) )f(j−1) (z(j−1) )

                                                         N
where w(j−1) ≡ y(j−1) − (p(j−1) (1 − κ(j−1) ) + κ(j−1) )π(j−1) and z(j−1) ≡ y(j−1) − (1 − p(j−1) )(1 −
         N
κ(j−1) )π(j−1) .14
  Now we specialize to the case in which πjN = π N for all j and πjA is drawn from the
                                                                           1
uniform distribution on [0, 1 − π N ] for all j. Thus fj (x) =           1−π N
                                                                                 for all x ∈ [0, 1 − π N ] and
                     / [0, 1 − π N ]. Under these assumptions, if all neutral voters in state S(j−1)
fj (x) = 0 for all x ∈
vote according to their private signals and y(j−1) > 1 − (p(j−1) (1 − κ(j−1) ) + κ(j−1) )π N , then
φ(j) = 1, as the only way so many voters could have voted for candidate A in state S(j−1) is
if the state of the world is a. If y(j−1) < (p(j−1) (1 − κ(j−1) ) + κ(j−1) )π N , then φ(j) = 0, as the
only way so few voters could have voted for candidate A in state S(j−1) is if the state of the
world is b. But if (p(j−1) (1 − κ(j−1) ) + κ(j−1) )π N ≤ y(j−1) ≤ 1 − (p(j−1) (1 − κ(j−1) ) + κ(j−1) )π N ,
then f(j−1) (w(j−1) ) = f(j−1) (z(j−1) ) and φ(j) = φ(j−1) .
  Thus under these assumptions, neutral voters in state S(j) follow simple strategies in
deciding which candidate to vote for. If a candidate has received a fraction of the vote
greater than 1 − (p(k) (1 − κ(k) ) + κ(k) )π N in some previous state S(k) with k < j, then voters
recognize that this candidate is the higher quality candidate, and all neutral voters in state
S(j) vote for that particular candidate. If no candidate has received a fraction of the vote
greater than 1 − (p(k) (1 − κ(k) ) + κ(k) )π N in some previous state S(k) with k < j, then all
neutral voters in state S(j) vote according to their private signals. We use this insight in
proving the following proposition:



14This   follows because the prior probability the state of the world is a is φ(j−1) and the relative likelihood
that A receives a fraction y(j−1) of the vote in state S(j−1) conditional the state of the world being a is
f (w(j−1) ). At the same time, the prior probability the state of the world is b is 1 − φ(j−1) and the relative
likelihood that A receives a fraction y(j−1) of the vote in state S(j−1) conditional the state of the world being
b is f (z(j−1) ). This gives the result in the previous equation.
                                                       10
                                                    1
Proposition 1. Suppose that πjN = π N ≥             2
                                                        for all j, πjA is drawn from the uniform distri-
                                                1
bution on [0, 1 − π N ] for all j, pj = p >     2
                                                    for all j, and κj = κ for all j. Then the ordering
of the states that maximizes the probability that the higher quality candidate wins the election
is the ordering in which the states are ordered from smallest to largest, or the ordering in
which state S(1) has the smallest value of λj , state S(2) has the second smallest value of λj ,
and in general state S(k) has the k th smallest value of λj .15

  The intuition for this result is as follows. Note that if voters are able to deduce the identity
of the higher quality candidate from the results of an early state, then more voters will have
an opportunity to act on this information if a larger number of voters remain to vote, and
more voters will vote for the higher quality candidate if larger states remain to vote. At
the same time, if voters are not able to deduce the identity of the higher quality candidate
from the results of an early state, then the order of the states will never affect the number
of voters who vote for the higher quality candidate. Thus under either scenario, at least
as many voters vote for the higher quality candidate if the small states vote before the big
states, and the higher quality candidate wins with the greatest possible probability if the
states are ordered from smallest to largest.
  One can further illustrate how the optimal order of the states depends on the accuracy
of the voters’ private information in each state. To address this, we consider what happens
when the states can be ordered in terms of how well-informed they are in the sense that
states with more voters who observe the state of the world exactly (larger values of κj ) also
receive more informative private signals (larger values of pj ) for voters who do not observe
the state of the world exactly. Formally we assume that pj > pk if and only if κj > κk for
all j and k. Under this assumption, we derive how the optimal order of the states depends
on the level of informativeness of the states in Proposition 2:

Proposition 2. Suppose that πjN = π N for all j, πjA is drawn from the uniform distribution
on [0, 1 − π N ] for all j, λj = λ for all j, and pj > pk if and only if κj > κk for all j
15This  ordering is also the unique ordering that maximizes the probability that the higher quality candidate
is elected if the higher quality candidate is not guaranteed to win the election.
                                                        11
and k. Then the ordering of the states that maximizes the probability that the higher quality
candidate wins the election is the ordering in which the states are ordered from the most
informed to the least informed, or the ordering in which state S(1) has the largest value of
pj , state S(2) has the second largest value of pj , and in general state S(k) has the k th largest
value of pj .


  To understand why this result holds, note that the result of an election in a state where
voters have accurate private signals is relatively more likely to give information that reveals
the identity of the higher quality candidate than the result of an election in a state where
voters have less accurate private signals. Thus if states where voters have more accurate pri-
vate information vote first, then the identity of the higher quality candidate will normally be
revealed more quickly than if states where voters have less accurate private information vote
first, and there will be more later states where all neutral voters vote for the higher quality
candidate if states with more accurate private signals vote first. At the same time, more
voters in early states will vote for the higher quality candidate when states where voters have
accurate private information vote first because voters in early states vote according to their
private information. Thus allowing the states with the most accurate private information to
vote first increases the number of voters who vote for the higher quality candidate in both
early states and later states. The result then follows.
  Propositions 1 and 2 have both made use of the assumption that the fraction of partisans
is drawn from a uniform distribution. This assumption is natural in many scenarios since
it is quite common for individuals to only react to news if the news provides very strong
evidence that an individual should change his or her beliefs, and such a reaction is captured
by the uniform distribution.16 It is also worth noting that this assumption is not completely
necessary for these results because if the distribution of partisans is close to a uniform
distribution, then the results in Propositions 1 and 2 still hold.


16There   is a long literature documenting that individuals underreact to news that contradicts their initial
beliefs such as Frazzini (2006), Hirshleifer et al. (2009), and Ikenberry and Ramnath (2002).
                                                     12
  However, the assumption that the fraction of partisans is drawn from a distribution that
is close to a uniform distribution rules out the possibility that a bandwagon may begin in
a state that benefits the lower quality candidate. Since these bad bandwagons may take
place under more general distributions, it is natural to ask how the results can be extended
without this assumption. We thus seek to illustrate that the results in Propositions 1 and 2
can be extended even if a bandwagon may start in a later state that helps the lower quality
candidate. As this is difficult to analyze under the general case with a large number of states,
we assume there are m = 2 states in analyzing this possibility.
  To address this, we consider what happens when the fraction of A-partisans in a given
state is drawn from a distribution with a density f such that this fraction is likely to assume
                                                                                          N
moderate values (those between δ and 1 − π N − δ for some δ ∈ (0, 1−π
                                                                    2
                                                                      )) and relatively
unlikely to assume extreme values (those less than δ or greater than 1 − π N − δ). Such a
density will allow for the possibility of bad bandwagons, as if the fraction of A-partisans in
a given state happens to be less than δ, then imperfectly informed voters in later states will
conclude that it is relatively more likely that B was the better candidate and vote for B
even if A is actually the better candidate. Moreover, this density will continue to have the
natural feature that imperfectly informed neutral voters in the second state will vote for A
if A does sufficiently well in the first state, vote for B if B does sufficiently well in the first
state, and vote according to their private signal otherwise.
  Formally, we will assume

                                                                                       1−π N
Condition 1. f (x) is symmetric and weakly single-peaked about x =                       2
                                                                                               and there exists
some positive δ satisfying δ < max{((2pj − 1)(1 − κj ) + κj )π N , 21 − (pj + (1 − pj )κj )π N } for
j = 1 and 2 such that

     • f (x) is constant for x ∈ [δ, 1 − π N − δ],
               πf (x)
     •   πf (x)+(1−π)f (z)
                             < min{1 − p1 , 1 − p2 } if x < δ and z ∈ [δ, 1 − π N − δ],
               πf (x)
     •   πf (x)+(1−π)f (z)
                             > max{p1 , p2 } if x ∈ [δ, 1 − π N − δ] and z > 1 − π N − δ and
                                          πf (x)
     • max{1−p1 , 1−p2 } <          πf (x)+(1−π)f (z)
                                                        < min{p1 , p2 } for all other values of x ∈ [0, 1−π N ]
         and z ∈ [0, 1 − π N ].
                                                          13
  Under such a density f (x), the fraction of A-partisans is considerably more likely to take
on a particular value between δ and 1 − π N − δ than a particular value less than δ or greater
than 1 − π N − δ. Moreover, if a candidate does poorly in the first state because the fraction
of partisans for the candidate in that state is less than δ, then imperfectly informed voters
conclude that candidate is unlikely to be the better candidate and imperfectly informed
neutral voters in the second state all vote for the other candidate. But if both candidates
do moderately well in the first state, then imperfectly informed voters still think there is a
substantial chance that either candidate could be the better candidate and voters continue
to act on their private information in the second state. Under these assumptions we obtain
the following result:


Proposition 3. Suppose that m = 2, πjN = π N , pj = p, κj = κ, and fj = f for all j,
(1 − κ)π N ≥ 21 , and Condition 1 holds. Then the ordering of the states that maximizes the
probability that the higher quality candidate wins the election is the ordering in which the
smaller state votes first and the larger state votes last.


  To understand the intuition for this result, note that if there are two states and there is
a bandwagon for candidate A, then candidate A wins the election regardless of the order of
the states. In order for the first state to induce a bandwagon for candidate A, it is necessary
that at least half of the voters vote for A in the first state. And if there is a bandwagon for
candidate A, then at least half of the voters vote for A in the second state. Thus if there is a
bandwagon for candidate A, then the majority of voters vote for A and A wins the election
regardless of the order of the states. Similarly, if there is a bandwagon for candidate B, then
candidate B wins the election regardless of the order of the states.
  Thus the only way the order of the states can affect which candidate is elected is if there is
no bandwagon for either candidate. Now if there is no bandwagon for either candidate, then
both candidates obtain a moderate number of votes in the first state, and the fraction of
votes received by the higher quality candidate in the first state is necessarily close to 21 . At
the same time, on average the majority of voters will vote for the higher quality candidate in
                                               14
the second state because the majority of neutral voters believe the higher quality candidate
is the better candidate.
   Thus if there is no bandwagon and the large state votes first, then the fraction of voters
                                                                             1
that votes for the higher quality candidate in the large state is close to   2
                                                                                 and the majority
of voters are expected to vote for the higher quality candidate in the small state. And if
there is no bandwagon and the small state votes first, then the fraction of voters that votes
                                                                  1
for the higher quality candidate in the small state is close to   2
                                                                      and the majority of voters
are expected to vote for the higher quality candidate in the large state. This indicates that
more voters will be expected to vote for the higher quality candidate in the scenario in which
the small state votes first than in the scenario in which the large state votes first. For this
reason the higher quality candidate wins with greater probability when the small state votes
first.
   One can also extend the conclusions of Proposition 2 to this framework that allows for the
possibility of bad bandwagons. This is done in Proposition 4:


Proposition 4. Suppose that m = 2, πjN = π N , λj = λ, κj = κ, and fj = f for all j,
and Condition 1 holds. Then the ordering of the states that maximizes the probability that
the higher quality candidate wins the election is the ordering in which the state with more
informative private signals votes first and the state with less informative private signals votes
last.


   To understand why this result holds, note that if the state with the more accurate private
signals votes first, then it is relatively more likely that there will be a bandwagon for the
higher quality candidate because the state is relatively more likely to reveal accurate infor-
mation that the higher quality candidate is the better candidate. It is also relatively less
likely that there will be a bandwagon for the lower quality candidate because the state is
relatively less likely to reveal inaccurate information that the lower quality candidate is the
better candidate. Thus relatively more favorable types of bandwagons take place when the
state with the more accurate private signals votes first.
                                               15
  At the same time, conditional on a bandwagon taking place, one would prefer that the
state with the more accurate private signals votes first. If a bandwagon takes place, then
imperfectly informed voters in the second state do not condition their votes on their signals,
and such voters vote the same way regardless of the accuracy of their signals. But more
voters in the first state vote for the higher quality candidate if the voters in the first state
have relatively more accurate private signals. Thus if a bandwagon takes place, more voters
vote for the higher quality candidate if the state with the more accurate private signals votes
first. And if no bandwagon takes place, then the number of voters who vote for the higher
quality candidate is not affected by the order of the states.
  Combining the ideas in these two paragraphs indicates that having the state with the more
accurate private signals vote first can only increase the number of voters that votes for the
higher quality candidate. Thus the higher quality candidate wins with greater probability if
the state with the more accurate private signals votes first.



                             4. Non-Representative States

  In the analysis so far we have restricted attention to cases in which the issues that voters
in one state care about are representative of the issues that voters in another state care
about in the sense that if a candidate is better for neutral voters in one state, then this
candidate is also better for neutral voters in other states. However, in general it might not
be the case that neutral voters in different states care about the same issues. For instance,
voters in Iowa may care a lot about issues like corn subsidies and ethanol, whereas the rest
of the country may be less concerned about this. How does the possibility that the issues
voters in one state care about may be completely unrepresentative of the issues that voters
in other states care about affect the optimal ordering of the states?
  To address this question, we consider an extension of our baseline model in which there is
another dimension in which states may differ from one another. In particular, in addition to
potentially differing in the fraction of partisans that support a given candidate, their size,
and the informativeness of their private signals, we now allow for the possibility that states
                                               16
may also differ in whether the neutral voters in the state care about the same issues as the
rest of the country as a whole. For each state j, there is both a state-specific issue that
is different for each state as well as a national issue that is the same for all states in the
country.
  The potentially unobserved state of the world is some random variable in the set {a, b}m+1 ,
where the last element of this vector is equal to a if A is the higher quality candidate on
the national issue and equal to b if B is the higher quality candidate on the national issue,
and the j th element of this vector is equal to a if A is the higher quality candidate on the
state-specific issue for state j and b if B is the higher quality candidate on the state-specific
issue for state j. We assume that the voters have common priors about the probabilities
of any of the states of the world, and we also assume that knowing whether a candidate is
stronger on any of the state-specific issues reveals no information about the probability the
candidate is stronger on the national issue or the other state-specific issues. That is, whether
a candidate is stronger on a given issue is a random variable that is independent of which
candidates are stronger on the other issues.
  Neutral voters in state j either all vote on the basis of which candidate is better for their
state-specific issue or all vote on the basis of which candidate is better for the national issue.
In particular, for each state j, there is some probability qj that gives the probability that
neutral voters in state j care about electing the candidate that is better for the national
issue and some probability 1 − qj that gives the probability that neutral voters in state j
care about electing the candidate that is better for the state-specific issue.
  If neutral voters in state j care about electing the candidate that is better for the national
issue, then their utility is the same as in the main model. But if these voters instead care
about electing the candidate that is better for the state-specific issue, then they obtain
utility 1 from electing candidate A(B) if the j th element of the state of the world is a(b) and
obtain utility 0 from electing candidate A(B) if the j th element of the state of the world is
b(a). Finally, if a voter is an A-partisan (B-partisan), then this voter again obtains utility 1



                                                17
from electing candidate A (B) and utility 0 from electing candidate B (A) regardless of the
realization of the state of the world.
  In this setup we assume that at the time the social planner decides on the ordering of
the states, the social planner can observe the values of qj , but cannot observe whether a
state will care about the state-specific issue or the national issue in that particular election.
However, we assume that at the time voters in a given state vote, these voters can observe
not only the results from states that voted earlier, but also whether these states cared about
a state-specific issue or the national issue. We make this modeling choice because we believe
that voters will be able to observe the issues on which candidates campaigned in early states
and thus the issues that these voters focused on in deciding which candidate to support, but
the social planner will not have this information at the time the social planner decides on
the ordering of the states. Instead the social planner will only know the probability that a
given state will end up caring about the same issues as the rest of the country as a whole.
  In this model the variable qj provides a measure of how representative state j is of the
rest of the country as a whole. If qj is quite large, then it is almost certain that this state
will care about the same issues as the rest of the country as a whole, and this state is quite
representative of the rest of the country. But if qj is fairly small, then there is a substantial
chance that this state will instead vote on the basis of issues that the rest of the country
does not care about, and this state is not representative of the rest of the country. Thus
in order to investigate how the possibility that different states may be less representative of
the country as a whole affects the optimal ordering of the states, we seek to investigate how
differences in the value of qj affects the optimal ordering of the states.
  The interesting conclusion that arises from this model is that differences in how represen-
tative the states are of the country as a whole has no effect on the optimal ordering of the
states. In particular, we obtain the following theorem:


Proposition 5. The optimal ordering of the states is independent how representative the
states are of the country as a whole. That is, the optimal ordering of the states is independent
of the values of qj for the different states.
                                                18
  To understand the intuition behind this result, note that if a state ends up caring about
different issues than the rest of the country, then the order in which this state votes has no
effect on the outcome of the election. The voters in that state will not condition their votes
on the results of earlier states because the results of other states contain no information
about which candidate is better for that state’s state-specific issue. And the voters in states
that vote after this state will also not condition their votes on the results of the election in
this particular state because these election results have no bearing on which candidate is
stronger either for the national issue or for these states’ state-specific issues.
  But if the order in which a state votes has no effect on the results of the election if that
state cares about the state-specific issue, then the optimal ordering of the states is the same
as the optimal ordering that would arise when all states care about the national issue. Thus
the optimal ordering of the states is independent of the values of qj for the different states
and therefore independent of how representative the states are of the country as a whole.
  This result has made use of the assumption that voters in later states are able to observe
whether voters in early states voted on the basis of a state-specific issue or issues that are
important to the country as a whole by observing which issues candidates campaigned on in
early states. While this is assumption seems quite plausible, it is natural to ask whether this
result will continue to hold if voters are imperfectly informed about the issues that voters
voted on in the early states. Although it is possible that the ordering of the states may
depend on the values of qj if voters are highly uninformed about the issues that candidates
campaigned on in earlier states, it is worth noting that the assumption that voters are
perfectly informed about the issues that voters voted on in early states is not necessary to
obtain this result. We now illustrate that as long as voters are sufficiently well-informed
about the issues that voters voted on in early states, then the optimal ordering of the states
continues to be independent of how representative the states are of the country as a whole.
  To illustrate this point, we consider an alternative model in which instead of voters in later
states directly observing whether voters in early states voted on the basis of a state-specific
issue, voters instead receive some noisy signal about which type of issue these voters voted

                                                19
on. In particular, for each state j, voters in other states observe a single public noisy signal
that is either equal to s or n. If the voters in state j voted on the basis of the state-specific
issue, then the signal is equal to s with probability r ∈ ( 21 , 1) and equal to n with probability
1 − r. And if these voters voted on the basis of the national issue, then the signal is equal
to n with probability r and s with probability 1 − r. In this environment, we prove the
following result:

Proposition 6. Suppose there is a unique optimal ordering of the states when voters directly
observe whether voters in other states voted on the basis of a state-specific issue. Then
generically this ordering of the states continues to be the unique optimal ordering of the
states if voters are sufficiently well-informed about whether voters in other states voted on
the basis of a state-specific issue in the sense that r is sufficiently close to 1.

  Thus our insight that the optimal ordering of the states does not depend on how represen-
tative the states are of the country as a whole in the sense that this ordering is independent
of the values of qj does not require the assumption that voters in later states can observe
which issues candidates campaigned on in earlier states. It is only necessary that these voters
are reasonably well-informed as to what issues came up when the earlier states voted in the
primary.



                         5. Endogenous Candidate Strategies

  In the previous sections we have assumed that changing the order of the states does not
affect the distribution of voter preferences in any particular state. This assumption might
seem questionable since candidates may wish to modify where they focus their campaign
resources if the order of these states is changed, and this may in turn change the distribution
of voter preferences. Thus we address the question of how allowing for endogenous candidate
strategies affects the main results of the paper in this section.
  Throughout this section we assume that by spending more money in a given state, a
candidate can increase the fraction of partisan supporters for that candidate in the state
                                                20
while simultaneously decreasing the fraction of neutrals by the same amount.17 In particular,
if candidate A wishes to increase the fraction of A-partisans in state Sj by aj , then candidate
A must spend some amount cj (aj ) in state Sj , where cj (a) is a strictly increasing function of
a satisfying cj (0) = 0. Similarly, if candidate B wishes to increase the fraction of B-partisans
in state Sj by bj , then candidate B must spend cj (bj ) in state Sj for the same function cj .
   Formally, the strategies for the candidates are as follows. Candidate A chooses an alloca-
                                                 P
tion a = (a1 , a2 , . . . , am ) ≥ 0 satisfying m  j=1 cj (aj ) = C while candidate B simultaneously
                                                                  P
chooses an allocation b = (b1 , b2 , . . . , bm ) ≥ 0 satisfying m  j=1 cj (bj ) = C, where C > 0 is the

budget available to a candidate. Each candidate’s objective is to maximize the probability
that he or she is elected. Throughout we assume that each candidate believes that he or she is
                                                             1
the higher quality candidate with probability φ =            2
                                                                 and that πjA is drawn from a distribution
with density fj that is symmetric about (1 − πjN )/2 in the sense that fj (x) = fj (1 − πjN − x)
for all x ∈ [0, 1 − πjN ].
  If candidate A chooses the allocation a = (a1 , a2 , . . . , am ), candidate B chooses the allo-
cation b = (b1 , b2 , . . . , bm ), and πjA is the original draw of the fraction of A-partisans in state
Sj from the distribution fj , then we assume that the fraction of A-partisans in state Sj is
π̃jA (πjA , aj , bj ), where π̃jA (πjA , aj , bj ) is πjA if aj ≤ bj , πjA + aj − bj if aj ∈ (bj , bj + πjN ], and
πjA + πjN if aj > bj + πjN . The fraction of B-partisans in state Sj is π̃jB (πjB , aj , bj ), where
π̃jB (πjB , aj , bj ) is πjB if bj ≤ aj , πjB + bj − aj if bj ∈ (aj , aj + πjN ], and πjB + πjN if bj > aj + πjN .
The fraction of neutral voters in state Sj is then just π̃jN = 1 − π̃jA − π̃jB . Voters then vote
sincerely after candidates choose their campaign strategies.
  Given these assumptions we obtain the following result:


Proposition 7. Suppose there exists a pure strategy equilibrium to the candidate budget
allocation game.18 Then the distribution of voter preferences in each state is the same as in
the original model without endogenous candidate strategies.

17The assumption that campaign spending is used to swing neutral voters is standard in the literature. For
example, Bombardini and Trebbi (2011) note that it is reasonable to model campaign spending as being
used to sway neutrals to support a particular candidate.
18One can show that such an equilibrium exists with the benefit of additional assumptions.
                                                       21
  The economic intuition for this result is as follows. While candidates may wish to change
how they allocate their resources to the various states if the order of the states is changed,
for any fixed order of the states, candidates are likely to have similar beliefs about which
states are the most important states to campaign in. For instance, candidates may always
think that the earliest states are the most important states and focus a disproportionate
percentage of their resources on early states.
  Thus we should expect that different candidates will follow similar resource allocation
strategies as one another regardless of the order of the states.19 But if different candidates
are allocating similar levels of resources to the various states, on average one would expect
candidates’ decisions about resource allocation to have little net effect on the total fraction
of voters in a state who prefer one candidate to the other. Thus the distribution of voter
preferences in each state should not be significantly affected by allowing for endogenous
candidate strategies.
  The proposition we have given is formally proven by showing that, under the conditions
given in this section, there is an equilibrium in which candidates use the same resource
allocation in each state. This result indicates that there are natural conditions under which
allowing for endogenous candidate strategies will not affect the optimal order of the states
given in the previous section. Since the distribution of voter preferences in each state remains
the same after allowing for endogenous candidate strategies, the optimal order of the states
also remains the same.



                                            6. Conclusion

  New Hampshire and Iowa’s position as the first primary and caucus in the presidential
election cycle clearly has an impact on which candidate gains the nomination, and their
position as small and not necessarily representative states has been sharply questioned.
Moreover, officials in larger states often express displeasure at the relatively minor influence
19There   is empirical evidence that candidates follow similar resource allocation strategies in presidential
primaries. For instance, Brams and Davis (1982) notes that presidential candidates in a given primary spent
similar levels of financial resources as one another in each state in the 1976 presidential primaries.
                                                     22
they hold by voting later in the process. For instance the acting Governor of New Jersey in
2005 put it thus: “No longer will New Jersey be an afterthought in selection of a candidate
for our nation’s highest office [...] No longer will candidates just court our wallets; now they
will court our votes.” (Chen, 2005). Indeed, perhaps the strongest evidence of dissatisfaction
is the constant race to be the earliest primary, as in the 2008 primary season.
  We have offered a model of presidential primaries which allows for bandwagon effects. We
provided conditions under which it is, in fact, optimal for states like Iowa and New Hampshire
to vote first, despite the fact that they may be “unrepresentative” compared with other more
populous states. Allowing small states to vote first has the benefit of enabling larger states to
observe the actions of smaller states and possibly make more accurate decisions as a result.
And Iowa and New Hampshire may also receive more accurate information about candidate
abilities since their small size affords closer contact with the candidates and their residents
have higher levels of education. This has the further benefit that there will be a greater
chance that early states will successfully reveal the identity of the superior candidate before
later states have to act.
  Our results about the nature of optimal primaries are surprisingly robust. They extend to
some settings where bad bandwagons might occur, to settings where one explicitly models the
possibility that voters in some states care about different issues than the rest of the country,
and to settings where the candidates may vary their allocations of campaign resources with
the order of the states. Nonetheless, a limitation of our analysis is that we have only
established the robustness result with the possibility of bad bandwagons in a two-state
setting. It would be desirable to extend this to an arbitrary number of states–a topic we
leave to future work.




                                               23
                                            Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1: First note that if (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N ≥ 21 , then the majority of
voters vote for the better candidate in each state, the better candidate wins with probability
                                                                                  1
1, and the result holds trivially. Thus we assume that (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N <        2
                                                                                      throughout this
proof.
  Suppose by means of contradiction that the ordering of the states that maximizes the
probability that the higher quality candidate is elected is some ordering S(1) , . . . , S(m) distinct
from the ordering described in the proposition. Then there are some states S(j) and S(j+1)
in this ordering such that λ(j+1) < λ(j) . We seek to show that the higher quality candidate
would be elected with greater probability if the order of states S(j) and S(j+1) were reversed.
  To do this, we show that if the state of the world is a, then reversing the order of states S(j)
and S(j+1) would increase the probability that candidate A is elected. A virtually identical
argument shows that if the state of the world is b, then reversing the order of states S(j) and
                                                                            A
S(j+1) would increase the probability that candidate B is elected. Letting π(j) denote the
fraction of A-partisans in the j th state to vote, we consider three cases:
                                      A
  Case 1: Suppose that the values of π(k) for k = 1, . . . , j − 1 are such that there is some
state S(k) with k < j for which the fraction of voters in state S(k) that votes for candidate
A is greater than 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N . Then all neutral voters in states S(k) with k ≥ j
vote the same way regardless of the order of states S(j) and S(j+1) , and reversing the order
of these two states has no effect on the probability with which candidate A is elected.
                                      A
  Case 2: Suppose that the values of π(k) for k = 1, . . . , j + 1 are such that there is no state
S(k) with k ≤ j + 1 for which the fraction of voters in state S(k) that votes for candidate A
is greater than 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N . Then all neutral voters in states S(k) with k ≥ j again
vote the same way regardless of the order of states S(j) and S(j+1) , and reversing the order
of these two states again has no effect on the probability with which candidate A is elected.
                                                                           A
  Case 3: If neither of the above possibilities holds, then the values of π(k) for k = 1, . . . , j +1
are such there is no state S(k) with k < j for which the fraction of voters in state S(k) that
votes for candidate A is greater than 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , and there is some state S(k) with
                                                 24
k = j or k = j + 1 for which the fraction of voters in state S(k) that votes for candidate
A is greater than 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N . We show that, conditional on the values of π(k)
                                                                                      A


for k = 1, . . . , j + 1 satisfying these conditions, the probability that A wins the election is
greater if the order of the states S(j) and S(j+1) is reversed. First we show this for the case
where the states allocate their delegates in direct proportion to the number of voters who
voted for each candidate.
                    A
  If the values of π(k) satisfy these conditions, then either the fraction of voters in state S(j)
that votes for candidate A is greater than 1−(p(1−κ)+κ)π N or the fraction of voters in state
S(j) that votes for candidate A is less than or equal to 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N and the fraction
of voters in state S(j+1) that votes for candidate A is greater than 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N .
Conditional on the fraction of voters in state S(j) that votes for candidate A being greater
than 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , the fraction of voters in state S(j) that votes for candidate A is
drawn from the uniform distribution on [1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , 1 − (1 − p)(1 − κ)π N ] and
the fraction of voters in state S(j+1) that votes for candidate A is drawn from the uniform
distribution on [π N , 1]. And conditional on the fraction of voters in state S(j) that votes for
candidate A being less than or equal to 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N and the fraction of voters in
state S(j+1) that votes for candidate A being greater than 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , the fraction
of voters in state S(j) that votes for candidate A is drawn from the uniform distribution on
[(p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N ] and the fraction of voters in state S(j+1) that votes
for candidate A is drawn from the uniform distribution on [1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , 1 − (1 −
p)(1 − κ)π N ].
                                   A                                                            1−π N
  In particular, if the values of π(k) satisfy these conditions, then with probability   2−(1+2(p(1−κ)+κ))π N
                                                                                                              ,
the fraction of voters in state S(j) that votes for candidate A is drawn from the uniform dis-
tribution on [1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , 1 − (1 − p)(1 − κ)π N ] and the fraction of voters in state
S(j+1) that votes for candidate A is drawn from the uniform distribution on [π N , 1]. And with
                1−2(p(1−κ)+κ)π N
probability   2−(1+2(p(1−κ)+κ))π N
                                   ,   the fraction of voters in state S(j) that votes for candidate
A is drawn from the uniform distribution on [(p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N ] and



                                                    25
the fraction of voters in state S(j+1) that votes for candidate A is drawn from the uniform
distribution on [1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , 1 − (1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ))π N ].
  Now note that if π N ≥ 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , then the uniform distribution on [π N , 1]
strictly first order stochastically dominates the uniform distribution on [1 − (p(1 − κ) +
κ)π N , 1 − (1 − p)(1 − κ)π N ], and the uniform distribution on [1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , 1 −
(1 − p)(1 − κ)π N ] strictly first order stochastically dominates the uniform distribution on
[(p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N ]. Thus if π N ≥ 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N and we reverse
the order of the states S(j) and S(j+1) by allowing the smaller state to vote before the larger
state, then the resulting distribution of the total fraction of voters in states S(j) and S(j+1)
that votes for A strictly first order stochastically dominates the original distribution of the
fraction of voters in states S(j) and S(j+1) that votes for A.
  Now suppose that π N < 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N . Rewriting the distribution of the fraction
                                                                                  A
of voters in state S(j) that votes for candidate A, we see that if the values of π(k) satisfy
                                                           1−(1+p(1−κ)+κ)π N
the conditions in Case 3, then with probability           2−(1+2(p(1−κ)+κ))π N
                                                                               ,   the fraction of voters in
state S(j) that votes for candidate A is drawn from the uniform distribution on [1 − (p(1 −
κ) + κ)π N , 1 − (1 − p)(1 − κ)π N ] and the fraction of voters in state S(j+1) that votes for
candidate A is drawn from the uniform distribution on [π N , 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N ]. With
                  (p(1−κ)+κ)π N
probability   2−(1+2(p(1−κ)+κ))π N
                                   ,   the fraction of voters in state S(j) that votes for candidate A
is drawn from the uniform distribution on [1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , 1 − (1 − p)(1 − κ)π N ] and
the fraction of voters in state S(j+1) that votes for candidate A is drawn from the uniform
                                                                         (1−(p(1−κ)+κ))π N
distribution on [1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , 1]. With probability           2−(1+2(p(1−κ)+κ))π N
                                                                                             ,   the fraction
of voters in state S(j) that votes for candidate A is drawn from the uniform distribution on
[(p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , π N ] and the fraction of voters in state S(j+1) that votes for candidate A is
drawn from the uniform distribution on [1 −(p(1−κ)+κ)π N , 1−(1−p)(1−κ)π N ]. And with
               1−(1+p(1−κ)+κ)π N
probability   2−(1+2(p(1−κ)+κ))π N
                                   ,   the fraction of voters in state S(j) that votes for candidate
A is drawn from the uniform distribution on [π N , 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N ] and the fraction of
voters in state S(j+1) that votes for candidate A is drawn from the uniform distribution on
[1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , 1 − (1 − p)(1 − κ)π N ].

                                                     26
  Note that it is equally likely that the fraction of voters in state S(j) that votes for candidate
A is drawn from the uniform distribution on [1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , 1 − (1 − p)(1 − κ)π N ] and
the fraction of voters in state S(j+1) that votes for candidate A is drawn from the uniform
distribution on [π N , 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N ] as it is that the fraction of voters in state S(j) that
votes for candidate A is drawn from the uniform distribution on [π N , 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N ]
and the fraction of voters in state S(j+1) that votes for candidate A is drawn from the uniform
distribution on [1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , 1 − (1 − p)(1 − κ)π N ]. Thus the order of states S(j)
and S(j+1) cannot affect the overall distribution of the total fraction of voters that votes for
candidate A in states S(j) and S(j+1) that arises from these circumstances.
  Thus the only two ways the order of the states can matter is if the fraction of voters in
state S(j) that votes for candidate A is drawn from the uniform distribution on [1−(p(1−κ)+
κ)π N , 1 − (1 − p)(1 − κ)π N ] and the fraction of voters in state S(j+1) that votes for candidate
A is drawn from the uniform distribution on [1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , 1] or if the fraction of
voters in state S(j) that votes for candidate A is drawn from the uniform distribution on
[(p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , π N ] and the fraction of voters in state S(j+1) that votes for candidate A
is drawn from the uniform distribution on [1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , 1 − (1 − p)(1 − κ)π N ].
  Now the uniform distribution on [1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , 1] strictly first order stochastically
dominates the uniform distribution on [1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , 1 − (1 − p)(1 − κ)π N ]. And
the uniform distribution on [1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , 1 − (1 − p)(1 − κ)π N ] strictly first order
stochastically dominates the uniform distribution on [(p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , π N ]. Thus in either
of the two circumstances in the previous paragraph, if we reverse the order of the states S(j)
and S(j+1) by allowing the smaller state to vote before the larger state, then the resulting
distribution of the total fraction of voters in states S(j) and S(j+1) that votes for A strictly
first order stochastically dominates the original distribution of the fraction of voters in states
S(j) and S(j+1) that votes for A.
  Thus regardless of whether π N > 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , if we make this change to the order
in which states S(j) and S(j+1) vote, then the distribution of the total fraction of voters in
the population that votes for candidate A strictly first order stochastically dominates the

                                                 27
distribution of the total fraction of voters in the population that votes for candidate A under
the original order. From this it follows that reversing the order in which states S(j) and
S(j+1) vote increases the probability that candidate A is elected if the states allocate their
delegates in direct proportion to the number of votes the candidates received.
  Now we show that reversing the order in which states S(j) and S(j+1) vote increases the
probability that candidate A is elected if the states allocate all of their delegates to the
candidate who received the most votes in each state. To see this, recall that if the values
    A
of π(k) satisfy the conditions in Case 3, then either the fraction of voters in state S(j) that
votes for candidate A is greater than 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N or the fraction of voters in state
S(j) that votes for candidate A is less than or equal to 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N and the fraction
of voters in state S(j+1) that votes for candidate A is greater than 1 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N .
In the first of these scenarios, a bandwagon begins in state S(j) , states S(j) and S(j+1) both
allocate all of their delegates to candidate A, and the order of these states does not affect
the number of delegates that candidate A receives in these states. In the second of these
scenarios, a bandwagon begins in state S(j+1) , so the j + 1th state allocates all of its delegates
to candidate A, but the j th state might not allocate its delegates to candidate A. In this
scenario, candidate A receives at least as many delegates in these states if the order of the
states S(j) and S(j+1) is reversed.
  But in either scenario, reversing the order in which states S(j) and S(j+1) vote increases
the probability that candidate A is elected. Thus regardless of how the states allocate their
delegates, ordering the states from smallest to largest maximizes the probability that the
higher quality candidate wins the election. ¤



                                                                               1
Proof of Proposition 2: First note that if (pj (1 − κj ) + κj )π N ≥           2
                                                                                   for the state Sj
with the largest value of pj and this state votes first, then the majority of voters vote for
the better candidate in the first state, voters in later states learn which candidate is the
better candidate from the results of the first state, the majority of voters vote for the better
candidate in all future states, and the better candidate wins with probability 1. Thus if
                                                28
                            1
(pj (1 − κj ) + κj )π N ≥   2
                                for the state Sj with the largest value of pj , then the better
candidate wins with probability 1 if the states are ordered as stated in the proposition and
                                                                     1
the result holds. Thus we assume that (pj (1 − κj ) + κj )π N <      2
                                                                         for all states Sj throughout
this proof.
  Suppose by means of contradiction that the ordering of the states that maximizes the
probability that the higher quality candidate is elected is some ordering S(1) , . . . , S(m) distinct
from the ordering described in the proposition. Then there are some states S(j) and S(j+1)
in this ordering such that p(j+1) > p(j) . We seek to show that the higher quality candidate
would be elected with greater probability if the order of states S(j) and S(j+1) were reversed.
  To do this, we show that if the state of the world is a, then reversing the order of states S(j)
and S(j+1) would increase the probability that candidate A is elected. A virtually identical
argument shows that if the state of the world is b, then reversing the order of states S(j) and
                                                                            A
S(j+1) would increase the probability that candidate B is elected. Letting π(j) denote the
fraction of A-partisans in the j th state to vote, we consider two cases:
                                      A
  Case 1: Suppose that the values of π(k) for k = 1, . . . , j − 1 are such that there is some
state S(k) with k < j for which the fraction of voters in state S(k) that votes for candidate A
is greater than 1 − (p(k) (1 − κ(k) ) + κ(k) )π N . Then all neutral voters in states S(k) with k ≥ j
vote the same way regardless of the order of states S(j) and S(j+1) , and reversing the order
of these two states has no effect on the probability with which candidate A is elected.
                                                                                A
  Case 2: Suppose that the above possibility does not hold. Then the values of π(k) for
k = 1, . . . , j − 1 are such that there is no state S(k) with k < j for which the fraction of
voters in state S(k) that votes for candidate A is greater than 1 − (p(k) (1 − κ(k) )+ κ(k) )π N . We
                                         A
show that, conditional on the values of π(k) for k = 1, . . . , j − 1 satisfying these conditions,
the probability that A wins the election is strictly greater if the order of states S(j) and S(j+1)
is reversed.
  Note that reversing the order of states S(j) and S(j+1) never affects the distribution of
votes in the states S(k) with k > j + 1, so to illustrate that reversing the order of states
S(j) and S(j+1) increases the probability of electing candidate A, it suffices to show that the

                                                 29
distribution of the total number of delegates in states S(j) and S(j+1) for candidate A when the
order of these states is reversed strictly first order stochastically dominates the distribution
of the total number of delegates for candidate A in these states under the original order.
First we prove this when states allocate their delegates in direct proportion to the number
of voters who voted for the candidates in each state.
                                 A
  To see this, note that if 0 ≤ π(j) ≤ 1 − 2(p(j+1) (1 − κ(j+1) ) + κ(j+1) )π N , then neutral voters
in the j th and j + 1th states vote according to their private signals regardless of the order
                                   A
in which states vote. Thus if 0 ≤ π(j) ≤ 1 − 2(p(j+1) (1 − κ(j+1) ) + κ(j+1) )π N , then the total
                                                                A
number of voters who vote for A in states S(j) and S(j+1) is λ{π(j) + (p(j) (1 − κ(j) ) + κ(j) )π N +
 A
π(j+1) + (p(j+1) (1 − κ(j+1) ) + κ(j+1) )π N } regardless of the order in which states S(j) and S(j+1)
vote, and the order in which states S(j) and S(j+1) vote has no effect on the probability with
which the candidates are elected.
  If 1 − 2(p(j+1) (1 − κ(j+1) ) + κ(j+1) )π N < π(j)
                                                 A
                                                     ≤ 1 − 2(p(j) (1 − κ(j) ) + κ(j) )π N , then neutral
voters in the j + 1th state to vote vote according to their private signals if the order states
S(j) and S(j+1) is not reversed, but vote for candidate A if the order of the states is reversed.
Thus if 1 − 2(p(j+1) (1 − κ(j+1) ) + κ(j+1) )π N < π(j)
                                                    A
                                                        ≤ 1 − 2(p(j) (1 − κ(j) ) + κ(j) )π N , then the
                                                                      A
total number of voters who vote for A in states S(j) and S(j+1) is λ{π(j) + (p(j) (1 − κ(j) ) +
κ(j) )π N + π(j+1)
             A
                   + (p(j+1) (1 − κ(j+1) ) + κ(j+1) )π N } if the order of the states is not reversed and
   A
λ{π(j) + (p(j+1) (1 − κ(j+1) ) + κ(j+1) )π N + π(j+1)
                                                A
                                                      + π N } if the order of the states is reversed.
Thus if 1 − 2(p(j+1) (1 − κ(j+1) ) + κ(j+1) )π N < π(j)
                                                    A
                                                        ≤ 1 − 2(p(j) (1 − κ(j) ) + κ(j) )π N , then
candidate A receives a strictly larger number of votes if the order of the states is reversed.
          A
  And if π(j) > 1 − 2(p(j) (1 − κ(j) ) + κ(j) )π N , then neutral voters in the j + 1th state to vote
vote for candidate A regardless of the order in which states S(j) and S(j+1) vote. Thus if
 A
π(j) > 1 − 2(p(j) (1 − κ(j) ) + κ(j) )π N , then the total number of voters who vote for candidate
                                  A
A in states S(j) and S(j+1) is λ{π(j) + (p(j) (1 − κ(j) ) + κ(j) )π N + π(j+1)
                                                                         A
                                                                               + π N } if the order of
                                  A
the states is not reversed and λ{π(j) + (p(j+1) (1 − κ(j+1) ) + κ(j+1) )π N + π(j+1)
                                                                               A
                                                                                     + π N } if the
                                          A
order of the states is reversed. Thus if π(j) > 1 − 2(p(j) (1 − κ(j) ) + κ(j) )π N , then candidate
A receives a strictly larger number of votes if the order of the states is reversed.

                                                   30
  In any of these cases, the total number of voters who vote for A is at least as large and
sometimes strictly larger if the order of states S(j) and S(j+1) is reversed. But this means that
if we make this change to the order in which states S(j) and S(j+1) vote, then the distribution
of the total fraction of voters in the population that votes for candidate A strictly first order
stochastically dominates the distribution of the total fraction of voters in the population that
votes for candidate A under the original order. From this it follows that reversing the order
in which states S(j) and S(j+1) vote increases the probability that candidate A is elected
if delegates are allocated in direct proportion to the number of voters who voted for the
candidates in each state.
  Now we show that reversing the order in which states S(j) and S(j+1) vote increases the
probability that candidate A is elected if each state allocates all of its delegates to the can-
didate who received the most votes in that state. To see this, first note that the probability
a bandwagon begins for candidate A if voters are voting according to their private signals
is greater in state S(j+1) than in state S(j) . Also note that the probability that state S(j)
would not allocate its delegates to candidate A is greater than the probability that state
S(j+1) would not allocate its delegates to candidate A if neutral voters vote according to
their private signals.
  Combining the facts in the previous paragraph shows that reversing the order in which
states S(j) and S(j+1) vote both increases the probability that there will be a bandwagon for
candidate A in the j th state to vote and also increases the probability that this will change
whether the j + 1th state to vote allocates its delegates to candidate A. Thus reversing the
order in which states S(j) and S(j+1) vote increases the probability that both of these states
will allocate all of their delegates to candidate A.
  At the same time, note that states S(j) and S(j+1) will allocate all of their delegates
                                               1                   1
to candidate B if and only if y(j) ≤           2
                                                   and y(j+1) ≤    2
                                                                     .   This happens with probability
F ( 21 − (p(j) (1 − κ(j) ) + κ(j) )π N )F ( 21 − (p(j+1) (1 − κ(j+1) ) + κ(j+1) )π N ) regardless of the order
of states S(j) and S(j+1) , where F denotes the cumulative distribution function satisfying
F = Fj for all j. Thus having the state with the more accurate private signals vote first

                                                     31
does not affect the probability that both of these states will allocate all of their delegates to
candidate B and it makes it more likely that both of these states will allocate all of their
delegates to candidate A. This implies that reversing the order in which states S(j) and
S(j+1) vote increases the probability that candidate A is elected if states allocate all of their
delegates to the candidate who received the most votes in that state. ¤




Proof of Proposition 3: Since δ < max{((2p − 1)(1 − κ) + κ)π N , 21 − (p + (1 − p)κ)π N }, it
follows that if y(1) −(p(1−κ)+κ)π N ∈ [0, δ], then y(1) −(1−p)(1−κ)π N ∈ [δ, 1−π N −δ] and if
y(1) −(1−p)(1−κ)π N ∈ [1−π N −δ, 1−π N ], then y(1) −(p(1−κ)+κ)π N ∈ [δ, 1−π N −δ]. From
the assumptions on f (x) we know that φ(2) < 1 − p if and only if y(1) − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N < δ
and y(1) −(1−p)(1−κ)π N ∈ [δ, 1−π N −δ] or y(1) −(p(1−κ)+κ)π N < 0. Combining this with
the first result in this proof indicates that φ(2) < 1−p if and only if y(1) −(p(1−κ)+κ)π N < δ
or y(1) < δ + (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N .
  Similarly, from the assumptions on f (x) we know that φ(2) > p if and only if either
y(1) − (1 − p)(1 − κ)π N > 1 − π N − δ and y(1) − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N ∈ [δ, 1 − π N − δ] or
y(1) − (1 − p)(1 − κ)π N > 1 − π N . Combining this with the first result in this proof indicates
that φ(2) > p if and only if y(1) −(1−p)(1−κ)π N > 1−π N −δ or y(1) > 1−δ−(p(1−κ)+κ)π N .
                                                         A
  Now suppose the state of the world is a. In this case π(1) = y(1) − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N .
Combining this with the results in the previous two paragraphs shows that φ(2) < 1 − p if
             A                                    A
and only if π(1) < δ and φ(2) > p if and only if π(1) > 1 − δ − 2(p(1 − κ) + κ)π N . Thus
                                                                                   A
imperfectly informed neutral voters in the second state vote for B if and only if π(1) < δ,
                                                                                   A
imperfectly informed neutral voters in the second state vote for A if and only if π(1) >
1 − δ − 2(p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , and all neutral voters vote according to their private signals if
                 A
and only if δ ≤ π(1) ≤ 1 − δ − 2(p(1 − κ) + κ)π N .
                A
  Note that if π(1) < δ and all imperfectly informed neutral voters in the second state vote
for B, then the majority of voters in both states vote for B, and B is elected regardless of
                                 A
the order of the states. And if π(1) > 1 − δ − 2(p(1 − κ) + κ)π N and all imperfectly informed
neutral voters in the second state vote for A, then the majority of voters in both states vote
                                               32
for A, and A is elected regardless of the order of the states. Thus the only way the order of
                                                            A
the states can affect which candidate is elected is if δ ≤ π(1) ≤ 1 − δ − 2(p(1 − κ) + κ)π N .
We first show that when the states allocate their votes in direct proportion to the number
of votes each candidate received, then candidate A is elected with greater probability when
     A
δ ≤ π(1) ≤ 1 − δ − 2(p(1 − κ) + κ)π N if the small state votes first.
           A
   If δ ≤ π(1) ≤ 1 − δ − 2(p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , then the total number of voters who vote for A is
       A
λ(1) (π(1) +(p(1−κ)+κ)π N )+λ(2) (π(2)
                                   A
                                       +(p(1−κ)+κ)π N ). Thus candidate A wins the election
                      A
if and only if λ(1) (π(1) + (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N ) + λ(2) (π(2)
                                                         A
                                                             + (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N ) ≥ 21 (λ(1) + λ(2) ) or
                                                                                            λ(1)
       A
λ(1) (π(1) +(p(1−κ)+κ)π N − 21 )+λ(2) (π(2)
                                        A
                                            +(p(1−κ)+κ)π N − 21 ) ≥ 0 or                    λ(2)
                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                 (π(1) +(p(1−κ)+
                                                                                             λ
κ)π N − 21 )+π(2)
              A
                  +(p(1−κ)+κ)π N − 21 ≥ 0 or π(2)
                                              A
                                                  ≥ 21 −(p(1−κ)+κ)π N − λ(2)
                                                                         (1)   A
                                                                             (π(1) +(p(1−κ)+
κ)π N − 21 ). So for a fixed π(1)
                              A                   A
                                  satisfying δ ≤ π(1) ≤ 1−δ −2(p(1−κ)+κ)π N , candidate A wins
                                                                            λ
the election with probability 1 − F ( 21 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N − λ(2)
                                                                (1)   A
                                                                    (π(1) + (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N − 21 )),
where I let F denote the cumulative distribution function satisfying F = F1 = F2 .
                                            A
   From this it follows that if δ ≤ π(1)       ≤ 1 − δ − 2(p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , then candidate A wins the
                                R 1−δ−2(p(1−κ)+κ)πN                                  λ(1)
election with probability δ                         [1−F ( 21 −(p(1−κ)+κ)π N − λ(2)         A
                                                                                          (π(1) +(p(1−κ)+
                                                                             R 1
                                                                                 −δ−(p(1−κ)+κ)π N
κ)π N − 21 ))]f (π(1)
                  A       A
                      ) dπ(1)             A
                              /P r(δ ≤ π(1)   ≤ 1−δ−2(p(1−κ)+κ)π N ) = δ+(p(1−κ)+κ)π
                                                                               2                           1
                                                                                              N − 1 [1−F ( 2 −
                                                                                                        2
                      λ
(p(1−κ)+κ)π N − λ(2)
                 (1)
                     x)]f ( 21 −(p(1−κ)+κ)π N +x) dx/P r(δ ≤ π(1)
                                                              A
                                                                  ≤ 1−δ−2(p(1−κ)+κ)π N ).
Now assume without loss of generality that λ1 = min{λ1 , λ2 } and λ2 = max{λ1 , λ2 }. These
expressions indicate that candidate A wins with greater probability when the small state
                             R 21 −δ−(p(1−κ)+κ)πN
votes first if and only if δ+(p(1−κ)+κ)π                1
                                              N − 1 F ( 2 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π
                                                                            N
                                                                              − λλ21 x)f ( 21 − (p(1 − κ) +
                                                  2
                 R 21 −δ−(p(1−κ)+κ)πN
κ)π +x) dx ≤ δ+(p(1−κ)+κ)πN − 1 F ( 2 −(p(1−κ)+κ)π N − λλ12 x)f ( 21 −(p(1−κ)+κ)π N +x) dx.
   N                                        1
                                          2

And since f (x) is constant for all x ∈ [δ, 1 − π N − δ], it follows that candidate A wins with
                                                                                       R 21 −δ−(p(1−κ)+κ)πN         1
greater probability when the small state votes first if and only if δ+(p(1−κ)+κ)π                         N−1 F (2 −
                                                                                                               2
                                      R 21 −δ−(p(1−κ)+κ)πN
(p(1 − κ) + κ)π N − λλ21 x) dx ≤ δ+(p(1−κ)+κ)π                    1
                                                        N − 1 F ( 2 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π
                                                                                            N
                                                                                                − λλ12 x) dx.
                                                            2
        R 21 −δ−(p(1−κ)+κ)πN                                                    R 1 −δ−(p(1−κ)+κ)πN
  Now δ+(p(1−κ)+κ)π                1
                         N − 1 F ( 2 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π
                                                            N
                                                              − λλ21 x) dx = 02                         F ( 21 − (p(1 −
                              2
                                                                         R 21 −δ−(p(1−κ)+κ)πN
κ) + κ)π N − λλ21 x) + F ( 21 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N + λλ21 x) dx and δ+(p(1−κ)+κ)π                      1
                                                                                           N − 1 F ( 2 − (p(1 − κ) +
                                                                                               2
                      R 1 −δ−(p(1−κ)+κ)πN
κ)π N − λλ12 x) dx = 02                      F ( 21 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N − λλ12 x) + F ( 21 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N +
λ2
λ1
   x)   dx. And    d
                  du
                     [F ( 21   − pπ N − u) + F ( 21 − pπ N + u)] = [f ( 21 − pπ N + u) − f ( 21 − pπ N − u)] ≥ 0

                                                          33
                                                                          1−π N       1
since f (x) is symmetric and weakly single-peaked about x =                 2
                                                                                  ≥   2
                                                                                          − pπ N . Thus since
λ2 > λ1 , F ( 21 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N − λλ12 x) + F ( 21 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N + λλ12 x) is at least as large as
F ( 21 −(p(1−κ)+κ)π N − λλ21 x)+F ( 21 −(p(1−κ)+κ)π N + λλ21 x) for any given x > 0. From this it
               R 1 −δ−(p(1−κ)+κ)πN
follows that 02                     F ( 21 −(p(1−κ)+κ)π N − λλ21 x)+F ( 21 −(p(1−κ)+κ)π N + λλ21 x) dx ≤
R 1 −δ−(p(1−κ)+κ)πN
 0
   2
                      F ( 21 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N − λλ12 x) + F ( 21 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N + λλ12 x) dx and
R 12 −δ−(p(1−κ)+κ)πN      1                         λ1
                                                                  R 21 −δ−(p(1−κ)+κ)πN
 δ+(p(1−κ)+κ)π −N   1 F ( 2 − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π
                                                N
                                                  − λ 2
                                                        x) dx ≤     δ+(p(1−κ)+κ)π N − 1
                                                                                        F ( 21 − (p(1 − κ) +
                   2                                                                  2
    N    λ2
κ)π −    λ1
            x)   dx.
                 A
  Thus when δ ≤ π(1) ≤ 1 − δ − 2(p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , candidate A wins with greater probability
when the small state votes first if the states allocate their delegates in direct proportion to
the number of votes each candidate received. We now show that when the states allocate all
of their delegates to the candidate who received the most votes in the state, then candidate
                                                A
A is elected with greater probability when δ ≤ π(1) ≤ 1 − δ − 2(p(1 − κ) + κ)π N if the small
state votes first.
  To see this, note that if each state allocates all of its delegates to the candidate who
receives the most votes in the state, then candidate A wins the election if and only if the
majority of voters in the large state vote for candidate A. Now if the large state votes first,
then the probability that the majority of voters in the large state votes for candidate A,
                    A
conditional on δ ≤ π(1) ≤ 1 − δ − 2(p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , is equal to the probability that the
majority of voters in the large state votes for candidate A, conditional on δ + (p(1 − κ) +
κ)π N ≤ y(1)
         A
             ≤ 1 − δ − (p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , or 21 . But if the large state votes second, then the
probability that the majority of voters in the large state votes for candidate A, conditional
        A
on δ ≤ π(1) ≤ 1 − δ − 2(p(1 − κ) + κ)π N , is just the unconditional probability that the
majority of voters in the large state votes for candidate A, which is greater than 21 .
  Thus candidate A wins with greater probability under this scenario when the small state
votes first if the states allocate all of their delegates to the candidate who received the most
votes in the state, and the probability that A is elected is always maximized by having the
small state vote first. A similar argument shows that if the state of the world is b, then
candidate B wins with greater probability when the small state votes first. From this it

                                                     34
follows that the better candidate wins with greater probability when the smaller state votes
first. ¤



Proof of Proposition 4: Since δ < max{((2pj − 1)(1 − κ) + κ)π N , 21 − (pj + (1 − pj )κ)π N }
for j = 1 and 2, it follows that if yj − (pj (1 − κ) + κ)π N ∈ [0, δ], then yj − (1 − pj )(1 − κ)π N ∈
[δ, 1 − π N − δ] and if yj − (1 − pj )(1 − κ)π N ∈ [1 − π N − δ, 1 − π N ], then yj − (pj (1 − κ) +
κ)π N ∈ [δ, 1 − π N − δ]. From the assumptions on f (x) we know that φ(2) < 1 − p(2) if and
only if y(1) − (p(1) (1 − κ) + κ)π N < δ and y(1) − (1 − p(1) )(1 − κ)π N ∈ [δ, 1 − π N − δ] or
y(1) − (p(1) (1 − κ) + κ)π N < 0. Combining this with the first result in this proof indicates that
φ(2) < 1 − p(2) if and only if y(1) − (p(1) (1 − κ) + κ)π N < δ or y(1) < δ + (p(1) (1 − κ) + κ)π N .
  Similarly, from the assumptions on f (x) we know that φ(2) > p(2) if and only if either
y(1) − (1 − p(1) )(1 − κ)π N > 1 − π N − δ and y(1) − (p(1) (1 − κ) + κ)π N ∈ [δ, 1 − π N − δ]
or y(1) − (1 − p(1) )(1 − κ)π N > 1 − π N . Combining this with the first result in this proof
indicates that φ(2) > p(2) if and only if y(1) − (1 − p(1) )(1 − κ)π N > 1 − π N − δ or y(1) >
1 − δ − (p(1) (1 − κ) + κ)π N .
                                                              A
  Now suppose that the state of the world is a. In this case π(1) = y(1) − (p(1) (1 − κ) + κ)π N .
Combining this with the results in the previous two paragraphs shows that φ(2) < 1 − p(2)
                A                                       A
if and only if π(1) < δ and φ(2) > p(2) if and only if π(1) > 1 − δ − 2(p(1) (1 − κ) + κ)π N .
Thus all imperfectly informed neutral voters in the second state vote for B if and only if
 A
π(1) < δ, all imperfectly informed neutral voters in the second state vote for A if and only
    A
if π(1) > 1 − δ − 2(p(1) (1 − κ) + κ)π N , and all neutral voters vote according to their private
                            A
signals if and only if δ ≤ π(1) ≤ 1 − δ − 2(p(1) (1 − κ) + κ)π N .
                                A
  From this it follows that if π(1) < δ, then the total number of voters who vote for A is
   A
λ(π(1) + (p(1) (1 − κ) + κ)π N + π(2)
                                  A
                                      + κπ N ). If δ ≤ π(1)
                                                        A
                                                            ≤ 1 − δ − 2 max{p(1) (1 − κ) + κ, p(2) (1 −
κ) + κ}π N , then the total number of voters who vote for A is λ(π(1)
                                                                  A
                                                                      + (p(1) (1 − κ) + κ)π N +
 A
π(2) + (p(2) (1 − κ) + κ)π N ). If 1 − δ − 2 max{p(1) (1 − κ) + κ, p(2) (1 − κ) + κ}π N < π(1)
                                                                                           A
                                                                                               ≤
1 − δ − 2 min{p(1) (1 − κ) + κ, p(2) (1 − κ) + κ}π N , then the total number of voters who vote for
        A
A is λ(π(1) + (p(1) (1 − κ) + κ)π N + π(2)
                                       A
                                           + (p(2) (1 − κ) + κ)π N ) if p(1) < p(2) and λ(π(1)
                                                                                           A
                                                                                               + (p(1) (1 −
                                                    35
κ)+κ)π N +π(2)
           A
               +π N ) otherwise. And if π(1)
                                         A
                                             > 1−δ −2 min{p(1) (1−κ)+κ, p(2) (1−κ)+κ}π N ,
                                                     A
then the total number of voters who vote for A is λ(π(1) + (p(1) (1 − κ) + κ)π N + π(2)
                                                                                    A
                                                                                        + π N ).
  But in any of these cases, the total number of voters who vote for A is at least as large if
the state with the more accurate private signals votes first. Thus when states allocate their
delegates in direct proportion to the number of voters who voted for the candidates, the
probability that A is elected is maximized when the state with the more accurate private
signals votes first.
  Now we show that if each state allocates all of its delegates to the candidate who received
the most votes in that state, then the probability that A is elected is maximized when
the state with the more accurate private signal votes first. To see this, first note that the
probability that a bandwagon begins for candidate A if voters are voting according to their
private signals is greater if the state with the more accurate private signals votes first. Also
note that the probability that a state would not allocate its delegates to candidate A if
neutral voters vote according to their private signals is greater when the voters in the state
have less accurate private information.
  Combining the facts in the previous paragraph shows that when the state with the more
accurate private information votes first, there is a greater probability that there will be a
bandwagon for candidate A in the first state, and there is also a greater probability that
this bandwagon will cause the second state to change from allocating all of its delegates to
candidate B to allocating all of its delegates to candidate A. Thus having the state with the
more accurate private signals vote first makes it more likely that both states will allocate all
of their delegates to candidate A.
  At the same time, note that both states will allocate all of their delegates to candidate B if
                    A
and only if either π(1)             A
                        < δ or δ ≤ π(1) ≤ 21 −(p(1) (1−κ)+κ)π N and π(2)
                                                                     A
                                                                         ≤ 21 −(p(2) (1−κ)+κ)π N .
This happens with probability F (δ) + [F ( 21 − (p(1) (1 − κ) + κ)π N ) − F (δ)]F ( 21 − (p(2) (1 − κ) +
κ)π N ) = F ( 21 − (p(1) (1 − κ) + κ)π N )F ( 21 − (p(2) (1 − κ) + κ)π N ) + F (δ)[1 − F ( 21 − (p(2) (1 − κ) +
κ)π N )], where F denotes the cumulative distribution function satisfying F = F1 = F2 . This
probability is smaller when the state with the more accurate private signals votes first. Thus

                                                      36
having the state with the more accurate private signals vote first makes it less likely that
both states will allocate all of their delegates to candidate B, and having the state with the
more accurate private signals vote first increases the probability that candidate A is elected.
  These results show that when the state of the world is a, then either method for allocating
delegates increases the probability that candidate A is elected. A similar argument shows
that if the state of the world is b, then the probability that B is elected is maximized when
the state with the more accurate private signals votes first. Thus the probability that the
better candidate is elected is maximized when the state with the more accurate private
signals votes first. ¤


Proof of Proposition 5: Note that if state j cares about the state-specific issue, then the
order in which this state votes never has any effect on the outcome of the election. If this
state votes after some states, then none of the voters in this state will condition their votes
on the results of earlier states because the results of the earlier states contain no information
about which candidate is better for the state-specific issue that is important to state j.
And if this state votes before other states, then none of the voters in these later states will
condition their votes on the results of the election in state j because the results in state j
contain no information about which candidate is better either for the state-specific issues
that are important to these later states or the national issue.
  From this it follows that in deciding the order in which state j should vote, one can assume
without loss of generality that state j cares about the national issue. And since this holds
for all states, it then follows that in deciding on the optimal ordering of the states, one can
assume without loss of generality that all states care about the national issue. From this
it follows that the optimal ordering of the states is independent of the values of qj for the
different states. ¤


Proof of Proposition 6: Consider a fixed ordering of the states. In the limit as r becomes
arbitrarily close to 1, the probability that all voters receive signals that correctly indicate
whether voters in early states voted on the basis of the state-specific issue or the national
                                               37
issue also becomes arbitrarily close to 1. In these cases, there will be at most an arbitrarily
small difference between the probability that voters in later states assign to the probability
that candidate A is the stronger candidate for the national issue and the probability these
voters would assign to the probability that candidate A is the stronger candidate for the
national issue if voters could observe whether voters in early states voted on the basis of
state-specific issues with precision. Generically, the probability that this will affect which
candidates voters vote for in the election is also arbitrarily small, so the difference between the
probability that the higher quality candidate wins the election when all voters are perfectly
informed as to which issues voters voted on in early states and the probability that the higher
quality candidate wins the election when all voters receive imperfectly informative signals
for values of r arbitrarily close to 1 is arbitrarily small.
  But if the difference between the probability that the higher quality candidate wins the
election under these two circumstances becomes arbitrarily small in the limit as r becomes
arbitrarily close to 1 and there is a unique optimal ordering of the states when voters directly
observe whether voters in other states voted on the basis of a state-specific issue, then it must
be the case that this ordering of the states continues to be the unique optimal ordering of
the states if voters are sufficiently well-informed about whether voters in other states voted
on the basis of a state-specific issue. The result then follows. ¤




Proof of Proposition 7: Note that the candidate budget allocation game is a strictly
competitive game because a candidate can only increase his or her probability of winning
the election by decreasing the other candidate’s probability of winning the election. Thus by
von Neumann (1928), we know that strategies for the candidates are equilibrium strategies
if and only if each candidate is using a minimax strategy or a strategy which minimizes the
maximum payoff the opposing candidate can obtain against the original candidate’s strategy.
  From this it follows that if there is a pure strategy equilibrium in which candidate A uses
the allocation a∗ , then a∗ is a minimax strategy for candidate A. Thus if P r(A wins|(σA , σB ))
                                                38
denotes the probability with which candidate A believes he will win the election when candi-
date A uses the strategy σA and candidate B uses the strategy σB , then σA = a∗ maximizes
the value of minσB P r(A wins|(σA , σB )).
  Now if P r(B wins|(σA , σB )) denotes the probability with which candidate B believes he
will win the election when candidate A uses the strategy σA and candidate B uses the strategy
σB , then P r(B wins|(σB , σA )) = P r(A wins|(σA , σB )). To see this, note that it is equally
likely that the fraction of A-partisans in state Sj before the candidates campaign is some
fraction πj as it is that the fraction of B-partisans in state Sj before the candidates campaign
is πj . Thus it is equally likely that the fractions of A and B-partisans in state Sj after the
candidates campaign are π̃jA and π̃jB respectively if candidate A chooses a = (a1 , a2 , . . . , am )
and candidate B chooses b = (b1 , b2 , . . . , bm ) as it is that the fractions of B and A-partisans
in state Sj after the candidates campaign are π̃jA and π̃jB respectively if candidate B chooses
a = (a1 , a2 , . . . , am ) and candidate A chooses b = (b1 , b2 , . . . , bm ). And since both candidates
believe that each candidate is the higher quality candidate with probability 21 , each candidate
believes it is equally likely that candidate A will win the election if the fractions of A and
B-partisans in state Sj after the candidates campaign are π̃jA and π̃jB respectively as it is
that candidate B will win the election if the fractions of B and A-partisans in state Sj
after the candidates campaign are π̃jA and π̃jB respectively. Putting this together shows that
P r(B wins|(σB , σA )) = P r(A wins|(σA , σB )).
  But this means that if σA = a∗ maximizes the value of minσB P r(A wins|(σA , σB )), then
σB = a∗ also maximizes the value of minσA P r(B wins|(σA , σB )), and σB = a∗ is a minimax
strategy for candidate B. Thus if σA = a∗ is a minimax strategy for candidate A, then it is a
pure strategy equilibrium for the candidates to use the allocation in which they both choose
a∗ . But if both candidates use the allocation a∗ , then the fraction of A-partisans in state Sj
is the same after candidates choose budget allocations than it is before the candidates choose
budget allocations. Thus the distribution of voter preferences in each state is the same as in
the original model without endogenous candidate strategies. ¤



                                                   39
                                               References

Abramson, P.R., Aldrich, J.H., Paolino, P., Rohde, D.W., 1992. “Sophisticated” voting in the 1988 presiden-
  tial primaries. Amer. Polit. Sci. Rev. 86, 55-69.
Aldrich, J.H., 1980. A dynamic model of presidential nomination campaigns. Amer. Polit. Sci. Rev. 74,
  651-669.
Ali, S.N., Kartik, N., 2012. Herding with collective preferences. Econ. Theory. 51, 601-626.
Banerjee, A., 1992. A simple model of herd behavior. Quart. J. Econ. 107, 797-818.
Bartels, L.M., 1985. Expectations and preferences in presidential nominating campaigns. Amer. Polit. Sci.
  Rev. 79, 804-815.
Bartels, L.M., 1988. Presidential Primaries and the Dynamics of Public Choice. Princeton University Press,
  Princeton.
Battaglini, M., 2005. Sequential voting with abstention. Games Econ. Behav. 51, 445-463.
Battaglini, M., Morton, R., Palfrey, T., 2007. Efficiency, equity, and timing of voting mechanisms. Amer.
  Polit. Sci. Rev. 101, 409-424.
Bikhchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D., Welch, I., 1992. A theory of fads, fashion, custom and cultural change as
  information cascades. J. Polit. Econ. 100, 992-1026.
Bombardini, M., Trebbi, F., 2011. Votes or money? Theory and evidence from the US congress. J. Public
  Econ. 95, 587-611.
Brams, S.J., Davis, M.D., 1982. Optimal resource allocation in presidential primaries. Math. Soc. Sci. 3,
  373-388.
Buhr, T., 2000. What voters know about the candidates and how they learned it: the 1996 New Hampshire
  Republican primary as a case study, in: Mayer, W.G. (Ed.), In Pursuit of the White House: How We
  Choose Our Presidential Nominees. Chatham House Publishers, Chatham, pp. 203-254.
Callander, S., 2007. Bandwagons and momentum in sequential voting. Rev. Econ. Stud. 74, 653-684.
Chen, D., (June 24, 2005). New Jersey moves to hold early primary. New York Times.
Dekel, E., Piccione, M., 2000. Sequential voting procedures in symmetric binary elections. J. Polit. Econ.
  108, 34-55.
Deltas, G., Herrera, H., Polborn, M., 2012. A theory of learning and coordination in the presidential primary
  system. University of Illionis Typescript.
Frazzini, A., 2006. The disposition effect and underreaction to news. J. Finance. 61, 2017-2046.
Hirshleifer, S., Lim, S., Teoh, S.H., 2009. Driven to distraction: extraneous events and underreaction to
  earnings news. J. Finance. 64, 2289-2325.

                                                      40
Hummel, P., Knight, B., 2012. Sequential or simultaneous elections? A welfare analysis. Brown University
  Typescript.
Ikenberry, D.L., Ramnath, S., 2002. Underrecation to self-selected news events. J. Finance. 15, 489-526.
Jones, J.M., 1998. Does bringing out the candidate bring out the votes? Amer. Polit. Quart. 2, 395-419.
Kenney, P.J., Rice, T.W., 1994. The psychology of political momentum. Polit. Res. Quart. 47, 923-938.
Klumpp, T., Polborn, M.K., 2006. Primaries and the New Hampshire effect. J. Public Econ. 90, 1073-1114.
Knight, B., Schiff, N., 2010. Momentum in presidential primaries. J. Polit. Econ. 118, 1110-1150.
Matthews, D.R., 1978. ‘Winnowing’: the news media and the 1976 presidential nominations, in: Barber,
  J.D. (Ed.), Race for the Presidency: Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, pp. 55-78.
Mayer, W.G., Busch, A.E., 2004. The Front-Loading Problem in Presidential Nominations. Brookings
  Institution Press, Washington, DC.
Norrader, B., 1992. Super Tuesday: Regional Politics and Presidential Primaries. University Press of Ken-
  tucky, Lexington.
Ottaviani, M., Sørensen, P., 2001. Information aggregation in debate: who should speak first? J. Public
  Econ. 81, 393-421.
Popkin, S.L., 1994. The Reasoning Voter: Communication and Persuasion in Presidential Campaigns. Uni-
  versity of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Redslawk, D., Tolbert, C., Donavan, T., 2011. Why Iowa? How Caucuses and Sequential Elections Improve
  the Presidential Nomination Process. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Selman, D., 2010. Optimal sequencing of presidential primaries. Boǧaziçi University Typescript.
Shaw, D.R., 1999. The effect of TV ads and candidate appearances on statewide presidential votes, 1988-
  1996. Amer. Polit. Sci. Rev. 93, 345-362.
Strumpf, K.S., 2002. Strategic competition in sequential election contests. Public Choice 111, 377-397.
Vavreck, L., Spiliotes, C.J., Fowler, L.L., 2002. The effects of retail politics in the New Hampshire primary.
  Amer. J. Polit. Sci. 46, 595-610.
von Neumann, J., 1928. Zur Theorie der Gesellschaftspielle. Math. Ann. 100, 295-320.




                                                     41
