                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 THE ROLE OF AGENTS AND BROKERS IN THE MARKET FOR HEALTH INSURANCE

                                         Pinar Karaca-Mandic
                                            Roger Feldman
                                             Peter Graven

                                         Working Paper 19342
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19342


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2013




This study was funded by grant #US DHHS AHRQ/1R03HS018242-01 from the Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality. The funding agency played no role in study design, data analyses, or interpretation
of the findings. Support for this research at the Minnesota Census Research Data Center from NSF
(ITR-0427889) is also gratefully acknowledged. We received invaluable feedback from participants
at the Minnesota Census RDC Research Conference, NBER Summer Institute of the Health Care Program,
Annual Health Economics Conference (AHEC), American Economic Association Annual Meeting,
as well as seminar participants at the University of Minnesota and the University of Alabama at Birmingham.
We are grateful for detailed comments by Jim Rebitzer, Joseph Doyle, Phil Cooper, Al Dobson, Jeffrey
McCullough, Jonathan Gruber, Bob Town, David Dranove and Mike Morrisey.˛˛Disclaimer: “Any
opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent
the views of the U.S. Census Bureau or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have
been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed.”

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Pinar Karaca-Mandic, Roger Feldman, and Peter Graven. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Role of Agents and Brokers in the Market for Health Insurance
Pinar Karaca-Mandic, Roger Feldman, and Peter Graven
NBER Working Paper No. 19342
August 2013
JEL No. I1,I13,L1

                                              ABSTRACT

Health insurance markets in the United States are characterized by imperfect information, complex
products, and substantial search frictions. Insurance agents and brokers play a significant role in helping
employers navigate these problems. However, little is known about the relation between the structure
of the agent/broker market and access and affordability of insurance. This paper aims to fill this gap
by investigating the influence of agents/brokers on health insurance decisions of small firms, which
are particularly vulnerable to problems of financing health insurance. Using a unique membership
database from the National Association of Health Underwriters together with a nationally representative
survey of employers, we find that small firms in more competitive agent/broker markets are more
likely to offer health insurance and at lower premiums. Moreover, premiums are less dispersed in more
competitive agent/broker markets.


Pinar Karaca-Mandic                                  Peter Graven
Division of Health Policy and Management             Division of Health Policy and Management
University of Minnesota                              420 Delaware Street SE, MMC 729
420 Delaware Street SE, MMC 729                      Minneapolis, MN 55455
Minneapolis, MN 55455                                grave165@umn.edu
and NBER
pkmandic@umn.edu

Roger Feldman
Health Policy and Management
School of Public Health
University of Minnesota
Mayo Mail Code 729
420 Delware Street S.E.
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0392
feldm002@umn.edu
I. Introduction
   Health insurance markets in the United States are characterized by the presence of imperfect

information, complex products, and substantial search frictions. Consumers can choose from a

wide range of insurance products that vary in multiple dimensions such as deductibles, provider

networks, coverage of specific services and medications, and out-of-pocket prices for different

sets of health services. Moreover, at the time of signing an insurance contract, most consumers

have incomplete information about the types of health care services they will need ex post; thus,

the information obtained on each product varies across consumers. Insights from search theory

suggest that the presence of search and information costs leads to equilibrium premiums higher

than those that would prevail in competitive insurance markets. Moreover, premiums are

dispersed even for identical products.

   In these types of market environments that exhibit high search and information costs, it is

only natural that intermediaries emerge, whom Stigler (1961) refers to as “specialized traders”.

These intermediaries exploit economies of scale in gathering information and provide a market

place for matching buyers to sellers and products; their presence potentially reduces information-

gathering and transaction costs. When search costs decrease, the resulting increase in search

intensity is expected to lead to lower premiums (Diamond, 1971, Reinganum, 1979, Carlson and

McAfee, 1983, Stiglitz, 1989, Cebul et al., 2011). Whether decreased search costs also lead to a

decrease in premium dispersion is theoretically ambiguous and depends on the market

environment (Baye, Morgan, and Scholten, 2006 provide a comprehensive review).

   Intermediaries play a significant role in access, finance, and delivery of health insurance

products. They sell insurance products from several insurers (brokers) or from a single insurer

(agents). In exchange, they receive commissions typically from the insurer. In general, they act


                                                                                                    3
as the consumer’s agent, providing specialized services to help consumers navigate the

complexities of insurance products when the consumer lacks this expertise (Cummins and

Doherty, 2006, Alderman, 2010). For example, they help individual consumers and employers

determine desired benefit packages and obtain premium quotes for those packages. They provide

guidance to employers on the complicated nature of rating and underwriting rules.

   The role of brokers and agents is particularly important for small firms that usually lack the

expertise and human resource departments to evaluate large health insurance choice sets. Small

firms rely heavily on agents and brokers to search for health insurance products to offer their

employees (Conwell, 2002, Hall 2000). The National Federation of Independent Business

(NFIB) survey of firms suggests that seventy-one percent of small firms that offered insurance in

2007 purchased their plans from an insurance broker (Dennis, 2007).

   Despite their direct and indirect influence on complex health insurance decisions, there is no

empirical evidence about the effects of agent/broker market structure on access to and

affordability of health insurance. In this paper, we investigate the role of agents and brokers in

the health insurance offering decisions of firms with 50 or fewer employees (small firms), a

sector that is particularly vulnerable to potential problems regarding health insurance financing.

We use data from the 2008 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey – Insurance Component (MEPS-

IC) and the National Association of Health Underwriters (NAHU) to examine whether the

structure of the market for health insurance agents/brokers that serve small firms is related to the

probability that small firms offer insurance and the premiums of plans offered. Specifically, we

test the predictions from search theory that small firms in more competitive agent/broker markets

will be more likely to offer insurance and to pay lower premiums if they do offer insurance. In




                                                                                                     4
addition, we investigate whether the variance of premiums paid by small firms is related to

agent/broker market structure.

    Our central finding is that small firms in more competitive agent/broker markets are more

likely to offer health insurance to their active employees. We also find that increased

agent/broker competition is associated with lower premiums. Finally, we find that premiums

have lower variance (they are less dispersed) in markets with more agent/broker competition.

    An empirical investigation of agent/broker market structure and small firms’ insurance

offering decisions has implications for two policy areas. First, small firms do not offer health

insurance as frequently as larger businesses. In 2011, while 95.7% of establishments with 50 or

more employees offered health insurance to their employees, only 35.7% of establishments with

less than 50 employees offered health insurance.1 Reducing this disparity by increasing the

offering rate among smaller firms has been a long-standing goal of health care reform.

    A second policy area impacted by our study relates to the provisions of the Affordable Care

Act (ACA) of 2010 that standardize insurance products, improve transparency and reduce

information costs. The ACA specifies a minimum, standard benefit package with varying levels

of cost-sharing. It also calls for electronic, state-based health insurance exchanges designed to

facilitate informed consumer choice among health insurance policies. The insurance exchanges

will presumably reduce the search costs substantially. As yet to be determined is the role of

brokers in these exchanges.

    A general concern in empirical studies of market structure and performance is reverse

causation: agents/brokers that serve small firms may locate in areas with strong unobserved

demand for insurance by small firms. We take several approaches to account for potential

1
 MEPS-IC publicly available summary tables
http://meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/data_stats/summ_tables/insr/national/series_1/2011/tia2.htm (accessed September
2012)


                                                                                                               5
endogeneity. Our models control for a rich set of economic and demographic factors related to the

demand for insurance at the county level as well as state fixed effects. In addition to responding

to market demand for insurance, brokers and agents may be more likely to enter markets where

employers offer more generous benefits in general. To capture this, our models control for

various fringe benefit offerings (sick leave, paid vacation, disability and life insurance, pensions,

etc.) at the employer level. Generous non-health benefits should be positively related to generous

health benefits and thus should control for market selection by brokers.

   More important, we use an instrumental variables approach exploiting variation in the

number of agents/brokers that do not serve small firms. Their presence in a given market should

be correlated with the presence of agents/brokers that serve small firms due to similar cost and

entry conditions. However, the market structure of agent/brokers that do not serve small firms

should not influence small firms’ insurance offering decisions.

   If some unobserved market-level factors simultaneously affect insurance demand in the

small-firm and large-firm markets, the validity of the instrument would be of concern. While we

cannot completely rule out this possibility, we undertake several sensitivity tests that alleviate

this concern.

   First, we estimate our models with different definitions of the geographic market (which vary

by population size and geographic boundaries). The problem of common market-level

unobservables would likely be most pronounced in smaller geographic markets (such as a

county), and less so as the geography widens (for example, the metropolitan Core Based

Statistical Area (CBSA)). If these factors are important, our estimates should vary substantially

across different geographic market definitions, but our findings are consistent across different

geographic market definitions.




                                                                                                     6
   Next, we exclude county-level characteristics and fringe benefit offerings which are likely

related to insurance demand to assess the impact of their omission on the parameter estimates.

While this is not a formal test of endogeneity or instrument validity, it lets us examine insurance

demand based on observed characteristics and serves as a guide to assess the extent of

unobservable characteristics affecting demand (Altonji, Elder and Taber, 2005).

   Third, in a related sensitivity analysis, we include fixed effects for large CBSAs when we

define the geographic market as a county. These fixed effects capture unobserved factors at the

CBSA level, such as the insurer market structure, that could influence demand for insurance and

the availability of insurance products.

   Fourth, we exploit variation in the number of loan agents and brokers across counties as an

alternative instrument. The correlation between health insurance brokers that serve small firms

and loan brokers is weaker than the correlation between health insurance brokers that serve small

firms and those that do not. However, one may argue more plausibly that small firms’ insurance

offering decisions do not respond to the market structure of loan brokers.

   Fifth, we conduct a falsification test by examining insurance offerings and premiums of

policies offered by large firms (200 or more employees). If common market-level unobservables

influence both the small and the large-group markets, we would expect large firms’ insurance

offering rates and premiums to be spuriously correlated with the market structure for agents and

brokers that serve small firms. We find that neither the offering decisions nor the premiums of

large firms respond to the market structure for agents and brokers that serve small businesses.

   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II presents background

information on health insurance for small firms. Section III introduces a conceptual framework

for thinking about the agent/broker market structure for small firms. Section IV presents the data,




                                                                                                   7
measures and the study sample. Section V discusses empirical specification. Section VI presents

results, and Section VII concludes. In the remainder of the paper, for simplicity of discussion, we

refer to both agents and brokers as “brokers”.


II. Health Insurance for Small Firms
        Small firms historically have reported problems with the availability and affordability of

health insurance (Brown, Hamilton and Medoff, 1990, McLaughlin, 1993, Fronstin and Helman,

2000). In 2004, two-thirds of small-firm owners listed health care costs as a critical problem – a

proportion that increased by 18 percentage points between 2000 and 2004 (NFIB, 2004). In

2008, 96% of firms with 50 or more employees offered insurance. However, only 43% of firms

with fewer than 50 employees offered coverage, down from 47 % in 20002. In 2011, even fewer

small employers (35.7%) offered health insurance.3 Low offer rates by small firms have been

attributed, in part, to lower demand for insurance by workers in small firms, as well as high

administrative costs associated with offering coverage and the unwillingness of insurers to

underwrite small firms, given concerns about adverse selection (McLaughlin, 1992, Fronstin and

Helman, 2000, Monheit and Vistnes, 1999, Abraham et al., 2009).

        Karaca-Mandic, Abraham, and Phelps (2011) examined health insurance loading fees,

which represent the portion of the total premium above and beyond the actuarially fair value of

expected claims to be received from the policy during the coverage period. The loading fee

includes general and claims-related administrative expenses, profits, broker commissions, other

sales-related expenses. Accordingly, one can think of the loading fee as the relevant “price” of


2
  Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Center for Cost and Financing Studies. Medical Expenditure Panel
Survey - Insurance Component, 2008 and 2000.
3
  MEPS-IC publicly available summary tables
http://meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/data_stats/summ_tables/insr/national/series_1/2011/tia2.htm (accessed September
2012)


                                                                                                                 8
the health insurance policy (Pauly, 1997, Phelps, 2010, Feldstein, 1999, Chernew and Hirth,

2002, Blumberg and Nichols, 2004, Marquis et al., 2007). The authors generated new estimates

of the size of loading fees and how they differ across the firm size distribution using data from

the confidential MEPS Household Component–Insurance Component Linked File. They found

that firms of up to 100 employees face similar loading fees of approximately 34% (premiums

charged are 34% higher than the claims incurred by health insurers). Loads decline with firm size

and are estimated to be 15% on average for firms with between 101 and 10,000 employees, and

4% for firms with more than 10,000 workers. The loading fee gradient by firm size offers an

explanation for the lower insurance offering rates observed in small firms relative to larger ones.

         The substantially higher price of insurance implied by high loading fees is also consistent

with the presence of higher search frictions for smaller firms relative to larger firms in the market

for health insurance. A key result of search theory is that higher search costs are related to a

larger gap between equilibrium premiums and the marginal cost of providing insurance (Cebul et

al., 2011).

         Intuitively as well, larger firms can avoid complexities related to searching for and

obtaining information about insurance products through self-insurance (Cebul et al., 2011,

Conwell, 2002). A firm that self-insures offers insurance benefits through its own funds, but

works with a third-party administrator that manages the plan or plans by providing services such

as claims processing and access to provider networks. Self-insurance is uncommon among small

firms. In 2011, while 64% of firms with 50 or more employers that offered insurance self-insured

at least one plan, only 12% of those with fewer than 50 employees did.4 Recently Cebul et al.


4
 http://meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/data_stats/summ_tables/insr/national/series_1/2011/tia2a.htm. Table I.A.2.a(2011)
Percent of private-sector establishments that offer health insurance that self-insure at least one plan by firm size and
selected characteristics: United States, 2011. Source: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Center for
Financing, Access and Cost Trends. 2011 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey-Insurance Component.


                                                                                                                       9
(2011) showed that search frictions are pervasive among fully-insured (not self-insured)

employer groups and large enough to transfer 13.2% of consumer surplus from policy-holders to

insurers.


III.   Conceptual Framework and Hypotheses

   Our conceptual model is primarily based on insights from search theory, as well as models of

“middlemen” and insurance intermediaries. As discussed above, the presence of high search and

information costs implies that equilibrium prices exceed marginal costs of production and that

prices are dispersed even for relatively similar products. Based on Stigler (1969), insurance

intermediaries exist as a natural response to the presence of high search costs. They are match-

makers in environments with asymmetric information. Because they have more sophisticated

information and expertise than do individual consumers, they are more efficient searchers. As

such, they have the potential to reduce search costs. They do this by narrowing the number of

potential sellers (insurance products) for buyers (small firms) and helping their clients select

from competing products. The general insights from intermediary models are that intermediaries

reduce the buyer’s search intensity, decrease the uncertainty of the match, and increase the

volume of sales (Focht, Richter and Schiller, 2012, Eckardt, 2007, Biglaiser, 1993, Rubinstein

and Wolinsky, 1987, Yavas, 1994, Cummins and Doherty, 2006).

   Based on these theoretical models, we predict that increased broker availability and

competition will reduce search costs for small firms, increase the insurance offering rate among

small firms, and reduce equilibrium premiums in the small-employer market. Moreover, we

conjecture that premiums will become less dispersed as search costs decrease with broker

availability and competition. Large firms typically self-insure as discussed above, and they tend




                                                                                                   10
to have human resource departments to overcome information costs. We expect large-firm

insurance offering rates and premiums are less likely to be influenced by broker market structure.

   In addition to the insights from search theory, oligopoly theory offers another explanation

why premiums may be related to broker market structure. As in other markets, brokers’ fees –

which are typically a percentage of the premiums of the health insurance products – may vary

with broker market structure. In particular, brokers in less competitive broker markets may

charge higher fees resulting in higher equilibrium premiums (assuming higher brokers’ fees are

passed on to consumers by insurers) and thus lower probability of offering insurance by small

firms. Large firms, which are less reliant on brokers, are again less likely to be affected by the

broker market structure.

   The literature on insurance intermediaries also has extensively discussed the well-known

principal-agent problem. The consumer (principal) is less informed than the broker and has

limited ability to verify the broker’s quality and search efforts. Because brokers are compensated

most often by a percentage (from 2% to 8%) of the health insurance premium, they may not act

diligently to locate products that employers want at the lowest prices (Conwell, 2002, Yegian et

al., 2000). The failure of agents to act diligently on behalf of their clients has been noted in other

markets (Laffont and Martimort, 2002). It is also argued that brokers rely heavily on their

reputation to compete successfully and this lowers their incentives to cheat with respect to

servicing their clients (Eckardt, 2007). This suggests that more competition among brokers will

increase the likelihood that brokers act more diligently to search for policies that better match

their clients’ needs, leading to increased offer rates. While we can test whether offer rates are

higher in more competitive broker markets, we are not able to test whether the policies offered in

more competitive markets are better matches for small firms. The latter test would require




                                                                                                     11
detailed firm and employee-level data to assess the types of plans that are best suited to the needs

of a given small firm. However, we investigate whether important benefit features of the policies

offered (for example deductible size) varies by broker market structure.

   Whether decreased search costs due to increased broker availability and competition lead to a

decrease in premium dispersion is theoretically ambiguous. While some search theory models

predict that a reduction in search costs will reduce the variance of prices (Reinganum, 1979),

others (MacMinn, 1980) predict the opposite. Their conclusions depend on the assumptions they

make about the search process. Reinganum (1979) assumes that consumers sequentially

consider different sellers and obtain price quotes until they find a match such that additional

search is not optimal, but MacMinn (1980) assumes that consumers commit ex-ante to consider a

fixed number of sellers.

   The relation between search costs and price dispersion also depends on the distribution of

sellers’ marginal costs. As consumers reduce their reservation prices as a response to lower

search costs, firms with higher marginal costs are pressured to reduce their prices to the

reservation price. Firms with lower marginal costs do not adjust their prices as much because

their prices are already close to the reservation price. The price adjustments of high-cost firms

lead to a reduction is the variance of prices.

   The models’ predictions also differ by whether the consumer’s decision to become informed

or not as search costs change is endogenous. For example, in Stahl (1989) and Varian (1980),

when information costs are very high, none of the consumers chooses to become informed, and

all firms charge the monopoly price (there is no price dispersion). On the other hand, if all

consumers become informed and shop when search costs fall, prices for identical products

converge to marginal cost and again there is no price dispersion (Baye, Morgan, and Scholten,




                                                                                                    12
2006 provide a comprehensive review). The price dispersion can exist only in the middle range

where some, but not all consumers become informed.

   Most recently, Cebul et al. (2011) model search behavior in health insurance markets. Their

model predicts a right skew in premiums because of search frictions. It also predicts that the right

tail becomes thicker when search frictions increase, implying that price dispersion increases with

search frictions. They also provide empirical evidence that premiums have “excess price

dispersion” (unexplained premium variation) with the right skew in the fully insured market

segment (where search frictions are more of a concern) relative to the self-insured segment. If

broker availability and competition reduces search frictions, we would hypothesize that price

dispersion in the fully insured market would be lower in markets with higher broker competition.


IV.     Data and Measures

       The primary data source on employers is the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey –

Insurance Component (MEPS-IC) for 2008. The broker market structure measures are

constructed from a novel 2008 membership database of the National Association of Health

Underwriters (NAHU), the leading professional association that represents more than 100,000

licensed health insurance agents, brokers, consultants and benefit professionals. We merge firms

in MEPS-IC with information on their broker market structure using the firm’s 5-digit zip-code.

Because the MEPS-IC provides limited information on the employer’s workforce composition,

we use demographic variables at the county level from the Area Resource File (ARF) to control

for factors that may influence the demand for insurance and hence for brokers’ services. We

merge ARF variables to MEPS-IC using state and county FIPS codes defined by the Census

Bureau. The MEPS-IC is a confidential dataset. The Census Bureau and the Internal Revenue

Service approved this study. The data are accessed through a Census Research Data Center, and



                                                                                                  13
statistics presented are required to go through disclosure review by the Census Bureau to protect

the confidentiality of the employer information.

    A. Data on Employers

    The MEPS-IC is a nationally representative sample of employers with information on their

health insurance offerings and characteristics of the policies offered, as well as other relevant

information such as the number of employees, primary industry, and workforce composition

(age, gender, and income). The unit of observation in MEPS-IC is an establishment. A firm

could have one establishment or multiple establishments. Multi-establishment firms could have

establishments in several states that are subject to different state regulations and market

conditions. In addition, the MEPS-IC may not include all establishments of multi-establishment

firms, making it difficult to construct health insurance offering decisions at the firm level.

Consequently, we selected firms with only one establishment. Among these, we selected firms

with 50 or fewer employees because small firms are likely to rely on brokers to purchase health

insurance. The MEPS-IC identifies 6,634,144 private-sector establishments in 2008 nationally,

of which 5,018,251 were in one-establishment firms. Ninety-six percent of the one-establishment

firms had fewer than 50 employees.5

    Outcome variables from the MEPS-IC include an indicator for whether the employer offers

health insurance6 and total premiums for single coverage. Given that an employer can offer

multiple plans (although only 18% of smaller firms with fewer than 50 employees that offer

insurance offer more than one plan7), we examine all plans offered by the firm and consider the


5
  http://www.meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/data_stats/summ_tables/insr/national/series_1/2008/tia1a.htm
We are not able to report raw summary statistics of the study sample due to disclosure restrictions.
6
  Variable corresponding to survey question: “Did your organization make available or contribute to the cost of any
health insurance plans for its ACTIVE employees at this location in YEAR X?”
7
  Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Center for Financing, Access and Cost Trend, 2008 Medical
Expenditure Panel Survey-Insurance Component, Table I.A.2.d(2008) Percent of private-sector establishments that


                                                                                                                 14
enrollment-weighted average premium for single coverage. In additional analyses, we also

examine whether the employer offers a plan with high deductible (more than $1,050 for single

coverage).

    As explanatory variables, we use a rich set of establishment characteristics that represent

factors that influence the demand for health insurance and the cost of providing health insurance.

We control for the total number of employees in the establishment (<25, 25-50), other fringe

benefits offered (paid vacation, paid sick leave, life insurance, disability insurance,

retirement/pension plans), flexible spending accounts offered for health care, number of years the

business has been in operation (business tenure), indicators for business industry, non-profit

status, and measures of workforce composition (percent employees female, percent older than

50, percent union members, and percent with earnings more than $26 per hour).

    B. Data on Brokers

    NAHU is a national organization of health insurance agents and brokers organized into over

200 chapters across the U.S. Each chapter roughly corresponds to one or two metropolitan

statistical areas (MSAs) in the same state. We obtained counts of NAHU’s members in 2008 by

5-digit zip-code for brokers servicing small firms and those that do not service small firms.

    The NAHU data are unique in several aspects. First, NAHU is the only national association

that exclusively represents health insurance brokers. A second national organization that

represents brokers is the Independent Insurance Agents and Brokers of America, but this

organization represents other types of brokers in addition to health insurance (e.g. automobile

and property insurance). Second, NAHU members likely represent active, practicing brokers

which we could not capture with simple counts of brokers licensed in the state. Third, the NAHU

offer health insurance that offer two or more health insurance plans by firm size and selected characteristics: United
States, 2008, http://www.meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/data_stats/summ_tables/insr/national/series_1/2008/tia2d.pdf



                                                                                                                    15
data allow us to extract counts of health insurance brokers that serve small businesses, the

primary focus of our study.

   While NAHU’s membership is large, representing about one-third of active brokers

(Alderman, 2010), it does not represent all licensed health insurance brokers; consequently, our

measure undercounts the actual number of brokers. To capture the universe of brokers, we

considered obtaining lists of state-licensed brokers, but these would be measured with error

because we don’t know if licensed brokers are actively practicing, whether they serve small

businesses, and because these lists would contain accident and casualty brokers as well as health

insurance brokers. Moreover, such a list would limit the variation in the broker competition

measure to the state level, which may not properly capture the relevant geographic market for

brokers. We also investigated the possibility of acquiring the number of brokers from the

Census’s zip code business patterns. However, the Census classification of brokers under NAICS

code 524210 (SIC code of 6411) is not limited to health insurance brokers. For example, it also

includes real estate insurance agents and brokers as well as brokers for other insurance categories

such as fire, life, property and casualty insurance. Similarly, the Dun & Bradstreet database does

not identify brokers who sell health insurance. Nevertheless, to investigate whether NAHU’s

coverage of health insurance brokers is representative, we compared NAHU’s health insurance

brokers (aggregated to the county level) to the broader category of brokers represented under

NAICS code 524210 in the U.S. Census County Business Patterns (CBP) data. First, the

variation of the two measures between counties is similar (coefficient of variation is 3.96 for the

NAHU’s health insurance brokers and 3.05 for the CBP’s broader category of brokers). Second,

the number of brokers in CBP is highly correlated with the number of NAHU brokers

(coefficient of correlation between the two measures is 0.87). Third, the count of CBP brokers is




                                                                                                 16
a strong predictor of NAHU brokers even after controlling for a large set of county-level

socioeconomic and demographic factors (Appendix Table 1). These tests suggest that the number

of NAHU brokers is representative of the universe of health insurance brokers, even though it

undercounts the actual number of brokers.

       C. Data on Market Characteristics

   We use the Area Resource File (ARF) to control for economic and demographic factors that

may influence the demand for insurance and hence for brokers’ services at the county level.

These variables include population estimates by age (percent of children, percent of adults under

65, percent over 65) and ethnicity/race (i.e. percent of white, black, Asian and so on), share of

foreign-born population, unemployment rate, percent population in urban areas, share of women

in the labor force, number of households, average household size, percent of households with a

married couple, percent of population in poverty, median household income, Medicare managed

care penetration rate, inpatient days per capita, outpatient visits per capita, and emergency

department visits per capita. Most of these variables have been shown to influence geographic

differences in health insurance coverage (Chernew, Cutler, and Keenan, 2005). In addition, we

use the rural/urban continuum codes of 2003 from ARF to identify the degree of urbanization of

each county. We categorize urbanization into metropolitan area, urban area with population

20,000, urban area with 2,500-19,999 population, and rural area with < 2,500 population.

   D. Measures of Broker Market Structure

   The existing literature does not define the geographic market for health insurance brokers.

However, limited evidence indicates that small firms rely heavily on in-person contacts with

local brokers rather than internet brokers. In a survey focusing on health savings accounts

(HSAs), Gates et al. (2010) found that 62.2% of small firms offering HSA-eligible insurance




                                                                                                    17
plans purchased these plans through a local insurance broker. Less frequently used for quotes

were benefit management companies (19.5%) and insurance companies (14.6%). No firm in the

sample of 228 purchased an HSA from an internet-based broker. Similarly, Dennis (2007)

suggests that small employers rely heavily on brokers for purchasing health insurance and for

consulting on health insurance-related matters. Seventy-one percent of small firms that offered

insurance in 2007 purchased their plans from an insurance broker, while only one percent

purchased directly from an insurer over the internet. This suggests that small firms value the

services offered by local brokers (e.g. advice on coverage choices and resolving claims-related

problems). Assuming such services require building close relationships between brokers and

their clients, it is likely that geographic proximity of the broker and the client is important.

   We approached this issue by considering alternative definitions of the geographic market. All

markets were defined using the zip codes of broker locations, and linked to MEPS-IC using the

zip code of the employer. We considered the following definitions of the relevant broker

geographic market for the employer:

   1) County: The zip code of each establishment is assigned to a county. For zip codes that

       overlap counties, the county that makes up the largest portion of the zip code is used.

       This definition results in 3,130 geographic markets in the U.S.

   2) CBSA: The zip code of each establishment is assigned to its metropolitan Core Based

       Statistical Area (CBSA). CBSAs, released in 2003, replace previous definitions of

       metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs). For zip codes that overlap CBSAs, we used the

       CBSA of the zip code centroid, and for zip codes outside any CBSA, we used the county

       or PUMA, whichever is larger in geographic area. A PUMA (Public Use Microdata Area)

       is a Census-created contiguous geography that does not cross state lines and encompasses




                                                                                                   18
          the residences of at least 100,000 people. The Census Bureau has relied on the PUMA

          definition since 1990 to present descriptive statistics from the decennial census and the

          American Community Survey (ACS). The 100,000 person threshold was chosen because

          any geography below this threshold would subject ACS estimates to disclosure risk.8 The

          iterative assignment of this definition results in 1,196 mutually exclusive geographies.

      3) Fixed Radius: Each zip code has a unique market that includes all zip codes within 25

          miles of the establishment.

      4) Variable Radius (<1 million population): Each zip code has a unique market that includes

          all zip codes within 25 miles or the nearest zip codes within 25 miles that have a

          cumulative population of 1 million people, whichever is smaller in geographic area. By

          constraining the population at 1 million, we avoid mega-markets in major cities that have

          more than 1 million people within a 25-mile radius.

      Figure 1 presents an example of zip code boundaries for two zip codes in Minnesota (55413

in Minneapolis, 56701 in Thief River Falls). For each zip code multiple market measures are

created. Since the definitions are overlapping, the map shows the portions they do not have in

common. As can be seen, the CBSA measure generally captures a larger area than the county or

other measures. The fixed and variable radius will be the same (and therefore only the variable

radius is shown) if the population is less than 1 million, which is the case for Thief River Falls

but not for Minneapolis where the fixed radius is larger in area than the variable radius.

      For each geographic market, our ultimate measure of broker competition is the number of

brokers that serve small firms per 100,000 people in the market.9 Table 1 describes the broker


8
    http://www.census.gov/geo/puma/2010_puma_guidelines.pdf, http://www.census.gov/geo/puma/puma_guide.pdf
9
 An alternative denominator could be the number of small firms rather than number of people in the geographic
market. In a specification based on the “county” geographic market, we examined the broker competition measure


                                                                                                             19
competition measures across different definitions of the geographic market for brokers. Due to

disclosure restrictions by the Census Bureau, we can report the means by quartile but not the

lower and upper bounds for the number of brokers per population within each quartile. The first

quartile typically represents very low broker availability with nearly zero brokers per 100,000

people, on average. The second quartile has on average one broker per 100,000 people; the third

quartile has 2-3 brokers per 100,000 people; and the fourth quartile has 6-7 brokers per 100,000

people.

    Studies that use the number of sellers to measure competition usually focus on what happens

when the number of sellers increases from a baseline of 1. In other words, what happens when a

monopolistic market becomes more competitive? However, in our application, the number of

brokers in a market can be zero (see Table 1, average number of brokers in quartile 1).10 Hence,

employers in these markets may not have an opportunity to buy health insurance through a

NAHU member broker. Employers may find better access to health insurance in a market with 1

broker, even though that broker is a monopolist, than in a market with no brokers.

    The Hirschman-Herfindahl Index (HHI) is a commonly used measure of market

concentration. However, the NAHU data do not provide information on the number or value of

policies sold by brokers, so we cannot compute the HHI. Furthermore, the HHI is considered a

suitable measure to model Cournot competition among homogenous firms, which may not

necessarily fit the broker market if firms have non-symmetric cost structures and sell

differentiated products. Finally, using the number of firms to capture competition in the market is

consistent with recent precedents in the empirical industrial organization literature. Bresnahan



as counts of brokers that serve small firms per 1,000 small firms (where we extracted the number of small firms
from the Census County Business Patterns). Our findings were robust to this modification.
10
   Brokers could be present, but there are no NAHU members in those markets.


                                                                                                                  20
and Reiss (1991), Mazzeo (2002) and Dranove, Gron and Mazzeo (2003) provide methods to

infer incremental effects of additional entrants on incumbents’ profits.


V. Empirical Specification
   The unit of observation in our analyses is an establishment in the MEPS-IC. We restrict our

attention to firms with one establishment and fewer than 50 employees (small firms). We

estimate models that relate our outcome variables to the market structure for health insurance

brokers while controlling for other factors that may influence the demand and cost of insurance

at the employer level as discussed above.

   A general concerns is reverse causality due to market selection of brokers. If brokers locate

in areas with strong unobserved demand for insurance, the effect of competition on offering

insurance would be biased upward (away from zero). Markets with higher unobserved search

costs would also increase the value of brokers’ services and attract broker entry. However,

offering of insurance could be lower in markets with such costs because of high premiums. This

would bias the association between broker competition and offering toward zero. A priori, it is

not possible to determine the direction of the bias.

   The reverse causality concern could also apply to the model of total premiums. More broker

competition could reduce premiums, but if broker competition is positively related to unobserved

demand conditions that increase premiums, we might not detect that effect (bias toward zero).

Similarly, if unobserved search costs increase both broker entry and premiums, this would also

bias the association between premiums and broker competition toward zero.

   Our models control for economic and demographic factors related to the demand for

insurance at the county level as well as state fixed effects. Such controls likely lessen the

endogeneity concern. In addition to responding to county-level demand factors, brokers may be



                                                                                                  21
more likely to enter markets where employers offer more generous benefits in general. To

capture this, our models control for a rich set of fringe benefit offerings (sick leave, paid

vacation, disability insurance, life insurance, retirement pension and so on) at the employer level.

Generous non-health benefits should be positively related to generous health benefits.

       As a more complete approach we use an instrumental variable that is correlated with

broker competition, but uncorrelated with unobserved factors that influence our outcome

measures. Our instrumental variable is the number of brokers in the market that do not serve

small firms (also obtained from NAHU) per 100,000 population. The counts of brokers that do

not serve small firms would be correlated with the counts of brokers that serve small firms due to

similar market conditions, but uncorrelated with insurance outcomes (offering decisions and

premiums) of small firms.

   If some unobserved market-level factors simultaneously affect insurance demand in the

small-firm and large-firm markets, the validity of the instrument would be of concern. While we

cannot completely rule out this possibility, we undertake several sensitivity tests that alleviate

this concern (described in the Results section).

   We estimate the models using the two-stage residual inclusion method (Terza, Basu and

Rathouz, 2008). The empirical specification for the probability of offering health insurance

coverage is:

               (1)      Pr(Yim  0)  ( 1   2 Bm   3 X m   4 Z im   s )

where Yim is the outcome variable for establishment i in market m . The vector Bm captures the

market structure of brokers that serve small firms. Our measure of broker competition is the

number of brokers that serve small firms per 100,000 people in the market. We categorized this

measure into quartiles and included three indicator variables (with the first quartile as the



                                                                                                     22
reference category) to capture non-linear effects. The vector X m captures other county-level

demographic factors that impact the cost and demand for health insurance. The vector Z im

captures the establishment’s characteristics, as described above. We control for systematic

differences between states, for example, different health insurance regulations for small firms,

with state fixed effects ( s ).11 Next, we estimate a model of the enrollment-weighted average

premium for single coverage (ordinary least squares)12 conditional on offering health insurance

using the same explanatory variables.

         To investigate whether the dispersion of premiums varies by broker market structure, we

model:

         Pr emiumim ~ Normal( ,  ) , where

         (2)    1   2 Bm   3 X m   4 Z im   s , and

         (3)   1   2 Bm   3 X m   4 Z im   s .

We estimate the parameters in (2) and (3) jointly using maximum likelihood estimation.

     Using the two-stage residual inclusion methodology, we first predict the number of brokers

that serve small businesses per capita. Because broker competition Bm is modeled as a vector to

indicate the quartiles of the number of brokers that serve small firms per capita, we estimate an

ordered logit model at the establishment level where the categorical outcome variable takes on

four values that correspond to the quartile of the broker market the establishment faces. The key

explanatory variable is our instrumental variable: the number of brokers that do not serve small

firms per 100,000 population. The empirical specification includes all other control variables


11
   Ideally we would like to control for market fixed effects. However, given our geographic market definitions, we
often observe only one firm per market.
12
   In a sensitivity test, we estimated the model with generalized linear models, using a log scale and gamma family
distribution.


                                                                                                                  23
discussed above. Next, we predict the probability of each outcome and the residual

corresponding to that prediction. Finally, our models for offer and premiums include three

additional explanatory variables corresponding to the residuals from the second, third and fourth

quartiles of the broker competition measure. Because these residuals are predicted from the first-

stage model, the standard errors need to be corrected in the second stage. We compute standard

errors using 500 bootstrap replications. All analyses utilize survey design variables (strata,

primary sampling unit and survey weights) using STATA version 12’s survey commands.


VI.     Results

   Because MEPS-IC is a confidential data set that can be accessed only at a Census RDC, all

output for public use must go through a disclosure review. All explanatory variables described in

the Data section are included in the models, but the tables report estimates for a limited number

of variables due to disclosure reasons. We present estimates by alternative definitions of the

geographic market for brokers. Model 1 uses the county definition, model 2 uses the CBSA

definition, model 3 uses the fixed radius definition, and model 4 uses the variable radius

definition.

   A. Instrumental Variable and the First Stage

   Table 2 presents the variation in the instrumental variable, number of brokers that do not

serve small firms per 100,000 population, across different definitions of the geographic market

for brokers. As in Table 1, we report only the means by quartile rather than the lower and upper

bounds due to disclosure restrictions. A comparison of Table 1 (number of brokers that serve

small firms) and Table 2 reveals that brokers that do not serve small firms are more numerous.

Such brokers would typically sell policies to large firms or to individuals in the Medicare or

long-term care insurance markets. The first quartile represents 1 broker per 100,000 people on



                                                                                                  24
average (rather than zero brokers that serve small firms). The second quartile has 2 brokers per

100,000 people on average; the third quartile has 5 brokers per 100,000 people; and the fourth

quartile has 10-13 brokers per 100,000 people.

   In Table 3, we present the first stage of the two-stage residual inclusion estimates to predict

the number of brokers that serve small businesses per capita using the instrumental variable and

all other control variables discussed above. The statistical significance of the instrumental

variable and the correspondingly large F statistics verify the strong correlation of the number of

brokers that serve small firms and those that do not serve small firms. Based on the reported

marginal effects for the “county” geographic market definition, a unit increase in the number of

brokers that do not serve small employers per capita is associated with statistically significant

declines of 0.037 and 0.016 in the probabilities that the small firm is in a broker market in the

first and second quartiles of brokers that serve small firms, respectively. On the other hand, it is

associated with statistically significant increases of 0.015 and 0.038 in the probabilities of the

third and fourth quartiles of brokers that serve small firms. An examination of the marginal

effects for other geographic market definitions reveals similar findings.

   B. Offer Models

   Table 4 reports marginal effects of a select number of firm characteristics and the broker

competition measures (quartiles of the number of brokers that serve small firms per capita) on

the probability that the small firm offers health insurance, based on the second stage of the two-

stage residual inclusion estimation. Standard errors are computed using 500 bootstrap

replications. Not surprisingly, the probability of offering health insurance increases by firm size

– even within this group of firms with 50 or fewer employees. In addition, offering health




                                                                                                     25
insurance is strongly associated with offering other fringe benefits (paid vacation, sick leave, life

insurance, disability insurance and retirement pension).

   To evaluate the impact of broker market competition on insurance offering, the reference

category is the first quartile (almost no brokers on average). Across all geographic market

definitions, firms in higher quartiles of broker competition are more likely to offer health

insurance, except for the second quartile (about one broker). This suggests that the presence of

the second broker makes a difference. The marginal effects of broker market structure on the

probability of offering health insurance are remarkably stable across different geographic market

definitions. Using the “county” as an example, the probability of offering is larger by 0.062 for

firms in the second quartile of broker market structure (about 2 brokers) and by 0.082 for those

in the fourth quartile (about 7 brokers) relative to firms in markets with no brokers. The adjusted

probability of offering increases from 0.38 in the first quartile to 0.43 in the second quartile, 0.44

in the third quartile, and 0.46 in the fourth quartile (Table 6). Predictions of the adjusted

probability based on other geographic market definitions are very similar. Estimates of the model

without endogeneity correction yield similar qualitative results although the magnitude of the

broker competition on the probability of offering is smaller across all geographic market

definitions (Appendix Table 2). As we argued earlier, the sign of bias without endogeneity

correction for the offer model is ambiguous ex ante.

   C. Premium Models

   Table 5 reports marginal effects of select firm characteristics and broker market structure on

premiums of firms that offer insurance. Firms with 25-50 employees have lower premiums

compared with firms with fewer than 25 employees. Similar to our findings for the probability

offering, the estimates present a gradient beyond the second quartile with lower premiums for




                                                                                                    26
firms in higher quartiles of broker competition. The second quartile effect is not statistically

significant for any of the geographic market definitions. While the fourth quartile effect is

statistically significant across all geographic market definitions, the third quartile effect is

statistically significant only for the county and the fixed radius definitions. Marginal effects are

similar across different market definitions. Estimates based on the county geographic market

predict adjusted premiums of $5,173 for quartile 1, $4,741 for quartile 2, $4,553 for quartile 3,

and $4,495 for quartile 4 (Table 6). Estimates based on other geographic market definitions are

very similar. In addition, a sensitivity test with a log scale and gamma family distribution

revealed very similar estimates (not reported in tables). For example, for the county definition,

marginal effects (standard errors) on broker competition for 2nd, 3rd and 4th quartiles respectively

were -357 (368), -640 (270), and -629 (302). We also estimated the models without endogeneity

correction (Appendix Table 2). Firms in the fourth quartile of broker competition have lower

premiums except for the variable radius definition. The magnitudes of the marginal effects are

smaller compared with the endogeneity-corrected two-stage residual inclusion models. This is

consistent with a bias toward zero as discussed earlier.

    Having shown that small firms in more competitive broker markets have lower premiums, we

investigated whether this reduction was because policies offered in those markets had different

benefit designs. For example, high-deductible health plans (HDHPs) (individual deductible

$1,050) typically have lower premiums, and as we argued earlier, brokers may be more likely to

advocate HDHPs in more competitive broker markets. In Table 7, we present estimated marginal

effects of broker competition on the probability of offering a high-deductible plan among firms

that offer insurance. We do not find evidence that broker competition matters for offering high-

deductible plans. In an additional sensitivity analysis, we estimated the premium models




                                                                                                    27
controlling for several benefit design characteristics: the deductible, the presence of an out-of-

pocket (OOP) maximum, office visit copay and inpatient visit copay. Only the deductible and the

OOP maximum were associated with premiums (negatively) with p-values of 0.05 (not

reported in tables). The marginal effects of broker competition quartiles were remarkably similar

to estimates presented in Table 5. The marginal effect (standard errors) of the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th

broker quartiles for the county specification were -444 (364), -591 (263), and -686 (293),

respectively. These findings suggest that policy benefit designs – at least the deductibles – do not

differ by broker market competition, and that premiums are lower in markets with high broker

competition regardless of the key benefit design features.

       Next, we investigated whether the dispersion of premiums varies by broker market

structure. Table 8 presents parameter estimates of equations (2) and (3) for the county

geographic market definition. The marginal effects of broker quartiles on average premiums are

very similar to those presented earlier in Table 5 (equation 2). The marginal effect of the fourth

broker quartile on the standard deviation of premiums is negative and statistically significant

(p=0.04), suggesting that premiums become less dispersed in the most competitive broker

markets (lower search costs). While different search models predict an ambiguous relation

between search costs and price dispersion, this finding is consistent with the prediction of Cebul

et al. (2011) for fully-insured health insurance markets.

   D. Sensitivity Analysis of the Instrumental Variable Validity

   As we discussed earlier, if some unobserved market-level factors simultaneously affect

insurance demand in the small-firm and large-firm markets, the validity of the instrument would

be of concern because the number of brokers that do not serve small firms would be spuriously




                                                                                                     28
correlated with insurance demand of small firms. We present several findings that alleviate this

concern.

   First, we estimate our offer and premium models for different definitions of the geographic

market (which vary by population size and geographic boundaries). The problem of common

market-level unobservables would likely be most pronounced in smaller geographic markets

(such as a county), and less so as the geography widens (for example, the CBSA). Therefore, if

important common unobservables influence insurance demand in small and large-firm markets,

we would expect even our instrumental variables estimates of the broker market structure to vary

across different geographic market definitions. However, Tables 4 (offer models) and 5

(premium models) show that our findings are remarkably consistent across different geographic

market definitions.

   Next, as a sensitivity test, we excluded county-level characteristics (from ARF) and firm-

level fringe benefit offerings which are likely related to insurance demand. As reported in Table

9, their omission does not substantially change the parameter estimates reported in Tables 4 and

5. While this is not a formal test of endogeneity or instrument validity, it suggests that the results

are robust to omission of important observed market characteristics and thus the extent of

unobservable characteristics affecting demand is likely limited (Altonji, Elder and Taber, 2005).

   Also in Table 9, we report estimates that include fixed effects for large CBSAs (those with at

least 200 observations of small firms) when we define the geographic market as a county. These

fixed effects capture unobserved factors at the CBSA level, such as the insurer market structure,

that could influence demand for insurance and the availability of insurance products. Again, the

estimates are very similar to those reported in Tables 4 and 5.




                                                                                                    29
       In addition, we explored the number of loan agents and brokers per 100,000 capita as an

alternative instrumental variable. From the Census County Business Patterns (CBP) of 2008, we

extracted county-level counts of mortgage and non-mortgage loan brokers (NAICS 522310), and

re-estimated our benchmark models using the two-stage residual inclusion model with this

alternative instrumental variable. The market presence of loan brokers and insurance brokers are

correlated likely because of common market conditions and preferences toward brokers. The first

stage verifies this correlation (F-stat=556.94), although our primary instrumental variable based

on health insurance brokers that do not serve small firms certainly has a stronger correlation with

the brokers that serve small firms (first stage F-stat=1365.04, Table 3). The advantage of the

alternative instrumental variable is that after controlling for various county-level demographic

and socioeconomic characteristics, small firms’ insurance offering decisions likely do not

respond to the market structure of loan brokers. As presented in Table 9, this alternative

instrumental variable yields similar results to the original instrumental variable. As before, a

specification not corrected for endogeneity is biased downward both for the offer and premium

models.

   Finally, as a falsification exercise, we hypothesized that larger firms will not respond to the

market structure for agents and brokers that serve small firms. However, if common market-level

unobservables influence both the small and the large-group markets, we would expect large

firms’ insurance offering rates and premiums to be spuriously correlated with the market

structure of brokers that serve small firms. Accordingly, we estimated all our models for larger

firms with at least 200 employees including the same set of explanatory variables except

substituting firm size indicators for 500-999 employees and 1,000 or more employees (reference

category of 200-499 employees). Table 10 shows that large firms do not respond to the market




                                                                                                   30
structure for agents and brokers that serve small businesses, lessening concerns on common

unobservables.


VII.     Conclusions

    Brokers potentially play an important role in reducing search costs and helping small

employers shop for health insurance, yet little is known about the market structure for brokers,

nor how variation in market structure affects small firms’ decisions with respect to health

insurance. In this paper we constructed measures of market structure for brokers serving small

firms from a unique data base – the membership directory of the National Association of Health

Underwriters.

       We used confidential employer data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey- Insurance

Component, and in models with state fixed effects and an instrumental variable, we found that

small firms in more competitive broker markets are more likely to offer health insurance to their

active employees. We also found evidence that competition among brokers is associated with

lower premiums, and that premiums are less dispersed in the most competitive broker markets.

   Our findings have implications for two policy areas. First, small firms do not offer health

insurance as frequently as larger businesses, and reducing this disparity by increasing the

offering rate among smaller firms has been a long-standing goal of health care reform. Our

findings identify a previously unexplored channel for accomplishing that goal. Greater

availability of brokers and more competitive broker market structure play an important role in

reducing search costs and improving offer rates in small firms.

   A second policy area impacted by our study relates to the provisions of the ACA that will be

effective 2014. The ACA specifies a minimum, standard benefit package with varying levels of

cost sharing. It also calls for electronic, state-based health insurance exchanges designed to



                                                                                                   31
facilitate informed consumers choice among health insurance policies. These changes will

improve transparency and reduce search costs. As yet to be determined is the role of brokers in

these exchanges. Two models appear to be the Utah Health Exchange, which began operating in

2011 for small employers (2 to 50 employees), and the Massachusetts Health Connector, which

dates to 2006.

      Brokers play an active rule the Utah exchange model. Employers are encouraged13 to

designate a broker in their application and participating brokers receive commissions of $37 per

covered employee per month. Employers that do not designate brokers are still charged the $37

fee to fund a consumer service center to support groups participating in the exchange. In its first

year, the Utah exchange had 100 small employers with 3,000 covered lives.

      The Massachusetts Health Connector offers a much smaller incentive for brokers to

participate. Commissions for small employers that purchase unsubsidized insurance policies are

currently capped at $10 per employee per month for employers with 1-5 employees and 2.5

percent of the total premium for employers with 6-50 employees. If a broker is not used, the

amount of the commission is used to fund Connector administrative costs. Brokers’ commissions

in the exchange are less than commissions for the same products sold outside the exchange. As

of late 2010, fewer than 25 brokers had chosen to participate in the program and most of the

36,000 members in the unsubsidized health plan had non-group policies.

      If more states follow the broker-friendly Utah exchange model, our results suggest that a

competitive broker market structure will contribute to enrollment of small employers in the

exchange. States might assess the level of broker density before deciding to adopt that model.

Additional monitoring of the policies sold through brokers in the exchange also might be helpful.


13
     The Utah exchange features a “broker of the month” on its web portal, http://www.exchange.utah.gov.



                                                                                                           32
If brokers tend to sell the more-expensive policies to small firms, this might be a sign that they

are not acting as agents for small employers.




                                                                                                     33
References

Abraham, J., T. DeLeire, and A.B. Royalty. 2009. “Access to Health Insurance at Small
   Establishments: What Can We Learn From Analyzing Other Fringe Benefits?” Inquiry 46
   (3): 253-273.

Alderman, L. 11 September 2010. “Getting a Guide for the Jungle of Individual Health Policies.”
   New York Times, B5.

Altonji, J.G., T.E. Elder, and C.R. Taber. 2005. “Selection on Observed and Unobserved
   Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools,” Journal of Political Economy
   113 (1): 151-184.

Baye, Michael R., J. Morgan, and P. Scholten. 2006. “Information, Search, and Price
   Dispersion.” In Handbook of Economics and Information Systems, edited by T. Hendershott,
   Amsterdam: Elsevier Press, .

Biglaiser, G. 1993. “Middlemen as Experts.” The RAND Journal of Economics 24 (2): 212-223.

Blumberg, L., and L. Nichols. 2004. “Why Are So Many Americans Uninsured? In Health
   Policy and the Uninsured, 35-95. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute Press.

Bresnahan, T.F. and P.C. Reiss. 1991. “Entry and Competition in Concentrated Markets.”
  Journal of Political Economy 99 (5): 977-1009.

Brown, C., J. Hamilton, and J. Medoff. 1990. Employers Large and Small. Cambridge, MA:
  Harvard University Press.

Carslon, J.A. and P.R. McAfee. 1983. “Discrete Equilibrium Price Dispersion.” The Journal of
    Political Economy 94 (2): 418-438.

Cebul, R.D., J.B. Rebitzer, L.J. Taylor, and M.E. Votruba. 2011. “Unhealthy Insurance Markets:
   Search Frictions and the Cost and Quality of Health Insurance.” American Economic Review
   101 (5): 1842-1871.

Chernew, M., D.M. Cutler, and P.S. Keenan. 2005. “Competition, Markets, and Insurance.”
   Health Services Research 40 (4): 1021-1039.

Chernew M, Hirth R. Modeling the Causes and Consequences of Lack of Health Insurance
   Coverage: Gaps in the Literature. Economic Research Initiative on the Uninsured Working
   Paper #1 2002 [accessed on June 11, 2007]. Available at
   http://eriu.sph.umich.edu/pdf/wp1.pdf.

Conwell, L.J. 2002. “The Role of Health Insurance Brokers: Providing Small Employers with a
   Helping Hand.” Issue Brief Center for Studying Health System Change, (57):1-4.



                                                                                               34
Cummins, J.D., and N.A. Doherty. 2006. “The Economics of Insurance Intermediaries.” Journal
  of Risk and Insurance 73 (3): 359-396.

Dennis, W.J. 2007. “NFIB National Small Business Poll, Purchasing Health Insurance.” NFIB
   Research Foundation Series 7, no.3.

Diamond, P.A. 1971. “A Model of Price Adjustment.” Journal of Economic Theory 3 (2):156-
   168.

Dranove, D., A. Gron, and M. Mazzeo. 2003. “Differentiation and Competition in HMO
   Markets.” The Journal of Industrial Economics 51 (4): 433-454.

Eckardt, M. 2007. Insurance Intermediation: An Economic Analysis of the Information Services
   Market. Heidelberg, New York: Physica-Verlag.

Feldstein, P. 1999. Health Care Economics. Albany, NY: Delmar Publishers.

Fronstin, P, and Helman, R. 2000. Small Employers and Health Benefits: Findings from the 2000
   Small Employer Health Benefits Survey. Washington, DC: Employee Benefit Research
   Institute, issue brief 226, special report SR35, October 2000.

Focht, U., A. Richter, and J. Schiller. 2012. “Intermediation and (Mis-)Matching in Insurance
   Markets—Who Should Pay the Insurance Broker?” The Journal of Risk and Insurance
   00 (0): 1-22.

Gates, SM, P. Karaca-Mandic, J.R. Burgdorf, and K. Kapu. 2010. “Health Savings Accounts for
   Small Businesses and Entrepreneurs: Shopping, Take-up and Implementation Challenges.”
   Open Health Services and Policy Journal, (3): 10-20.

Hall, M.A. 2000. “The Role of Independent Agents in the Success of Health Insurance Market
   Reforms.” The Milbank Quarterly 78 (1): 23-45.

Karaca-Mandic P., J. Abraham, and C. Phelps. 2011. “How Do Health Insurance Loading Fees
   Vary By Group Size? Implications for Healthcare Reform.” International Journal of Health
   Care Finance and Economics 11 (3): 181-207.

Laffont, J.J., and D. Martimort. 2002. The Theory of Incentives: The Principal-Agent Model.
   Princeton University Press.

MacMinn, R.D., 1980. “Search and Market Equilibrium.” Journal of Political Economy, 88 (2),
  308-327.

Marquis, M.S. and S.H. Long. 2002. “Effects of ‘Second Generation’ Small Group Health
 Insurance Market Reform, 1993 to 1997.” Inquiry 38: 365-380.




                                                                                                35
 Mazzeo, M.J. 2002. “Product Choice and Oligopoly Market Structure.” Rand Journal of
  Economics 33 (2): 221-242.

McLaughlin, C.G. 1993. “The Dilemma of Affordability: Health Insurance for Small
 Businesses.” In American Health Policy: Critical Issues for Reform, edited by Robert B.
 Helms, 152-163. Washington, DC: AEI Press.

Monheit, A.C., and J.P. Vistnes. 1999. “Health Insurance Availability at the Workplace: How
  Important Are Worker Preferences?” The Journal of Human Resources 34 (4): 770-785.

Pauly, M. 1997. Health Benefits At Work: An Economic and Political Analysis of Employment-
   based Health Insurance. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

Phelps, C. 2010. Health Economics. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Reinganum, J.F. 1979. “A Simple Model of Equilibrium Price Dispersion.” Journal of Political
   Economy 87 (4): 851-858.

Rubinstein, A., and A. Wolinsky. 1987. “Middlemen.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
   102 (3): 581-593.

Stahl, D. O. 1989. “Oligopolistic Pricing With Sequential Consumer Search.” American
economic Review, 79, 700-712.

Stigler, G.J. 1961. “The Economics of Information.” Journal of Political Economy 69 (3):
    213- 225.

Stiglitz, J.E. 1989. “Imperfect Information in the Product Market.”In The Handbook of Industrial
    Organization, Vol. 1, edited by R. Schmalensee and R.D. Willig.

Terza, J.V., A. Basu, and P.J. Rathouz. 2008. “Two-stage Residual Inclusion Estimation:
   Addressing Endogeneity in Health Econometric Modeling.” Journal of Health Economics 27
   (3): 531-43.

Varian, H.R. 1980. “A Model of Sales.” American Economic Review, 70, 651-659.

Yavas, A. 1994. “Middlemen in Bilateral Search Markets.” Journal of Labor Economics 12 (3):
   406-429.

Yegian, J.M., T.C. Buchmueller, M.D. Smith, and A.F. Monroe. 2000. “The Health Insurance
   Plan of California: The First Five Years.” Health Affairs 19 (5): 71-78.




                                                                                              36
Table 1: Average number of brokers that serve
small firms per 100,000 population by quartiles of
the broker geographic market definition
           Broker Geographic Market Definition
                                Fixed Variable
Quartile County CBSA Radius Radius
       1      0.00      0.12      0.09       0.06
       2      0.90      1.15      1.17       1.05
       3      2.31      2.35      2.43       2.55
       4      6.68      5.62      5.97       6.57




Table 2: Average number of brokers that do not
serve small firms per 100,000 population by
quartiles of the broker geographic market
definition
            Broker Geographic Market Definition
                                 Fixed Variable
Quartile County CBSA Radius Radius
        1      0.84       0.77     0.78      0.74
        2      1.89       2.53     2.41      2.08
        3      4.64       4.30     4.66      5.13
        4     11.93      10.37    11.07     12.58




                                                     37
Table 3: First Stage Model - Ordered logit to predict the quartile of brokers that serve small employers per
100,000 population

                                                  Broker Geographic Market Definition
                                   Model 1            Model 2           Model 3                Model 4
                                   County              CBSA          Fixed Radius           Variable Radius

                              Dependent Variable: Quartiles of brokers that serve small employers per
Instrumental Variable:        100,000 population (Categorical: 1,2,3,4)
                                                       Coefficient (Std. Error)
Number of brokers that do
not serve small employers
per 100,000 population             0.46***              0.86***            0.82***              0.68***
                                   (0.013)              (0.018)            (0.016)              (0.014)

Adjusted Wald Test F-stat          1365.04              2433.32            2878.52              2423.62

                              Marginal effect (Std. Error) of the number of brokers that do not serve small
                                 firms on the probability of each category of the dependent variables
1st Quartile                     -0.037***            -0.067***          -0.064***           -0.056***
                                   (0.001)              (0.001)            (0.001)             (0.001)
2nd Quartile                     -0.016***            -0.015***          -0.017***           -0.014***
                                  (0.0005)             (0.0007)           (0.0007)            (0.0006)
3rd Quartile                     0.015***              0.025***           0.025***            0.028***
                                  (0.0007)              (0.001)           (0.0009)            (0.0007)
4th Quartile                     0.038***              0.058***           0.056***            0.043***
                                  (0.0008)              (0.001)           (0.0008)            (0.0005)
Notes:
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
All firm and market characteristics listed in the Data section are included in the model but not reported in
the Table.




                                                                                                      38
Table 4: Probability of Offering Insurance

                                                             Logit estimates with two-stage residual inclusion

                                                                   Broker Geographic Market Definition
                                                       Model 1          Model 2        Model 3         Model 4
                                                                                                       Variable
                                                       County            CBSA        Fixed Radius      Radius

Independent Variables:                                          Change in probability of offering (Std. Error)

Firm size (ref: < 25 employees)
                            25-50 employees           0.148***           0.149***         0.149***          0.148***
                                                       (0.015)            (0.015)          (0.015)           (0.015)

Firm fringe benefit offerings
                                paid vacation         0.186***           0.185***         0.185***          0.186***
                                                        (0.01)             (0.01)           (0.01)            (0.01)
                                sick leave            0.035***           0.036***         0.036***          0.035***
                                                       (0.008)            (0.008)          (0.009)           (0.008)
                                life insurance        0.285***           0.286***         0.286***          0.286***
                                                       (0.012)            (0.012)          (0.012)           (0.012)
                                disability
                                insurance             0.084***           0.084***         0.084***          0.084***
                                                       (0.012)            (0.012)          (0.012)           (0.012)
                                retirement pension    0.123***           0.122***         0.123***          0.123***
                                                       (0.009)            (0.009)          (0.009)           (0.009)
Number of brokers that serve small employers
per 100,000 pop (ref: 1st quartile)
                             2nd quartile               0.055             0.057*            0.036            0.015
                                                       (0.038)            (0.034)          (0.035)          (0.033)
                                3rd quartile           0.062**            0.05**            0.036           0.056**
                                                       (0.032)            (0.026)          (0.024)          (0.024)
                                4th quartile          0.082***            0.06**           0.063**          0.057**
                                                       (0.032)            (0.027)          (0.028)          (0.028)

Observations                                           18,345            18,345            18,345            18,345
Hausman test F (p-value)                             0.77 (0.51)        0.79 (0.5)       0.77 (0.51)        1.55 (0.2)

Notes:
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
All firm and market characteristics listed in the Data section are included in the model but not reported in the Table
Standard errors are computed using 500 bootstrap replications.


                                                                                                            39
Table 5: Premium for single coverage weighted across all plans conditional on offering

                                                                OLS estimation with two-stage residual inclusion

                                                                      Broker Geographic Market Definition
                                                         Model 1          Model 2          Model 3        Model 4
                                                         County            CBSA          Fixed Radius Variable Radius

Independent Variables:                                           Change in single coverage premium (Std. Error)

Firm size (ref: < 25 employees)
                             25-50 employees           -288.61***         -285.58***         -285.15***        -283.41***
                                                         (79.56)            (79.54)             (79.1)            (79.3)

Firm fringe benefit offerings
                                paid vacation            243.88*           252.88**           247.26*              240.63*
                                                         (131.37)          (131.18)           (131.05)             (131.31)
                                sick leave                 -66.05           -65.52             -57.16               -53.07
                                                          (94.64)           (93.96)            (94.63)              (95.04)
                                life insurance             -21.28            -38.9              -37.22               -38.83
                                                          (84.63)           (84.78)            (84.57)              (84.62)
                                disability insurance       -93.48            -93.3             -91.72               -96.92
                                                          (80.49)           (81.12)            (80.59)              (80.25)
                                retirement pension          81.4             91.54              90.01                90.51
                                                           (78.6)           (78.93)            (78.61)              (78.69)

Number of brokers that serve small employers per
100,000 pop (ref: 1st quartile)
                               2nd quartile               -432.11           -560.98*            -411.9           -452.96
                                                         (333.84)            (305.5)           (295.86)          (295.34)
                                3rd quartile            -619.56**           -477.84*          -464.41**          -233.66
                                                         (272.35)           (254.75)           (236.59)          (232.28)
                                4th quartile            -677.89**          -570.26**         -604.04***         -495.15**
                                                         (292.47)           (263.48)           (237.41)           (241.4)

Observations                                               7,666             7,666              7,666             7,666
Hausman test F (p-value)                                1.34 (0.26)        0.97 (0.4)        1.11 (0.34)       2.12 (0.096)

Notes:
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
All firm and market characteristics listed in the Data section are included in the model but not reported in the Table
Standard errors are computed using 500 bootstrap replications.




                                                                                                              40
Table 6: Adjusted Predictions of Insurance Offering and Premiums by Broker Market Structure

                                                            Broker Geographic Market Definition
                                              Model 1            Model 2         Model 3           Model 4
                                              County              CBSA         Fixed Radius     Variable Radius
Number of brokers that serve small
employers per 100,000 pop:
                                                                   Probability of Offering
                    1st quartile                0.38               0.39                0.4            0.4
                    2nd quartile                0.43               0.44               0.43           0.41
                    3rd quartile                0.44               0.44               0.43           0.45
                    4th quartile                0.46               0.45               0.46           0.45

                                                              Premium for Single Coverage ($)

                    1st quartile                5173               5119               5091           5010
                    2nd quartile                4741               4558               4679           4558
                    3rd quartile                4553               4641               4627           4777
                    4th quartile                4495               4549               4487           4515


Note: Predictions are based on two-stage residual inclusion models presented in Tables 4 and 5.




                                                                                                   41
Table 7: Probability of offering a high-deductible plan conditional on offering

                                                                 Logit estimates with two-stage residual inclusion

                                                                       Broker Geographic Market Definition
                                                          Model 1          Model 2          Model 3        Model 4
                                                          County            CBSA          Fixed Radius Variable Radius

                                                        Change in probability of offering a high deductible plan conditional
Independent Variables:                                                        on offering (Std. Error)



Number of brokers that serve small employers per
100,000 pop (ref: 1st quartile)
                                2nd quartile                0.024             0.095               0.05               0.042
                                                           (0.08)            (0.075)            (0.074)             (0.079)
                               3rd quartile                -0.004             0.069               0.06                0.06
                                                          (0.065)            (0.058)            (0.054)             (0.055)
                               4th quartile                -0.055             0.012              0.039               0.017
                                                           (0.07)            (0.062)            (0.059)             (0.063)

Observations                                               6,079              6,079              6,079             6,079
Hausman test F (p-value)                                0.28 (0.84)        0.33 (0.81)        0.13 (0.94)       0.36 (0.78)

Notes:
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
All firm and market characteristics listed in the Data section are included in the model but not reported in the Table.
Standard errors are computed using 500 bootstrap replications.




                                                                                                               42
Table 8: Premium Dispersion: Joint maximum likelihood estimation of mean and
standard deviation of premiums, “county” geographic market

                                                                         Standard
                                                       Mean of         Deviation of
                                                      Premiums          Premiums
                                                     (equation 2)      (equation 3)
Independent Variables:

Number of brokers that serve small employers
per 100,000 pop (ref: 1st quartile)
                             2nd quartile               -297.04          -578.87
                                                       (365.71)          (385.34)
                             3rd quartile              -582.7**          -305.01
                                                       (266.87)          (296.77)
                             4th quartile             -624.99**         -644.55**
                                                        (303.8)          (313.49)
Adjusted Predictions by
broker quartiles
                             1st quartile                5031              2491
                             2nd quartile                4734              1912
                             3rd quartile                4448              2186
                             4th quartile                4406              1847
Notes:
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Sample is the same as in Table 5, 7,666 observations
All firm and market characteristics listed in the Data section are included in the
model but not reported in the Table.
Standard errors in parentheses




                                                                                      43
Table 9: Sensitivity Tests for Assessing the Instrumental Variable, “county” geographic market

                                                  Exclude county-                                 Use an
                                                        level                                   alternative
                                                                            Include fixed
                                                   characteristics                             instrumental
                                                                           effects for the
                                                  (from ARF) and                                 variable
                                                                         largest 10 CBSAs
                                                  firm-level fringe     (those with at least
                                                  benefit offerings      200 observations)

                                                                                                Number of
                                                 Number of health insurance brokers that       loan brokers
                                                   do not serve small employers per            per 100,000
Instrumental Variable                                        100,000 pop                           pop
Number of brokers that serve small
employers per 100,000 pop (ref: 1st
quartile):
                                                   Change in probability of offering by small firms (Std.
                                                  Error) - based on logit estimates with two-stage residual
                                                                           inclusion

                         2nd quartile                   0.066                 0.052               0.070
                                                       (0.035)               (0.037)             (0.046)
                         3rd quartile                 0.068**                0.058**             0.086**
                                                        (0.03)               (0.029)             (0.036)
                         4th quartile                 0.112***               0.071**             0.135**
                                                        (0.03)               (0.030)             (0.048)

Observations                                           18,345                 18,345              18,345

                                                  Change in single coverage premium of plans offered by
                                                  small firms (Std. Error) - based on OLS estimates with
                                                               two-stage residual inclusion

                         2nd quartile                  -289.48               -414.65             -959.28**
                                                       (286.73)              (364.37)             (398.15)
                         3rd quartile                 -443.18**             -543.64**            -676.21**
                                                       (227.94)              (265.10)             (305.90)
                         4th quartile                 -585.7***             -609.78**           -1038.54**
                                                       (240.12)              (296.21)             (422.19)

Observations                                              7,666                 7,666               7,666
Notes:
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
First stage results for the alternative instrumental variable: Coefficient estimate of the instrumental
variable: 0.19 (standard error 0.008). Adjusted Wald Test F-statistic: 556.94




                                                                                                            44
Table 10: Falsification analyses based on large employers with at least 200 employees


                                                                             Broker Geographic Market Definition
                                                          Model 1                 Model 2               Model 3               Model 4
                                                          County                  CBSA                Fixed Radius         Variable Radius

Number of brokers that serve small employers per
100,000 pop (ref: 1st quartile):

                                                     Change in probability of offering by large firms (Std. Error) - based on logit estimates


                          2nd quartile                      0.006                  0.003                  -0.005                 -0.003
                                                           (0.005)                (0.003)                (0.004)                (0.005)
                          3rd quartile                      0.004                  -0.002                -0.003                  0.001
                                                           (0.005)                (0.005)                (0.005)                (0.005)
                          4th quartile                      0.006                  0.002                  -0.004                 0.003
                                                           (0.004)                (0.005)                (0.005)                (0.005)

Observations                                                8733                    8733                   8733                  8733


                                                     Change in single coverage premium of plans offered by large firms (Std. Err) - based
                                                                                     on OLS estimates


                          2nd quartile                     24.954                  24.232                 -1.785                -7.627
                                                          (85.593)                (75.631)               (78.416)                (75.8)
                          3rd quartile                    -26.434                  31.217                -63.234                42.698
                                                           (80.88)                 (74.05)               (75.039)              (74.692)
                          4th quartile                     22.496                 -13.654                -74.277               -78.214
                                                          (78.613)                (79.263)               (79.203)               (83.02)

Observations                                                8399                    8399                   8399                  8399


Notes:
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
All firm and market characteristics listed in the Data section are included in the model but not reported in the Table




                                                                                                                              45
Appendix Table 1: Comparing NAHU health insurance brokers to County Business
Patterns (CBP) broad category of insurance brokers- County Level Analyses

                                 Dependent Variable: NAHU counts of health insurance
                                                      brokers,
                                                   OLS estimation


                                        Model 1                     Model 2
CBP counts of Insurance
Brokers (NAICS 524210)                  0.055***                   0.053***
                                        (0.00057)                  (0.00074)
Include county-level
demographic &
socioeconomic variables                    No                         Yes
Number of observations                    3006                        3006
R-Squared                                 0.76                        0.76
Notes
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
CBP counts of Insurance Brokers (NAICS 524210) represents a broader category of
brokers including real estate agents and brokers as well as brokers for other
insurance categories such as real estate, fire, life, property and casualty
insurance.
County-level demographic & socioeconomic variables in Model 2 were extracted from
the Area Resource File. They included indicators for urbanization of the county
(Metropolitan Area; Urban > 20,000 pop; urban <20,000; rural); county population, %
Hispanic, %male, %white, % black, % Asian, %elderly, median household income, %
families in poverty, % unemployed.




                                                                                       46
Appendix Table 2: Estimates of offering and premiums by small employers without endogeneity correction
                                                                 Broker Geographic Market Definition
                                                   Model 1            Model 2             Model 3                 Model 4
                                                   County              CBSA            Fixed Radius            Variable Radius
Number of brokers that serve small
employers per 100,000 pop (ref: 1st quartile):
                                                 Change in probability of offering by small firms (Std. Error) - based on logit
                                                                                   estimates

                        2nd quartile                  0.022                0.014                0.016                0.018
                                                     (0.015)              (0.014)              (0.014)              (0.013)
                        3rd quartile                0.034**               0.027*                0.023              0.037***
                                                     (0.015)              (0.015)              (0.015)              (0.014)
                        4th quartile                0.042***              0.036**              0.034**              0.036**
                                                     (0.015)              (0.016)              (0.015)              (0.015)

Observations                                         18,345                18,345               18,345              18,345


                                                  Change in single coverage premium of plans offered by small firms (Std.
                                                                     Error) - based on OLS estimates

                        2nd quartile                -290.73**           -481.89***            -267.53**             -122.3
                                                     (133.58)             (127.36)             (123.37)            (117.23)
                        3rd quartile                 -191.68            -381.88***             -261.43*            -185.06
                                                     (136.65)             (146.71)             (137.67)            (124.51)
                        4th quartile               -353.17***            -319.24**           -325.66***             -91.38
                                                     (143.13)             (146.81)             (140.93)            (136.64)

Observations                                          7,666                7,666                7,666                7,666
Notes:
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
All firm and market characteristics listed in the Data section are included in the model but not reported in the Table




                                                                                                                  47
Figure 1: An Example of Geographic Market Definitions




                                                        48
