NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PAYMENT SIZE, NEGATIVE EQUITY, AND MORTGAGE DEFAULT
Andreas Fuster
Paul S. Willen
Working Paper 19345
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19345

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

ˆWe are grateful to Ronel Elul, Andy Haughwout, Andrew Leventis, Brian Melzer, Anthony Murphy,
Joe Tracy, and seminar audiences at MIT Sloan, Freddie Mac, FRB Philadelphia, FRB New York,
the NBER Summer Institute, and the AREUEA National Conference for helpful comments and discussions.
The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Boston or New York, or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Andreas Fuster and Paul S. Willen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Payment Size, Negative Equity, and Mortgage Default
Andreas Fuster and Paul S. Willen
NBER Working Paper No. 19345
August 2013
JEL No. E43,G21
ABSTRACT
Surprisingly little is known about the importance of mortgage payment size for default, as efforts to
measure the treatment effect of rate increases or loan modifications are confounded by borrower selection.
We study a sample of hybrid adjustable-rate mortgages that have experienced large rate reductions
over the past years and are largely immune to these selection concerns. We show that interest rate
reductions dramatically affect repayment behavior, even for borrowers who are significantly underwater
on their mortgages. Our estimates imply that cutting a borrower’s payment in half reduces his hazard
of becoming delinquent by about 55 percent, an effect approximately equivalent to lowering the borrower’s
combined loan-to-value ratio from 145 to 95 (holding the payment fixed). These findings shed light
on the driving forces behind default behavior and have important implications for public policy.

Andreas Fuster
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Research Group
33 Liberty St
New York, NY 10045
andreas.fuster@ny.frb.org
Paul S. Willen
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
600 Atlantic Avenue
Boston, MA 02210-2204
and NBER
willen968@gmail.com

1

Introduction

Measuring the relative importance of payment size and negative equity is a central question in
the analysis of the mortgage default decision. Ongoing policy debates have pitted proponents
of principal reductions who argue that only the latter matters against opponents who argue
that monthly payment reductions are sufficient to prevent most defaults.1 Early in the recent
crisis, the dominant view was that the increase in foreclosures was almost entirely the result
of rising monthly payments (for example, Bair 2007 and Eakes 2007). However, others such
as Foote, Gerardi, and Willen (2012) have argued that payment increases of adjustable-rate
loans were not a major driving factor behind the crisis, based on the fact that the number
of defaults does not seem to react much even to large payment increases.
In this paper, we contribute to this debate by exploiting the resets of Alt-A hybrid
adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) over the period 2008–2011. Hybrid ARMs have fixed
payments for 3, 5, 7, or 10 years and then adjust annually or semiannually until the mortgage
matures, meaning that the borrower’s required monthly payment can adjust substantially
at a particular moment in the life of the mortgage.2 What makes our sample unique is
that, because of the changed macroeconomic environment, required payments on most of
these loans fell at the reset, often dramatically (see Panel A of Figure 1). This gives us an
advantage over previous work, because, as we explain in Section 2, the prepayment option
makes it impossible to use payment increases to measure the effects of payment changes on
mortgage defaults.
We compare the performance of mortgages before and after payment reductions to the
performance of otherwise similar mortgages that did not receive a contemporaneous payment
reduction, because they had a different fixed payment period. Our analysis also uses variation
in the size of payment reductions coming from different origination dates across loans. We
find that payment reductions have very large effects. Panel B of Figure 1 plots the hazard of
becoming 60-days delinquent for three types of loans as a function of the number of months
since the origination of the loan. It shows the hazard for ARMs that reset in month 61 (5year or “5/1” ARMs3 ) dropping from 1.7 percent in month 58 (three months prior to reset)
1

A recent Wall Street Journal article illustrates the debate: “Economists are split. ‘There’s no question
that in many cases, [principal forgiveness] is the only way to assure people will stay in the house,’ says
Kenneth Rosen of the University of California, Berkeley. Others say what really matters to borrowers is an
affordable monthly payment. ‘If people have a huge debt burden but the mortgage is not the problem, why
are we reducing the mortgage?’ asks Thomas Lawler, an independent housing economist in Leesburg, Va.”
(“How Forgiveness Fits in Housing-Fix Toolkit,” p. A2, July 30, 2012)
2
We restrict our sample to “interest-only” (IO) loans that do not amortize principal over the first ten
years of their life. As discussed later, the IO feature was very common among Alt-A hybrid ARMs.
3
We follow industry convention in referring to loans that reset after X years as “X/1” with the 1 referring
to the annual frequency of subsequent adjustments, generating a slight abuse of terminology as a majority

1

to 0.5 percent by month 64 (after the reset). Payments for these borrowers had fallen on
average by more than 3 percentage points, or 50 percent. The ARMs that reset after 7 or 10
years (“7/1+”) and thus had not yet reset in our observation period display no similar drop
around month 61. Until month 60, shortly prior to the reset, the hazard of the 7/1+ loans
was lower than that of the 5/1s, but after the reset the default hazard comes in dramatically
lower for the 5/1s.
While this figure is strongly suggestive, it obviously does not provide conclusive evidence
on the strength of the effects of payment reductions. In the remainder of this paper, we use
statistical techniques to show that the payment reductions indeed caused the changes in the
default hazards. In particular, we control for the possibility that changes in macroeconomic
conditions may differentially affect different loan types, and explore various alternative specifications to ensure that our effects are not driven by pre-reset trends or omitted variables.
We robustly find a large effect of payment reductions.
To quantify the size of the effect, we focus on comparing the effects of an interest rate
reduction with that of reducing a borrower’s negative equity position (while holding the
payment size constant). Our estimates indicate that a 2-percentage point reduction in the
interest rate charged to a borrower has effects on the default hazard approximately equivalent, for instance, to reducing the borrower’s combined loan-to-value ratio (CLTV) from
135 to 105.4 A reduction of 4 percentage points or more, which indeed applied to about
20 percent of 5/1s in our sample, has approximately the same predicted effect on the delinquency hazard as a reduction in the CLTV from 155 to 80. As an alternative way to quantify
the effect, our estimates imply that an interest rate decrease of 3 percentage points for a
group of “typical” 5/1s at age 61 months (close to the mean reduction such loans actually
experienced) with a CLTV between 130 and 140 reduces the number of delinquencies for
these loans over the year after the reset by about 9 percentage points, or more than half.5
This illustrates the broader and important finding that our estimated effects are similar if
we look at only a subset of borrowers in our sample who are severely underwater. As we
show, this is consistent with basic finance theory and goes against the intuition held by some
commentators that once a borrower’s mortgage is sufficiently far underwater, it is always
optimal for him to default.
An interesting question is at what point in time the effects of a predictable interest rate
of the ARMs in our sample actually adjust every 6 months.
4
A major advantage of the dataset we use over most of the previous literature is that for a large fraction
of loans, we have updated information on the current CLTV, including all liens on a property.
5
Such counterfactuals account for the fact that payment reductions also reduce the hazard of prepayment,
as shown in Panel C of Figure 1. For underwater loans, the prepayment hazard is very low, so reductions in
the default hazard translate almost directly into reductions in the number of defaults.

2

decrease actually occur. The default decision of a borrower who understands the terms of
his mortgage, tracks the underlying index (for example, the six-month LIBOR), and is not
liquidity constrained should not be affected by the actual occurrence of the reset. Instead,
such a borrower would, in each period, consider the expected rate path over all future
periods and decide accordingly whether default is optimal today, given his equity position
and his expectations of future house prices. We find little evidence for effects of interest rate
reductions on delinquency occurring much ahead of the actual reset, suggesting that either
many borrowers do not actively anticipate the much lower rate they will be paying after the
reset, or that they are so liquidity constrained that even foreknowledge of the reset cannot
prevent them from defaulting if they are short of cash a few months before the reset occurs.
We also study the effect of a decrease in the interest rate on the probability that a loan
that is at least 60-days delinquent “cures” (meaning that it becomes current again or pays
off voluntarily). As Panel D of Figure 1 illustrates, we see large effects there as well, with
the cure probability for 5/1s roughly doubling in month 63 relative to what it was before
the reset.6 Econometrically, we estimate that a 2-percentage point reduction in the interest
rate increases the probability of cure by about 50 percent, which is comparable to the effect
of reducing a loan’s CLTV from 135 to 110.
In sum, all our evidence suggests that the size of the required monthly payment is an
important determinant of mortgage delinquencies and cures for the borrower population we
study.7 This is not to say that a borrower’s equity position is unimportant: in fact, we
document very substantial effects of the CLTV on the likelihood of delinquency, and show
that using the more accurate information on second liens available in our dataset leads to a
higher estimated sensitivity of default to the level of negative equity.
Our results have important policy implications. A number of government-supported
programs such as HAMP (Home Affordable Modification Program) and HARP (Home Affordable Refinance Program) attempt to reduce mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures by
lowering the payments to “affordable” levels. However, empirical evidence on the success of
such programs is scarce (for exceptions, see Adelino, Gerardi, and Willen 2009, Haughwout,
Okah, and Tracy 2010, and Agarwal et al. 2011, who all study modifications, with a focus on
6

The cure rate in this figure may seem low; this is due to the fact that the denominator includes all 60+
days delinquent loans that have not foreclosed yet (including those that are in the foreclosure process). In
the appendix, we also look at newly 60-days delinquent loans separately, and find that those have a much
higher cure rate (which, for 5/1s, goes from about 12 percent in month 50 to a high of 30 percent after the
reset). It may also be surprising that the cure hazard falls again after month 63, but this can be explained
by the fact that the borrowers most likely to cure when the rate is reduced do so relatively quickly.
7
This is somewhat at odds with Amromin et al. (2010), who argue that for borrowers with “complex
mortgages” (including interest-only mortgages, to which we restrict our sample), payment resets do not have
important effects on delinquencies. However, over the period that they study, payment resets were relatively
unimportant, unlike the case in our sample.

3

how payment reductions perform relative to principal reductions in affecting re-default rates)
and somewhat difficult to interpret, because servicers and lenders choose the borrowers to
whom they offer a modification or a refinancing (and on what terms).8 As a consequence,
it is very difficult to know to what extent any observed effect is driven by selection or treatment, and therefore one cannot reliably extrapolate the resulting estimates of intervention
effectiveness to either larger-scale modification programs or policy interventions aimed at
reducing delinquency in the first place.
The identification of the effects of payment reductions in our setting is cleaner in that regard, as the payment reduction for borrowers with a certain mortgage type at a certain loan
age is unconditional on any other borrower covariates that may have changed since origination. Absent the ideal scenario of completely randomized payment reductions—which
unfortunately have not occurred—this seems to provide as good a natural laboratory to look
at the effects of substantial payment reductions as we can think of. On the other hand, the
Alt-A hybrid ARM borrower population we focus on is obviously not necessarily representative of the broader market. That said, contemporaneous work by Tracy and Wright (2012)
documents similar effects of interest rate reductions on the delinquency rates of ARM borrowers in the prime segment.9 Zhu (2012) studies HARP refinances using internal Freddie Mac
data, and also finds that these payment-reducing refinances substantially lower subsequent
default rates.
This paper is organized as follows: in the next section, we discuss the effects of payment
size and negative equity on mortgage defaults from a theoretical perspective, and the difficulties one faces when trying to cleanly identify these effects empirically. Section 3 describes
the empirical methods and data we use, while Section 4 presents the results from our analysis. Section 5 first discusses what our results tell us about the driving forces behind defaults,
and then moves on to policy implications. Section 6 offers a brief conclusion.
8
Also, servicers tend to only modify delinquent mortgages; it is not clear to what extent payment reductions reduce the default probability of nondelinquent borrowers, which are the target of HARP.
9
Tracy and Wright’s main goal is to predict the effects of a large-scale refinancing program such as HARP
on subsequent defaults and credit losses. Among other differences, Tracy and Wright do not focus on large
payment resets as we do, and do not explicitly discuss the relative importance of liquidity versus negative
equity in causing defaults. (As they are using the LPS data, measuring the precise extent of negative equity
is difficult, as that dataset contains no information on second liens.)

4

2
2.1

Theoretical considerations and identification
Why payment size would matter for default

In theoretical analyses of mortgage delinquency, researchers (for example, Deng, Quigley,
and Van Order 2000; Schelkle 2012) typically distinguish between a “frictionless” model in
which households are assumed to be able to borrow freely at the risk-free rate and default
is completely costless, and more realistic models in which borrowers are constrained and
subject to shocks, or where there are costs to defaulting beyond the loss of the house.
In both types of theory, negative equity is a necessary but not sufficient condition for
default. Likewise, payment size matters in both worlds. In a frictionless world, the payment
matters because it affects the total discounted cost of the mortgage (which the rational borrower compares to the expected net present value of the house). In the appendix, we present
a barebones, frictionless model that demonstrates the following points: first, mortgages can
usefully be thought of as call options on a call option on the house. Second, negative equity
is basically never sufficient for default to be optimal except in a situation where a borrower
with negative equity at time t also has negative equity for all s > t along every possible
path for prices. Unless that is the case, there is always a monthly payment low enough
such that it is optimal for the borrower to not default; therefore, payment reductions should
lower default rates. Importantly, this statement holds even if the borrower is free to default
and then repurchase the same house at a lower price, as long as there is no arbitrage in
the economy.10 And third, we show that changes in the size of the monthly payment affect
repayment behavior more when borrowers have negative equity than when they have positive
equity (as it is never optimal for a borrower with positive equity to default; he is better off
selling the house).
Frictions such as borrowing constraints and income shocks make the analysis more complicated and less elegant than the option-theoretic frictionless case. The economic mechanism
in such models (for example, Campbell and Cocco 2011) is typically that borrowers get hit
by “liquidity shocks” that make them more impatient (for example, they lose their job or
are subject to large medical expenses and cannot borrow sufficient amounts to smooth their
consumption) such that the effective cost of having to make a payment today weighs more
than the expected future value of the option on the house. This model is often referred
to as “double trigger,” because the combination of negative equity and some shock drives
10

The intuition for this result is that if it is optimal for the borrower to exercise his option by making
the payment, the overall expected value of the call option on the house must be positive, while any new
option the borrower could acquire in the market must ex ante have zero net expected value, as otherwise it
represents an arbitrage opportunity.

5

defaults. In such a world, having to make a smaller monthly payment makes it less likely
that for a shock of a given size, a borrower finds it optimal to default (or alternatively, the
shock size that makes defaulting optimal increases). The further underwater a borrower is,
the lower the payment that makes it worthwhile for him to continue paying after being hit by
a shock, but generally there again exists a payment size sufficiently low so that it remains in
the borrower’s interest to keep making payments rather than default.11 Payment reductions
should, therefore, again affect the default decision for any level of negative equity; whether
these reductions have larger effects the more negative equity a borrower has is theoretically
ambiguous.

2.2

Why we don’t know how much payment size matters for default

The proposition that researchers do not really know the precise effect of payment size and
affordabilty more broadly on the decision by a borrower to default on a mortgage may seem
surprising, given the attention to the topic of mortgage default in recent years and the
wealth of data on the subject provided by the worst foreclosure crisis in U.S. history.12 In
this section, we first review why it is so difficult to identify these effects and explain why the
resets of hybrid ARMs since 2008 present a unique opportunity to address the question.
One could try to identify the effect of payment size on delinquency simply by exploiting
the sizable heterogeneity among the monthly payments required of borrowers at a given point
in time. However, such an analysis would be plagued by very serious selection concerns:
lenders may require some borrowers to pay a higher interest rate precisely because these
borrowers are at a higher risk of default (so the lender requires a risk premium), or conversely,
some borrowers may be willing to pay more points upfront to reduce their interest rate
because they plan to stay in their house for a longer time. An alternative strategy one
might consider would be to rely purely on time-series variation in interest rates, but such an
analysis would be confounded by the fact that economic conditions also vary over time and
may affect default rates.
When thinking about the effects of affordability, or liquidity shocks, summary variables
that are often considered are the payment-to-income or the broader debt-to-income ratios.
A logical strategy to study the link between affordability (or liquidity) and default would
11

We say “generally” because one can, of course, imagine extreme shocks and borrowing constraints such
that a borrower prefers to spend all his money on food rather than make even a very low mortgage payment.
12
Of course, researchers have been trying to quantify the relative importance of negative equity and
affordability for mortgage default since much before the recent crisis—see, for example, von Furstenberg
(1969) or Campbell and Dietrich (1983) for important early contributions.

6

therefore be to look at income shocks, in particular those due to unemployment. However,
this is again a difficult endeavor: while large fractions of respondents in surveys of delinquent
borrowers report suffering shocks, including spells of unemployment and illness (for example,
Cutts and Merrill 2008), to identify the effects of those shocks we would need similar survey
data on the population of nondelinquent borrowers. Unfortunately, no publicly available
dataset combines detailed information on mortgage performance and employment histories.13
Recently, researchers have gained access to matched samples of credit bureau data and
loan-level mortgage data. While these datasets also do not allow direct observation of income
shocks, they do contain updated information on the status and availability of credit. Elul
et al. (2010), for example, use borrowers’ bankcard utilization rates as a proxy for their
liquidity constraints, and find that these have a statistically and economically significant
effect on the likelihood of default, especially for borrowers with high CLTV ratios (consistent
with double trigger theories). While this is a very interesting approach, it does not directly
identify the effects of liquidity shocks, as borrowers’ bankcard utilization rates are to some
extent endogenous to their behavior and their type.
Where does this leave us? Ideally, one would have a randomized experiment in which
some mortgage borrowers are required to make lower payments than others.14 As far as we
know, such data are not available, so we rely on perhaps the next best thing: a situation
in which different borrowers’ payments adjust at different times and by different amounts,
depending on when they took out their mortgage and exactly what type of mortgage they
got, but not conditional on their current equity position or other characteristics that may
have changed since origination. Such a situation is provided by hybrid ARMs with different
fixed-rate periods, different reset times, and different index rates.15 One needs not only
any type of resets, however, but downward resets: as we explain more formally now, the
prepayment option makes it impossible to use upward resets to reliably estimate the causal
13
The loan-level servicer and trustee data used by researchers to study mortgage performance typically
only provide information about the borrower’s income at the time of origination of the loan. The Panel
Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) or the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) provide
data on employment and mortgage default at annual frequencies but contain no information on the timing
of default, the terms of the mortgage, or precise information on the location and value of the property.
Hsu, Matsa, and Melzer (2013) use the SIPP to document that an increase in a state’s unemployment
insurance generosity significantly lowers the likelihood of mortgage delinquency and eviction of unemployed
homeowners, consistent with liquidity being an important driver of default.
14
For an example of such an experiment in the context of unsecured micro-credit, see Karlan and Zinman
(2009).
15
An alternative clever identification strategy is used by Anderson and Dokko (2011), who exploit random
variation in the due date of property taxes to study the causal effect of liquidity reductions on early payment
default of subprime borrowers. In a different context, Almeida et al. (2012) use ex-ante variation in the
maturity of long-term debt (similar to the ex-ante variation in reset dates used here) together with the
disruption in credit markets in the third quarter of 2007 to measure the causal effect of financial contracting
on firm behavior.

7

effect of payment size on defaults.
2.2.1

Selection versus treatment effects

Consider a situation with a continuum of borrowers divided into two types i ∈ {g, b} for
good and bad, with prepayment and defaults hazards of pit and dit , respectively. We assume
that dbt > dgt , that is, the bad types default more. We make no similar assumption about
prepayment. At time t the share of bad borrowers is σt , meaning that the prepayment and
default hazards in the population are pt = σt pbt + (1 − σt )pgt and dt = σt dbt + (1 − σt )dgt ,
respectively.
Consider a reset that occurs at time t + 1 and assume that it affects the default hazard
multiplicatively so that dit+1 = φdit for both types of borrowers. In case of an upward reset
we expect φ > 1, while for a downward reset we expect φ < 1. The goal of this paper is to
estimate φ, but the challenge we face is that we cannot tell the two borrower types apart
and can only observe dt and dt+1 (as well as pt and pt+1 ).
Two equations illustrate the key identification issues in estimating the effect of resets on
the default hazard. The first shows the treatment and selection effects on the change in the
default hazard:


dt+1
≡ φ̂ =
dt

φ
|{z}

Treatment effect

g 
b

1 + (σt+1 − σt )(dt − dgt )  .

σt dbt + (1 − σt )dt 
|
{z
}

(1)

Selection effect

Clearly, the treatment effect will be overestimated by φ̂ if σt+1 − σt > 0, that is, if the share
of bad borrowers is larger after the reset than before.
The second key equation is the law of motion for the share of bad borrowers in the
population:
σt (1 − pbt − dbt )
− σt ,
σt+1 − σt =
σt (1 − pbt − dbt ) + (1 − σt )(1 − pgt − dgt )
which we can re-write as:


1 − pgt − dgt
σt+1 − σt = σt σt + (1 − σt ) ·
1 − pbt − dbt

−1

− σt .

(2)

This expression will be positive if pgt + dgt > pbt + dbt , that is, if a larger fraction of good
borrowers than bad borrowers leaves the population during period t.
This illustrates why it is difficult to get an accurate estimate of φ from looking at upward
resets: a large fraction of good borrowers typically prepays before or at the reset (pgt is high),
8

meaning that the quality of the borrower pool is lower after the reset, and as a consequence
φ̂ > φ.16 In other words, the increase in the default hazard after the reset that is typically
observed in the data (for example, Ambrose, LaCour-Little, and Huszar 2005; deRitis, Kuo,
and Liang 2010; or Pennington-Cross and Ho 2010) confounds the treatment effect of higher
payments with the selection of higher-quality borrowers into prepayment.
This simple model also shows how selection can explain why researchers (for example,
Sherlund 2008 or Foote, Gerardi, and Willen 2012) found that when rates went up, the
number of defaults stayed relatively constant, and why this does not teach us much about
the effect of the reset on the hazard of default. Essentially, even if the hazard of default goes
up at the reset, the number of borrowers at risk falls, and these two effects can cancel out.
Letting Dt be the number of defaults at time t, we have


Dt+1
dbt σt (pbt + dbt ) + dgt (1 − σt )(pgt + dgt )
.
=φ 1−
Dt
dbt σt + dgt (1 − σt )
The expression in brackets is smaller than 1, and potentially substantially so, for instance
if pgt and 1 − σt are large (a large fraction good types prepay before the reset and these
good types represent a significant part of the borrower population). As a consequence, even
with φ much larger than 1, it is possible that the number of defaults stays relatively constant
around the reset. This is discussed in more detail in appendix A.3, which relates our findings
to earlier work arguing that upward resets of ARMs were not a major contributor to the
mortgage crisis.
The downward resets we consider in our empirical analysis are not subject to the selection
problem of good types avoiding the payment reset, but selection remains a potential issue. In
this case, we are most concerned with selection that would lead us to estimate φ̂ < φ, meaning
that our estimates would exaggerate the extent to which lowering the interest rate reduces
the default hazard. Thus, going back to equation (1), we are concerned with situations in
which σt+1 − σt < 0, that is, the share of bad borrowers is lower after the reset than before.
As we show in our empirical analysis, the reset affects both default and prepayment
behavior. Consider our law of motion for the share of bad borrowers and assume that the
reset affects the prepayment hazard by a factor π and the default hazard again by a factor
φ:



1 − πpg − φdg
σt+1 − σt = σt σt + (1 − σt ) ·
1 − πpb − φdb
16

−1

− σt .

(3)

Of course, upward resets need not lead to an increase in prepayments, if the rate that prepaying borrowers
could get on a new loan is not sufficiently below the rate on their current loan after the reset to make it
worthwhile to incur the transaction cost. However, initial rates on new ARMs (or FRMs) have historically
been sufficiently low to cause large spikes in prepayment rates when the rate reset up.

9

Suppose we assume that initially π and φ equal 1 and there is a constant termination hazard
for both types, meaning that pg − dg = pb − db (omitting time subscripts for simplicity). How
do shocks to π and φ affect the evolution of the share of bad types?
∂(σt+1 − σt )
∂π
∂(σt+1 − σt )
∂φ

=

σ(1 − σ)(pg − pb )
>0
1 − pb − d b

(4)

=

σ(1 − σ)(dg − db )
<0
1 − pb − d b

(5)

pb +db =pg +dg ,π=φ=1

pb +db =pg +dg ,π=φ=1

What this means is that if the reset lowers the probability of prepayment, then it reduces the
growth in the number of bad types; if it lowers the probability of default, then it increases
the growth in the number of bad types. In other words, a reduction in the prepayment
hazard due to the reset may lead us to overstate the effect of the reset on the default hazard,
while a reduction in the true default hazard may attenuate our estimate of the effect of the
reset on the default hazard towards 1.
We argue that while we cannot show theoretically that our estimated treatment effect is
perfectly unbiased, it is unlikely that selection effects lead to exaggerated estimates of the
effect of the downward resets in our setting. First, since the default hazard is higher (and
in some cases much higher) than the prepayment hazard around the resets in our data, we
would generally expect the net effect of the reset to increase the growth in the number of bad
types in the population, meaning that the bias would attenuate our estimated effect. Second,
a subsample of the borrowers in our sample is so deeply underwater that the prepayment
hazard before and after the reset is practically zero. This means that any effect of π is
effectively turned off, and as a consequence, the average quality of loans in this subsample,
if anything, worsens after the reset relative to what would have happened without the reset,
and we may underestimate the true change in φ.
In sum, the loans in our sample offer a unique combination. Since payments are falling,
the borrowers in our sample have little incentive to refinance around the reset. Furthermore,
a majority of the borrowers in our sample are deeply underwater and therefore unable to
refinance or sell, even if they wanted to do so for reasons unrelated to interest rates. As a
consequence, the borrower population in our sample stays approximately fixed around the
reset, and our analysis is thus much less plagued by potential selection effects than if we
studied upward resets.

10

3

Empirical methods

In the remainder of the paper, we estimate versions of the equation
yit = F (β1 X1,i + β2 X2,t + β3 X3,it + γRit + ǫit ) ,

(6)

where yit is the probability of default, prepayment, or cure.17 The index i denotes a loan
and t is a measure of time (which will correspond to the number of months since origination for delinquency or prepayment, or to the number of months since becoming delinquent
for the cure analysis). The X variables are our explanatory variables: X1,i is a vector of
characteristics of the loan at origination; X2,t are macroeconomic variables like the unemployment rate; and X3,it are time-varying, borrower-specific variables like the amount of
equity the borrower has in the property. Our main focus is on Rit , the interest rate faced
by borrower i at time t, which we measure relative to the initial interest rate on the loan for
delinquency and prepayment, or relative to the interest rate at the time when the borrower
became delinquent for the cure analysis. In this section, we discuss key details of our various
regression specifications including the data we use, the precise specification of the model,
and the timing of the relevant variables.

3.1

Measuring defaults, prepayments and cures

As mentioned, we consider three different outcome variables: default, prepayment, and cure.
We define default as occurring when the servicer reports a borrower as 60-days delinquent
using the MBA (Mortgage Bankers Association) definition of delinquency.18 Specifically, the
MBA definition says that a borrower’s delinquency status increases by 30 days every time the
borrower fails to make a scheduled payment before the next payment is due. For example,
using the MBA method, a servicer would report a borrower who is current, has a payment
due on June 1 and makes no payments in June as current in June and 30-days delinquent in
July. Depending on whether the borrower makes no payment, one payment, or two payments
in July, he will transition to 60 days, stay at 30 days or become current, respectively. This
means that a borrower who resumes making payments but fails to make up missed payments
can remain in a particular delinquency bin indefinitely. Historically, and even in this crisis,
borrowers who become 30-days delinquent are very likely to become current again and thus
17
We also consider the probability of modification for delinquent loans (as modification is a competing
hazard for cure). However, as we do not emphasize these results in the main text, we omit modifications
from the discussion in this section.
18
There is an alternative delinquency definition, the OTS/FFIEC rule. See www.securitization.net/
pdf/content/ADC_Delinquency_Apr05.pdf for details.

11

30-day delinquency is not considered evidence of serious stress. On the other hand, in our
data, 83 percent of borrowers who become 60-days delinquent also enter foreclosure over the
sample period, meaning that 60-day delinquency is a good indicator of serious stress.
A prepayment occurs when borrower repays the loan in full. In our framework, default
and prepayment are competing risks, meaning that a borrower who has prepaid cannot
default and a borrower who has defaulted cannot prepay. This means that for the purpose
of our delinquency analysis, a loan “dies” the first time it becomes 60-days delinquent.
Such loans that are at least 60-days delinquent do not become irrelevant for us, however,
because we consider them separately in our cure analysis. For our purposes, cure of a
delinquency occurs when the servicer reports the borrower as current or prepaid after the
borrower has become 60-days delinquent. Note that to cure, the borrower cannot simply
resume making scheduled payments but must remit all the missed payments as well. In
other words, to go from 60-days delinquent to current in one month, a borrower must make
three payments.

3.2

Data

We use a sample of 221,000 Alt-A, interest-only (IO) adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs)
originated between January 1, 2005 and June 30, 2006. The sample comes from the CoreLogic
LoanPerformance (LP) dataset, which contains data on pools of loans sold in the privatelabel securitization market, meaning that the loans were not insured by Fannie Mae, Freddie
Mac, or the Federal Housing Administration. We now describe the data in detail, discuss
the reasons for our sample restrictions, and provide some descriptive statistics.
The LP dataset includes basic origination information, including borrower FICO score,
the zip code of the property, the terms of the loan, the original loan-to-value ratio, whether
the loan was used to purchase a property or to refinance another loan, and whether the
borrower plans to occupy the property or is an investor.19
For ARMs, the information about the terms of the loan includes the number of months
after which the loan resets for the first time, the frequency of subsequent resets (6 or 12
months), the interest rate to which the loan is indexed,20 the margin over the index rate,21
19

Information about whether the borrower is an investor is generally not considered highly reliable; as
Haughwout et al. (2011) document, many investors pretended to be occupying the property underlying
the mortgage, presumably in order to obtain more favorable loan terms. That said, Alt-A mortgages are
traditionally considered an “investor product,” so misrepresentation in our sample may be less severe than
in the subprime segment.
20
In our sample, 69 percent of loans are indexed to the 6-month LIBOR, 29 percent to the 1-year LIBOR,
and 2 percent to the 1-year Treasury bill rate.
21
The most common margins in our sample are 225 basis points (71 percent of loans) and 275 basis points
(19 percent of loans). Almost all of the remaining loans have margins between 250 and 500 basis points. After

12

and bounds on the admissible level of or changes to the interest rate (commonly referred
to as “caps” and “floors”).22 The information provided is (nearly) sufficient to predict the
evolution of the interest rate as a function of the index to which it is linked.23
Most importantly for us, the LP dataset contains dynamically updated information on a
loan’s current interest rate and delinquency status, and flags for loan modifications, allowing
us to distinguish scheduled changes to the terms of a loan from unscheduled ones.
Our version of LP also includes a new, dynamically updated measure of a borrower’s
leverage in the property, which should be much more accurate than the information that has
traditionally been used in mortgage research. Since the dataset was created 20 years ago, LP
has reported the origination LTV of most loans. For a subset of loans, LP also reported the
initial CLTV which took into account second liens taken out at origination (known as “piggybacks”). LP traditionally did not update LTV or CLTV over time to account for new liens
or for changes in the price of the house.24 However, LP recently augmented their data with
a new measure of updated CLTV called “TrueLTV.” TrueLTV uses information from statelevel public records databases to measure all liens, including both simultaneous second liens
taken out at origination and second liens taken out later, and uses an automated valuation
model to update the value of the property. The TrueLTV of a mortgage is updated either
monthly (for most loans) or annually but is not available for all loans (and, even within a
loan, not necessarily for all months); as a consequence, we also compare the predicted effects
of CLTV on delinquency with the predicted effect from an alternative measure that updates
the LTV of a first-lien loan based on local house price changes, as is frequently done in the
literature (for example, Bajari, Chu, and Park 2008; Elul 2011; Tracy and Wright 2012).25
With the exception of Goodman et al. (2010), we are, to the best of our knowledge, the first
adding the margin to the index rate, the interest rate is rounded to the nearest one-eight of one percentage
point. The margins on subprime loans made over this period were typically substantially higher, with an
average around 600 basis points (Demyanyk and Van Hemert 2011).
22
An example from an actual loan contract: “The interest rate I am required to pay at the first Change
Date will not be greater than 12.625% or less than 2.25%. Thereafter, my interest rate will never be increased
or decreased on any single Change Date by more than Two percentage points (2%) from the rate of interest
I have been paying for the preceding six months. My interest rate will never be greater than 12.625%.”
23
The only piece of information that is missing is the exact date at which the index rate is taken to
determine the borrower’s subsequent interest rate after the reset. Typically, this is the first business day
of the month prior to the reset date, but we have also encountered loan contracts where the relevant index
rate was measured 45 days prior to the reset date. When imputing interest rates (or forecasts thereof) we
assume that the relevant index rate is taken as of the first business day of the month.
24
The same is true for other popular datasets used in this literature, such as the one provided by LPS
Applied Analytics (formerly known as “McDash”), which furthermore does not contain information on initial
CLTVs (when there are multiple liens) for any loans.
25
We use the CoreLogic zip-code-level indices based on sales of nondistressed properties.

13

to use TrueLTV for academic research.26
The LP dataset contains both Alt-A and subprime mortgages; we focus on Alt-A rather
than subprime because subprime ARM contracts typically contained floors such that the
interest rate could not go lower than the initial rate (Bhardwaj and Sengupta 2011). AltA mortgages are also referred to as “near prime” and are linked to borrowers who are
characterized by either minor credit quality issues or an inability or unwillingness to provide
full documentation of income and assets. Adelson (2003), Mayer, Pence, and Sherlund
(2009), and Sengupta (2010) provide an overview of the Alt-A market and how it compares
to subprime; we also discuss some comparisons below.
We focus on 30-year hybrid ARMs with fixed-rate periods of 3, 5, 7, or 10 years and a
10-year interest-only (IO) feature, originated between January 1, 2005, and June 30, 2006.
An IO period means that over that time, the borrower only pays interest, without amortizing
the mortgage. This leads to an initially lower monthly payment, but allows the borrower
to avoid building equity in the property.27 We study IO mortgages because for these loans
the interest rate change directly corresponds to the payment change, and an interest rate
decrease of a given magnitude will have the largest impact on the payment. For instance,
payment reductions of regular amortizing 5/1s are not all that large, because after 5 years a
substantial part of the payment is principal amortization. Also, we choose mortgages with
the 10-year-IO feature because 5-year-IO mortgages (which are also quite popular) start
amortizing after 5 years and so may in fact see payment increases even if the interest rate
resets substantially lower. Finally, the 10-year-IO feature was very popular among Alt-A
hybrid ARMs.28
Our origination date range was chosen for two reasons. First, when these loans reset, the
majority of them see large reductions in interest rates, as the 6-month and 1-year LIBOR
as well as the constant-maturity 1-year Treasury bill rate, to which these loans are indexed
when they reset, have been very low since early 2009 (see Panel A of Figure 2) after an initial
drop in early 2008. Second, for those that have reset (the 3/1s and 5/1s), we have at least
26

Elul et al. (2010) and Bond et al. (2013) use updated CLTV estimates based on information on second
liens from credit bureau data.
27
Barlevy and Fisher (2010) argue that IOs are the perfect product to speculate during a bubble. An
alternative type of “exotic” mortgage that was popular during the boom years was the negative amortization
or “option” ARM, which allowed the borrower to make less than his scheduled monthly payment and to
add the difference to the mortgage balance. This feature was mostly combined with otherwise regular
amortization, that is, non-IO ARMs.
28
Among hybrid ARMs with fixed-rate periods of three years or longer originated in 2005/6, the share of
10-year-IOs is approximately 59 percent. About 20% were 5-year-IOs, while only about 13% were regularly
amortizing over the full loan term. Overall, the value-weighted shares of Alt-A originations over 2005/6 are
approximately as follows: Fixed-rate mortgages (FRMs) 29 percent, amortizing ARMs (mostly without an
initial fixed-rate period) 37.5 percent, 5-year-IO ARMs 8.5 percent, and 10-year-IO ARMs 21.3 percent, with
the rest going to ARMs with different or unknown IO periods, or balloon mortgages.

14

an additional five months of performance data (unless they prepay or foreclose, of course).
We retain only first-lien mortgages on single-family homes, condominiums, and townhouses, with origination amounts between $40,000 and $1,000,000 (roughly corresponding
to the 1st and 99th percentile of our initial sample) and with an origination LTV between
20 and 100 percent. Also, we restrict our sample to loans that enter the dataset within six
months of origination, in order to minimize selection bias. This leaves us with a total of
221,561 loans, of which about 59 percent are 5/1s, 18 percent are 10/1s, 16 percent are 3/1s,
and 7 percent are 7/1s. As of November 2011, the last month of performance data in our
sample, slightly fewer than one-third (70,422) of our original loans were still open (they had
not prepaid and were not currently in foreclosure).
Panel B of Figure 2 shows the distribution of interest rate changes at the first reset, as
well as subsequent resets. For the 5/1s, almost two-thirds of loans saw a reduction of 3
percentage points or more at the first reset (with the heterogeneity mostly due to differences
in floors and caps, as well as the initial rate). Subsequent resets for these loans tended to
be small. For the 3/1s, the pattern is somewhat different, as only about 20 percent of those
loans saw interest rate reductions of 2 percentage points or more at the first reset (which
happened between January 2008 and June 2009), but subsequent resets tended to be more
substantial than for the 5/1s (as the index rates kept decreasing).
Table 1 shows other basic information about our sample. Panel A shows that the market
for Alt-A hybrid ARMs grew markedly over our sample, with 88,500 loans originated in the
first half of 2006 compared with only 60,400 in the same period one year earlier. The mix
of loans changed considerably as well, with a doubling in the origination of longer-duration
ARMs offsetting a more than halving of the market for 3/1s.29
Panel B shows some key statistics about characteristics at origination. Overall, borrowers
in our sample were highly levered and unlikely to provide full documentation when obtaining
their mortgage. More than half the involved properties were located in the so-called sand
states: Arizona, California, Florida, or Nevada. The average FICO score for all loan types is
above 710, which is close to the median FICO score in the U.S. population. Compared with
subprime loans originated around the same time, the characteristics of which are summarized
in Mayer, Pence, and Sherlund (2009), the loans in our sample are similarly highly levered,
have higher FICO scores (the median FICO score of subprime loans in this period was around
617), are more likely to provide low or no documentation (subprime: 37 percent), are more
likely to be on (declared) investor or second home properties (subprime: 7 percent), are
29
The change in market shares of the different types over the origination period is most likely due to
changes in the term structure of interest rates during this time: the yield curve flattened substantially over
the course of 2005, making long-duration loans relatively cheaper and thus prompting borrowers to move
into hybrid ARMs with longer fixed-rate periods (or into FRMs).

15

more likely to be purchase loans (subprime: 41 percent), and are less likely to be subject to
a prepayment penalty (subprime: 71 percent).30 Comparing the loans with different fixedrate periods in our sample, one notices that the 10/1s, although larger, are somewhat less
risky than the others, based on characteristics at origination.
Panel C shows that by the beginning of 2008, most borrowers in the sample had negative
equity and by 2010 and especially 2011, were deeply underwater with a mean CLTV of 145
percent for the whole sample.31
The Alt-A ARMs originated in 2005 and 2006 are an exceptionally troubled group of
loans. Panel D shows that by November of 2011, lenders had foreclosed or arranged for
short sales on more than a third of the loans. The 5/1 and 7/1 ARMs performed significantly
worse than either the 3/1s or the 10/1s. As we discuss below, the stronger performance of
those loans reflects the earlier resets for the 3/1s, as well as the better initial credit quality
for the 10/1 borrowers, who had both higher credit scores and significantly more equity at
and after origination than the rest of the sample.

3.3

Econometric methods

3.3.1

Default and prepayment

As is standard in the literature, we conduct a competing risk analysis of prepayment and
default (for example, Deng, Quigley, and Van Order 2000; Foote et al. 2010; Krainer and
Laderman 2011).32 We use a Cox proportional hazard framework, which asserts that the
hazard rate of borrower j at loan age t for outcome n ∈ (default, prepayment) is given by
hn (t|Xit ) = hn0 (t) · exp(Xit β n ),

(7)

where Xit is the vector of borrower-specific controls (some of which are time-varying, such
as the current CLTV and the interest rate). The baseline hazard h0 (t) for both outcomes
is unrestricted, and we typically let it vary by origination quarter of the mortgage (that
is, we have six different baseline hazards) in order to pick up differences in underwriting
standards or other unobservables. The default and prepayment hazards are assumed to be
independent.
Our population of interest is loans that are either current or 30-days delinquent. When
estimating the Cox model for delinquency, we treat mortgages that prepay as censored, and
30

For about 95 percent of loans with a prepayment penalty, the penalty applies for three years or less,
with three years as the modal length.
31
This includes delinquent loans. Among loans that are current, the mean CLTV in November 2011 was
137.5, with a median of 129.6.
32
Classic analyses of the prepayment decision include Schwartz and Torous (1989) and Stanton (1995).

16

vice-versa.33 Importantly, we also treat as censored mortgages that are subject to an interest
rate increase; as explained in Section 2, such upward resets give rise to potentially important
selection biases. That said, in our data only about 15,000 loans ever see their interest rate
increase, most of them at either age 37 or 43 months (for 3/1s) or 67 months (for 5/1s,
which, at age 61 months, see large decreases).
In our baseline specification, we only retain loans that are older than 30 months. This
is because we are primarily interested in the effects of rate resets, which start occurring
in month 37, and we want to avoid that the “comparison group” of loans with no reset is
dominated by young loans, where the relative performance of different loan types may be
different from the relative performance just before the reset. That said, we will see later that
not imposing this restriction, or instead looking only at a narrow time window around the
reset, leaves the results almost unchanged, suggesting that this issue is of minor importance
in our sample.
3.3.2

Cures

To study the determinants of cures of delinquent mortgages, we again use a Cox proportional
hazard model, this time on only the population of loans that is 60+ days delinquent. The
possible competing outcomes are now n ∈ (cure, foreclosure, modification); we discuss mainly
the results on the cure hazard. The index t now refers to the number of months a loan has
been delinquent, since the number of periods a loan has been in delinquency will strongly
affect the likelihood that it cures. We additionally add dummies for each loan age to allow
for age dependence in the likelihood of cures. We retain all “delinquency episodes” that start
with a 60-day delinquency; if a borrower cures after his first episode, he may appear in more
than one episode. Consequently, we cluster the standard errors at the loan level (while for
the delinquency and prepayment analysis, we cluster at the state level).
In addition to the Cox models, we also run linear probability models on the determinants
of cures for (only) newly 60-days delinquent loans. The results, which are given in the
appendix, provide an alternative perspective on the size of the effects, test for forwardlooking effects, and allow easy comparative statics exercises.
33

In both cases, we also treat mortgages as censored when they are marked in the LP data as being
subject to a loan modification, which often leads the mortgage to become a fixed-rate mortgage or to reset
at different dates than those specified in the original contract. Only about 3,000 uncensored loans in our
data are modified while current or 30-days delinquent.

17

3.4

Control variables

Panel B of Figure 3 shows the main borrower-specific control variables that we include in
our regressions. Our main variables of interest are the borrower’s current interest (relative
to his initial rate) and his updated CLTV. To allow for nonlinear effects in a parsimonious
and easy-to-interpret manner, we use indicators for bins of values these variables take. We
also include bins of the interest rate at origination (of width 25 basis points) to control for
initial differences in payment size, as well as the interest rate spread at origination (SATO,
calculated relative to the median rate of loans of the same type originated in the same month)
and original LTV to account for potential selection effects. For the same reason, we add loan
type dummies (3/1, 5/1, 7/1+), and we also interact these with calendar quarter dummies,
to account for the possibility that borrowers in different loan types are affected differentially
by changing economic conditions.
In addition, we include the FICO score at origination, dummies for the current number of
open liens, the log of the origination amount, a dummy for there being an active prepayment
penalty, a condo dummy, purpose type (dummies for rate-term refi and cash-out refi, with
purchase as the omitted category), documentation (dummies for full and no documentation,
with low documentation as the omitted category), and a dummy for whether the loan is
on a second home or investment property. We also put in some proxies for local economic
conditions and income shocks of the borrower: zip-code-level house price growth over the
past 12 months (measured by the CoreLogic house price index), the local (MSA or statelevel) unemployment rate, and the six-month change in the unemployment rate. We add
the current Freddie Mac 30-year FRM rate, which one would expect to matter in particular
in the prepayment regression. Finally, to account for differences in the legal environment
across states (Ghent and Kudlyak 2011), we include state dummies in our regressions.

3.5

Timing

The central question of this paper is how a reduction in the required monthly payment
affects payment behavior, but linking a particular monthly payment to default is not as
straightforward as it sounds, as the following simple example illustrates. Suppose a borrower
has a loan that resets from a fixed rate to an adjustable rate on June 1. In the typical loan
in our dataset, the new interest rate for June will depend on the value of the index interest
rate on the first business day of the month prior—that is, May 1 in our example. The reset
means that on June 1, interest starts accruing at, for example, the six-month LIBOR on
May 1 plus 225 basis points. But, since mortgage payments are made in arrears, the first
monthly payment using the new rate will not be due until July 1. Furthermore, recall from
18

our earlier discussion that a missed payment changes delinquency status only in the month
after the missed payment. Therefore, if a loan reset on June 1 affects a borrower’s ability to
make the payment, we will not detect this as a change in delinquency status until August.
The note holder is required by law to deliver a written notice to the borrower with the
details of the new payment before the change becomes effective. Thus, a borrower whose
interest rate changes in June (so the higher payment becomes due in July) would be notified
about the change in May.
In our baseline specification for delinquency, we assume that the borrower’s payment
behavior is affected in the month the payment is due, as described above. In other words, we
use the two-month-lagged interest rate as our independent variable—for example, the June
rate for delinquency in August. On the other hand, when analyzing the prepayment hazard,
we do not lag the interest rate, because prepayment is recorded the month it occurs.
The baseline specification is not the only natural model to use. In a frictionless model
(discussed verbally in Section 2 and formally in Appendix A.2), the value of the call option
on the house depends on the price of future call options. Therefore, if a borrower’s expected
required payment in any future period decreases, he should become less likely to default today
(with the magnitude of the effect depending on the borrower’s discount factor). Below, we
test to what extent interest rate reductions affect delinquency before they actually occur.
To do so, we need to impute an expectation for our borrowers. Following the discussion
above, a borrower who knows the terms of his mortgage will always know the interest rate
that will affect his delinquency status two months out. For additional months in the future,
we assume that the borrower bases his expectation on the current value of the index rate
underlying his mortgage (for example, the six-month LIBOR) on the first of the month and
assumes that this rate follows a random walk.34 Using information on a borrower’s margin
above the index rate, as well as caps and floors on interest rate changes that are specified in
the loan contract, we then impute what the borrower would likely expect the interest rate
to be up to six months in the future.

4

Results

In this section, we review the results of estimating equation (6) for defaults, prepayments,
and cures. The main question is whether formal statistical analysis confirms the visual
evidence from Figure 1 that interest rate reductions reduce the likelihood of defaults and
34

Koijen, Van Hemert, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2009) study time-series determinants of demand for fixedrate versus adjustable-rate mortgages and find that a backward-looking specification for interest rate expectations explains borrower choices well.

19

increase the likelihood of cures. After presenting results from a baseline specification, we
address potential concerns related to pre-reset trends, selection, and differential sensitivity
of different loan types to economic conditions. We also present a variety of other robustness
checks.
In proportional hazard models, the exponential functional form implies that the effect of
a change in a control variable is assumed to be multiplicative. In our figures as well as the
complete regression tables, which are given in the appendix, we report hazard ratios, which
can be interpreted as the multiplicative effect of a one-unit increase in a variable (while to
get, say, the predicted effect of a two-unit decrease, one needs to calculate 1/(hazard ratio)2 ).

4.1

Defaults

Figure 3 shows the estimation results for our baseline default regression. The top panel
shows that rate resets have an effect on the default hazard that is both statistically and
economically highly significant. For instance, a 2-percentage point reduction in the interest
rate on the loans in our sample lowers the probability of default by about 40 percent while a
4-percentage point reduction lowers it by two-thirds, effects that are statistically significant
at the 0.1-percent level.
To give a better sense of the economic magnitude of these estimates, we add a plot of
the effect of different levels of CLTV to the top panel of Figure 3. A 2-percentage point
reduction in the interest rate has an effect roughly comparable to a reduction in CLTV
from our baseline level of 135 to around 105, holding the payment fixed. Alternatively, a
3-percentage point reduction, which is close to the mean and median reduction experienced
by 5/1s at their first reset, and approximately cuts their required monthly payment in half,
corresponds approximately to moving the CLTV from 145 to 95.35
It is important to stress here that whereas one can plausibly interpret the effect of the
interest rate changes as a causal treatment effect, it is more difficult to do the same for the
CLTV because the variation in CLTV is not random: reductions in house prices proxy for
local economic conditions that also affect the default hazard. That said, we try to proxy for
these economic conditions by directly adding the change in local house prices as well as the
unemployment rate and recent changes therein as explanatory variables in our regressions.
The coefficients on the control variables, reported in Panel B of Figure 3, behave largely
as expected. Despite controlling for interest rates and many other observables directly, the
SATO positively predicts defaults, suggesting that riskier borrowers obtain higher interest
loans. The fact that origination LTV has an effect despite the fact that we control for CLTV
35
One caveat here is that we do not observe the interest rate and required payment on second liens. Thus,
a 3-percentage point reduction may actually reduce the monthly payment by less than half on average.

20

after origination implies a similar selection into high LTV loans. Finally, while we do not
report the coefficients on loan type × calendars quarters, the default hazards for 5/1s and
3/1s tend to significantly exceed that of 7/1 and 10/1 loans, suggesting that borrowers with
longer fixed-rate periods are less risky.
In Section 2, we argued that the size of the monthly payment should affect the default
hazard even for borrowers with negative equity, and the data overwhelmingly confirm this
prediction. First, remember that at the time of the resets of the 5/1 ARMs, the average
LTV in our sample is over 140, making it hard to imagine that our results are driven by
borrowers with positive equity. But to analyze this more formally, we repeat our baseline
regression with a restricted sample of borrowers with CLTV greater than 140. Panel A of
Figure 4 shows that there is no meaningful difference between the estimated effect of payment
reductions for the whole sample and for the sample of borrowers with deep negative equity.
The same panel also shows that not controlling for CLTV (or other loan characteristics aside
from interest rates) has little effect on the estimated effect of rate reductions. This illustrates
one of the main advantages of the setting we are analyzing, namely that the rate reductions
are pre-determined by the original mortgage contract and the current index rates, and thus
effectively orthogonal to a mortgage’s current characteristics.
4.1.1

Alternative specifications

There are a number of possible reservations about our baseline regression specification. We
address three potential issues: (1) differential pre-reset trends across different loan types; (2)
correlation in the size of the reset with unobservable variation in borrower characteristics;
(3) differential responses across loan-types to changes in macro conditions. In addition, we
consider a variety of other alternative specifications.
One potential concern is that loans of different types may have differential pre-reset
trends in default hazards (in a way not absorbed by the loan-type-specific calendar quarter
dummies), and that including data away from the resets biases the estimated effects. In
our baseline specification, we do not use the first 30 months of data, in order to make sure
they do not drive the estimated effects.36 We now provide further graphical and econometric
evidence that this issue is not confounding our estimates, focusing on the stark resets of the
5/1s relative to the 7/1+ loans. First, Panel B of Figure 4 plots the “raw” default hazard
of 5/1s relative to 7/1+ (i.e., the ratio of the solid and dashed lines in Panel B of Figure 1).
We are plotting the ratio rather than the difference because that is what the proportional
hazard model we estimate identifies the effects from. We note that from loan ages 40 to 59,
36

As column (6) of Table A-1 shows, however, the results are very similar if we do include the first 30
months after origination.

21

this ratio is remarkably stable. It then drops over the course of four months from about 1.4
to 0.5, and remains stable after that.37 This again seems strongly suggestive in favor of the
reset causing the drop, as there are no trends in relative default hazards either before or
after. To further investigate this point, we conduct an “event study” of the effect of the 5/1
reset, by retaining only five months of data before and after the reset, and by comparing
only the 5/1 and the 7/1+ loans. The resulting coefficient estimates are plotted in Panel B
of Figure 4 and show that for the common rate reductions of 2.5 percentage points or more,
the estimated effects are very similar in size to those in the baseline specification.38
A second potential concern is that our estimates are confounded by a type of selection
different from the one discussed in section 2.2: the size of the reset for borrowers within a
loan type may be affected by the riskiness of a borrower. For instance, riskier borrowers get
higher initial interest rates and therefore larger resets (assuming they have no binding rate
floor). There is also some heterogeneity across borrowers in terms of index rates, margins,
and rate floors. To eliminate this potential confound, we re-run our regression using the
median interest rate (relative to the initial rate) of loans of the same type and originated the
same month as loan i in lieu of loan i’s actual relative interest rate. The resulting coefficients,
also shown in Panel B of Figure 4 are overall again similar to those in the baseline, meaning
that the relevant variation really comes from two sources: when a loan was originated, and
how long its fixed-rate period was.39
The third main concern is that different loan types are differentially sensitive to changes
in economic conditions—for instance, the default hazard of 5/1 borrowers relative to that
of 7/1+ borrowers could fall around the time of the 5/1 resets (in 2010 and 2011) because
the economy improves around that time and the borrowers who chose the 5/1s, who are
riskier than those in the 7/1+ loans, may benefit more from this improvement in economic
conditions. However, this effect would be soaked up in the loan type × calendar quarter
dummies, so it should not affect the estimated effect of the rate reduction.40
37

Recall from Section 3.5 that the reset of the 5/1 loans, which for the majority of them occurs in month
61 (but in some cases is marked in the data as occurring in months 60 or 62) becomes directly relevant for
the delinquency status two months later, i.e. generally in month 63. The fact that the relative hazard starts
dropping in month 60 is consistent with “anticipation effects” as discussed in the next subsection.
38
We only plot the estimated effects for rate reductions of 1.5 percentage points or more, as there are very
few 5/1s with smaller reductions. The estimated hazard ratios are also shown in Column (3) of Table A-1.
39
As an alternative way to eliminate concerns about selection, we run our baseline regression on a “uniform”
subsample of loans with the following characteristics: their rate must be indexed to the six-month LIBOR
with a margin of 225 basis points and no binding rate floor; furthermore their SATO must be between -50
and 50 basis points. The results for this subsample, shown in column (5) of Table A-1, are again very similar
to the baseline.
40
Not including these interacted dummies, as done in an earlier version of this paper, leads to slightly
larger estimated effects of the rate reduction. Using calendar month instead of quarter barely affects the
results, but significantly increases the time it takes for the maximum likelihood estimation to converge.

22

Furthermore, we note that the estimation does not need to rely on the inclusion of
the 7/1+ loans as comparison group: we can also identify the effects of resets solely from
comparing the 3/1 loans, which start resetting 37 months after origination, to the 5/1 loans.
Comparing these two loan groups may be appealing because they are very similar in terms
of origination characteristics, and also because their default hazards over the first 30 months
track each other quite closely. What is particularly interesting, however, is that the relative
rate differences between 3/1s and 5/1s vary across origination cohorts, both in magnitude
and in timing, and we can check visually whether this variation is also reflected in relative
default hazards. This is done in Figure 5. This figure shows, for each of the six originationquarter-vintages, how the differences in average rates between 3/1s and 5/1s (top line), as
well as the relative default hazards of 3/1s (bottom line), change over (calendar) time.41
What the figure shows is that the relative performance of 3/1s and 5/1s is closely aligned
with the resets: when the rate of the 3/1s falls, they default less than the 5/1s; once the 5/1s
also reset down, the relative performance of the 5/1s improves. Also, this clearly happens
at different calendar times for different vintages, going against the hypothesis that the effect
we pick up in the aggregate is driven by differential sensitivity of the different loan types.
Quantitatively, Table A-2 shows that removing the 7/1+ loans from the sample, and only
identifying the effects of interest rate changes from the 3/1s and 5/1s, leads to very similarly
sized effects as in our baseline. The same is true if we alternatively drop the 3/1s or the 5/1s
(columns (1) to (3)).
Table A-2 also contains some additional alternative specifications. In column (4), we
replace the measure of the borrower’s equity position by the “self-updated” estimate of a
loan’s LTV ratio, which is what researchers in this area have usually done when information
on additional liens or the updated estimate of the home value was not available. This measure
is based on the loan amount of the first lien only, and updates the denominator based on the
zip-code house price index.42 As the table shows, the coefficients on the different interest rate
bins are very similar to the baseline. However, the predicted effects of LTV on the probability
of delinquency are now smaller. For instance, a loan with an estimated LTV between 130
and 140 is now only 1.6 times as risky as a loan with an LTV between 90 and 100, while
in the baseline it was 2.1 times as risky. In a sense, these attenuated effects are of course
expected, as they are a well-known consequence of measurement error in the right-hand-side
variable. Nevertheless, the results illustrate to what extent the quantitative importance of
41

To reduce noise, we plot three-quarter moving average relative default hazards, and to enhance comparability across cohorts, we normalize the relative hazard to 1 for the tenth quarter of each cohort’s history.
42
Our regression controls again also include a quadratic function of LTV at origination, as well as a dummy
for this LTV being equal to 80, which is a good proxy for the presence of a second lien (see Foote et al.
2010).

23

negative equity for mortgage delinquency may have been underestimated when information
on second liens was unavailable.
Columns (5) to (7) look at different subsamples. First, in column (5) we study the effects
of interest rate changes and CLTV on the delinquency of (self-declared) investors and secondhome owners. While the effects are qualitatively similar to our baseline results, some of the
coefficients suggest that investor delinquency could be slightly less responsive to interest rate
decreases than what we observe for the whole sample. Similarly, in column (6), we exclude
borrowers from the sand states and find that the resulting coefficients are largely similar to
our baseline results, although some of the effects are slightly smaller. Finally, column (7)
restricts the sample to borrowers that provided full documentation at origination, with the
idea that this might tell us how applicable the results are to borrowers who might usually
get prime loans. The table shows that the estimated effects are very similar to those in the
baseline specification.
4.1.2

Do borrowers anticipate the reset?

In the results shown so far, we have studied the effect of the required monthly payment on
contemporaneous repayment behavior, but as explained earlier, there are good theoretical
reasons to think that payment changes should affect behavior before they actually occur. To
test this, we estimate a version of equation (6) in which we include forward-looking changes
in payments. In other words, our explanatory variables now include not only the interest rate
that affects the current delinquency status but also six additional months of forward-looking
interest rates (all relative to a loan’s initial rate). In order to make the estimation simpler,
we use quadratic functions of these interest rates (relative to the initial rate) rather than
rate bins. Based on the resulting coefficients, we can then calculate the predicted effect of
an interest rate reduction becoming delinquency-status-relevant in x months, for x ranging
from 0 (this month) to 6, and the associated confidence interval.
For the interpretation of the estimated effects, it is important to remember our discussion
from Section 3.5 above. During the month that we call “2 months ahead of the reset” (for
example, June when looking at the delinquency status in August), the required payment in
fact is accruing at the lower rate already, and the borrower has received a letter informing
him of the lower rate in the month prior (May). If the borrower was not aware of the reset
prior to receiving the letter, but learning about the reset affects his payment choice, then
this should be reflected in the delinquency status two months prior to the reset.
Panel D of Figure 4 shows that anticipated rate reductions do affect delinquency, but
that the effect is strong only shortly before the resets. For a 1-percentage point reduction in
rates, there is a small reduction in the default hazard one and two months prior to the reset;
24

however, the effects are only marginally statistically significant. For a 3-point reduction in
the interest rate, the effects appear sooner and are stronger. The default hazard falls by about
15 percent three months before the reset (and already by up to 10 percent during the months
before, though these estimates are not all statistically significant), which is consistent with
there being some borrowers whose repayment behavior is affected by future (large) changes
in the interest rate on the loan. Two months prior to the reset becoming delinquency-status
relevant, the default hazard is about 30 percent lower than with no anticipated change in the
rate, consistent with the receipt of the information mattering. However, the estimated total
effect once the reduction has actually occurred is twice as large, at 60 percent. As discussed
later, this points toward liquidity constraints as an important driver of borrower default.

4.2

Prepayment and the incidence of default

Figure 6 shows the estimation results for the prepayment hazard. As we discussed in Section
2, ignoring the prepayment hazard can generate incorrect inference when looking at resets.
Specifically, when payments increase, we often see a spike in prepayments, as creditworthy
borrowers select out of the sample, meaning that the change in the default hazard confounds
both selection and treatment effects.
The top panel of Figure 6 shows that prepayments respond strongly to both CLTV and
to interest rate changes, but the pattern is quite different from that observed for defaults.
Whereas reduced CLTV and payments work in the same direction for defaults, they work in
opposite directions for prepayment. As the figure, which is in logs, shows, reducing CLTV
from 135 to below 80 increases the likelihood of prepayment by an order of magnitude,
whereas reducing the interest rate by 2.5 percentage points roughly cuts the likelihood of
prepayment in half.
On the face of it, one might conclude that reductions in prepayments due to the decrease
in rates could offset much of the decrease in the default hazard. However, the figure illustrates
why this is not of first-order importance here. Essentially, for the borrowers most likely to
default (those with high CLTV), the prepayment hazard is so low that changes to it have
little or no economically meaningful effect. Even for all remaining loans in the sample, one
can see in Panels B and C of Figure 1 that the default hazard for 5/1s shortly before the
reset is approximately four times the size of the prepayment hazard.
In appendix A.4, we quantify the combined effect of the change in default and prepayment hazards on the incidence of defaults, using our estimated coefficients to predict the
cumulative fraction of delinquency for a fixed population of 5/1 loans with “typical” characteristics, and for different assumptions about their CLTV. Our estimates imply that for

25

loans with a CLTV between 130 and 140, a 3-percentage point reduction in the interest rate,
which corresponds approximately to cutting the payment in half, is predicted to reduce the
incidence of default by about 9 percentage points (or more than 50 percent) over the span
of one year after the reset.

4.3

Cure rates

Having discussed transitions into delinquency, we now turn our attention to the effect of
payment reductions on transitions out of delinquency. Figure 7 shows the results of our
baseline specification and, as with the defaults, formal statistical analysis confirms the visual evidence in Figure 1 and shows that rate changes have statistically and economically
significant effects on the likelihood of cure.
The top panel of Figure 7 shows that a 2–2.5-percentage point reduction in the interest
rate leads to a 75-percent increase in the cure hazard, and a 3-point or higher reduction
more than doubles the probability of cure. As with the default hazard, the effect of payment
reduction is comparable to the effect of large changes in CLTV, with the same caveats about
the interpretation of such changes. Also, as shown in Table A-3 in the appendix, negative
equity does not attenuate and may in fact enhance the effect of rate reduction on cures. For
instance, for borrowers with CTLV> 140, the estimated effect of a 3 percentage point rate
reduction increases from 200 percent to about 240 percent.
One might worry that the measured effect of rate reductions on cures is confounded by
concurrent changes in servicers’ propensity to modify delinquent loans. If, for instance, servicers tended to modify the loans that are most likely to cure (even without a modification),
and then reduced the number of loans they modify after the interest rates decrease, then
the measured effect of rate reductions on cures would be due at least in part to selection.
Table A-3 shows that we find little systematic effect of rate reductions on the probability of
a loan’s receiving a modification.

5

Discussion

We divide our discussion of the implications of the results of Section 4 into two parts, focusing
first on the general decision of the borrower to default on a mortgage and second on policies
to prevent foreclosure.

26

5.1

What do the resets tell us about borrower behavior?

In our view, the evidence in Section 4 holds a number of lessons. First, many researchers
(for example, Bhutta, Dokko, and Shan 2010) have attempted to identify some critical value
of negative equity at which borrowers default. But our results illustrate that the answer to
such a question is not straightforward. In Figure 8 we use the estimates from Figure 3 to
construct “iso-default curves,” with each line representing combinations of CLTV and rate
reduction that are equally likely to lead to default. For instance, the line labeled “1” shows
that a borrower with a CLTV of 90 paying 6 percent, a borrower with CLTV of 120 paying 4
percent, and a borrower with a CLTV of 140 paying 3 percent are all approximately equally
likely to default. The line labeled “1.5” represents combinations of CLTV and rate reduction
that make borrowers 1.5 times more likely to default than the borrowers in the line labeled
1, and so on.
Figure 8 shows that the threshold level of negative equity is highly sensitive to the size
of the monthly payment. Therefore, if one asks the question “If the value of your mortgage
exceeded the value of your house by $50K [$100K/$150K], would you walk away from your
house (that is, default on your mortgage) even if you could afford to pay your monthly
mortgage?” as Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2013) do, one should get wildly different
answers depending on whether the borrower is paying 3, or 4, or 6 percent in interest.
We now turn to the question of what the results tell us about borrower decisionmaking
more broadly. It will come as a surprise to many that Figure 8 is completely consistent with
the concept of “strategic default.” Kau et al. (1992) show that a borrower making a purely
financial decision about whether to default in a completely frictionless world compares the
value of the property with the value of the mortgage, which is the present discounted value
of all future mortgage payments, controlling for the fact that the borrower has options to
prepay or default on the mortgage. Simple bond math says that the value of the mortgage
will depend on the size of the monthly payment and thus that borrowers making lower
payments are less likely to default. In other words, iso-default curves as shown in Figure 8
are exactly what the frictionless theory would predict.
That said, while Figure 8 does not provide evidence against strategic default, it does not
necessarily provide evidence in its favor either. First, a combination of a simple nonoptimizing
double trigger model and mismeasured house prices could generate the patterns we observe.
According to the double trigger model, a borrower gets hit with an income shock that makes
it impossible to pay the mortgage and then either sells or refinances the house if he or she
has positive equity, and defaults otherwise. All else being equal, lower mortgage payments
reduce the likelihood that a given shock is sufficient to cause nonpayment. Mismeasured
house prices mean that measured equity provides only a noisy signal for whether the bor27

rower is actually unable to sell or refinance; however, the probability of that being the case
is higher the higher the measured CLTV.
Second, it is difficult to square the evidence on forward-looking behavior in Figure 4
with a pure strategic default story. Recall that Panel D of Figure 4 shows that even a large
payment reduction does not have an economically meaningful effect on repayment behavior
until 2–3 months prior to the reset and, even one month prior to reset, the effect is still only
about half as strong as it is when the rate actually changes. A strategic default story would
ascribe this to the difference between the value of the mortgage one month prior to the reset
and one month after, given by the difference between one payment at the higher rate and one
at the lower rate. For a 3-percentage point rate cut, we divide this by 12 months, meaning
that the value of the mortgage is 25 basis points higher one month prior to the reset. This
small difference cannot possibly account for the enormous change in behavior.
To make sense of Figure 4, we need to understand why borrower behavior changes discontinuously at the time of the reset. At least two logical explanations present themselves.
The first is that borrowers are behaving strategically but are inattentive and fail to realize
that the rate is going to change. As mentioned in Section 3.5, lenders are supposed to inform
borrowers by mail before the index rate changes, which would mean that the notice should
arrive prior to the due date of the last pre-reset payment.43 Prior to that, the borrowers
could forecast the expected change, but to do so they would need to know the terms of the
mortgage, including the index used and the margin, and Bucks and Pence (2008) raise serious questions about whether average borrowers understand these terms. That said, it seems
hard to imagine that a borrower making a potentially life-changing decision to default on a
mortgage would not find out. Thus, the implications of the combination of ignorance and
strategic default are odd. Because we know that the borrowers choose to continue paying
when confronted with the true monthly payment, the implication is that their ignorance
leads them to walk away from mortgages that they would prefer to pay.
An alternative explanation is that borrowers face liquidity shocks, for instance due to
unemployment or illness. In standard consumption-portfolio choice models with constraints,
liquidity shocks drive up the marginal utility of current consumption to make borrowers
behave as if they were highly impatient. One potential explanation for the response to the
resets is that some share of borrowers face such liquidity shocks every period, causing them
to default, and that the lowered payment shrinks the set of liquidity shocks sufficient to
induce default. This intuitively appealing model is thus qualitatively consistent with our
findings. An interesting question for future research is whether a quantitative model with
realistic parameters (along the lines of Campbell and Cocco 2011 or Schelkle 2012) would
43

Of course, it is debatable whether borrowers will read or understand such a notice.

28

quantitatively match the effects of rate reductions that we find in the data.

5.2

Policy implications

Our results indicate that payment reductions, if sufficiently large, are an effective tool to
reduce mortgage defaults and increase cures, even if a borrower is massively underwater. This
suggests that government or lender programs that allow underwater borrowers to refinance
at a lower rate, or loan modifications that lower the interest rate, have the potential to
significantly reduce delinquencies, and that the view that principal reduction is the only way
to meaningfully reduce defaults is incorrect.
A logical and important follow-up question is whether, given our estimates, it is more costefficient from an investor perspective to reduce an underwater loan’s interest rate (and thus
the required monthly payment) or the principal (which lowers the CLTV and the required
payment).44 We leave this question for further research, as it is nontrivial to analyze: the
answer will depend on investors’ discount rate, the recovery rate in case of default, and
notably also on the length of time the borrower is assumed to stay in the mortgage in case
he does not default, which will itself depend on market interest rates and the borrower’s
equity position.45
Furthermore, one needs to keep in mind two things when trying to apply our results to
broader policy questions. First, the interest reductions we study are not necessarily permanent, as the benchmark rates may increase again in the future.46 If they were permanent,
the resulting reductions in the default hazard might be even larger. Second, the effects of an
interest rate reduction of x percent on the required monthly payment would be smaller for
amortizing mortgages than for the interest-only mortgages we study, and so the reduction
in the default hazard following a fixed cut in the interest rate would likely be smaller than
for the loans in our sample.
In any event, we do not mean to argue that payment reductions are generally more
(cost) effective than principal reductions when it comes to reducing defaults of underwater
homeowners—we simply show that they are certainly not ineffective, as argued by some
44

See Das (2011) for a theoretical, option-based analysis that argues that principal reductions are preferable
to rate reductions.
45
The present value of a loan with an interest rate above the current market rate will be lower the sooner
the borrower prepays. As a consequence, if a principal reduction causes the borrower to prepay sooner,
this effect needs to be taken into account when assessing the cost of the principal reduction. Furthermore,
the reduction in the principal the investor receives as a consequence of the modification is more costly in
present-value terms the sooner it is realized.
46
Such temporary reductions are also a characteristic of the HAMP program, where a borrower pays a
low fixed interest rate for five years, while after that, the interest rate increases by 1 percent a year until
it reaches the lesser of the Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey rate or the originally contracted
rate.

29

commentators, and are a potentially valuable tool when principal reductions are impossible
as a result of institutional constraints.
From a broader perspective, a key feature of the payment reductions in our sample is
that they came about because of the historically low interest rates, which are arguably tied
closely to the state of the economy and also to monetary policy. Our results thus show
that, with ARMs, monetary policy can have large effects on mortgage delinquency, and by
extension, on the health of the housing market as a whole. In principle, to the extent that
monetary policy affects long-term rates (either through the expectations channel, or more
recently, through expansion of the Fed’s balance sheet), the same would be true for FRMs.
However, a painful realization of the period since 2008 is that in case of a credit crunch with
tight underwriting standards, many borrowers are not able to take advantage of the lower
rates. In that sense, FRMs make the transmission of monetary policy more fragile. On the
other hand, should benchmark rates increase without a contemporaneous improvement in
house prices and economic conditions more broadly (for example, in a stagflation episode),
ARMs would be at a higher risk of default again.
Finally, in terms of regulation of mortgage products, our results suggest that one might
want to limit the ability of lenders to offer ARMs with asymmetric floors and caps on interest
rates. As mentioned earlier, such asymmetries were prevalent for subprime ARMs, where
at the end of the fixed-rate period, the interest rate could only increase but not decrease.
This means that decreases in short-term interest rates due to economic conditions did not get
passed through to subprime ARM borrowers to the same extent they did to Alt-A and prime
ARM borrowers, and this likely caused subprime defaults to be higher than they would have
been without the rate floors. To prevent this from happening in future cycles, one could
imagine a regulation along the following lines: if an ARM’s interest rate can increase by
up to x percentage points relative to the initial rate, it must also be possible for the rate
to decrease by x percentage points relative to the initial rate. x would then be an easy-tounderstand indicator of the nominal interest rate risk borne by the household (with x = 0
corresponding to an FRM).

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we have studied the effects of payment size and negative equity on mortgage
borrowers’ likelihood of becoming delinquent. After arguing that because of the prepayment
option, one needs to study payment reductions to get accurate estimates of the treatment
effect of changes in the required payment, we exploit a sample for which large payment
reductions took place due to the low-interest-rate environment over the period 2008–2011.
30

Our results show that the size of the monthly payment matters strongly for delinquency
and cures, even for borrowers who are deeply underwater. These findings, which we argue
are consistent with theoretical predictions, shed light on the driving forces behind mortgage
default and have a variety of policy implications.
In terms of related research, our results could be used to calibrate or discipline quantitative models of mortgage delinquency in which the effects of different policy options are
simulated. Also, our findings should be useful for the pricing of mortgage-backed securities
based on ARMs.

31

References
Adelino, Manuel, Kristopher Gerardi, and Paul S. Willen. 2009. “Why Don’t Lenders Renegotiate More Home Mortgages? Redefaults, Self-Cures and Securitization.” Working
Paper 15159. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Adelson, Mark. 2003. “A Journey to the Alt-A Zone: A Brief Primer on Alt-A Mortgage
Loans.” Nomura Fixed Income Research, June 3, 2003.
Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Douglas D. Evanoff. 2011. “Market-Based Loss Mitigation Practices for Troubled Mortgages
Following the Financial Crisis.” Working Paper 2011-03. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, Bruno Laranjeira, and Scott Weisbenner. 2012. “Corporate Debt Maturity and the Real Effects of the 2007 Credit Crisis.” Critical Finance
Review 1(1): 3–58.
Ambrose, Brent W., Michel LaCour-Little, and Zsuzsa R. Huszar. 2005. “A Note on Hybrid
Mortgages.” Real Estate Economics 33(4): 765–782.
Amromin, Gene, Jennifer Huang, Clemens Sialm, and Edward Zhong. 2010. “Complex
Mortgages.” Working Paper 2010-17. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Anderson, Nathan B., and Jane K. Dokko. 2011. “Liquidity Problems and Early Payment
Default Among Subprime Mortgages.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2011-09.
Federal Reserve Board.
Bair, Sheila C. 2007. “Statement on Possible Responses to Rising Mortgage Foreclosures.”
Testimony before the House Financial Services Committee, April 17, 2007. Available
at http://www.fdic.gov/news/news/speeches/archives/2007/chairman/spapr1707.
html.
Bajari, Patrick, Chenghuan Sean Chu, and Minjung Park. 2008. “An Empirical Model of
Subprime Mortgage Default From 2000 to 2007.” Working Paper 14625. National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Barlevy, Gadi, and Jonas D.M. Fisher. 2010. “Mortgage Choices and Housing Speculation.”
Working Paper 2010-12. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Bhardwaj, Geetesh, and Rajdeep Sengupta. 2011. “Subprime Mortgage Design.” Working
Paper 2008-039E. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
Bhutta, Neil, Jane Dokko, and Hui Shan. 2010. “The Depth of Negative Equity and Mortgage
Default Decisions.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2010-35. Federal Reserve
Board.
Bond, Philip, Ronel Elul, Sharon Garyn-Tal, and David K. Musto. 2013. “Does Junior
Inherit? Refinancing and the Blocking Power of Second Mortgages.” Working Paper
13/3-R. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
32

Bucks, Brian, and Karen Pence. 2008. “Do Borrowers Know Their Mortgage Terms?” Journal of Urban Economics 64(2): 218–233.
Campbell, John Y., and Joao F. Cocco. 2011. “A Model of Mortgage Default.” Working
Paper 17516. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Campbell, Tim S., and J. Kimball Dietrich. 1983. “The Determinants of Default on Insured
Conventional Residential Mortgage Loans.” Journal of Finance 38(5): 1569–1581.
Cutts, Amy Crews, and William A. Merrill. 2008. “Interventions in Mortgage Default:
Policies and Practices to Prevent Home Loss and Lower Costs.” In Borrowing to Live:
Consumer and Mortgage Credit Revisited, eds. Nicolas P. Retsinas and Eric S. Belsky,
203–254. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Das, Sanjiv R. 2011. “The Principal Principle.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis forthcoming.
Demyanyk, Yuliya, and Otto Van Hemert. 2011. “Understanding the Subprime Mortgage
Crisis.” Review of Financial Studies 24(6): 1848–1880.
Deng, Yongheng, John M. Quigley, and Robert Van Order. 2000. “Mortgage Terminations,
Heterogeneity and the Exercise of Mortgage Options.” Econometrica 68(2): 275–307.
deRitis, Cristian, Chionglong Kuo, and Yongping Liang. 2010. “Payment Shock and Mortgage Performance.” Journal of Housing Economics 19(4): 295–314.
Eakes, Martin. 2007. “Evolution of an Economic Crisis? The Subprime Lending Disaster and the Threat to the Broader Economy.” Testimony before the Joint Economic
Committee, September 19, 2007. Available at http://www.responsiblelending.org/
mortgage-lending/policy-legislation/congress/senate-sept-07-final.pdf.
Elul, Ronel. 2011. “Securitization and Mortgage Default.” Working Paper 09-21/R. Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
Elul, Ronel, Nicholas S. Souleles, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Dennis Glennon, and Robert
Hunt. 2010. “What “Triggers” Mortgage Default?” American Economic Review 100(2):
490–494.
Foote, Christopher L., Kristopher S. Gerardi, Lorenz Goette, and Paul S. Willen. 2010.
“Reducing Foreclosures: No Easy Answers.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 24: 89–183.
Foote, Christopher L., Kristopher S. Gerardi, and Paul S. Willen. 2012. “Why Did So Many
People Make So Many Ex Post Bad Decisions? The Causes of the Foreclosure Crisis.”
Public Policy Discussion Paper 12-2. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
Ghent, Andra C., and Marianna Kudlyak. 2011. “Recourse and Residential Mortgage Default: Evidence from US States.” Review of Financial Studies 24(9): 3139–3186.
Goodman, Laurie S., Roger Ashworth, Brian Landy, and Ke Yin. 2010. “Second Liens: How
Important?” Journal of Fixed Income 20(2): 19–30.
33

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2013. “The Determinants of Attitudes
towards Strategic Default on Mortgages.” Journal of Finance 68(4): 1473–1515.
Haughwout, Andrew, Donghoon Lee, Joseph Tracy, and Wilbert van der Klaauw. 2011.
“Real Estate Investors, the Leverage Cycle, and the Housing Market Crisis.” Staff Report
No. 514. Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Haughwout, Andrew, Ebiere Okah, and Joseph Tracy. 2010. “Second Chances: Subprime
Mortgage Modification and Re-Default.” Staff Report No. 417. Federal Reserve Bank of
New York.
Hsu, Joanne W., David A. Matsa, and Brian T. Melzer. 2013. “Unemployment Insurance and
Consumer Credit.” Working Paper. Federal Reserve Board and Northwestern University.
Karlan, Dean, and Jonathan Zinman. 2009. “Observing Unobservables: Identifying Information Asymmetries With a Consumer Credit Field Experiment.” Econometrica 77(6):
1993–2008.
Kau, James B., Donald C. Keenan, Walter J. Muller, and James F. Epperson. 1992. “A
Generalized Valuation Model for Fixed-Rate Residential Mortgages.” Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking 24(3): 279–299.
Koijen, Ralph S.J., Otto Van Hemert, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. 2009. “Mortgage Timing.” Journal of Financial Economics 93(2): 292–324.
Krainer, John, and Elizabeth Laderman. 2011. “Prepayment and Delinquency in the Mortgage Crisis Period.” Working Paper 2011-25. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Mayer, Christopher, Karen Pence, and Shane M. Sherlund. 2009. “The Rise in Mortgage
Defaults.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(1): 27–50.
Pennington-Cross, Anthony, and Giang Ho. 2010. “The Termination of Subprime Hybrid
and Fixed-Rate Mortgages.” Real Estate Economics 38(3): 399–426.
Schelkle, Thomas. 2012. “Mortgage Default during the U.S. Mortgage Crisis.” Working
Paper. London School of Economics.
Schwartz, Eduardo S., and Walter N. Torous. 1989. “Prepayment and the Valuation of
Mortgage-Backed Securities.” Journal of Finance 44(2): 375–392.
Sengupta, Rajdeep. 2010. “Alt-A: The Forgotten Segment of the Mortgage Market.” Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 92(1): 55–71.
Sherlund, Shane M. 2008. “The Past, Present, and Future of Subprime Mortgages.” Finance
and Economics Discussion Series 2008-63. Federal Reserve Board.
Stanton, Richard. 1995. “Rational Prepayment and the Valuation of Mortgage-Backed Securities.” Reviw of Financial Studies 8(3): 677–708.

34

Tracy, Joseph, and Joshua Wright. 2012. “Payment Changes and Default Risk: The Impact
of Refinancing on Expected Credit Losses.” Staff Report No. 562. Federal Reserve Bank
of New York.
von Furstenberg, George M. 1969. “Default Risk on FHA-Insured Home Mortgages as a
Function of the Terms of Financing: A Quantitative Analysis.” Journal of Finance 24(3):
459–477.
Zhu, Jun. 2012. “Refinance and Mortgage Default: An Empirical Analysis of the HARP’s
Impact on Default Rates.” Working Paper. Freddie Mac.

35

Table 1: Summary statistics
A. Distribution of loan types
3/1 ARMs
2005H1
2005H2
2006H1
Total

5/1 ARMs

# (000s) Share (%)
19.1
32
8.3
11
8.2
9
35.6

16

7/1 ARMs

# (000s)
32.4
43.5
55.4

Share (%)
54
60
63

# (000s)
1.4
4.0
9.6

131.2

59

15.0

10/1 ARMs

Share (%) # (000s) Share (%)
2
7.6
13
6
17.1
23
11
15.3
17
7

40.0

18

B. Origination characteristics
3/1s
Origination amount
(std. dev.)
LTV on first lien
(std. dev.)
CLTV (TrueLTV)
(std. dev.)
Number of Liens
(std. dev.)
FICO score
(std. dev.)
Initial interest rate
(std. dev.)
Condo
Investor or 2nd home
Low documentation
No documentation
CA, NV, FL, or AZ
Purchase mortgage
Resets every 6 months
Prepayment penalty

5/1s

7/1s

294
272
345
(170) (164) (200)
78
77
77
( 8)
( 9)
(11)
93
94
93
(20) (20) (20)
1.7
1.7
1.6
(0.5) (0.5) (0.5)
714
710
717
(42) (45) (46)
6.2
6.6
6.6
(0.7) (0.8) (0.6)
0.21
0.21
0.22
0.24
0.28
0.19
0.73
0.69
0.63
0.04
0.06
0.04
0.57
0.52
0.57
0.68
0.70
0.61
0.85
0.79
0.45
0.32
0.38
0.30

10/1s Total
414
(218)
74
(12)
88
(22)
1.5
(0.5)
721
(46)
6.3
(0.5)
0.21
0.15
0.74
0.06
0.67
0.57
0.28
0.34

306
(19)
77
( 9)
93
(21)
1.7
(0.5)
713
(45)
6.5
(0.7)
0.21
0.24
0.70
0.06
0.56
0.67
0.69
0.35

C. Mean CLTV (active loans only) at different points over sample period (%)
3/1s 5/1s 7/1s 10/1s Total
January 2008
(std. dev.)
January 2010
(std. dev.)
November 2011
(std. dev.)

109
(26)
144
(47)
150
(50)

108
(26)
142
(48)
147
(50)

107
(25)
139
(44)
146
(48)

102
(26)
130
(43)
137
(45)

107
(26)
139
(47)
145
(49)

D. Outcomes (as of November 2011)
3/1s 5/1s 7/1s 10/1s Total
Goes 60+ days delinquent
Foreclosure / short sale
Voluntary prepayment
Modified at least once

0.37
0.30
0.46
0.04

36

0.46
0.38
0.36
0.07

0.45
0.35
0.32
0.08

0.36
0.26
0.35
0.07

0.43
0.34
0.37
0.07

Total
# (000s)
60.4
72.9
88.5
221.6

Figure 1: Resets, defaults, prepayments and cures over the life of the loan
Based on sample of hybrid Alt-A loans with interest-only feature for ten years, originated between January 2005 and June 2006. Except
for exclusions based on origination characteristics as explained in text, includes all loans (also those with upward resets). After loan age 65
months, the sample changes because loans originated toward the end of the origination period are no longer observed (which explains the
kink in the dashed line in Panel A). Vertical lines indicate loan ages 37 months (when 3/1s reset for the first time) and 61 months (when 5/1s
reset for the first time). A small percentage of loans are recorded as resetting one month before or after the scheduled reset month.

B. Default hazard rates

0

3

.005

Interest Rate (in %)
(Means)
4
5
6

Monthly Hazard
.01
.015
.02

.025

7

A. Mean interest rates

37

0

10

20

30
40
50
Months since Origination

reset after 5 yrs
reset after 3 yrs

60

70

0

reset after 7 or 10 yrs

30
40
50
Months since Origination

reset after 5 yrs
reset after 3 yrs

60

60

70

reset after 7 or 10 yrs

70

reset after 7 or 10 yrs

Fraction of 60+ days delinquent loans curing
.005
.01
.015
.02

.025
Monthly Hazard
.01
.015
.02
.005

20

30
40
50
Months since Origination

D. Cure rates

0

10

20

reset after 5 yrs
reset after 3 yrs

C. Prepayment hazard rates

0

10

40

50
60
Months since Origination
reset after 5 yrs

reset after 7 or 10 yrs

70

Figure 2: Index rates and resets
Panel A displays the evolution over our sample period of the three interest rates to which the mortgages in our
sample are indexed (data source: Haver Analytics). The first months relevant for resets are, respectively, January
2008 and January 2010 for 3/1s and 5/1s originated in January 2005. Values displayed are of the first of each
month. Panel B shows the distribution of interest rate changes at the first reset (month 37 for 3/1s, month 61 for
5/1s) as well as subsequent resets (every 6 or 12 months after the initial reset).

0

1

2

Percent
3

4

5

6

A. Index rates over sample period

Jan 05

Jan 06

Jan 07

Jan 08

Jan 09

Jan 10

6−month LIBOR
1−year Treasury Bill

Jan 11

Jan 12

1−year LIBOR

0

.2

Cumulative Density
.4
.6
.8

1

B. Distribution of interest rate changes at resets

−5 −4.5 −4 −3.5 −3 −2.5 −2 −1.5 −1 −.5
Interest Rate Change
5/1, first reset
3/1, first reset

38

0

.5

5/1, later resets
3/1, later resets

1

1.5

2

Figure 3: Results of baseline default hazard estimation
Panel A graphically displays hazard ratios for bins of interest rates (relative to loan’s original rate) as well
as combined loan-to-value (CLTV) ratios in our baseline proportional hazard regression of 60-day delinquency.
Coefficients and standard errors are also given in Table A-1 in the appendix. Panel B shows hazard ratios and
standard errors for other control variables, and provides details about the regression. Sample is restricted to loan
ages > 30 months.

A. Effects of CLTV and rate reduction
130

CLTV
110
100

120

90

80

1
0.9
Hazard Ratio


H

0.8


0.7



0.6






ւEffect of CLTV (top scale)

0.5






0.4

Effect of rate change (bottom scale)ր







0.3
0

0.5

1

2
2.5
3
1.5
Rate Reduction

3.5

4

>4

(H p < 0.05, N p < 0.01,  p < 0.001)

B. Effects of control variables
SATO
FICO/100
Open liens = 2
Open liens ≥ 3
Prepayment penalty active
Log(loan amount)
Baseline hazard strat.
State dummies
Loan type × calendar q. dummies
Initial interest rate bins

1.191∗∗∗
(0.046)
0.591∗∗∗
(0.009)
1.190∗∗∗
(0.028)
0.980
(0.054)
1.065∗∗∗
(0.012)
1.062∗
(0.033)
Closing q.
X
X
X

Origination LTV
(Orig. LTV)2 /100
Full doc.
No doc.
Purpose=cashout refi
Purp.=non-cashout refi
Observations
# Loans
# Incidents

Exponentiated coefficients; Standard errors (clustered at state level) in parentheses
∗
p < 0.05 ∗∗ p < 0.01 ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

39

1.048∗∗∗
(0.007)
0.977∗∗∗
(0.004)
0.600∗∗∗
(0.017)
1.087∗∗
(0.031)
0.954∗∗∗
(0.012)
0.989
(0.016)
1,890,615
75,123
30,377

Not owner-occupied
Condo
12-month HPA
Unemp. rate
6-month ∆(Unempl. rate)
30-year FRM rate

1.019
(0.068)
0.854∗∗∗
(0.037)
0.985∗∗∗
(0.002)
1.000
(0.006)
1.004
(0.008)
1.148∗∗
(0.056)

Figure 4: Understanding the default hazard
Panels A and C displays hazard ratios for bins of interest rates (relative to loan’s original rate) for different
samples/specifications of our proportional hazard regression of 60-day delinquency. The corresponding coefficients
and standard errors are in columns (1), (2), and (7) (Panel A) and (1), (3), and (4) (Panel C) of Table A-1 in
the appendix. Panel B displays the ratio of hazard rates of 5/1 and 7/1+ loans. Panel D displays the cumulative
predicted effect of interest rate changes from 0 to 6 months before the delinquency-status relevant payment
changes.

A. Negative equity does not attenuate
the effect of rate reduction
1

B. Default hazard of 5/1 relative to 7/1+
loans drops discretely around reset
1.75
1.5

ւRate controls only

0.8
0.7
0.6

Relative Hazard

Hazard Ratio

0.9

1.25

ր
Sample with
CLT V > 140

ւ Baseline

1

0.75

0.5
0.4

0.5

40

0.25

0.3

0
0

0.5

1

1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5
Rate Reduction

4

40

30

>4

50

60

70

80

Months since origination

C. Estimated effect is robust to event
study and use of median resets

D. Do borrowers anticipate the reset?
1.1

1
ւResets set to median

0.9

0.8
ր
Baseline

0.7

Hazard Ratio

Hazard Ratio

ւ1 ppt rate reduction

1

0.9

ւ“Event Study”

0.6
0.5

0.8
0.7

3 ppt rate reductionր

0.6
0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3
0

0.5

1

1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5
Rate Reduction

4

>4

6

5

4
2
3
Months before Reset

1

(dashed lines represent 95% confidence interval)

0

Figure 5: Timing of rate resets and defaults hazards of 3/1s vs. 5/1s
Figure shows how the differences in average rates between 3/1s and 5/1s (top line), as well as the relative quarterly
default hazards of 3/1s relative to 5/1s (bottom line), evolve over (calendar) time, for each of the six originationquarter-vintages. To reduce noise, three-quarter moving average relative default hazards are plotted, and to
enhance comparability across cohorts, the relative hazard is normalized to 1 for the tenth quarter of each cohort’s
history.

Rate difference 3/1 − 5/1ց
∆ rate
3/1
5/1

ց
1
0.5

2007

2008

2009

2010

1
0.5

2011

2007

41

∆ rate

0
−1
−2
−3
1
0.5

2007

2008

2009

2010

0.5

2007

∆ rate

∆ rate

2011

Hazard ratio

0.5

2010

2008

2009

2010

2011

Q2, 2006 Loans

1

2009

2011

1

2011

0
−1
−2
−3

2008

2010

0
−1
−2
−3

Q1, 2006 Loans

2007

2009

Q4, 2005 Loans

Hazard ratio

∆ rate

Q3, 2005 Loans

2008

Hazard ratio

Relative hazard

0
−1
−2
−3

0
−1
−2
−3
1
0.5

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Hazard ratio

0
−1
−2
−3

Hazard ratio

Q2, 2005 Loans

Hazard ratio

∆ rate

Q1, 2005 Loans

Figure 6: Prepayment hazard as a function of rate reduction
Panel A graphically displays hazard ratios for bins of interest rates (relative to loan’s original rate) as well as
combined loan-to-value (CLTV) ratios in our baseline proportional hazard regression of prepayment. Vertical axis
has a log scale. Panel B shows hazard ratios and standard errors for other control variables, and provides details
about the regression. Sample is restricted to loan ages > 30 months.

A. Effects of CLTV and rate reduction
CLTV
130

120

110

100

90

8

80






Hazard Ratio

4



տEffect of CLTV (top scale)
N

2

1

H
N

Effect of rate change
ւ(bottom scale)


0.5

N
N

0

0.5

1

1.5 2 2.5 3
Rate Reduction

H

N

3.5

4

>4

(H p < 0.05, N p < 0.01,  p < 0.001)

B. Effects of control variables
SATO
FICO/100
Open liens = 2
Open liens ≥ 3
Log(loan amount)
Prepayment penalty active
Baseline hazard strata
State dummies
Loan type × calendar q. dummies
Initial interest rate bins

1.225∗
(0.099)
1.682∗∗∗
(0.066)
0.944
(0.055)
1.823∗∗∗
(0.306)
1.331∗∗∗
(0.067)
0.542∗∗∗
(0.040)
Closing q.
X
X
X

Origination LTV
(Orig. LTV)2 /100
Full doc.
No doc.
Purpose=cashout refi
Purp.= Non-cashout refi
Observations
# Loans
# Incidents

Exponentiated coefficients; Standard errors (clustered at state level) in parentheses
∗
p < 0.05 ∗∗ p < 0.01 ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

42

0.969∗∗∗
(0.004)
1.013∗∗
(0.004)
1.387∗∗∗
(0.041)
1.021
(0.049)
0.724∗∗∗
(0.028)
0.822∗∗∗
(0.032)
1,890,611
75,123
6,878

0.589∗∗∗
(0.052)
Condo
0.899
(0.055)
12-month HPA
1.015∗
(0.006)
Unemp. rate
0.964
(0.023)
6mon ∆(Unemp. rate)
1.045
(0.027)
30-year FRM rate
0.460∗∗∗
(0.054)
Not owner-occupied

Figure 7: Cure hazard as a function of rate reduction
Panel A graphically displays hazard ratios for bins of interest rates (relative to mortgage rate at which borrower
became 60-days delinquent) as well as combined loan-to-value (CLTV) ratios in our baseline proportional hazard
regression of curing (= becoming current again or prepaying voluntarily). Coefficients and standard errors are
also given in column (1) of Table A-3 in the appendix. Panel B shows hazard ratios and standard errors for other
control variables, and provides details about the regression.

A. Effects of CLTV and rate reduction
130

120

110

CLTV
100
90

80

3

Hazard Ratio



Effect of CLTV (top scale)ց

2.5








2








1.5

H


տEffect of rate change
(bottom scale)

H


1
0

0.5

1

1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5
Rate Reduction

4

>4

(H p < 0.05, N p < 0.01,  p < 0.001)

B. Effects of control variables
SATO
FICO/100
Open liens = 2
Open liens ≥ 3
Log(loan amount)
Prepayment penalty active
Loan age dummies
State dummies
Missed interest rate bins
Loan type × calendar q. dummies

1.002
(0.035)
0.812∗∗∗
(0.019)
0.936∗∗
(0.024)
1.156∗∗
(0.057)
0.867∗∗∗
(0.018)
0.942∗
(0.023)
X
X
X
X

Origination LTV
(Origination LTV)2
Full doc.
No doc.
Purpose = Cashout refi
Purp. = Non-cashout refi
Baseline hazard strat.
Observations
# Loans
# Incidents

0.959∗∗∗
(0.006)
1.000∗∗∗
(0.000047)
1.209∗∗∗
(0.028)
1.014
(0.038)
1.098∗∗∗
(0.028)
0.987
(0.029)
Closing q.
847,262
65,900
14,867

Exponentiated coefficients; Standard errors (clustered at individual level) in parentheses
∗
p < 0.05 ∗∗ p < 0.01 ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

43

0.897∗∗∗
(0.024)
Condo
0.954
(0.02)
12-month HPA
1.019∗∗∗
(0.001)
Unemp. rate
0.989
(0.007)
6mon ∆(Unemp. rate)
1.000
(0.010)
30-year FRM rate
1.163
(0.108)
Not owner-occupied

Figure 8: Iso-default curves
Lines on plot represent the combinations of rate reductions and CLTVs that lead to the same probability of
default according to our baseline specification. Number on line measures the default probability relative to other
lines; for example, borrowers with combinations of CLTV and rate reduction on the line marked “0.5” are half as
likely to default as borrowers on the line marked “1” and one-third as likely to default as borrowers on the line
marked “1.5.”

2

1

2.5

1.5

140
2

120

1

CLTV in %

1.5

3

160

0.5

1.5

1

0.5

100

1

0.5

80
0

0.5

1

1.5
2
2.5
3
Rate Reduction

44

3.5

4

>4

Appendix

1

A.1

Additional tables
Table A-1: Proportional hazard models of 60-day delinquency

Loan ages (months)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

> 30

> 30

58 − 67

> 30

> 30

all

> 30

CLTV≥ 140

no 3/1

Sample restrictions
Use median resets?

unif. sample
X

Interest rate − initial rate (omitted bin: [−0.01, 0.01]):
(−0.01, −0.5]

0.978
(0.0556)

0.976
(0.0775)

0.695
(0.728)

1.059
(0.0491)

1.048
(0.107)

1.013
(0.0475)

1.062
(0.0587)

(−0.5, −1]

0.836∗∗
(0.0515)

0.889
(0.0686)

1.140
(0.542)

0.850∗∗
(0.0420)

0.903
(0.0590)

0.831∗∗
(0.0535)

0.878∗∗∗
(0.0291)

(−1, −1.5]

0.750∗∗∗
(0.0470)

0.664∗∗∗
(0.0369)

0.476
(0.206)

0.873
(0.0695)

0.787
(0.116)

0.740∗∗∗
(0.0497)

0.794∗∗∗
(0.0377)

(−1.5, −2]

0.582∗∗∗
(0.0618)

0.572∗∗∗
(0.0929)

0.668
(0.159)

0.611∗∗∗
(0.0800)

0.598∗
(0.131)

0.590∗∗∗
(0.0590)

0.555∗∗∗
(0.0418)

(−2, −2.5]

0.593∗∗∗
(0.0408)

0.571∗∗∗
(0.0745)

0.676∗∗
(0.0827)

0.520∗∗∗
(0.0422)

0.616∗∗∗
(0.0794)

0.617∗∗∗
(0.0433)

0.576∗∗∗
(0.0472)

(−2.5, −3]

0.436∗∗∗
(0.0383)

0.427∗∗∗
(0.0378)

0.409∗∗∗
(0.0299)

0.481∗∗∗
(0.0305)

0.407∗∗∗
(0.0620)

0.455∗∗∗
(0.0426)

0.454∗∗∗
(0.0371)

(−3, −3.5]

0.437∗∗∗
(0.0302)

0.409∗∗∗
(0.0242)

0.440∗∗∗
(0.0464)

0.422∗∗∗
(0.0271)

0.416∗∗∗
(0.0479)

0.450∗∗∗
(0.0350)

0.415∗∗∗
(0.0280)

(−3.5, −4]

0.352∗∗∗
(0.0476)

0.355∗∗∗
(0.0620)

0.386∗∗∗
(0.0767)

0.327∗∗∗
(0.0301)

0.298∗∗∗
(0.0622)

0.346∗∗∗
(0.0518)

0.323∗∗∗
(0.0425)

≤ −4

0.300∗∗∗
(0.0298)

0.250∗∗∗
(0.0373)

0.337∗∗∗
(0.0478)

0.240∗∗∗
(0.0524)

0.265∗∗∗
(0.0272)

0.314∗∗∗
(0.0315)

Current CLTV (omitted bin: [130, 140)) :
< 80

0.341∗∗∗
(0.0193)

0.445∗∗∗
(0.0609)

0.341∗∗∗
(0.0193)

0.321∗∗∗
(0.0340)

0.254∗∗∗
(0.0110)

[80, 90)

0.401∗∗∗
(0.0197)

0.541∗∗∗
(0.0620)

0.401∗∗∗
(0.0197)

0.369∗∗∗
(0.0387)

0.313∗∗∗
(0.0245)

[90, 100)

0.472∗∗∗
(0.0255)

0.558∗∗∗
(0.0463)

0.472∗∗∗
(0.0255)

0.486∗∗∗
(0.0439)

0.393∗∗∗
(0.0230)

[100, 110)

0.585∗∗∗
(0.0302)

0.717∗∗∗
(0.0412)

0.585∗∗∗
(0.0303)

0.574∗∗∗
(0.0425)

0.537∗∗∗
(0.0296)

[110, 120)

0.668∗∗∗
(0.0381)

0.710∗∗∗
(0.0699)

0.667∗∗∗
(0.0382)

0.654∗∗∗
(0.0423)

0.686∗∗∗
(0.0281)

[120, 130)

0.842∗∗∗
(0.0167)

0.881∗∗
(0.0420)

0.842∗∗∗
(0.0167)

0.850∗∗∗
(0.0292)

0.849∗∗∗
(0.0102)

[140, 150)

1.076∗
(0.0357)

0.693∗∗∗
(0.0159)

1.075
(0.0892)

1.076∗
(0.0357)

1.081∗
(0.0349)

1.127∗∗∗
(0.0303)

[150, 160)

1.246∗∗∗
(0.0561)

0.815∗∗∗
(0.0122)

1.163∗∗∗
(0.0492)

1.246∗∗∗
(0.0560)

1.196∗∗∗
(0.0426)

1.273∗∗∗
(0.0542)

≥ 160

1.473∗∗∗
(0.0565)

1

1.507∗∗∗
(0.0781)

1.472∗∗∗
(0.0563)

1.453∗∗∗
(0.0493)

1.491∗∗∗
(0.0625)

FICO/100

0.591∗∗∗
(0.00948)

0.693∗∗∗
(0.0101)

0.651∗∗∗
(0.0312)

0.590∗∗∗
(0.00953)

0.601∗∗∗
(0.0156)

0.543∗∗∗
(0.0126)
Continued on next page

2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

SATO

1.191∗∗∗
(0.0458)

1.092
(0.0855)

1.303
(0.265)

1.171∗∗∗
(0.0424)

1.114
(0.152)

1.263∗∗∗
(0.0576)

Open liens = 2

1.190∗∗∗
(0.0279)

1.124∗∗∗
(0.0304)

1.199∗∗∗
(0.0462)

1.191∗∗∗
(0.0281)

1.161∗∗∗
(0.0489)

1.232∗∗∗
(0.0269)

Open liens ≥ 3

0.980
(0.0537)

0.903
(0.0510)

0.859
(0.104)

0.981
(0.0540)

0.966
(0.0722)

0.910
(0.0516)

Ppmt. penalty active

1.065∗∗∗
(0.0124)

1.043∗∗
(0.0151)

1.213
(0.145)

1.065∗∗∗
(0.0126)

0.969
(0.0361)

1.065∗∗∗
(0.0114)

Log(loan amount)

1.062∗
(0.0327)

1.033
(0.0202)

0.855∗∗∗
(0.0328)

1.061
(0.0324)

1.135∗∗∗
(0.0328)

1.189∗∗∗
(0.0387)

Origination LTV

1.048∗∗∗
(0.00681)

1.082∗∗∗
(0.0125)

1.059∗∗∗
(0.0132)

1.049∗∗∗
(0.00686)

1.064∗∗∗
(0.0146)

1.043∗∗∗
(0.00544)

(Orig. LTV)2 /100

0.977∗∗∗
(0.00353)

0.957∗∗∗
(0.00606)

0.969∗∗∗
(0.00750)

0.977∗∗∗
(0.00357)

0.967∗∗∗
(0.00794)

0.978∗∗∗
(0.00267)

Full documentation

0.600∗∗∗
(0.0175)

0.660∗∗∗
(0.0166)

0.712∗∗∗
(0.0257)

0.601∗∗∗
(0.0175)

0.566∗∗∗
(0.0237)

0.596∗∗∗
(0.0147)

No documentation

1.087∗∗
(0.0309)

1.106∗∗
(0.0379)

1.099
(0.0681)

1.089∗∗
(0.0306)

1.113∗
(0.0492)

1.085∗∗∗
(0.0176)

Cashout Refi

0.954∗∗∗
(0.0120)

0.874∗∗∗
(0.0102)

1.068
(0.0424)

0.954∗∗∗
(0.0120)

0.937∗∗∗
(0.0178)

0.850∗∗∗
(0.0253)

Non-cashout refi

0.989
(0.0159)

0.970
(0.0242)

0.974
(0.0781)

0.988
(0.0158)

0.998
(0.0271)

0.949∗
(0.0194)

Not owner-occupied

1.019
(0.0681)

0.935
(0.0593)

0.840∗
(0.0627)

1.022
(0.0681)

0.987
(0.0957)

1.060
(0.0642)

Condo

0.854∗∗∗
(0.0370)

0.870∗∗∗
(0.0307)

0.973
(0.0410)

0.854∗∗∗
(0.0364)

0.864∗∗∗
(0.0290)

0.843∗∗∗
(0.0406)

12-month HPA

0.985∗∗∗
(0.00157)

0.990∗∗∗
(0.00124)

1.001
(0.00414)

0.985∗∗∗
(0.00160)

0.983∗∗∗
(0.00142)

0.983∗∗∗
(0.00170)

Unempl. rate (U)

1.000
(0.00579)

0.989∗
(0.00531)

1.000
(0.00577)

1.000
(0.00574)

0.996
(0.00635)

1.011∗
(0.00480)

6-month ∆U

1.004
(0.00810)

1.001
(0.0114)

1.036
(0.0225)

1.004
(0.00807)

1.013
(0.0145)

1.003
(0.00858)

30-year FRM rate

1.148∗∗
(0.0556)

1.041
(0.0675)

0.621∗∗
(0.100)

1.148∗∗
(0.0540)

1.122
(0.160)

1.129∗
(0.0660)

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

1890615
75123
30377
-267200.0

493284
29541
14197
-108759.6

315482
34469
3152
-26520.1

1890615
75123
30377
-267249.2

589163
23973
9404
-71531.4

4790556
138077
55238
-499127.1

2823245
116866
49914
-470664.5

State dummies
Initial interest rate bins
Loan type × calendar q.
dummies
Observations
# Loans
# Incidents
Log Likelihood

Exponentiated coefficients; Standard errors (clustered at state level) in parentheses.
In all regressions, baseline hazard allowed to vary by origination quarter.
Significance: ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

3

(7)

Table A-2: Proportional hazard models of 60-day delinquency — Robustness
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Loan ages (months)

> 30

> 30

> 30

> 30

> 30

> 30

> 30

Sample restrictions

no 3/1

no 7/1+

no 5/1

Inv. only

no AZ,CA,FL,NV

Full doc only

Use “self-updated” LTV

X

Interest rate − initial rate (omitted bin: [−0.01, 0.01]):
(−0.01, −0.5]

0.265
(0.203)

0.982
(0.0494)

0.963
(0.0544)

0.950
(0.0449)

1.428∗∗
(0.192)

0.799
(0.151)

0.932
(0.163)

(−0.5, −1]

1.411∗
(0.210)

0.844∗
(0.0659)

0.791∗∗∗
(0.0458)

0.810∗∗∗
(0.0350)

0.791
(0.108)

0.918
(0.156)

0.771
(0.133)

(−1, −1.5]

1.049
(0.251)

0.771∗∗∗
(0.0447)

0.692∗∗∗
(0.0555)

0.783∗∗∗
(0.0387)

0.915
(0.114)

0.845
(0.118)

0.766
(0.117)

(−1.5, −2]

0.531∗∗∗
(0.0902)

0.603∗∗∗
(0.0676)

0.574∗∗∗
(0.0881)

0.578∗∗∗
(0.0512)

0.496∗∗∗
(0.0975)

0.607∗∗
(0.103)

0.639∗∗∗
(0.0864)

(−2, −2.5]

0.629∗∗∗
(0.0826)

0.613∗∗∗
(0.0526)

0.549∗∗∗
(0.0598)

0.556∗∗∗
(0.0428)

0.647∗∗∗
(0.0680)

0.603∗∗∗
(0.0828)

0.651∗∗∗
(0.0689)

(−2.5, −3]

0.452∗∗∗
(0.0362)

0.453∗∗∗
(0.0528)

0.402∗∗∗
(0.0575)

0.432∗∗∗
(0.0349)

0.517∗∗∗
(0.0639)

0.497∗∗∗
(0.0750)

0.457∗∗∗
(0.0492)

(−3, −3.5]

0.430∗∗∗
(0.0393)

0.465∗∗∗
(0.0417)

0.449∗∗∗
(0.0421)

0.410∗∗∗
(0.0257)

0.488∗∗∗
(0.0384)

0.529∗∗∗
(0.0500)

0.427∗∗∗
(0.0466)

(−3.5, −4]

0.353∗∗∗
(0.0613)

0.385∗∗∗
(0.0589)

0.352∗∗∗
(0.0457)

0.333∗∗∗
(0.0428)

0.511∗∗∗
(0.0620)

0.374∗∗∗
(0.0477)

0.415∗∗∗
(0.0594)

≤ −4

0.326∗∗∗
(0.0385)

0.334∗∗∗
(0.0398)

0.233∗∗∗
(0.0420)

0.322∗∗∗
(0.0313)

0.315∗∗∗
(0.0512)

0.335∗∗∗
(0.0645)

0.319∗∗∗
(0.0610)

Current CLTV (omitted bin: [130, 140)) :
< 80

0.343∗∗∗
(0.0184)

0.359∗∗∗
(0.0254)

0.317∗∗∗
(0.0218)

0.440∗∗∗
(0.0447)

0.314∗∗∗
(0.0292)

0.313∗∗∗
(0.0312)

0.368∗∗∗
(0.0542)

[80, 90)

0.403∗∗∗
(0.0181)

0.412∗∗∗
(0.0259)

0.392∗∗∗
(0.0267)

0.530∗∗∗
(0.0389)

0.407∗∗∗
(0.0245)

0.387∗∗∗
(0.0339)

0.425∗∗∗
(0.0407)

[90, 100)

0.476∗∗∗
(0.0228)

0.507∗∗∗
(0.0283)

0.417∗∗∗
(0.0249)

0.633∗∗∗
(0.0343)

0.528∗∗∗
(0.0284)

0.482∗∗∗
(0.0352)

0.457∗∗∗
(0.0287)

[100, 110)

0.585∗∗∗
(0.0243)

0.603∗∗∗
(0.0401)

0.568∗∗∗
(0.0267)

0.756∗∗∗
(0.0288)

0.709∗∗∗
(0.0346)

0.597∗∗∗
(0.0426)

0.612∗∗∗
(0.0387)

[110, 120)

0.667∗∗∗
(0.0345)

0.715∗∗∗
(0.0388)

0.606∗∗∗
(0.0321)

0.873∗∗∗
(0.0113)

0.718∗∗∗
(0.0407)

0.721∗∗∗
(0.0490)

0.682∗∗∗
(0.0535)

[120, 130)

0.827∗∗∗
(0.0167)

0.865∗∗∗
(0.0288)

0.845∗∗∗
(0.0154)

0.948∗
(0.0241)

0.899∗
(0.0391)

0.827∗∗∗
(0.0476)

0.858∗∗∗
(0.0372)

[140, 150)

1.062
(0.0392)

1.058∗
(0.0281)

1.134∗∗
(0.0436)

1.089∗∗
(0.0286)

1.072
(0.0449)

1.062
(0.0627)

1.096
(0.0635)

[150, 160)

1.222∗∗∗
(0.0521)

1.237∗∗∗
(0.0683)

1.307∗∗∗
(0.0375)

1.139∗∗∗
(0.0205)

1.099
(0.0575)

1.146
(0.109)

1.271∗∗
(0.103)

≥ 160

1.454∗∗∗
(0.0513)

1.457∗∗∗
(0.0620)

1.527∗∗∗
(0.0658)

1.240∗∗∗
(0.0267)

1.363∗∗∗
(0.0589)

1.272∗
(0.141)

1.580∗∗∗
(0.0652)

FICO/100

0.589∗∗∗
(0.0107)

0.615∗∗∗
(0.0137)

0.558∗∗∗
(0.0119)

0.608∗∗∗
(0.0134)

0.588∗∗∗
(0.0227)

0.540∗∗∗
(0.0149)

0.526∗∗∗
(0.0209)

SATO

1.192∗∗∗
(0.0552)

1.178∗∗∗
(0.0568)

1.349∗∗∗
(0.0651)

1.184∗∗∗
(0.0382)

1.254
(0.145)

1.159
(0.0898)

1.034
(0.0716)

Open liens = 2

1.184∗∗∗

1.201∗∗∗

1.187∗∗∗

1.365∗∗∗

1.079

1.206∗∗∗

Continued on next page

4

(1)

(2)

(3)

(0.0267)

(0.0397)

Open liens ≥ 3

0.976
(0.0483)

Ppmt. penalty active

(5)

(6)

(7)

(0.0228)

(0.0391)

(0.0654)

(0.0460)

1.016
(0.0709)

0.955
(0.0743)

1.067
(0.140)

0.838
(0.0973)

0.961
(0.0749)

1.084∗∗∗
(0.0179)

1.024∗
(0.0119)

1.085∗∗∗
(0.0223)

1.075∗∗
(0.0272)

1.033
(0.0495)

1.047
(0.0517)

1.083∗∗
(0.0313)

Log(loan amount)

1.058
(0.0364)

1.118∗∗∗
(0.0270)

1.013
(0.0390)

1.050
(0.0593)

0.996
(0.0274)

1.074∗∗
(0.0258)

0.931
(0.0417)

Origination LTV

1.051∗∗∗
(0.00733)

1.049∗∗∗
(0.00858)

1.040∗∗∗
(0.00680)

1.097∗∗∗
(0.00936)

1.065∗∗∗
(0.0144)

1.031∗∗
(0.0100)

1.075∗∗∗
(0.0128)

(Orig. LTV)2 /100

0.975∗∗∗
(0.00371)

0.976∗∗∗
(0.00448)

0.983∗∗∗
(0.00443)

0.945∗∗∗
(0.00554)

0.967∗∗∗
(0.00826)

0.985∗
(0.00646)

0.961∗∗∗
(0.00680)

Orig. LTV = 80

(4)

1.085∗∗
(0.0291)

Full documentation

0.598∗∗∗
(0.0161)

0.581∗∗∗
(0.0226)

0.643∗∗∗
(0.0176)

0.624∗∗∗
(0.0174)

0.605∗∗∗
(0.0220)

0.568∗∗∗
(0.0276)

No documentation

1.085∗∗
(0.0312)

1.062
(0.0399)

1.171∗∗∗
(0.0398)

0.937∗∗
(0.0204)

1.211∗∗
(0.0817)

1.064
(0.0531)

Cashout Refi

0.971∗
(0.0132)

0.927∗∗∗
(0.0171)

0.948∗
(0.0216)

0.919∗∗∗
(0.0134)

1.078
(0.0456)

0.985
(0.0423)

1.052
(0.0446)

Non-cashout refi

1.001
(0.0172)

0.986
(0.0213)

0.977
(0.0338)

1.012
(0.0176)

1.130
(0.0735)

0.983
(0.0320)

1.033
(0.0465)

Not owner-occupied

1.001
(0.0692)

1.046
(0.0713)

1.004
(0.0675)

0.844∗
(0.0620)

1.132
(0.0851)

1.060
(0.0752)

Condo

0.863∗∗∗
(0.0354)

0.833∗∗∗
(0.0366)

0.867∗∗
(0.0446)

0.898∗∗∗
(0.0243)

0.878∗∗∗
(0.0325)

0.760∗∗∗
(0.0234)

0.898∗
(0.0489)

12-month HPA

0.985∗∗∗
(0.00152)

0.984∗∗∗
(0.00155)

0.986∗∗∗
(0.00215)

0.993∗∗∗
(0.00167)

0.988∗∗∗
(0.00221)

0.983∗∗∗
(0.00456)

0.985∗∗∗
(0.00202)

Unempl. rate (U)

1.001
(0.00597)

1.000
(0.00710)

0.996
(0.00503)

1.008
(0.00452)

0.998
(0.0123)

1.015
(0.0167)

1.000
(0.0105)

6-month ∆U

1.007
(0.00882)

1.004
(0.00975)

0.998
(0.00667)

1.007
(0.00590)

1.029
(0.0190)

0.984
(0.0231)

1.000
(0.0203)

30-year FRM rate

1.103
(0.0740)

1.283∗∗∗
(0.0712)

1.020
(0.0598)

1.132∗∗
(0.0464)

1.383∗
(0.193)

1.183
(0.120)

1.131
(0.125)

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

State dummies
Initial interest rate bins
Loan type × calendar q.
dummies
Observations
# Loans
# Incidents
Log Likelihood

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

1733461
64353
27666
-240862.8

1206985
51643
21281
-178577.0

840784
34250
11807
-94225.9

2484935
103516
45278
-413728.2

432029
16479
6037
-43854.7

796231
29945
8846
-69928.9

624331
22105
6245
-47456.5

Exponentiated coefficients; Standard errors (clustered at state level) in parentheses.
In all regressions, baseline hazard allowed to vary by origination quarter.
Significance: ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

5

Table A-3: Proportional hazard models of cures and modifications of 60+ days delinquent loans
Cure
(1)
All

Modification

(2)
CLTV>140 only

(3)
All

(4)
All

(5)
CLTV>140 only

(6)
All

Interest rate − missed rate (omitted bin: [−0.01, 0.01]):
≥ +0.01

0.840
(0.0836)

0.817
(0.153)

0.868
(0.0707)

1.214
(0.216)

1.191
(0.284)

1.345∗
(0.200)

(−0.01, −0.5]

1.052
(0.0880)

1.156
(0.160)

0.975
(0.0689)

1.159
(0.200)

1.288
(0.283)

1.035
(0.158)

(−0.5, −1]

1.235∗∗
(0.0993)

1.341∗
(0.193)

1.299∗∗∗
(0.0881)

1.088
(0.137)

0.960
(0.172)

1.118
(0.120)

(−1, −1.5]

1.419∗∗
(0.161)

1.709∗∗
(0.309)

1.343∗∗
(0.133)

1.164
(0.173)

1.132
(0.233)

1.048
(0.141)

(−1.5, −2]

1.247
(0.145)

1.382
(0.268)

1.173
(0.113)

1.166
(0.130)

1.076
(0.166)

1.107
(0.107)

(−2, −2.5]

1.736∗∗∗
(0.191)

1.786∗∗
(0.316)

1.407∗∗∗
(0.134)

1.259∗
(0.137)

1.252
(0.178)

1.139
(0.112)

(−2.5, −3]

1.753∗∗∗
(0.158)

2.242∗∗∗
(0.317)

1.538∗∗∗
(0.117)

1.072
(0.101)

1.102
(0.138)

1.095
(0.0901)

(−3, −3.5]

2.200∗∗∗
(0.186)

2.551∗∗∗
(0.352)

1.908∗∗∗
(0.137)

1.000
(0.0925)

0.851
(0.110)

1.027
(0.0825)

(−3.5, −4]

1.853∗∗∗
(0.184)

2.084∗∗∗
(0.339)

1.640∗∗∗
(0.137)

0.898
(0.0927)

0.901
(0.123)

0.904
(0.0808)

≤ −4

2.128∗∗∗
(0.233)

2.114∗∗∗
(0.384)

1.852∗∗∗
(0.165)

0.801
(0.0948)

0.889
(0.136)

0.821
(0.0847)

Current CLTV (omitted bin: [130, 140)) :
< 80

2.861∗∗∗
(0.143)

0.794∗
(0.0860)

[80, 90)

2.386∗∗∗
(0.108)

0.878
(0.0770)

[90, 100)

2.019∗∗∗
(0.0831)

0.987
(0.0650)

[100, 110)

1.624∗∗∗
(0.0638)

1.008
(0.0542)

[110, 120)

1.335∗∗∗
(0.0526)

1.054
(0.0500)

[120, 130)

1.160∗∗∗
(0.0470)

0.975
(0.0453)

[140, 150)

0.898∗
(0.0423)

1.226∗∗∗
(0.0576)

0.958
(0.0443)

1.190∗∗∗
(0.0482)

[150, 160)

0.950
(0.0473)

1.304∗∗∗
(0.0610)

0.902∗
(0.0433)

1.114∗∗
(0.0462)

≥ 160

0.738∗∗∗
(0.0306)

1

0.835∗∗∗
(0.0324)

1

SATO

1.002
(0.0346)

1.036
(0.0650)

0.833∗∗
(0.0466)

0.866
(0.0665)

FICO/100

0.812∗∗∗

0.749∗∗∗

0.815∗∗∗

0.819∗∗∗
Continued on next page

6

Cure

Modification
(4)
All

(5)
CLTV>140 only

(0.0368)

(0.0231)

(0.0311)

0.880∗

0.874∗∗∗

(0.0235)

(0.0497)

(0.0260)

0.973
(0.0435)

Open liens ≥ 3

1.156∗∗
(0.0566)

1.137
(0.0926)

0.895
(0.0530)

1.044
(0.0802)

Ppmt. penalty active

0.942∗
(0.0226)

0.973
(0.0679)

1.076
(0.0550)

1.061
(0.0775)

Log(loan amount)

0.867∗∗∗
(0.0179)

0.894∗
(0.0455)

0.927∗∗
(0.0267)

0.884∗∗
(0.0387)

Origination LTV

0.959∗∗∗
(0.00625)

0.863∗∗∗
(0.0178)

1.065∗∗∗
(0.0155)

1.058∗
(0.0300)

(Orig. LTV)2 /100

1.026∗∗∗
(0.00483)

1.101∗∗∗
(0.0151)

0.963∗∗∗
(0.00949)

0.968
(0.0181)

Full documentation

1.209∗∗∗
(0.0278)

1.195∗∗∗
(0.0576)

0.824∗∗∗
(0.0271)

0.772∗∗∗
(0.0353)

No documentation

1.014
(0.0382)

0.993
(0.0997)

0.933
(0.0512)

0.918
(0.0782)

Cashout Refi

1.098∗∗∗
(0.0277)

1.280∗∗∗
(0.0668)

1.082∗∗
(0.0318)

1.215∗∗∗
(0.0481)

Non-cashout refi

0.987
(0.0294)

1.075
(0.0727)

1.109∗∗
(0.0417)

1.108
(0.0608)

Not owner-occupied

0.897∗∗∗
(0.0239)

0.999
(0.0623)

0.436∗∗∗
(0.0203)

0.426∗∗∗
(0.0301)

Condo

0.954
(0.0229)

0.917
(0.0443)

0.603∗∗∗
(0.0206)

0.579∗∗∗
(0.0265)

12-month HPA

1.019∗∗∗
(0.00123)

1.020∗∗∗
(0.00304)

1.017∗∗∗
(0.00184)

1.016∗∗∗
(0.00276)

Unempl. rate (U)

0.989
(0.00680)

1.020∗
(0.0100)

0.986∗
(0.00699)

0.972∗∗
(0.00839)

6-month ∆U

1.000
(0.0104)

1.003
(0.0173)

1.001
(0.0131)

1.026
(0.0170)

30-year FRM rate

1.163
(0.108)

0.988
(0.203)

1.817∗∗∗
(0.237)

2.003∗∗∗
(0.356)

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

Open liens = 2

(1)
All

(2)
CLTV>140 only

(0.0194)
0.936∗∗

Age dummies
State dummies
Missed interest rate bins
Loan type × calendar q.
dummies
Observations
# Loans
# Incidents
Log-Likelihood

(3)
All

X
X

p < 0.05,

∗∗

p < 0.01,

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

847262
65900
14867
-128812.6

424887
35322
3349
-26307.3

1354863
106971
23493
-218350.3

847262
65900
8649
-70489.4

424887
35322
4688
-35076.9

1354863
106971
11678
-103219.1

Exponentiated coefficients; Standard errors (clustered at loan level) in parentheses
In all regressions, baseline hazard allowed to vary by origination quarter.
∗

(6)
All

∗∗∗

p < 0.001

7

A.2

A simple model of mortgage default

This section presents a barebones model of a borrower’s default decision, in order
to derive qualitative predictions for what we should expect to see in the data. This
model is a simplified version of other frictionless models in the literature, such as
Kau et al. (1992).
We consider the following transaction. A homeowner owns a house priced S0 and
gets a three-period mortgage. The terms of the loan are that the lender advances
some amount L0 at time 0 and the borrower promises to make a periodic payment
of m dollars at time 1 and to repay e dollars at time 2. The house price evolves
stochastically but the payments m and e are deterministic. There is a market interest
rate r and the borrower can borrow and lend unlimited amounts at that rate. If the
borrower fails to pay m at time 1 or e at time 2, the lender sells the house to recover
the money owed. We abstract here from the possibility of prepayment but this is,
otherwise, a standard promissory note: the borrower promises to make a series of
payments and the lender sells the collateral in the event that the borrower defaults.
There are no frictions and the lender has no recourse to the borrower’s other assets
nor are there penalties for default. At time 1 the borrower can, if he so desires,
default on his promised payment and buy an identical house with a new, smaller
mortgage.
We now show three key propositions about mortgages. First, we show that we
can characterize the mortgage described above as a call option on a call option on the
house. Second, we show that negative equity is basically never sufficient for default
to be optimal except in a situation where a borrower with negative equity at time
t also has negative equity for all s > t along every possible path for prices. And
third, we show that changes in the size of the monthly payment affect repayment
behavior more when borrowers have negative equity than positive and that for any
reduction in principal, there is an equivalent reduction in the monthly payment that
will reduce default by the same amount.
We stress that the purpose of this model is not to describe an actual borrower’s
decision. At the very least, a complete description of the borrower’s choice would
include borrowing limits on the riskless asset, liquidity shocks, and some sort of
penalty for default. A more sophisticated model would differentiate the consumption
of housing from that of other goods.47 For our purposes, one can think of the
household as having some fixed level of housing consumption and assume that the
47

See e.g. Campbell and Cocco (2011) for a more realistic model of the default decision.

8

payments made by the borrower are net of rent. In other words, at time 1, the
borrower actually pays r + m on the mortgage and r if he opts to default. Despite
these omissions, the model described below illustrates some basic principles of the
mortgage default problem that apply in any model and also some common errors
that economists and others make in thinking about the problem.

A.2.1

A formal model

Consider a three-period model with t = 0, 1, 2, with a finite sample space Ω =
{ω1 , ..., ωK }, with a probability measure P , and a filtration F . Suppose we have a
security S with adapted price process St , t = 0, 1, 2 and a riskless asset with return
r. Let M be a security in which the investor gets the option to pay m at time 1
for an option to buy security S at time 2 for price e. Let C be a call option on the
house with strike price e exercised at time 2. Let M be a call option on C with strike
price m exercised at time 1. Importantly, we assume absence of arbitrage, which
implies the existence of an equivalent martingale measure Q defined on F and Ω.
For simplicity, we assume the borrower does not discount the future.
Our first insight is that selling the house and buying the call option M at time
0 is an identical problem to the mortgage choice problem described above. The
coincidence of these two strategies is a simple example of put-call parity and results
from the fact the mortgage contract includes an embedded put option. To see the
mechanics, start at time 2. If the borrower made the mortgage payment m at time
1, then his payoff would be:
(S2 − e)+ ,
which is also the payoff for the call option C, which the investor has the option to
buy for price m. In other words, buying the call option and making the mortgage
payment at time 1 are identical investments. At time 0, the borrower receives L0 by
receiving a loan of that amount and the buyer of M also receives L0 , but, in his case,
it comes from selling the house for S0 , paying M0 for the call option.

A.2.2

Equity and default

Going forward, we focus on the call option formulation, as it is far easier to work
with. We now turn our attention to the question of the relationship between negative
equity and default. As explained above, default at time 1 consists of failing to exercise

9

the call option M. That is to say:
Borrower Defaults ⇔ C1 < m.

(8)

What is surprising and somewhat counterintuitive is that neither the price process of
the house S nor the outstanding balance of the loan e appear in equation (8). But,
of course, C1 depends on S, and, by absence of arbitrage, we can re-write equation
(8) as
Borrower Defaults ⇔ C1 =

1
E
(1+r) Q

(S2 − e)+ < m.

(9)

Equation (9) allows us to establish a proposition that is central to understanding the
default decision:
Proposition 1 If and only if there exists ω ∈ F ∈ F1 such that S2 (ω) > e, then
there exists m > 0 such that C1 > m and default is not optimal.
Proposition 1 leads to two significant conclusions. First, suppose all we observe
about a borrower is that he has negative equity, that is, that S1 < e. What can
we say about whether it is optimal to default? Not much. The sufficient condition
for default is that the borrower must have negative equity in every possible future
state of the world, and S1 < e is not a sufficient condition for that. In fact, the
historical evolution of house prices indicates that nominal house prices often surpass
their previous peaks over fairly short horizons even after deep busts. In other words,
negative equity today has not, historically, been sufficient to eliminate the possibility
of positive equity at some point in the future.
The second key point, and the one most relevant to this paper, is that as long as
there is some state of the world in which the borrower has positive equity, then that
borrower will continue making mortgage payments if we lower the payment enough.
So long as C1 > 0, then, we can set the payment at C1 /2 and ensure continued
payment.
Before continuing, it is important to stress that we have not, in any way, ruled
out the possibility that the borrower could opt against exercising M and go and
buy another house with a new mortgage. However, the existence of such a strategy
has no effect on our results; as long as there is no arbitrage, it is always the case
that if C1 > m, “walking away” and making any other investment is strictly wealth
reducing relative to exercising the call option. To see why, note that if C1 > m, then
the borrower has an opportunity to buy an asset worth C1 dollars but pay less than
C1 . By exercising the option the borrower increases his wealth by C1 − m dollars.
10

What investment could possibly dominate that? No investment. Unless an arbitrage
opportunity exists, the most valuable alternative investment a borrower can make
with the m dollars will be worth m dollars, which is strictly less than C1 and thus
will reduce the borrower’s wealth.
We conclude this discussion of negative equity by making one thing crystal clear.
Proposition 1 does not imply that borrowers will never default. For a fixed m, a
sufficiently large fall in prices will reduce the value of the call option so that C1 < m
and default is optimal. But to deduce that default is optimal for a given borrower,
we need to know the borrower’s beliefs about the stochastic process for house prices,
the discount rate, and the size of the monthly payment and, in a multi-period world,
future monthly payments. Thus, the existence of borrowers with negative equity
making their monthly payments is fully consistent with rationality in every sense.

A.2.3

Taking the model to the data

What does our simple model tell us to expect in the data? First, as we have already
explained, Proposition 1 implies that unless there is no state of nature in which
the borrower will have positive equity, borrowers will continue to make mortgage
payments if the monthly payment is sufficiently low. Furthermore, changes in the
monthly payment will affect repayment behavior, no matter how negative the equity.
In fact, in the extreme, payment reduction should be more effective, the more negative the equity. To formalize this, imagine that we have a continuum of borrowers
with the same S1 and e but indexed by different levels of C1 . If S1 − e > m, then
C1 > m for all i and no borrower will want to default, meaning that perturbing the
monthly payment will have no effect on default behavior. For lower levels of equity
and a sufficiently high monthly payment, a small perturbation of the monthly payment should have no effect but a sufficiently large change will always affect borrower
repayment behavior.
We can also think about the dynamics of default using the model. Up to now,
we have focused on the decision to default at time 1, but we can think about default
at time 0 by imagining that the borrower has to pay m0 to buy security M at time
0. The default decision at time 0 is
Borrower Defaults ⇔ M0 < m0 ,

11

(10)

which, by absence of arbitrage is
Borrower Defaults ⇔ M0 =

1
E
(1+r) Q

(C1 − m)+ < m0 .

(11)

Default at time 0 obviously depends on the level of the current payment m0 but
also on the future payment m. In other words, a future reduction in the monthly
payment should affect current willingness to pay.

A.3

Comparison with earlier work on upward resets

Researchers studying the causes of the mortgage crisis have argued that upward
resets of ARMs played only a small role, a claim that may seem at odds with the
results in this paper. For example, Foote, Gerardi and Willen (2012) write that for
loans originated in January 2005,
...the initial interest rate was 7.5 percent for the first two years. Two years
later, in January 2007, the interest rate rose to 11.4 percent, resulting in
a payment shock of 4 percentage points, or more than 50 percent in
relative terms. However, (...) delinquencies for the January 2005 loans
did not tick up when this reset occurred. In fact, the delinquency plot
shows no significant problems for the 2005 borrowers two years into their
mortgages when their resets occurred.
On the face of it, the statement that there were “no significant problems for the 2005
borrowers... when their resets occurred...” appears to contradict the basic thesis of
this paper that resets have an economically large effect on the default hazard. The
statements are, however, both correct — there is no contradiction here. Figure A-1,
which shows the performance of subprime ARMs that reset for the first time 24
months after origination (known as “2/28”), illustrates why. Panel A shows that
the median rate paid rose by more than 200 basis point in month 24, and Panel B
shows, consistent with this paper (and other work such as Pennington-Cross and Ho
2010), that the default hazard also jumped sharply. However, Panel C shows that
consistent with the quote above, the incidence of defaults seems little affected by the
reset: almost two-thirds of the defaults in this pool occurred prior to the reset, and
the share of borrowers of the original pool who default just before the reset is about
the same as the share who default just after.
12

How can Panels B and C be consistent with one another? The key is prepayments,
which are shown in Panel D: between months 21 and 25, about half the remaining
loans in the pool prepay as borrowers either sell or get new mortgages to avoid
the higher payments. The result is that the increase in the default hazard and
the reduction in the number of loans in the pool roughly offset one another, which
explains why there is no noticeable change in the path of the cumulative incidence
shown in Panel C.
As we explained in Section 2.2.1, interpreting the default hazard in Panel B is not
easy, and this cohort of loans illustrates precisely why. On one hand, Panel B could
reflect a situation where there is no treatment effect of the payment increase, but only
the borrowers who are not going to default can select into prepayment. Alternatively,
if prepayments were randomly assigned, then the change in the default hazard would
be a pure treatment effect of the higher monthly payment. The motivation for this
paper is that we were able find a sample of borrowers who faced a reset but had no
incentive and, in many cases, no ability to prepay.
The median payment increase for the borrowers in the 2005:Q1 sample depicted
in Figure A-1 at the first reset is about 27%, which is roughly consistent with about
a 1.5 percentage point rate change for the borrowers in our sample (who face lower
payments to begin with, as their rates are lower and their loans are not amortizing
over our sample period). According to Figure 3, such a payment increase would lead
approximately to a 1/0.66 = 1.5 fold increase in the default hazard. Since the actual
hazard in Panel B more than doubles, we can attribute about half of the increase
in the hazard in Panel B to the treatment effect of higher mortgage payments and
the other half to the selection effect of more creditworthy borrowers prepaying. This
means that of the one-third of the defaults in the pool that occurred after the reset,
we can attribute about a quarter to the treatment effect of the payment increase (as
half of the defaults would have happened even with a constant default hazard). If
we look at the pool as a whole, it follows that we can only attribute approximately
1/12 = 1/3 × 1/4 of the defaults directly to the increase in payment size.

13

Figure A-1: The role of the resets in the foreclosure crisis
Sample is all amortizing subprime 2/28 mortgages originated in the first quarter of 2005 in the CoreLogic LoanPerformance ABS database. Default is defined as the first transition to 60-day delinquency.

A. Median interest rate

B. Default hazard
4

Default Hazardց

Default Hazard in %

Interest Rate in %

10
Median Interest Rateց

9

8

2

7

14

0
0

6

12

18

24

30

36

42

48

0

54

6

24

30

36

42

48

54

Months since origination

D. Prepayment hazard

C. Cumulative default incidence
30

14
Prepayment Hazard in %

Cumulative Incidence of Defaultց
Cumulative incidence in %

18

12

Months since origination

20

10

12

Prepayment Hazardց

10
8
6
4
2

0

0
0

6

12

18

24

30

36

42

Months since origination

48

54

0

6

12

18

24

30

36

42

Months since origination

48

54

A.4

The incidence of delinquency

The results in Section 4 of the paper show that interest rate reductions i) strongly
reduce the default hazard, even for borrowers who are deeply underwater, and ii)
also strongly reduce the prepayment hazard, although this is relative to a lower base
rate than for the default hazard. In this appendix, we illustrate the combined effect
on the cumulative number or incidence of defaults, which is affected by both default
and prepayment hazards (because a loan that prepays can no longer default). To do
so, we use our estimated coefficients to predict the cumulative fraction of delinquency
for a fixed population of 5/1 loans with certain characteristics, starting at loan age
55 months.
The loan characteristics we chose are shown in Panel A of Figure A-2. These
are close to the modal characteristics of loans that are still in the sample at age
55. Panel B shows the cumulative incidence of 60-day delinquency implied by the
combination of our estimated baseline default and prepayment hazard models, with
and without a 3-percentage point reduction in the interest rate occurring at loan age
61 months, and for two different assumptions about a loan’s CLTV.48 The upper two
lines show that for a CLTV between 130 and 140, our estimates imply that at the
initial interest rates, about one-third of loans that are not delinquent at age 55 would
become 60-days delinquent by age 75. With the 3-percentage point reduction at the
reset, however, this predicted fraction goes down to about 23 percent. If we compare
the predicted incidence of delinquency only after loan age 63, when the reset becomes
relevant, we see that only about 8 percent of loans become delinquent with the reset,
but that about 17 percent become delinquent without the reset. Thus, over the
span of one year after the reset, a 3-percentage point reduction, which corresponds
approximately to cutting the payment in half, is predicted to reduce the incidence
of default by about 9 percentage points, or more than 50 percent.
The lower set of lines in Panel B shows the predicted cumulative incidence of
delinquency for loans that are not underwater, with a CLTV between 80 and 90.
Unsurprisingly, such loans are predicted to go delinquent at a much lower though
still non-trivial rate. While without the reset at age 61, the model predicts that about
14 percent of loans go delinquent by age 75, with the reduction the predicted fraction
is below 10 percent. While the relative impact on delinquency rates is similar to the
impact for the underwater loans, the absolute reduction in the number of delinquent
48

In calculating the competing hazards, we take equal-weighted averages across the possible
origination months, thereby accounting for the fact that the baseline hazards are allowed to vary
at the origination-quarter level and that our regressions include calendar-quarter effects.

15

loans due to the reset is much lower than for underwater loans.
Finally, one might think that the model-implied incidence of delinquency seems
unreasonably high, but Panel C shows that this is not the case. The panel shows the
actual cumulative fraction of loans with a CLTV above 130 at loan age 55 that become
60-days delinquent by age 75, for our three different loan types. We see that among
loans in the ARM 7/1 and 10/1 category, one quarter become 60-days delinquent
over that time span. For 3/1s, which have benefitted from a number of downward
rate resets, the corresponding number is below 20 percent. Most interestingly, the
5/1s, to which the counterfactuals in Panel B apply, were on a higher path than the
7/1+ loans prior to loan age 61, and it is plausible that 30 percent or more of these
loans would have become delinquent without the reset. However, in actuality we see
a notable change in the slope of the incidence function for these loans around age 62
(with a slight reduction in the slope already occurring around age 60, consistent with
the findings from Section 4.1.2), so that by age 75 fewer than 20 percent defaulted.

16

Figure A-2: Cumulative incidence of 60-day delinquency
Panel B shows the model-predicted incidence of default for a set of loans with characteristics given in Panel A,
starting at loan age 55 months. Panel C shows the actual cumulative incidence of default for loans in our data with
current CLTV of 130 at age 55 months. The fractions in this panel are based on loans in our sample originated
up to August 2005 only, as loans originated after that are in the sample for less than 75 months.

A. Characteristics of counterfactual loans
Loan type
Initial rate
FICO
Open liens
Loan amount
Original LTV
Purpose
Ppmt penalty

5/1
6.25%
720
2
200,000
80
Purchase
No

Documentation
Investor
Condo
State
Unemployment
12-month HPA
FRM rate

Low
No
No
California
8% (fixed)
-4%
4.50%

0

Cumulative Fraction of
60−day Delinquencies
.1
.2
.3

.4

B. Predicted cumulative incidence of delinquency

55

60

65
Months since Origination

70

75

CLTV in [130,140); no reset
CLTV in [130,140); 3 pp. interest rate reduction
CLTV in [80,90); no reset
CLTV in [80,90); 3 pp. interest rate reduction

0

.05

Cumulative Fraction of
60−day Delinquencies
.1
.15
.2

.25

C. Actual cumulative incidence of delinquency for loans with CLTV>130

55

60

65
Months since Origination

reset after 5 yrs
reset after 3 yrs

17

70

reset after 7 or 10 yrs

75

A.5

An alternative analysis of cures

Here, we provide an alternative analysis of cures, which is meant to complement the
hazard analysis in the main text.
Now, we focus only on loans that have just become 60-days delinquent (that is,
they have missed two payments). As Figure A-3 suggests, although the cure rate
of these loans is much higher than that of all delinquent loans, these loans are still
not very likely to cure—for loan ages between 25 and 55 months, 60-days delinquent
loans without interest rate resets cure within three months at a rate of only 10 to 15
percent. However, as the figure also suggests, 5/1s become much more likely to cure
around the time of the large interest rate reduction they witness.49
We estimate linear probability models where the dependent variable is whether a
loan cures within the next three months. The independent variable of interest is the
change in the borrower’s interest rate during the month in which he becomes 60-days
delinquent, relative to the interest rate at which the borrower failed to make his last
payment.50 In some specifications we also use leads and lags of these changes, as will
be explained below.
We exclude from the estimation loans that in the LP modification dataset are
marked as having received a modification in the month when the loan became 60-days
delinquent or the following three months. We also drop loans that are not marked as
getting modified but nevertheless experience an unscheduled interest rate decrease.
In all regressions, we include a loan-type specific quartic function of the loan age in
months, to account for the fact, clearly visible in Figure A-3, that younger loans are
more likely to cure (if there is no interest rate reduction). We also include loan type
× calendar quarter dummies.
Table A-4 displays the results. In column (1), we simply regress the cure indicator on the change in a delinquent borrower’s interest rate. The coefficient of
−0.047 (strongly statistically significant) means that borrowers whose interest rate
decreases by 1 percentage point are predicted to have a probability of curing within
three months that is 4.7 percentage points higher; for an interest rate decrease of 3
49

In the figure as well as in the regressions in this section, we only retain a 60-days delinquent loan
for the first month it is 60-days delinquent. However, the same loan—if it cures at least once—can
be in the sample more than once, at different ages. In our regressions, we cluster the standard
errors at the loan level.
50
For instance, a borrower who is recorded as going delinquent during month 62 failed to make
a payment during month 61, and the payment that was due at that time was based on the interest
rate during month 60. His new payment is determined by the interest rate that applied during
month 61. Thus, the variable “∆t rate” would be the change in the contract interest rate between
months 60 and 61. We exclude interest rate increases.

18

percentage points the corresponding effect size would be 14.1 percentage points. This
is a large effect: as can be seen in Figure A-3, it corresponds roughly to a doubling
of the probability of curing, which corresponds closely to the findings of our analysis
in the main text.
In the remaining columns, we allow for the effect of the interest rate decrease
to occur before or after the actual decrease. The coefficients on the variables “∆t+j
rate” should be interpreted as the effect of a 1-percentage point interest rate change
in period t + j on the probability that a borrower who goes 60-days delinquent in
period t cures within three months. For j ≥ 4, such an effect would be due to an
anticipation effect: the cure occurs before the required scheduled payment is actually
reduced. For j < 0, the coefficient measures the effect of the relatively lower interest
rate on delinquent borrowers who went 60-days delinquent after the lower interest
rate was already in effect; it can thus be interpreted as measuring to what extent a
lower required payment makes it easier to recover from delinquency if delinquency
occurred despite this lower payment.
In column (2), we control for the missed interest rate in addition to six leads and
lags of interest rate changes. We see that the coefficient on the contemporaneous
interest rate change is now of slightly larger magnitude, such that a 3-percentage
point interest rate decrease in period t is now predicted to increase the probability
of a 60-days delinquent loan in t curing by t + 3 by 17.7 percentage points. We
also see that the coefficients on changes in t − j for j = 1, . . . , 6 are negative and
significant, although somewhat smaller in magnitude. This is likely explained by
the fact that borrowers who become delinquent under a lower required payment are
“worse types” than those who become delinquent under the earlier, higher payment.
Yet, as noted in the main text, the overall effect of the rate reduction is still to increase
cures, even for borrowers becoming delinquent under low payments. For t + 1 and
t + 2, the coefficients are negative and of economically significant magnitude; this
is not necessarily due to anticipation but consistent with borrowers’ making double
or triple payments once the rate reduction occurs and thereby curing within three
months. For an interest rate reduction in t+3 this would not suffice, and the detected
(relatively small) effect on cures is either due to borrowers’ making up payments in
anticipation of the rate reduction, or a triple payment during the first month for
which the interest rate decreases.51 For t + 4 and higher, the coefficient approaches
51

An example may be helpful: for a borrower who goes 60-days delinquent in month 59, “∆t+3
rate” is the change in the contract interest rate between months 60 and 61, affecting the payment
due in month 62, which will be reflected in the delinquency status of month 63, and thus after
the three-month cure window we are considering. However, he may make up the missed earlier

19

zero, consistent with borrowers mostly (though not completely) failing to anticipate
future decreases. This is qualitatively similar to the findings in Section 4.1.
In columns (3) and (4), we run the same regressions in two separate samples:
5/1s only and the other types only. The resulting coefficients are similar, although
they tend to be of somewhat smaller magnitude and less significant when 5/1s are
excluded. This suggests a potentially nonlinear effect of interest rate changes on
cure probabilities, as interest rate decreases tend to be larger for 5/1s than for 3/1s.
In column (5) we add the same control variables we were using in Section 4, which
tends to increase the magnitude of the coefficients (a 3-percentage point decrease in
the interest rate is now predicted to increase the cure probability by more than 20
percentage points). As a point of comparison, this effect on the probability of curing
is similar to the difference between a borrower who has more than 20 percent equity
in his property and one who is more than 20 percent underwater.
Column (6) restricts the sample to borrowers who are severely underwater (with
a CLTV exceeding 140 percent) and finds coefficients of similar magnitude (although
with larger standard errors due to the smaller sample), indicating that even severely
underwater borrowers become much more likely to cure if their interest rate is reduced
substantially.

.1

.15

.2

.25

.3

.35

Figure A-3: Cure rate of newly 60-days delinquent loans, by loan type

10

20

30

40
Loan Age

reset after 5 yrs

50

60

70

reset after 7 or 10 yrs

Cure = become current or pay off mortgage within 3 months of becoming 60 days delinquent.

payments during month 61, as he knows that the required payment during that month is lower.

20

Table A-4: OLS regressions of the probability to cure within 3 months
(1)
All

(2)
All

(3)
5/1s only

(4)
w/o 5/1s

(5)
All w/Controls

(6)
CLTV>140 only

-0.0467***
(0.00591)

-0.0588***
(0.00687)

-0.0589***
(0.00775)

-0.0463***
(0.0142)

-0.0722***
(0.00883)

-0.0731***
(0.0128)

∆t−1 rate

-0.0379***
(0.00875)

-0.0428***
(0.0103)

-0.00623
(0.0155)

-0.0339***
(0.0108)

-0.0257*
(0.0149)

∆t−2 rate

-0.0371***
(0.00876)

-0.0473***
(0.0108)

-0.00312
(0.0135)

-0.0287***
(0.0103)

-0.00450
(0.0105)

∆t−3 rate

-0.0419***
(0.00910)

-0.0481***
(0.0109)

-0.0209
(0.0153)

-0.0429***
(0.0111)

-0.0526***
(0.0156)

∆t−4 rate

-0.0307***
(0.00808)

-0.0312***
(0.00930)

-0.0260
(0.0172)

-0.0290***
(0.00981)

-0.0134
(0.0129)

∆t−5 rate

-0.0164**
(0.00770)

-0.0137
(0.00909)

-0.0186
(0.0149)

-0.0193**
(0.00942)

-0.00657
(0.0110)

∆t−6 rate

-0.0248**
(0.0106)

-0.0331**
(0.0139)

-0.00565
(0.0158)

-0.0233*
(0.0128)

-0.0151
(0.0162)

∆t+1 rate

-0.0406***
(0.00593)

-0.0401***
(0.00676)

-0.0265**
(0.0122)

-0.0511***
(0.00756)

-0.0439***
(0.0109)

∆t+2 rate

-0.0345***
(0.00503)

-0.0355***
(0.00560)

-0.0229*
(0.0118)

-0.0401***
(0.00638)

-0.0282***
(0.00848)

∆t+3 rate

-0.0139***
(0.00394)

-0.0165***
(0.00438)

0.00253
(0.00878)

-0.0137***
(0.00504)

0.00343
(0.00576)

∆t+4 rate

-0.00993***
(0.00375)

-0.0117***
(0.00415)

-0.000594
(0.00843)

-0.0126***
(0.00479)

-0.00761
(0.00600)

∆t+5 rate

-0.00441
(0.00350)

-0.00423
(0.00376)

-0.00861
(0.00984)

-0.00569
(0.00466)

-0.00692
(0.00621)

∆t+6 rate

-0.00293
(0.00330)

-0.00307
(0.00357)

-0.00433
(0.00890)

-0.00257
(0.00431)

-0.00266
(0.00590)

∆t rate

CLTV < 80

0.196***
(0.0116)

CLTV ∈ [80, 90)

0.128***
(0.00924)

CLTV ∈ [90, 100)

0.0833***
(0.00675)

CLTV ∈ [100, 110)

0.0485***
(0.00554)

CLTV ∈ [110, 120)

0.0211***
(0.00484)

CLTV ∈ [120, 130)

0.0146***
(0.00458)

CLTV ∈ [140, 150)

0.00486
(0.00461)

0.0124***
(0.00446)

CLTV ∈ [150, 160)

0.00407
(0.00496)

0.00971**
(0.00454)

CLTV ≥ 160

-0.00572
(0.00436)

0

Loan-type-specific
quartic fn. of loan age
Loan type × calendar q.
dummies
Missed interest rate bins
Other controls
Observations
# unique loans
Adj. R2

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

122284
92080
0.0690

117375
89288
0.0728

76455
58226
0.0717

40920
31062
0.0740

71846
54141
0.107

24132
20483
0.0481

Clustered standard errors in parentheses;

∗

p < 0.10,

∗∗

p < 0.05,

∗∗∗

p < 0.01

