NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPORTANCE OF PARENTAL KNOWLEDGE AND SOCIAL NORMS:
EVIDENCE FROM WEIGHT REPORT CARDS IN MEXICO
Silvia Prina
Heather Royer
Working Paper 19344
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19344

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

For useful comments, we thank Emily Breza, Mac Brown, Kitt Carpenter, Mariana Carrera, Carlos
Chiapa, David Clingingsmith, Pascaline Dupas, Silke Forbes, Mireille Jacobson, Laura Juarez, Peter
Kuhn, Paco Martorell, Paulina Oliva, Justin Sydnor, and Mark Votruba. We also appreciate the suggestions
and thoughts of seminar participants at Case Western Reserve University, Cornell University, El Colegio
de México, and the University of California-Santa Barbara and conference attendees at the American
Society of Health Economists 2010 Conference, Mind the Gap: From Evidence to Policy Impact 2011
Conference, and the 2011 Advances in Field Experiments Conference at the University of Chicago.
This research would not have been possible without the outstanding work of Janine Kaiser who served
as our project coordinator. We also thank Ashley Pierson for valuable help at the start of the project,
Allison Bauer for research assistance, and the Russell Sage Foundation for generous research support.
Royer thanks the RAND Corporation for hosting her during the completion of the project. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19344.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Silvia Prina and Heather Royer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Importance of Parental Knowledge and Social Norms: Evidence from Weight Report
Cards in Mexico
Silvia Prina and Heather Royer
NBER Working Paper No. 19344
August 2013
JEL No. I12,I18,O54
ABSTRACT
The rise of childhood obesity in less developed countries is often overlooked. We study the impact
of body weight report cards in Mexico. The report cards increased parental knowledge and shifted
parental attitudes about children's weight. We observe no meaningful changes in parental behaviors
or children's body mass index. Interestingly, parents of children in the most obese classrooms were
less likely to report that their obese child weighed too much relative to those in the least obese classrooms.
As obesity rates increase, reference points for appropriate body weights may rise, making it more difficult
to lower obesity rates.

Silvia Prina
Case Western Reserve University
Weatherhead School of Management
11119 Bellflower Road, Room 273
Cleveland, Ohio 44106-7235
silvia.prina@gmail.com
Heather Royer
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara
2127 North Hall
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
royer@econ.ucsb.edu

I

Introduction

The incidence of childhood obesity has risen dramatically in both developed and developing
countries. While the tripling of rates of childhood obesity in the United States over the last
30 years has garnered much attention (Centers for Disease Control, 2011), the recent trends
in developing countries have received less emphasis although their trends are often more
stark. In several developing countries, both the rate of growth of childhood obesity and the
level of childhood obesity exceed those of developed countries (World Bank, 2011; World
Health Organization, 2012). Mexico, the country we study, is a prime example. Mexico has
one of the highest obesity rates in the world (El Universal, January 22, 2010) and is on a
trajectory to surpass obesity rates in the United States.1 Despite these patterns, there have
been very few economics studies on obesity in developing countries.2
Statistics like these trigger widespread concern because childhood obesity is associated
with many adverse outcomes. Obese children face short-term consequences such as an elevated risk of hypertension and type 2 diabetes in addition to detrimental psychological
consequences of low self-esteem and discrimination (Chomitz et al., 2003; Must et al., 1999;
Must and Strauss, 1999). They are also more likely to be obese as adults (Dietz, 1998).
As such, the rapid increase in obesity rates at young ages will likely have implications for
human capital formation, adult health, labor market opportunities and other socioeconomic
outcomes (Cawley, 2004; Daniels, 2006; Taras and Potts-Datema, 2005). In addition, there
is some evidence that early interventions are more cost-effective than later interventions
(Heckman, 2006). As evidence towards this point, Conti and Heckman (2012) show that
an early intervention that moves a child’s health from the bottom to the top of the health
distribution decreases his/her probability of being obese at age 30 by 20 percentage points,
1
In Mexico in 1999, 5.3 percent of male children and 5.9 percent of female children were obese and, in
2006, those percentages were 10.8 percent and 9 percent, respectively (Olaiz et al., 2006). Data on the
heights and weights of Mexican school-aged children are only available for more recent years. Rates in the
U.S. were relatively stable rising from 13.9 percent to 15.5 percent during the same period. Statistics come
from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/obesity_child_07_08/obesity_child_07_08.htm.
2
Exceptions include Luo et al. (2006); Bhalotra and Rawlings (2011).

1

affirming that tackling issues of obesity early in life may have dramatic long-run effects.
There has been much discussion about what policies may counteract these changes.
Across the developing and developed world, popular proposals include removing vending
machines from schools, banning food vendors on school property, taxing soda, and increasing physical activity in schools. But these policy initiatives are often expensive, require
significant changes in the school environment, or meet political resistance. Information
interventions may be less intrusive but yet powerful alternatives. Certainly, within other
domains, information interventions have been effective in changing behavior.3 In fact, many
health and obesity-related policies, such as mandatory posting of calories on menus (Bollinger
et al., 2011; Wisdom et al., 2010) and nutritional labeling (Jayachandran and Cawley, 2006),
are predicated on the idea that information could affect behavior.
We evaluate the effect of a tailored information intervention—the delivery of body weight
report cards to parents using a randomized-controlled design within Mexico. The fastgrowing rate of childhood obesity there along with limited knowledge about children’s weight
issues (e.g., only 21% of parents of overweight or obese children correctly classified their
child as overweight or obese in our sample) make Mexico an interesting and relevant place
to carry out this field experiment. We study the impact of weight report cards on parental
knowledge, obesity-related attitudes and behaviors, and body mass index (BMI) for 2,746
elementary school students.4 We use data collected from several sources—surveys of parents,
child anthropometric measures, and observed attendance rates at an information session on
healthy eating and physical activity.
Our intervention is intended to fill a gap in the understanding of the effectiveness of these
weight report cards. Several states and countries have implemented weight report cards
despite the limited empirical evidence on their effectiveness.5 As the Centers for Disease
3

Examples include encouraging students to finish high school (Jensen, 2010), helping low-income families
choose schools (Hastings and Weinstein, 2008), and reducing AIDS prevalence (De Walque, 2007; Dupas,
2011a).
4
BMI is equal to an individual’s body weight (in kilograms) divided by the square of his or her height (in
meters).
5
Arkansas, New York City, the United Kingdom, and Malaysia have used them (Evans and Sonneville,

2

Control (2009) states:
Little is known about the outcomes of BMI measurement programs, including
effects on weight-related knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors of youth and their
families. As a result, no consensus exists on the utility of BMI screening programs for young people. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force concluded that
insufficient evidence exists to recommend for or against BMI screening programs
for youth in clinical settings as a means to prevent adverse health outcomes.
The few studies on weight report cards focus exclusively on developed countries, and these
studies suffer from omitted variables bias issues and problems of highly-selected samples.6
Even putting these concerns aside, these earlier findings are likely not very informative for
developing countries where parents are less knowledgable about the prevalence of childhood
obesity, the population is poorer, and cultural beliefs about the appropriate body weight are
different (Oria and Sawyer, 2007; Guendelman et al., 2010).
Weight report cards may be particularly successful for several reasons. First, as we find in
our data, parents are poorly informed about their child’s health. Second, personalized health
campaigns are generally more effective than non-personalized health campaigns (Hawkins et
al., 2008). Recent research rationalizes this finding by showing that tailored information interventions (as opposed to more general information interventions) are more likely to activate
areas of the brain important for awareness, which later are important for precipitating behavioral change (Chua et al., 2011).7 Third, according to the Health Belief Model (Hochbaum
et al., 1952), a highly-cited psychological model which attempts to explain health behaviors,
a person must understand vulnerability to disease before any behavioral change can occur.
2009; Schocker, April 19, 2011). Additional areas have BMI surveillance programs where students are weighed
on a regular basis but only aggregate statistics are reported (Nihiser et al., 2009). Some states have added a
BMI calculation to their student’s academic report card (http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/04/19/
bmi-schools_n_850776.html)
6
These include Chomitz et al. (2003); Grimmett et al. (2008); Kalich et al. (2008); Kubik et al. (2006).
7
While this literature considers the relation between one’s own awareness and one’s own health, it is
reasonable to think that these same principles may apply when thinking about parental awareness and
children’s health.

3

In this field experiment, children were randomized into one of four groups: a control
group and three treatment groups. Parents of children in the treatment groups received
information on the height and weight of their children and their child’s weight classification
(i.e., underweight, healthy weight, overweight, or obese).8 Two of the three treatment groups
(referred to as the RISK and COMPARE treatments) received information in addition to this
basic information. These two treatments were designed to test the effects of different types of
information. In particular, the RISK treatment provided the health risks of obesity. Making
the consequences of the child’s weight status more salient to parents may be important
because the costs of healthy behaviors are accrued earlier than the benefits, leading people to
procrastinate on engaging in health-improving behaviors (e.g., DellaVigna and Malmendier,
2006; Giné et al., 2010). The COMPARE treatment provided information on the number
of children in each weight classification in the child’s class in school.9 The purpose of this
treatment was to test the importance of social norms. In classes where the majority of
students are obese, learning that your child is obese may worry parents less because the
reference group is obese.
Our analysis proceeds in several steps. First, we study whether the report cards changed
parental knowledge and attitudes concerning the child’s weight. This is likely a necessary
condition for changes in behavior to occur. Many informational interventions look at behaviors without documenting whether the information is absorbed and retained, making it then
difficult to understand why the intervention was ineffective in the case of null results. We do
find that the intervention increased parental knowledge of their child’s weight reported one
to two months after the intervention. At baseline, 33% of parents of overweight children and
only 6% of parents of obese children correctly reported their child’s weight status. Following the intervention, those percentages rose to 59% and 20% respectively for those receiving
report cards. Additionally, this knowledge translated into changes in parents’ beliefs concern8

We describe these classifications in more detail later but they are based on the Centers for Disease
Control (CDC) classifications (i.e., are not specific to Mexico).
9
We tried to keep the information conveyed as simple as possible so we presented counts, which we thought
would be easier to understand than percentages.

4

ing their child’s weight. The treatment increased the fraction of parents of overweight and
obese children reporting that their child weighs too much. Moreover, reference groups and
social norms have important effects on these beliefs. In classes where parents of overweight
and obese children were told that more than a third of students were overweight or obese,
the report cards had no effect on parental beliefs about the child’s weight.10 Such a finding
suggests that as obesity rates rise, parents may be less inclined to believe that their child is
obese, and thus, it may be more difficult to induce change. Second, after documenting the
effects on parental knowledge and perceptions, we evaluate whether these effects translate
into behavioral changes. We observe no changes in observed and self-reported behaviors,
including parents’ attendance to a session on healthy habits and physical activity, child’s
enrollment in a sports class, seeing a doctor in regard to the child’s weight, and encouraging the child to increase physical activity or in intentions for the future to increase child’s
physical activity or reduce the quantity of food consumed. Third, we estimate whether there
are impacts on children’s outcomes such as BMI or weight. We do not find any detectable
effects on BMI or weight.
We explore several possible explanations for these null behavioral results. First, it is
possible that limited resources affected parents’ ability to respond to this new information.
Some obesity-reducing actions such as signing a child up for a sports class could be costly.
If resources are important for reducing obesity, we would expect that the most educated
parents would be the most responsive to the report cards. However, there are no differential
responses to the report cards by parental education. Also, a lack of resources likely cannot
explain the lack of behavioral changes by parents given that when free resources (i.e., help
from nutritionist and an information session on healthy eating and physical activity) were
provided, few parents took advantage of them. Second, the report cards may not be meaningful to parents if they are not cognizant of ways to reduce obesity. But from the endline
10

These findings are reminiscent of those of Ali et al. (2011), who show, using observational data from the
National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, that an adolescents’ social group affects his/her weight
perceptions.

5

survey, it was clear that most parents were aware of the causes of obesity.11 Lastly, in order
to observe meaningful behavioral changes, it may be necessary that parental concerns about
obesity change. We do not observe changes in such concerns nor in the ranking of concern
about child’s weight relative to other parental concerns. Overall, our results suggest that the
provision of weight report cards is simply not enough to induce change despite the positive
effects on knowledge and attitudes.

II
A

Experimental Design and Data Collection
Experimental Design and Timeline

The field experiment took place in the city of Puebla, Mexico, the fourth largest city in
Mexico (1.5 million people). Puebla is located in central Mexico. In 2000, average income
per capita in the city of Puebla was 9,843 US dollars, more than the national Mexican average
of 7,025 US PPP 2005 dollars.12
Seven primary public schools were selected to participate.13 Classes from second through
sixth grade were considered. All students within each class were surveyed. The children
ranged in age between 6 and 14 years old, but most of the sample (96%) was between 8 and
12 years old.
We outline the timeline of the experiment and the different treatment arms in Figure 1.
The field experiment began with the distribution of a baseline survey to students to take
home to parents to complete (see the Appendix for a copy of the survey). Included in this
survey is a diversity of questions – done such to not prime participants about the focus of the
study. Of the 24 questions, only 5 concern weight. This survey collected information from
the primary caretaker about his/her education, occupation, parental concerns (e.g., H1N1,
11

However, being cognizant of the causes might not imply that one knows how to reduce obesity.
These statistics come from the 2000 Mexican Census. See http://www.puebladelosangeles.gob.mx/
wb/pue/ingreso_percapita_anual_por_municipio_de_la_zona_m for the Puebla statistic.
13
Schools that were neither the poorest or the richest schools in the urban area were considered. Then the
sample was restricted further to schools that expressed an interest in participating.
12

6

child’s weight, child’s performance in school), their classification of the child’s weight (i.e.,
underweight, healthy weight, overweight, and obese), and rates of time preference. The baseline survey response rates was 67%. These response rates are higher than some other studies
using school-based samples (Angrist et al., 2002; Bettinger and Slonim, 2007). The baseline
response rates are not related to treatment status since we stratified the randomization based
on whether the family responded to the baseline survey.
Following the collection of the baseline survey, nutritionists weighed and measured all
students in the participating classes. Each child’s weight was categorized using the BMIfor-age weight status categories and corresponding percentiles established by the Centers for
Disease Control.14
Next, the students were randomized into one of four groups: three treatment groups
(BASIC, RISK, and COMPARE) and a control group. The randomization was stratified
based on the combination of school, weight status, and whether or not the baseline survey was
completed. An overview of these treatments is presented in Figure 1. The three treatment
groups received a personalized health report card that detailed the child’s height, weight,
and weight classification (i.e., underweight, healthy weight, overweight, or obese). To enable
parents to understand these weight classifications, the ranges of weights for each classification
were given for each of these classifications based on the child’s height, age, and sex. See the
Appendix for a copy of an example of the BASIC, RISK, and COMPARE report cards.
The weight report cards were sent home in sealed envelopes to parents along with a letter
from the school district and contact information of a nutritionist to contact, free of charge,
if parents had further questions. We considered the possible adverse effects of the report
cards (e.g., the lowering of children’s self-esteem). However, in discussions with the research
team, we heard of no mention of these type of effects. The control group did not receive this
personalized health report card.
14

According to the CDC, students are classified underweight if their weight is less than the 5th percentile,
healthy weight if their weight is between the 5th percentile and the 85th percentile, overweight if their
weight is between the 85th and the 95th percentile, and obese if their weight is equal or greater than the
95th percentile for their age in months, height, and sex.

7

What distinguishes the three treatment groups is the level of information they received.
The BASIC treatment group received the report card as detailed above. The report cards
of the RISK and COMPARE treatments included additional information. In particular, the
RISK treatment group had an additional script describing the health risks of their child’s
weight classification. For obese or overweight children, the message was “Obese/overweight
children are at higher risk of living shorter lives and developing diseases such as diabetes,
high blood pressure, heart disease, asthma, and cancer.” For underweight children, the relevant text was “Underweight children run a higher risk of malnourishment, low scholastic
achievement, and low resistance to illness.” The parents of healthy weight children received
information on the health risks of being overweight/obese. The purpose of this treatment
was to make the health risks of being underweight, overweight, or obese more salient to parents. Given that many parents in our sample appear to have present-biased preferences, such
salience may lead parents to expend more resources towards long-run investments in health.
The COMPARE treatment group obtained the same report card as the BASIC treatment
but also received information about the number of children in the child’s class in each of
the weight categories: underweight, healthy weight, overweight, and obese. The intention
of this treatment was to understand whether parents’ beliefs and actions about their child’s
weight are dependent on the prevalence of overweight and obese in their child’s class. In
observational settings, beliefs about one’s own weight are impacted by the weights of one’s
peer group (Ali et al., 2011).
The three treatment groups and control group received an invitation to attend an information session entitled “Practical Tips for Improving Your Child’s Eating Habits and
Physical Activity.” Note that this session does not directly address weight. For the treatment groups, this invitation was sent home along with the report card. For the control group,
this invitation was sent by itself. All children regardless of their weight classification received
an envelope to take home that included an invitation to this session and if they were in a
treatment group, a report card. However, we are primarily interested in the effects among

8

the overweight/obese populations. Envelopes were distributed to all children to reduce the
possible adverse self-esteem effects. The main motive for this invitation was to obtain an
observed (i.e., not self-reported) measure of parents’ reaction to the weight report card; attendance at this session was one of our main outcome variables. Moreover, since the session
was free, a lack of parental response cannot be attributed to a lack of income.15 Observed
behavior (e.g., attendance to the session) and self-reported behavior might be very different.
For example, a parent may say that she intends to change her child’s habits, but we care
mostly about her behaviors rather than her intentions. The information sessions occurred
two weeks after the delivery of the weight report card; each school had two sessions.
The administration of the experiment follows the usual operating procedures of the
schools. Schools communicate with parents by sending notifications home with the students.
Parents are often invited to come to school to discuss school performance and occasionally meetings regarding non-academic topics such as safety and health are scheduled. The
intervention adheres to these norms, including following the traditional days of the week
and times these meetings are arranged. Typical attendance at these meetings varies across
schools but averages 80%.
Following the informational sessions, in March 2010, the endline survey was distributed
to all treatment groups and to the control group. The endline survey was intended to
capture parental response to the report card information. This survey contained many of
the baseline survey questions but also asked parents whether they had taken particular
actions–seen a medical professional in regards to the child’s weight, put the child on a diet,
engaged in physical activity with the child, discussed the child’s weight with him or her,
family members, or friends, had the child skip meals or snacks, and/or signed the child
up for a sport or exercise class. Questions about these particular actions come from the
public health study on body mass index report cards of Kalich et al. (2008). There were
also questions inquiring about parental intentions to change the amount of food the child
15

Of course, this statement does not take into account the opportunity cost of time.

9

consumed and the amount of exercise he or she engaged in. The post-intervention survey
finished with a series of questions about health knowledge and knowledge of their child’s
weight status. Unlike many previous studies on the effect of information on behaviors, we
try to understand the steps by which health information may impact behavior. Documenting
these steps is important because, in the case of a null effect of information on behavior, as
some studies including this one find, it is not clear whether the result is due to the lack of
the information being transmitted or a lack of a response to the new information.16 Those
who attended the informational session filled out the endline survey at the session so their
responses would not be affected by the class. In analyses not reported, we examined whether
the treatment effects differ for attendees and non-attendees and find similar results across
the two groups.
In the second half of May 2010, at the end of the school year, the nutritionists measured
the heights and weights of both treatment and control children again to see if the intervention
had had any impact on children’s weight or BMI.
It is important to note that the randomization was done at the individual level rather
than at the school or grade level. The choice to randomize at the individual level was dictated
by the fixed sample size. To maximize the power of the experiment, the randomization was
performed at the individual level. Given this level of randomization, there is the possibility
of cross-contamination effects biasing our estimates. Specifically, one might imagine that
a parent in the control group may become more concerned about his/her child’s weight if
the parent talks with a parent who received the RISK treatment report card. Any spillover
effects, if they exist, might dampen the differences between the treatments and the control
group, leading us to be biased against finding any significant effects of the intervention. In an
effort to reduce cross-contamination effects, there was an attempt to make the information
private by delivering home the report cards in sealed envelopes. Moreover, we performed a
16

Examples of null effects of information on behavior include Giné et al. (2010); Meredith et al. (2012).
Giné et al. (2010) estimate no impact of information on smoking behaviors in the Philippines and Meredith
et al. (2012) consider the effect of health risk information on the transmission of hookworm.

10

series of robustness checks, discussed later, which we believe point to small spillover effects.
As some students have siblings in the same school who were also part of the experiment,
children of the same household could be assigned to different treatments. Given the tight
timeline dictated by the schools’ schedules, there was not enough time between the baseline
survey and the treatment assignment to determine which children belonged to the same
families. As a robustness check, which we discuss later, we consider families with only one
child in the experiment where spillovers may be minimal and our results are similar.

B

Sample Characteristics and Balance Check

Table 1 provides the means for key variables across the three treatment groups and the
control group in the pre-treatment period. In the last two columns, we present p-values
from two tests: one testing the equivalence of the overall treatment group mean (combining
the three treatment groups together) and the control group mean (i.e., treatment=control
column) and the other testing the equivalence of the means of all four groups (i.e., all equal
column). Panel A presents the baseline anthropometric data (not conditional on completion
of the baseline survey) and Panel B presents data from the baseline responses collected from
the primary caretaker.
The randomization worked well. None of the p-values testing whether the treatment
averages are different from the control averages dip below 0.05. Only two of the p-values
(concern about child’s weight and concern about child’s school performance) are less than
0.05 in a test of equivalent means across all 4 groups. This is not surprising given the
large number of means contrasted. These differences, however, are slight and suggest that
parents in the control group were slightly more concerned about their children on a number
of dimensions.17,18
Panel A shows that 2,746 children participated in our study (i.e., were in class the day
17

We have also run all our regressions controlling for these baseline characteristics and we observed no
substantial changes in our treatment effect estimates. Results are available upon request.
18
The NAs for p-values are due to the fact that our p-values are based on regressions with strata fixed
effects and as such, there is no variation in the variables we stratified on within the strata.

11

the baseline weight and height measurements were collected). Approximately, half of the
children were male and the average age was nearly 10 years old. Obesity rates among these
young children hovered just over 10% and overweight rates are just under 20%.19 Moreover,
33.6% of boys and 26.5% of girls were obese or overweight. These percentages match well
with published statistics from the 2008 National Schoolchildren Survey (Levy, 2010).20
Panel B indicates that the baseline survey respondent is most frequently the mother
(67%). In the remaining cases, it was primarily the father (30% of total responses). The
level of parental education is low: over 30% of primary caretakers had not completed high
school.
To gauge how concerned parents were about obesity, we asked parents about their level
of concern on several dimensions—parents’ own weight, child’s weight, H1N1, and child’s
performance in school. Parental concern about their child’s weight was the second lowest of
all concerns, only above concern about the caretaker’s own weight.
Table 2 presents the analogous table to Table 1 but for the sample of overweight and obese
children, the target population for this intervention. The randomization here is also fairly
balanced, which is unsurprising given that weight status is one of the stratification variables.
Most of the means are similar to those in Table 1 with the exception of concern about child’s
weight and parental classification of the child’s weight. Not surprisingly, parents of obese
and overweight children were more likely to characterize their child as overweight or obese
than the overall population was, and parents of obese and overweight children were also more
concerned about their child’s weight.
Since we look at several post-survey outcomes, Appendix Tables 1 and 2 replicate Tables 1
and 2 conditional on completion of the endline survey. For the overall sample, the treatment
and control groups are still balanced with the exceptions of slight differences in concern
19

For comparison, among children of this age in the US, the obesity rate was 19.6 percent. See http://www.
cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/obesity_child_07_08/obesity_child_07_08.htm. The overweight statistic
is not provided.
20
Indeed, this survey shows that, for primary school children within the state of Puebla, 27.6% of boys
and 23.9% of girls are classified as obese or overweight.

12

about child’s weight and concern about child’s school performance akin to those observed
in Table 1. For the overweight and obese, across most variables, we are unable to reject
the equivalence of means across the groups in Appendix Table 2. However, the primary
caretaker characteristics (i.e., education) differ across the treatment and control groups. To
deal with this imbalance, we can control for caretaker educational level, and our regression
estimates are very similar.

C

Parents’ Knowledge about Child’s Weight Status

As our goal is to evaluate the impact of weight report cards on parental knowledge, attitudes,
and behavior, it is important to know how knowledgeable parents are about their child’s
weight status at baseline. In Table 3, we examine parental misperceptions of their child’s
weight by looking at parental classification at baseline versus actual classification of weight
status. If caretakers can accurately classify their child’s weight, the main impact of the
report cards would likely be a salience effect. It is clear, however, that there are large
misperceptions. 67% of caretakers of overweight children and 94% of caretakers of obese
children underestimated their children’s weight status. These misclassification percentages
are much higher than those found in U.S. samples, which ranged from 35 to 50% (NeumarkSztainer et al., 2008; Warschburger and Kroller, 2009).
In order to understand the prevalence of underweight, overweight, and obese further along
with misclassification rates, we next explore the cross-sectional partial correlations between
weight status and weight misclassification and parental and child attributes in Table 4.
Columns (1) through (3) of Table 4 report estimates from separate linear regressions of weight
status (i.e., underweight, overweight, and obese) on these attributes. Column (4) examines
the relationship between whether the caretaker correctly classified the child’s weight in the
baseline survey and these characteristics. For this regression, we also control for the child’s
weight status as weight status is a strong predictor of whether the caretaker could correctly
classify the child’s weight. We should, of course, take caution in extrapolating too much
13

from these regressions given that they are subject to usual concerns about omitted variables
bias.
If part of the reason why some children are obese or overweight is limited knowledge about
the risks of obesity or deficient resources (e.g., limited access to healthy foods), we might
expect that rates of obesity/overweight are higher among the less educated. Interestingly,
however, we find that parental education is positively correlated with obesity risk, a common
finding in developing countries, particularly Mexico (Hernández et al., 2002; Martorell et al.,
2000; Ullmann et al., forthcoming). The most educated however, are most likely to correctly
classify their child’s weight, suggesting that lack of knowledge may be an explanation of the
high rates of misclassification observed earlier. Table 4 also shows that rates of obesity are
higher among male children.
Aside from these socioeconomic characteristics, we assess whether a parent’s time preferences are predictive of his/her child being underweight, overweight or obese and correctly
classifying the child’s weight.21 Since many of the contributing obesity factors (e.g., unhealthy eating and physical inactivity) motivate models of self-control, it is natural to think
that obesity is related to time-inconsistent preferences.22 While it is more typical to consider
the relation between one’s own time preferences and own’s obesity risk, here we are thinking
about a parent’s time preferences and his/her child’s obesity risk. Nevertheless, if parents are
altruistic, parents with self-control problems may be prone to postpone actions that would
help their child become more healthy such as limiting the consumption of unhealthy snack
foods and encouraging them to be more physically active. This is because the costs of such
21
Our baseline survey collected answers to standard time preference questions. We use the same wording
and setup of the time preference questions used by Ashraf et al. (2006). As in Ashraf et al. (2006), we classify
individuals into 4 categories: always patient (31% of the sample), always impatient (45%), future biased (4%)
or present biased (20%). This classification is based on answers to two hypothetical questions: (a) Do you
prefer 500 pesos today or 625 pesos in 1 month? and (b) Do you prefer 500 pesos in 6 months or 625 pesos
in 7 months? For exact wording of these questions, see a copy of the surveys in the Appendix. An individual
preferring 500 pesos today and 500 pesos in 6 months was labeled as always impatient. An individual wanting
500 pesos today and 625 pesos in 7 months was designated as present biased. An individual asking for 625
pesos in 1 month and 500 pesos in 6 months was classified as future biased. Finally, an individual preferring
625 pesos in 1 month and 625 pesos in 7 months was labeled always patient.
22
Courtemanche et al. (2011) provide evidence of a relationship between time inconsistency and obesity
in the United States.

14

actions, which include combating resistance from one’s child, are accrued earlier than the
benefits (i.e., a healthier child). Overall, time inconsistency (being either present biased or
future biased) shows no relation to being underweight, overweight, or obese. For overweight
and obese, in fact, present biased individuals appear to be less likely to have overweight or
obese children. It is unclear whether this finding is due to a lack of a relationship between
parental time preferences and child obesity risk or it is due to the context (i.e., Mexico
versus the United States). In evaluating the effects of the intervention, we have looked at
whether there is heterogeneity in the treatment effects by the degree of time inconsistency,
our analysis does not point to substantial treatment heterogeneity in that regard.

III
A

Results
Empirical Strategy

To estimate the effect of the report cards on our outcomes of interest (e.g., parental attitudes, parental behaviors, and child’s BMI), we first assess the overall treatment effect via
regressions of the following form:

Yi = β0 + β1 Ti + γas + δr + i

(1)

where Yi is an outcome of interest for individual i, Ti is a treatment indicator equal to 1
if the child is assigned to one of the three treatment groups and 0 if the child belongs to
the control group, γas are child’s age in years times sex fixed effects, δr are randomization
strata fixed effects, and i is the error term. The randomization of the treatment makes
the inclusion of age by sex fixed effects unnecessary but, as many of the studied outcomes
vary with age and sex, we include these fixed effects as a means of obtaining more precise
estimates.23 Our estimates are similar to those without these fixed effects. We estimate
23

In principle, one could include baseline survey measures as controls to increase precision, but in our case,
their inclusion does not change our standard errors much so we exclude them.

15

heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors.
Second, to discern how the effect of the report card varies across the type of report card,
we estimate the following:

Yi = β0 + β1 BASICi + β2 RISKi + β3 COM P AREi + γas + δr + i

(2)

where BASICi , RISKi , and COM P AREi are each treatment indicators equal to 1 if the
child is assigned to that treatment group respectively and 0 otherwise.

B

Attrition - Endline Survey and Endline Weight & Height Measurements

Many of our main outcome variables come from responses to an endline survey. To insure
that our subsequent analyses are not impacted by selection bias due to differential response
rates across the treatment and control groups, we estimate whether endline response rates
are different for the treatment and control groups. The results are presented in Table 5.
We consider the overweight/obese, healthy weight, and underweight samples separately as
the effects of the report cards are likely to be heterogeneous across these groups and in our
main analysis, we examine these subsamples separately. For each subsample, we estimate
two regressions: (a) endline survey response rates as a function of treatment and (b) endline
weight and height measurement rates as a function of treatment. Across the three subsamples, we see no statistically significant differences in response or measurement rates across
the treatment and control groups. For the overweight/obese sample, endline survey response
rates are arguably quite high given that the surveys were not personally-administered (63%
for the control group). The mean endline measurement rates of weight and height all exceed
90%. Since these measurements occurred during the school day and no one, to our knowledge, declined being measured, the lack of endline height/weight measurements is due to

16

school absences. These measurement rates are consistent with attendance rates.24
Aside from the difference in response rates, we also compare how the sample of endline
respondents differs across the treatment and control groups. As discussed earlier, Appendix
Tables 1 and 2 replicate Tables 1 and 2 for the sample of endline respondents. There are
few differences in observable characteristics across the treatment and control groups. When
we control for any observed differences, the treatment effects are similar to those reported
earlier (results not reported).25

C

Treatment Results

Having established that sample selection due to attrition may not be a large concern, we
now move to estimating our main treatment effects for the overweight/obese. We provide
the results for the healthy and underweight as a validity check in Appendix Table 3. Table
6 presents these results based on estimates of equation (1). Each estimate comes from a
separate regression. We separate the outcomes into 3 groups: outcomes measured in the
endline survey, outcomes measured from observed behavior, and endline height and weight
measurements. The sample sizes differ across these 3 groups due to survey response. For
endline survey outcomes, the estimates are based on the sample of endline survey responders. The sample sizes also vary across these outcomes due to item non-response. For the
observed behavior outcome, the sample is all students who were initially weighed, and for
the endline measurements, the sample consists of those who attended class on the day of the
endline weight/height measurements and who were present for the baseline weight/height
measurements. Thus, endline measurement sample and endline survey sample are subsets
of the observed behavior sample, but the endline measurement sample is a bigger subset as
there was less attrition for these measurements when compared to the endline survey.
24

The school district did not notify parents about the timing of the height and weight measurements.
One may worry that a comparison of the observable characteristics in Appendix Tables 1 and 2 is also
subject to selection bias. In particular, many of these pre-intervention characteristics in Appendix Tables 1
and 2 come from the baseline survey. However, we check whether baseline weight and height are different
across the treatment and control groups for the sample of endline respondents. We observe no statistically
significant differences across these groups for the overall sample and for the sample of overweight and obese.
25

17

The endline survey responses could vary by whether the father or the mother was the
primary caretaker. Importantly, however, when we estimated these effects separately by
whether the father or the mother responded to the survey, we found no differential responses
across these two groups. Thus, we pooled them together.
The estimates in Table 6 are intent-to-treat effects, not treatment effects on the treated.
Of course, since some parents may not have received or read the report cards, the treatment
effect on the treated will be larger. We hesitate to report treatment effects on the treated
because the first-stage estimates of the effect of the treatment on report card receipt is selfreported. Nevertheless, we believe that most parents received and read the report cards.
Ninety percent of respondents to our endline survey reported receiving a report card. Even
taking into account non-response to the endline survey, under a worst case scenario, nearly 60
percent of parents read the report card. One may then want to upweight the intent-to-treat
effects to think about the treatment effects on the treated.
First, we are interested in whether the cards affected parental knowledge among the
overweight/obese. At the center of the Health Belief Model (Hochbaum et al., 1952) is the
idea that health behavioral change is contingent on understanding vulnerability to disease.
Column (1) reports estimates of the report cards on whether parents correctly classified
the weight of the child in the endline survey. The intervention had a strongly statistically
significant and positive impact on correctly classifying the child’s weight. The treatment
increased this percentage by nearly 60%.
Next we explore how this new knowledge changed parental perceptions about their child’s
weight. While the intervention changes parental classification of the child’s weight, it is
not immediately clear how parents interpret this information. In the recent past, being
obese/overweight in Mexico was indicative of wealth and thus desirable (Oria and Sawyer,
2007). The effects on parental perceptions are easily visualized in Figure 2 which shows,
by weight classification, the distribution of parental responses to the question, “How would
you characterize your child’s weight?” for the treatment and control groups. Across all four

18

weight categorizations, the treatment moved parental responses in the expected direction.
The effect of the treatment was particularly remarkable for the obese. Among this group,
only 6% of control group parents reported that the child weighed much too much whereas
among the treatment group this figure was 28%.
These effects are quantified in column (2) of Table 6. For the obese/overweight sample, the report card raised the propensity to report that the child weighed too much by a
statistically-significant 12 percentage points off of a base of 58%.
Despite the effects on knowledge and beliefs for overweight/obese, there are no statistically significant effects on behaviors or parental concern for this sample. The effect of the
intervention on parental concern is small at 0.04, 1/20th of a standard deviation. Given
this null effect, it is not surprising that we observe no effects on actions - either looking at
the total number of actions or whether parents had at least one action.26 Like the parental
concern effect, these treatment effects are very modest. For example, the upper bound of
the 95% confidence interval for the number of actions is 0.36 (a standard deviation for this
variable is 1.51). Moreover, when looking at the actions separately, there are no statistically
significant impacts (see Appendix Table 4).27
Although it is reasonable that the timing of the intervention left parents some time
to engage in behavioral change, especially given that the number of actions undertaken in
the last month by control parents was 2.2 (out of a possible 7), one may want to look at
changes over a longer term. Next we examine the effects on intentions in regards to eating
and physical activity. We view these outcomes as less preferred compared to actual actions
because parents may not follow through with their intentions. In terms of eating behaviors,
the effect of the treatment is sizable but not statistically significant. Treatment effects on
intentions in relation to physical activity are more challenging to identify as most parents
26

These actions include: seen a medical professional in regards to the child’s weight, put the child on a
diet, had the child skip meals or snacks, engaged in physical activity with the child, discussed the child’s
weight with him or her, family members, or friends, and/or signed the child up for a sport or exercise class.
27
One can also categorize these actions in different ways (e.g., combining the physical activity actions
together or the weight actions together) and there are still no statistically significant effects on these outcomes.

19

intend to have their children engage in more physical activity.28
In terms of non-self-reported outcomes, the intervention did not induce changes for the
obese/overweight sample. Although nearly all parents expressed that a class on eating
habits and physical activity would be useful and that child’s BMI is positively associated
with attendance at the session, the report card did not induce parents of overweight/obese to
attend the informational session. Given the null results on parents’ actions and self-reported
behaviors, the treatment effects on weight and BMI are not surprising. The confidence
intervals of these estimates exclude negative effects larger in magnitude than −0.7% and
−2.1% on BMI and weight, respectively.29 For comparison, in a study of similarly-aged
children in the United States conducted over a period of 6 months (a little longer than our
study), Spiegel and Foulk (2012) find that their randomized intervention which consisted
mainly of an educational campaign about physical activity and eating reduced BMI by 0.3,
an effect size outside of our 95% confidence interval.
We can also gauge the size of these effects by comparing these changes to the average
changes between the pre-intervention and post-intervention period. These were -2.5% and
0.6% for BMI and weight, respectively.30 For Mexican children of similar age groups, GómezDı́az et al. (2004) also find that BMI does not necessarily monotonically increase with age.
Although the gap in time between the two sets of weight and height measurements was only
28
We have also examined whether the treatment affected health knowledge using questions from the endline
survey and found no effects.
29
As a robustness check, we trimmed the sample to deal with outlier observations; the second round
of height and weight measures had some obvious measurement errors. To address this issue, we dropped
observations with weights exceeding the minimum and maximum weights observed with the pre-intervention
measurements (16 kilograms was the minimum and 83 kilograms was the maximum). In the post-intervention
period, 16 kilograms corresponds to the 0.16 percentile (i.e., only 3 observations have values below that
threshold) and 83 kilograms corresponds to the 99.92 percentile (i.e., only 2 observations have values above
that threshold). This will necessarily drop a few possibly valid observations that were near 83 kilograms at
the outset but our results are not sensitive to this inclusion or exclusion. We also dropped observations for
whom the weight change between the two measurements exceeded 10 kilograms (the 99.2 percentile of the
distribution). We performed similar exclusions for observations based on their height measurements. We
dropped students (7 in total) with heights below the minimum height observed in the pre-intervention period
(111 cm) and one student with a height of 199 cm, which was an outlier by 30 cm. Finally, we dropped
observations (34 observations) where the change in height was less than -5cm. As a robustness check we also
use robust regressions, which give less weight to outlier observations, and end up with similar estimates.
30
The trends in weight are skewed; the median change is 0 whereas for BMI, the median is -2.3%.

20

four to five months, students’ body compositions were changing sufficiently that we might
have expected to observe an effect on BMI and weight if the report card delivery induced
behavioral modifications. However, it is possible that the examined time period may have
been too short for parents to have had adequate time to alter their actions (e.g., enroll child
in a sports class) although as noted previously parents do partake in these actions. On
the other hand, the effect of the intervention might die down over time as the disseminated
information becomes less salient, implying that if there are effects of the cards, their effects
would be largest in the short-run.
In Appendix Table 3, we present estimates for the healthy weight and underweight,
mainly as a plausibility check for our main results for the overweight/obese. Like that for
the overweight/obese, the report card has a positive effect on correctly classifying the child’s
weight. For the healthy weight, the intervention lowers the fraction misclassifying their child
by over 50%, an effect that is statistically significant at the 1% level. The effect for the
underweight is of nearly the same size in percentage points although not statistically significant due to the small sample size. For the remaining outcomes (e.g., actions and weight), as
expected a priori, the report card has little impact on the healthy weight subsample. The one
exception is attendance at the information session where the treatment leads to lower rates
of attendance for the healthy weight. To understand this effect, one can think of the report
card as resolving some uncertainty. For the more concerned parent, the report card may
act as assurance (i.e., good news), leading them to be less likely to go to the informational
session than those who did not receive a report card (i.e., the control group). On the other
hand, for the less concerned, the information in the report card may not have had this type
of effect. Indeed the treatment effects follow this pattern with the effect on attendance being
concentrated among the most concerned (75% of the sample); for the less concerned, the
treatment effect on attendance is positive although not statistically significant. Overall the
effects on the healthy weight and underweight largely confirm that the intervention had little
effect on behaviors and outcomes, aside from the impact on attendance at the information

21

session for the healthy weight but had a positive impact on knowledge about the child’s
weight.
We also looked to see whether these overall results hide some interesting treatment effect
heterogeneity. Probably the most obvious heterogeneity to examine is the variation in treatment effects by how surprising the report card information was. In unreported analyses, we
look at whether the treatment effect varies with the degree of surprise as measured by the
difference between the child’s actual weight classification and the parent’s weight classification in the baseline period. The more surprising the information received is, the more of
a response we would expect. For the outcome of believing the child weighs too much, we
do find that the treatment effect varies positively with the surprise factor. Yet, even for
this group, we do not estimate statistically significant effects on parental behaviors or child
outcomes.

i

Robustness Checks - Possible Cross-Treatment Contamination Effect

The randomization at the child level left open the possibility that there were spillover effects across the different treatments. We gauge the extent of cross-contamination effects
in three ways: (a) examining changes in survey responses from baseline to endline for the
overweight/obese control group, (b) looking at the results for children who have no siblings
in the experiment, and (c) estimating how the treatment effects vary with the fraction of
students treated in each class.
Starting with the first approach, for the outcomes for which we have baseline and endline
measures, we estimate whether there are statistically-significant changes in the outcomes for
the control group. If the treatment affects the control group, we might expect to observe
“treatment” effects for this group (i.e., significant changes). Such effects would likely dampen
the main treatment estimates in Table 6. The control group outcomes, however, may also
change between the two surveys for other reasons besides spillover effects of the treatment.
For example, in the presence of strong age effects, changes from the baseline survey to the

22

endline survey may be large. For this reason, we consider the non-weight outcomes.
Appendix Table 5 presents estimates from regressions of the control group change on an
intercept for the subsample of the overweight and obese. Any intercept estimates statistically
different from zero imply that the control group mean changed during the intervention. We do
not observe any significant differences in responses between the baseline survey and endline
survey when considering the outcomes of correctly classifying the child’s weight, parental
beliefs about whether the child weighs too much, and parental concern about the child’s
weight. The magnitudes of the changes are small relative to the main treatment effects
reported in Table 6. For instance, the main treatment effect for classifying the child’s weight
correctly is 0.156 whereas the difference for the control group reported in Appendix Table
5 is 0.020. Similarly, for the outcome of weighing too much, the treatment effect is 0.122
whereas the control group difference is 0.041. Thus, the experiment does not appear to affect
the control group behavior.
Our next robustness check considers the effect of the treatment on families with only one
child in the experiment in Table 5. One could imagine that spillovers might be larger among
families with more than one child in the intervention because for instance, two children in
the same family may have received two different treatments. In general, the magnitudes of
the estimates are similar across the overall sample and the sample with only one child in the
experiment.31
Finally, we examine how the treatment effects vary with the fraction treated in the class
(results not reported).32 Due to small sample variation, the fraction treated varies from 0.58
to 0.96 across classes (72 classes in total). Of the 3 robustness checks, this check is the least
precise; for none of the outcomes in Table 6 does the treatment effect vary significantly in a
statistical sense with the fraction treated albeit the results are imprecise. For the outcomes
of correctly classifying the child’s weight and believing that the child weighs too much, the
31

For example, the overall estimate for correctly classifying your child’s weight for the overweight/obese
sample in Table 6 is 0.122 whereas among the sample considered in Appendix Table 6, it is 0.138.
32
We use fraction treated in the whole class, not the fraction of the overweight/obese treated.

23

larger the fraction treated the more likely a parent is to correctly classify the child’s weight or
report that they weigh too much. Interestingly, for the action outcomes, the treatment effect
varies negatively with the fraction treated. As such, these results taken literally imply that
randomization at the classroom or school level might have led to larger effects on knowledge
but even smaller effects on actions. Together these robustness checks give us some confidence
that cross-contamination effects are not a first-order concern.

D
i

Heterogeneity in the Treatment Effects
Results by Treatment Type

So far, we have considered the general effect of the report card without regards to the type
of report card received. We now look at the effects by treatment type (BASIC, RISK, and
COMPARE). Table 7 reports the regression results of estimating equation (2).
Ex ante, we might expect that the RISK treatment would have a stronger effect than
the BASIC treatment because relaying the health risks of obesity would make such risks
more salient to parents. On the other hand, recent economics and psychology literature
argues that people sometimes suffer from limited attention.33 This phenomenon implies that
the provision of additional information could be distracting to people, leading the BASIC
treatment to be at least as powerful as the RISK treatment.
As for the COMPARE treatment, the effects could go in either direction. If many of
the children in the class are overweight or obese, the COMPARE treatment may not impact
behavior much because the norm is overweight/obese. In contrast, if few classmates have high
BMIs, the report card information may be more prominent to parents. This implies that the
effects of this treatment may be predictably heterogenous, a possibility we investigate later.
Even more than the RISK treatment, problems of cognitive errors may impact the effects
of this treatment because the information conveyed is more complicated (i.e., distributions
may be hard to understand).
33

See, for instance, DellaVigna (2009); Lacetera et al. (2011).

24

Looking at the results reported in Table 7, differences in the treatment effects across the
different report cards seem small; none of the treatment effects are statistically distinguishable across the three treatment groups. For the outcome of weighing too much, the BASIC
treatment effects exceed those of the other two treatments. But the BASIC treatment does
not always trump the other treatments if we look across the other outcomes. The possible
differential effects are too small to discern with the sample at hand.34 In fact, even if we
consider the full sample - overweight/obese, healthy weight, and underweight, where we have
more power, for the outcome of correctly classifying your child’s weight, the effects across
the treatment groups are so similar that they are statistically indistinguishable.

ii

Effect of Norms

Ex ante, we suspected the impact of the COMPARE treatment to be a decreasing function
of the fraction of children who are overweight/obese in the class. A parent of an overweight/obese child may be more concerned when fewer of his/her child’s classmates are
obese/overweight.
In Table 8, we consider exclusively the control and COMPARE treatment subsamples
and we test these predictions by interacting the treatment dummy with a variable indicating
whether the fraction of obese/overweight students in the class is more than 36%, between
25 and 36%, and less than 25%. These groupings represent the upper quartile, interquartile
range, and lower quartile of the distribution of the classroom fraction of obese/overweight
students. To estimate these effects, we estimate regressions of the following form:

Yi = β0 + β1 Ti + β2 Ti D2i + β3 Ti D3i + β4 D2i + β5 D3i + αg + i

(3)

where Ti is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the student is in the COMPARE group and 0
if the student is in the control group, D2i is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the student
34

For example, to distinguish a 0.02 difference across the treatments, we would need a sample roughly 6
times as large for the outcome of a child weighing too much.

25

is in a class where the fraction of obese/overweight students is between 25 and 36% and 0
otherwise, D3i is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the student is in a class where the fraction
of obese/overweight students is more than 36%, and αg are school by grade fixed effects. Since
the fraction of obese/overweight children in each class is not random, we include grade by
school fixed effects, effectively comparing students across classrooms within the same grade
and school.35 There are 28 grade times school combinations and all but 7 of them have
variation across classrooms in the quartile of the classroom fraction of obese/overweight
students. We exclude the age by sex fixed effects and stratification fixed effects since the
grade times school fixed effects are nearly collinear with the grade by school fixed effects.
The results in Table 8 imply that the larger the fraction of obese/overweight in the
class, the less likely a parent was to report that his/her overweight/obese child weighed too
much. For example, for obese/overweight children in a class with the largest fraction of
obese/overweight, the treatment effect on parental beliefs that the child weighed too much is
small (i.e., 0.379-0.401=-0.022). On the other hand, the treatment effect on this outcome for
classes with the smallest fraction of overweight/obese (<25% overweight/obese) is positive
and much larger (0.379). Not surprisingly given the earlier estimates, effects on parental
beliefs about whether the child weighs too much do not translate into observable effects on
parental behaviors.36
We test the plausibility of the estimates in column (2) in two ways. First, as a placebo
test, we use the same parental beliefs question but use the baseline survey response. We
should not expect to find a similar pattern as in the endline survey and we do not. Second,
we assess whether information about the distribution of the weights of children in the class
was retained. Specifically, we estimate whether the COMPARE treatment affected whether
parents answered the question ”How would you classify the weight of most of the children in
your childs class?” correctly. Here we find a significant effect of the COMPARE treatment
relative to the control and the other treatment arms. This finding also serves to validate these
35
36

Results are similar without adding these controls.
In results not reported, the effects on BMI and weight are also statistically insignificant.

26

survey questions; one worry with the correct weight classification measure as an outcome is
that our main results could be the result of an increased willingness to report their child’s
weight accurately, perhaps due to reduced stigma, rather than due to the treatment. The
correct characterization of the weight of the children’s peers may be subject less to this
source of reporting bias and thus, since we find an effect here on the characterization of the
weight of the children’s peers, this may alleviate concerns about reporting bias.
This finding that obesity perceptions are related to the obesity levels of the peer group
is consistent with Ali et al. (2011), who use the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent
Health and conclude that the obesity rates of one’s peers affect one’s own weight perceptions.
Also, Guendelman et al. (2010) finds that norms affect perceptions of ideal body weights.
In their study, parents of Mexican children in Mexico had higher ideal body weights for
their children than similar parents living in the United States. These results imply that
as obesity rates increase, it may become harder to make individuals recognize that obesity
is a health issue. Thus, policies relying on individuals to make lifestyle changes may be
increasingly difficult as more individuals become obese or overweight because individuals’
reference points in regards to the accepted healthy weight may change. On the positive side,
interventions that induce some individuals to reduce obesity may have important spillover
effects and precipitate change amongst others by altering the reference point.

IV
A

Discussion
Relation to Previous Work on the Effect of Report Cards

To put our results n context, we discuss the earlier public health and medical literature on
weight report cards (Chomitz et al., 2003; Grimmett et al., 2008; Kalich et al., 2008; Kubik
et al., 2006). These studies suffer from problems of non-randomized designs or low survey
response rates. They focus on the effects in developed countries (United States and United
Kingdom). We discuss briefly the results of the study by Chomitz et al. (2003) conducted in
27

Cambridge, Massachusetts, as it has a randomized design. Chomitz et al. (2003) collect data
using a telephone survey that has a response rate of 34%. The degree of misclassification of
weight status is more severe in our study. Chomitz et al. (2003) report that 16% of parents
with an obese child classify their child’s weight status correctly compared to 6% in our
study. In our context, report cards have a larger effect on correct classification. But unlike
our own study, Chomitz et al. (2003) find that among both the overweight/obese and the
healthy weight, parents receiving report cards are more likely to report to having engaged
in weight-modifying behaviors for their children including physical activity and dieting.37

B

Concluding Thoughts

We study how the provision of information affects behavior. Specifically, we examine the effect of weight report cards on parental behaviors and children’s outcomes in Mexico. Despite
the rapid growth in obesity in developing countries, and particularly in Mexico, there has
been a dearth of obesity research, both looking at the causes of obesity and understanding
effective policies to curb these trends. Relative to many other childhood obesity policies
(e.g., increases in physical activity classes), weight report cards have advantages: they are
low-cost, interfere minimally with the school curriculum, and are easily scaled up. The potential usefulness of our intervention is grounded in the idea that a necessary pre-requisite
for behavioral modification is the understanding of the risks associated with the disease
(Health Belief Model (Hochbaum et al., 1952)). Thus, childhood obesity policies may only
be effective if people are cognizant of the risks of childhood obesity and their child’s obesity
status. But, if people do not understand or care about their child’s susceptibility to obesity
and its risks, the many paternalistic obesity policies (e.g., soft drink taxes, the banning of
trans-fat foods) may be less successful because of unintended consequences. As an example,
Fletcher et al. (2010) conclude that increases in soft drink taxes lead to the consumption of
other high calorie beverages, effectively undoing the intended effects of the policy.
37

Chomitz et al. (2003) do not explore the effects on weight or BMI.

28

Our main results suggest that weight report cards are an effective means of transmitting
obesity information to parents. Parents become more informed about their child’s weight,
and, for parents of overweight/obese children, this information changes their beliefs about
their child’s weight. These perceptions have an important interaction with peer obesity levels.
In particular, the more obese/overweight a class is, the less likely a parent is to report an
overweight/obese child as weighing too much. Extrapolating these findings, growth in the
prevalence of obesity may shift perceptions about healthy body weights. As these social
norms change, parents of obese children may be less inclined to believe that their obese child
is obese, making it challenging to encourage parental behavior changes that will improve
their children health. On a more promising note, interventions may harness the power of the
norm if the intervention precipitates behavioral change amongst some subsample.
The puzzling finding of the paper is why we did not observe any impacts on behaviors,
given that parental knowledge increased. There are many possible explanations for these null
results—most of which we are not able to rule out. First, parents could believe that childhood
obesity has little relevance for adult obesity. However, this explanation is somewhat at odds
with the observation that the treatment affected parental beliefs about the child weighing
too much. Second, the risks of obesity may not yet be particularly salient, especially in a
society where obesity is a relatively new health problem and which has battled problems of
underweight in the past. It is possible that once parents become more aware of the risks
of obesity, we will see more of them taking pro-active steps to reduce childhood obesity.
Third, parents may not have either the income or the knowledge about how to decrease
the incidence of childhood obesity. A healthy diet is often more expensive (Monsivais et
al., 2011). We do not however estimate differential treatment effects by parental education.
Also, when provided free resources to help address obesity (i.e., the informational session
and assistance from a nutritionist), we see relatively few families taking advantage of such
resources.
Information is simply not enough to induce to change in this context. Indeed some of

29

the most successful informational interventions in developing countries couple information
with remedies (Dupas, 2011b). Thus, an effective weight report card intervention may also
need to be combined with a set of actions helpful for reducing obesity. In some sense,
the informational session of this intervention served as this set of actions. But we saw
little interest in the session. However, the provision of direct information on how to reduce
childhood obesity may be more fruitful. Future research should test whether the report cards
combined with specific suggested actions (e.g., restricting portion sizes) are more effective.

30

References
Ali, Mir M., Aliaksandr Amialchuk, and Francesco Renna, “Social Network and
Weight Misperception Among Adolescents,” Southern Economic Journal, 2011, forthcoming.
Angrist, Joshua, Eric Bettinger, Erik Bloom, Elizabeth King, and Michael Kremer, “Vouchers for private schooling in Colombia: Evidence from a randomized natural
experiment,” American Economic Review, 2002, 92 (5), 1535–1558.
Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin, “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence from a Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines,” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 2006, 121 (2), 635–672.
Bettinger, Eric and Robert Slonim, “Patience among Children,” Journal of Public
Economics, February 2007, 91 (1-2), 343–363.
Bhalotra, Sonia and Samantha Rawlings, “Intergenerational Persistence in Health in
Developing Countries: The Penalty of Gender Inequality?,” Journal of Public Economics,
2011, 95 (3), 286–299.
Bollinger, Bryan, Phillip Leslie, and Alan Sorensen, “Calorie Posting in Chain
Restaurants,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2011, 3 (1), 91–128.
Cawley, John, “The Impact of Obesity on Wages,” Journal of Human Resources, 2004, 39
(2), 451.
Centers for Disease Control, “Body Mass Index Measurement in Schools,” 2009.
, “Prevalence of Obesity Among Children and Adolescents: United States, Trends 19631965 Through 2007-2008,” 2011.
Chomitz, Virginia R., Jessica Collins, Juhee Kim, Ellen Kramer, and Rober
McGowan, “Promoting healthy weight among elementary school children via a health
report card approach,” Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 2003, 157, 765–
772.
Chua, Hannah Faye, S. Shaun Ho, Agnes Jasinska, Thad A Polk, Robert C.
Welsh, Israel Liberzon, and Victor J Strecher, “Self-Related Neural Response to
Tailored Smoking-Cessation Messages Predicts Quitting,” Nature Neuroscience, 2011, 14
(4), 426–427.
Conti, Gabriella and James J. Heckman, “The Economics of Child Well-Being,” NBER
Working Paper No. 18466, 2012.
Courtemanche, Charles, Garth Heutel, and Patrick McAlvanah, “Impatience, Incentives, and Obesity,” University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Department of Economics Working Paper 11-09, 2011.

31

Daniels, Stephen R., “The Consequences of Childhood Overweight and Obesity,” The
Future of Children, 2006, 16 (1), 47–67.
De Walque, Damien, “How Does the Impact of an HIV/AIDS Information Campaign Vary
with Educational Attainment? Evidence from Rural Uganda,” Journal of Development
Economics, 2007, 84 (2), 686–714.
DellaVigna, Stefano, “Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field,” Journal of
Economic Literature, 2009, 47 (2), 315–372.
and Ulrike Malmendier, “Paying Not to Go to The Gym,” American Economic Review,
2006, 96 (3), 694–719.
Dietz, William H., “Childhood weight affects adult morbidity and mortality,” Journal of
Nutrition, 1998, 128 (2), 518S–525S.
Dupas, Pascaline, “Do Teenagers Respond to HIV Risk Information? Evidence from a
Field Experiment in Kenya,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2011, 3
(1), 1–34.
, “Health Behavior in Developing Countries,” Annual Review of Economics, 2011, forthcoming.
Evans, Whitney E. and Kendrin R. Sonneville, “BMI Report Cards: Will They Pass
or Fail in the Fight against Pedriatic Obesity?,” Current Opinion in Pedriatrics, 2009, 21,
431–236.
Fletcher, J.M., D.E. Frisvold, and N. Tefft, “The Effects of Soft Drink Taxes on Child
and Adolescent Consumption and Weight Outcomes?,” Journal of Public Economics, 2010,
94, 967–974.
Giné, Xavier, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman, “Put Your Money Where Your
Butt Is: A Commitment Contract for Smoking Cessation,” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 2010, 2 (4), 213–235.
Gómez-Dı́az, Rita A., Arturo J. Martı́nez-Hernàndez, Carlos A. Aguilar-Salinas,
Rafael Violante, Mardia López-Alarcón, Margarita Jiménez-Villarruel, Niels
Wacher-Rodarte, and Fortino Solórzano-Santos, “Percentile Distribution of the
Waist Circumference among Mexican Pre-Adolescents of a Primary School in Mexico
City,” Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism, 2004, 7, 716–721.
Grimmett, Chloe, Helen Croker, Susan Carnell, and Jane Wardle, “Telling parents
their childs weight status: psychological impact of a weight-screening program,” Pediatrics,
2008, 122, e682–e688.
Guendelman, Sylvia, Lia C.H. Fernald, Lynnette Neufeld, and Elena FuentesAfflick, “Maternal Perceptions of Early Childhood Ideal Body Weight Differ among
Mexican-Origin Mothers Residing in Mexico Compared to California,” Journal of the
American Dietetic Association, 2010, 110 (2), 222–229.
32

Hastings, Justine S. and Jeffrey M. Weinstein, “Information, School Choice, and Academic Achievement: Evidence from Two Experiments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2008, 123, 1373–1414.
Hawkins, Robert P., Matthew Kreuter, Kenneth Resnicow, Martin Fishbein,
and Arie Dijkstra, “Understanding Tailoring in Communicating about Health,” Health
Education Research, 2008, 23 (3), 454.
Heckman, James J., “Skill Formation and the Economics of Investing in Disadvantaged
Children,” Science, 2006, 312 (5782), 1900–1902.
Hernández, Bernardo, Lucı́a Cuevas-Nasu, Teresa Shamah-Levy, Eric A. Monterrubio, Claudia Ivonne Ramı́rez-Silva, Raquel Garcı́a-Feregrino, Juan A Rivera,
and Jaime Sepúlveda-Amor, “Factors associated with overweight and obesity in Mexican school-age children: Results from the National Nutrition Survey 1999,” Salud Pública
de México, 2002.
Hochbaum, Godfrey, Irwin Rosenstock, and Stephen Kegels, “Health Belief Model,”
United States Public Health Service, 1952.
Jayachandran, N. Variyam and John Cawley, “Nutrition Labels and Obesity,” NBER
Working Paper No. 11956, 2006.
Jensen, Robert, “The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (2), 515–548.
Kalich, K., V. Chomitz, K. Peterson, R. McGowan, R. Houser, and A. Must,
“Comfort and Utility of School-Based Weight Screening: The Student Perspective,” BMC
pediatrics, 2008, 8 (1), 9.
Kubik, Martha Y., Jayne A. Fulkerson, Mary Story, and Gayle Rieland, “Parents
of elementary school students weigh in on height, weight and body mass index screening
at school,” Journal of School of Health, 2006, 76, 496–501.
Lacetera, Nicola, Devin G. Pope, and Justin R. Sydnor, “Heuristic Thinking and
Limited Attention in the Car Market,” NBER Working Paper No. 17030, 2011.
Levy, Teresa Shamah, “Encuesta Nacional de Salud en Escolares 2008,” in Teresa Shamah
Levy, ed., Encuesta Nacional de Salud en Escolares 2008, Cuernavaca (México): Instituto
Nacional de Salud Pública, México, 2010.
Luo, Zhehui, Ren Mu, and Xiaobo Zhang, “Famine and Overweight in China,” Applied
Economic Perspectives and Policy, 2006, 28 (3), 296–304.
Martorell, R., L. Kettel Khan, M.L. Hughes, and L.M. Grummer-Strawn, “Overweight and Obesity in Preschool Children from Developing Countries,” International Journal of Obesity, 2000, 24 (8), 959–967.

33

Meredith, Jennifer, Jonathan Robinson, Sarah Walker, and Bruce Wydick,
“Keeping the Doctor Away: Experimental Evidence on Investment in Preventative Health
Products,” Mimeo, University of California-Santa Cruz, 2012.
Monsivais, P., A. Aggarwal, and A. Drewnowski, “Following Federal Guidelines To
Increase Nutrient Consumption May Lead To Higher Food Costs For Consumers,” Health
Affairs, 2011, 30 (8), 1471.
Must, Aviva and Richard S. Strauss, “Risks and consequences of childhood and adolescent obesity,” International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders, 1999,
23 (suppl 2), S2–S11.
, Jennifer Spadano, Eugenie H. Coakley, Alison E. Field, Graham Colditz,
and William H. Dietz, “The disease burden associated with overweight and obesity,”
Journal Of the American Medical Association, 1999, 282, 1523–1529.
Neumark-Sztainer, Dianne, Melanie Wall, Mary Story, and Patricia van den
Berg, “Accurate Parental Classification of Overweight Adolescents’ Weight Status: Does
it Matter?,” Pediatrics, 2008, 121 (6), e1495.
Nihiser, Allison J., Sarah M. Lee, Howell Wechsler, Mary McKenna, Erica
Odom, Chris Reinold, Diane Thompson, and Larry Grummer-Strawn, “BMI
Measurement in Schools,” Pediatrics, 2009, 124 (Supplement), S89.
Olaiz, Gustavo, Juan Rivera, Teresa Shamah-Levy, Rosalba Rojas, Salvador
Villalpando-Hernández, Mauricio Hernández-Avila, and Jaime Sepúlveda, Encuesta Nacional de Salud y Nutrición 2006, 2006.
Oria, Maria and Kristin Sawyer, Joint US-Mexico Workshop on Preventing Obesity in
Children and Youth of Mexican Origin: Summary, National Academy Press, 2007.
Schocker, Laura, “More Schools Including Weight, BMI On Report Cards,” Huffington
Post, April 19, 2011.
Spiegel, S.A. and D. Foulk, “Reducing Overweight through a Multidisciplinary Schoolbased Intervention,” Obesity, 2012, 14 (1), 88–96.
Taras, Howard and William Potts-Datema, “Obesity and Student Performance at
School,” The Journal of School Health, 2005, 75, 291–295.
Ullmann, S. Heidi, Alison M. Buttenheim, Noreen Goldman, Anne R. Pebley,
and Rebeca Wong, “Socioeconomic Differences in Obesity among Mexican Adolescents,”
International Journal of Pediatric Obesity, forthcoming, 6, e373–80.
Warschburger, Petra and Katja Kroller, “Maternal Perception of Weight Status and
Health Risks Associated with Obesity in Children,” Pediatrics, 2009, 124 (1), e60.
Wisdom, Jessica, Julie S. Downs, and George Loewenstein, “Promoting Healthy
Choices: Information Versus Convenience,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2010, 2 (2), 164–178.
34

World Bank, “Global Status Report on Noncommunicable Diseases 2010,” 2011.
World Health Organization, “Obese and Overweight Fact Sheet,” 2012.

35

Figure 1: Description of Treatments
January 2010: Distribution of Baseline Survey in Class in 7 Schools

January 2010: Collection of Weight and Height Information of All Students

Randomization of Students into 1 of 4 Treatments
Stratification: School x Weight Status x Whether or Not the Baseline Survey was Completed
Control Group:
Received Invitation to
Class

BASIC Treatment:
Received Report Card
on Child’s Weight
+
Invitation to Class

RISK Treatment:
Received Report Card
on Child’s Weight and
Information on Health
Risks of Obesity
+
Invitation to Class

COMPARE Treatment:
Received Report Card
on Child's Weight and
Information on the
Distribution of Weight
Classifications for
Children in the Child's
Class
+
Invitation to Class

February 2010:
Distribution of Treatment via Letter Sent Home with Children
(i.e., Invitation to Class for Control Group & Invitation and Report Card for Treatment Groups)

February 2010 (Approximately 2 Weeks after Distribution of Treatment):
“Practical Tips for Improving Your Child's Eating Habits and Physical Activity” Class

March 2010 :
Distribution of Endline Survey to All Children*

May 2010 :
Measurement of Height and Weight of All Children

*In the case that caretakers attended the “Practical Tips for Improving Your Child’s Eating Habits and Physical Activity “ Class, we had
caretakers fill out the endline survey at the information session as we did not want their answers to the endline survey to be affected by the
class. We estimate treatment effects separately for attendees and non-attendees and find similar results.

Figure 2: Distribution of Post-Intervention Parental Attitudes about Child's Weight
Overweight	


100	


100	


80	


80	

Treatment	


60	


Control	


40	


Percent	


Percent	


Underweight	


20	


60	

40	

20	


0	


0	

Weighs much Weighs too Weighs just Weighs too Weighs much
too little	

little	

enough	

much	

too much	


Weighs
much too
little	


100	


100	


80	


80	


60	

40	

20	


Weighs
much too
much	


Obese	


Percent	


Percent	


Healthy weight	


Weighs too Weighs just Weighs too
little	

enough	

much	


60	

40	

20	


0	


0	

Weighs much Weighs too Weighs just Weighs too Weighs much
too little	

little	

enough	

much	

too much	


Weighs
much too
little	


Weighs too Weighs just Weighs too
little	

enough	

much	


Weighs
much too
much	


Table 1: Baseline Characteristics - Overall Sample
Mean
Control Basic

Risk

P-value
Compare

Treatment
= Control

All equal

Panel A: Child Measurement
N=673 N=702 N=680

N=691

Male
Age

0.50
9.78
[1.17]

0.47
9.80
[1.25]

0.48
9.84
[1.29]

0.51
9.85
[1.22]

0.41
0.69

0.55
0.37

BMI

18.11
[3.44]

18.34
[3.53]

18.36
[3.45]

18.29
[3.35]

0.16

0.06

0.03
0.68
0.17
0.12

0.03
0.66
0.18
0.13

0.03
0.67
0.17
0.12

0.03
0.67
0.18
0.13

NA
NA
NA
NA

NA
NA
NA
NA

Fraction Underweight
Fraction Healthy weight
Fraction Overweight
Fraction Obese
Panel B: Baseline Survey Responses by Primary Caretaker

N=499 N=508 N=505

N=518

Primary Caretaker: Mother
Primary Caretaker: Father
Primary Caretaker: Other

0.67
0.30
0.03

0.69
0.29
0.02

0.68
0.30
0.02

0.65
0.32
0.03

0.61
0.78
0.24

0.84
0.99
0.58

Less than High School
High School
More than High School

0.34
0.42
0.23

0.38
0.41
0.21

0.33
0.42
0.26

0.31
0.45
0.24

0.16
0.58
0.45

0.92
0.99
0.85

Concern about H1N1 [1-4]

3.27
[0.79]

3.22
[0.78]

3.25
[0.81]

3.25
[0.79]

0.76

0.54

Concern about child's weight [1-4]

3.16
[0.95]

3.10
[0.98]

3.01
[1.00]

3.08
[0.98]

0.07

0.04

Concern about own weight [1-4]

3.06
[0.97]

3.03
[0.98]

2.98
[0.99]

3.03
[0.94]

0.59

0.35

Concern about child's school performance [1-4]

3.71
[0.58]

3.67
[0.67]

3.63
[0.67]

3.62
[0.68]

0.06

0.01

0.02
0.55
0.06
0.37

0.02
0.55
0.07
0.36

0.02
0.56
0.05
0.37

0.03
0.57
0.06
0.34

0.68
0.87
0.88
0.72

0.74
0.48
0.81
0.53

-0.02
[0.73]

-0.09
[0.74]

-0.06
[0.71]

-0.05
[0.73]

0.69

0.36

Happy with child's school performance [0/1]

0.67

0.68

0.68

0.72

0.29

0.39

Internet access at home [0/1]

0.39

0.35

0.39

0.39

0.42

0.62

Other children in experiment [0/1]

0.30

0.29

0.27

0.28

0.50

0.25

Response rate to baseline survey

0.74

0.72

0.74

0.75

0.24

0.68

Classifies child as underweight
Classifies child as healthy weight
Classifies child as overweight
Does not know weight classification
Child's school performance relative to peers [-2-2]

Notes: Table presents means and standard deviations in brackets for continuous variables. For child's school performance relative to peers, a response of 0 indicates that
the student's performance is average; below 0 is below average and above 0 is above average. P-values are from regressions of these characteristics on a treatment
dummy [treatment=control] or the set of treatment dummies [all equal]; these regressions include randomization strata fixed effects based on the combination of weight
status, school, and whether the baseline survey was completed. The fraction of parents who classify their child as obese is very close to 0 across all categories and
therefore is omitted. All p-values with NA values are not defined since those are variables upon which randomization was stratified. Thus, as we include strata fixed
effects in measuring the differences across groups, there is no within strata variation in these stratification variables.

Table 2: Baseline Characteristics - Overweight and Obese
Mean

P-value
Compare

Treatment
= Control

All equal

N=196 N=217 N=202
0.59
0.51
0.53
9.81
9.86
9.82
[1.08] [1.14] [1.21]

N=209
0.57
9.92
[1.15]

0.27
0.73

0.17
0.51

22.32
[2.68]

22.55
[2.63]

22.44
[2.74]

22.37
[2.48]

0.76

0.54

0.59
0.41

0.57
0.43

0.58
0.42

0.58
0.42

NA
NA

NA
NA

N=139
0.58
0.38
0.04

0.33
0.48
0.86

0.41
0.52
0.54

Control Basic

Risk

Panel A: Child Measurement
Male
Age
BMI
Fraction Overweight
Fraction Obese
Panel B: Baseline Survey Responses by Primary Caretaker
Primary Caretaker: Mother
Primary Caretaker: Father
Primary Caretaker: Other
Less than High School
High School
More than High School

N=131 N=142 N=134
0.67
0.67
0.64
0.31
0.30
0.34
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.34
0.41
0.24

0.28
0.45
0.28

0.28
0.44
0.28

0.22
0.47
0.30

0.13
0.91
0.51

0.05
0.63
0.16

Concern about H1N1 [1-4]

3.30
[0.84]

3.20
[0.79]

3.27
[0.85]

3.28
[0.83]

0.71

0.59

Concern about child's weight [1-4]

3.31
[0.82]

3.29
[0.82]

3.20
[0.90]

3.23
[0.82]

0.51

0.29

Concern about own weight [1-4]

3.12
[0.97]

3.08
[0.96]

3.01
[1.00]

3.11
[0.87]

0.77

0.59

Concern about child's school performance [1-4]

3.70
[0.57]

3.70
[0.69]

3.66
[0.64]

3.57
[0.76]

0.29

0.24

0.01
0.56
0.14
0.29

0.01
0.52
0.13
0.32

0.01
0.56
0.10
0.33

0.01
0.55
0.11
0.33

0.94
0.94
0.75
0.88

0.77
0.80
0.52
0.44

-0.01
[0.78]

-0.03
[0.73]

0.01
[0.69]

0.00
[0.75]

0.98

0.94

Happy with child's school performance [0/1]

0.62

0.63

0.73

0.76

0.01

0.07

Internet access at home [0/1]

0.39

0.37

0.46

0.41

0.56

0.63

Other children in experiment [0/1]

0.30

0.22

0.24

0.24

0.37

0.09

Response rate to baseline survey

0.67

0.65

0.66

0.67

NA

NA

Classifies child as underweight
Classifies child as healthy weight
Classifies child as overweight
Does not know weight classification
Child's school performance relative to peers [-2-2]

Notes: Table presents means and standard deviations in brackets for continuous variables. For child's school performance relative to peers, a response of 0 indicates that
the student's performance is average; below 0 is below average and above 0 is above average. P-values are from regressions of these characteristics on a treatment
dummy [treatment=control] or the set of treatment dummies [all equal]; these regressions include randomization strata fixed effects based on the combination of weight
status, school, and whether the baseline survey was completed. The fraction of parents who classify their child as obese is very close to 0 across all categories and
therefore is omitted. All p-values with NA values are not defined since those are variables upon which randomization was stratified. Thus, as we include strata fixed
effects in measuring the differences across groups, there is no within strata variation in these stratification variables.

Table 3: Parental Classification versus Actual Classification of Weight Status at Baseline
Parental Classification
Actual Classification
Underweight
Healthy weight
Overweight
Obese

Underweight

Healthy weight

Overweight

Obese

Don't know

27
(41%)
205
(15%)
2
(<1%)
0
0%

38
(58%)
1,090
(82%)
240
(66%)
52
(20%)

0
(0%)
32
(2%)
113
(33%)
189
(74%)

1
(2%)
0
(0%)
1
(<1%)
14
(5%)

0
(0%)
7
(1%)
6
(2%)
2
(1%)

Notes: Table shows the count in each category. Classifications along both dimensions are based on pre-treatment classifications. Percentages in
parentheses represent percentages for each row (i.e., each row percentages add to 100%).

Table 4: Cross-Sectional Correlations Between Weight Status and Other Variables
Weight Status at Baseline
Underweight

Overweight

Obese

Correct
Classification

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Caretaker education: less than high school

0.003
(0.010)

-0.040
(0.027)

-0.054*
(0.024)

-0.031
(0.027)

Caretaker education: high school

0.001
(0.009)

-0.016
(0.024)

-0.016
(0.023)

-0.006
(0.023)

Male child

-0.016*
(0.008)

0.005
(0.018)

0.081**
(0.015)

0.003
(0.018)

Internet access at home

-0.007
(0.008)

-0.036
(0.020)

0.037*
(0.018)

0.008
(0.020)

Mother filled out the survey

0.029**
(0.006)

0.014
(0.052)

-0.062
(0.052)

0.001
(0.055)

Father filled out the survey

0.035**
(0.009)

0.019
(0.054)

-0.035
(0.054)

0.037
(0.057)

Caretaker present biased

0.000
(0.011)

-0.018
(0.025)

-0.005
(0.022)

0.049
(0.026)

Caretaker future biased

-0.002
(0.019)

0.009
(0.048)

-0.059
(0.032)

0.020
(0.048)

Caretaker always impatient

-0.003
(0.009)

-0.003
(0.021)

0.024
(0.018)

0.017
(0.022)

Child in grade 2

0.038
(0.026)

-0.029
(0.038)

0.046
(0.032)

0.048
(0.045)

Child in grade 3

-0.016
(0.016)

-0.009
(0.031)

0.055*
(0.024)

0.029
(0.036)

Child in grade 4

-0.022
(0.016)

0.023
(0.032)

0.105**
(0.025)

0.035
(0.035)

Child in grade 5

-0.023
(0.016)

0.059
(0.032)

0.045
(0.023)

0.044
(0.036)

Observations
Dep. Var. Mean

1,859
0.03

1,862
0.18

1,862
0.13

1,832
0.62

Notes: Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. * denotes statistical significance at the 5% level and ** at the 1% level. The omitted
categories are caretaker education greater than high school, other than mother or father filled out the survey, female child, caretaker always patient, child
in grade 6. Additionally, column (4) controls for weight classification.

Table 5: Sample Selection as a Function of Treatment

Panel A: Overweight/Obese Sample
Treatment
Observations
Dep. Var. Mean
Panel B: Healthy Weight Sample
Treatment
Observations
Dep. Var. Mean
Panel C: Underweight Sample
Treatment
Observations
Dep. Var. Mean

Whether Responsed to
Endline Survey

Whether Was Present for
Endline Weight & Height
Measurements

(1)

(2)

-0.065
(0.039)

0.003
(0.022)

824
0.633

824
0.923

-0.014
(0.025)

-0.008
(0.015)

1,839
0.564

1,839
0.917

-0.007
(0.121)

-0.078
(0.078)

83
0.619

83
0.952

Notes: Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. Regressions include age x sex fixed effects and strata fixed
effects. Sample includes all subjects assigned to treatment (i.e., those with baseline height and weight measurements).

Table 6: Effects of Treatment on Behaviors/Outcomes - Overweight/Obese Sample
Observed
Behavior

Endline Survey Questions
Correct
classification
Child
of child's
weighs too
weight
much?

Concern
about
child's
weight

Intend to
Intend to have child
have child get more
Number of
physical
eat less
actions
Any action
taken?
taken
food
activity

Endline Measurements

Attend
class

BMI

Weight
(Kg)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.156**
(0.046)

0.122*
(0.049)

0.044
(0.093)

0.034
(0.168)

0.019
(0.026)

0.069
(0.049)

-0.018
(0.018)

0.002
(0.033)

0.199
(0.184)

0.144
(0.535)

459
0.267

450
0.581

471
3.387

465
2.197

465
0.934

424
0.718

449
0.983

824
0.204

755
21.38

755
43.35

Sample: Obese/Overweight
Treatment

Observations
Dep. Var. Mean

Notes: Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. * and ** denote statistical significance at the 5% and 1% level, respectively. The possible actions undertaken by parents are: discussed weight with
family/friends, discussed child's weight with him/her, seen doctor in regards to child's weight, put child on a diet, had child skip meals, engaged in physical activity with child, and signed child up for sport/exercise
class.

Table 7: Effects on Behaviors/Outcomes by Treatment Type - Obese/Overweight Sample
Observed
Behavior

Endline Survey Questions
Intend to
Intend to have child
have child get more
Number of
physical
eat less
actions
Any action
taken?
taken
food
activity

Correct
classification of
child's weight

Child
weighs too
much?

Concern
about
child's
weight

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

BASIC treatment

0.208**
(0.059)

0.135*
(0.060)

-0.022
(0.112)

0.044
(0.205)

0.029
(0.030)

RISK treatment

0.121*
(0.057)

0.116*
(0.059)

0.008
(0.113)

0.024
(0.203)

COMPARE treatment

0.141*
(0.057)

0.116*
(0.059)

0.139
(0.105)

459
0.267

450
0.581

471
3.387

Observations
Dep. Var. Mean

Endline Measurements

Attend
class

BMI

Weight
(Kg)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.045
(0.059)

-0.023
(0.026)

-0.008
(0.039)

0.139
(0.185)

0.012
(0.601)

0.033
(0.030)

0.046
(0.060)

-0.032
(0.026)

-0.005
(0.040)

0.160
(0.186)

0.396
(0.604)

0.034
(0.201)

-0.004
(0.033)

0.112
(0.059)

-0.001
(0.022)

0.020
(0.040)

0.066
(0.185)

-0.475
(0.599)

465
2.197

465
0.934

424
0.718

449
0.983

824
0.204

755
21.38

755
43.35

Notes: Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. * and ** denote statistical significance at the 5% and 1% level, respectively. The possible actions undertaken by parents are: discussed weight with
family/friends, discussed child's weight with him/her, seen doctor in regards to child's weight, put child on a diet, had child skip meals, engaged in physical activity with child, and signed child up for sport/exercise
class.

Table 8: Heterogeneous Treatment Effects of COMPARE Treatment among Overweight and Obese
Observed
Behavior

Endline Survey Questions
Correct
classification
Concern
of child's
Child weighs about child's Number of
too much?
weight
weight
actions taken

Any action
taken?

Intend to
have child eat
less food

Intend to
have child
get more
physical
activity

Attend class

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Treatment

0.099
(0.140)

0.379**
(0.142)

0.206
(0.221)

0.029
(0.431)

0.052
(0.096)

0.193
(0.180)

-0.013
(0.056)

0.017
(0.104)

Treatment*Fraction Obese and Overweight
in Class Between 25-36%

-0.044
(0.166)

-0.254
(0.169)

0.009
(0.267)

-0.048
(0.512)

-0.053
(0.108)

-0.038
(0.197)

0.009
(0.060)

-0.031
(0.126)

Treatment*Fraction Obese and Overweight
in Class More than 36%

0.066
(0.178)

-0.401*
(0.193)

-0.310
(0.298)

0.155
(0.575)

-0.127
(0.111)

-0.175
(0.208)

0.012
(0.069)

-0.008
(0.129)

238
0.267

232
0.581

245
3.387

243
2.197

243
0.934

218
0.718

235
0.983

405
0.204

Observations
Dep Var Mean

Notes: Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. * and ** denote statistical significance at the 5% and 1% level, respectively. The possible actions undertaken by parents are: discussed weight with
family/friends, discussed child's weight with him/her, seen doctor in regards to weight, put child on a diet, had child skip meals, engaged in physical activity with child, and signed child up for sport/exercise class.
Sample includes only the control and the COMPARE treatment group.

Appendix Table 1: Baseline Characteristics - Overall Sample, Conditional on Filling Out Endline Survey
Mean
Control Basic

Risk

Compare

P-value
Treatment
All equal
= Control

Panel A: Child Measurement
Male
Age
BMI
Fraction Underweight
Fraction Healthy weight
Fraction Overweight
Fraction Obese

N=394 N=355 N=405
0.49
0.44
0.46
9.77
9.76
9.80
[1.14] [1.19] [1.25]

N=381
0.51
9.82
[1.18]

18.13
[3.41]

18.25
[3.61]

18.23
[3.47]

0.03
0.65
0.19
0.12

0.03
0.65
0.19
0.13

0.04
0.68
0.16
0.13

0.36
0.85

0.57
0.64

18.42
[3.43]

0.30

0.08

0.03
0.65
0.17
0.15

NA
NA
NA
NA

NA
NA
NA
NA

Panel B: Pre-Survey Responses by Primary Caretaker
N=290 N=268 N=305

N=277

Primary Caretaker: Mother
Primary Caretaker: Father
Primary Caretaker: Other

0.67
0.30
0.03

0.69
0.30
0.02

0.68
0.30
0.02

0.63
0.33
0.03

0.48
0.72
0.37

0.99
0.75
0.35

Less than High School
High School
More than High School

0.34
0.43
0.23

0.39
0.41
0.20

0.32
0.43
0.25

0.31
0.45
0.24

0.15
0.69
0.55

0.68
0.77
0.82

Concern about H1N1 [1-4]

3.33
[0.78]

3.21
[0.78]

3.26
[0.79]

3.29
[0.75]

0.29

0.21

Concern about child's weight [1-4]

3.19
[0.92]

3.09
[1.01]

3.00
[1.00]

3.13
[0.95]

0.08

0.04

Concern about own weight [1-4]

3.08
[0.93]

2.99
[1.04]

2.98
[1.00]

3.05
[0.90]

0.52

0.26

Concern about child's school performance [1-4]

3.76
[0.55]

3.65
[0.70]

3.64
[0.69]

3.64
[0.65]

0.05

0.00

0.03
0.54
0.06
0.38

0.02
0.57
0.06
0.34

0.01
0.56
0.05
0.37

0.03
0.57
0.06
0.33

0.47
0.36
0.71
0.96

0.60
0.41
0.29
0.93

-0.03
[0.76]

-0.04
[0.77]

-0.03
[0.69]

-0.05
[0.71]

NA

0.88

Happy with child's school performance [0/1]

0.67

0.70

0.68

0.73

0.28

0.33

Internet access at home [0/1]

0.38

0.34

0.38

0.37

0.79

0.60

Other children in experiment [0/1]

0.31

0.29

0.25

0.26

0.12

0.06

Response rate to baseline survey

0.74

0.75

0.76

0.73

0.20

0.26

Classifies child as underweight
Classifies child as healthy weight
Classifies child as overweight
Does not know weight classification
Child's school performance relative to peers [-2-2]

Notes: Table presents means and standard deviations in brackets for continuous variables. For child's school performance relative to peers, a response of 0
indicates that the student is average; below 0 is below average and above 0 is above average. P-values are from regressions of these characteristics on a treatment
dummy [treatment=control] or the set of treatment dummies [all equal]; these regressions include randomization strata fixed effects based on the combination of
weight status, school, and whether the baseline survey was completed. The fraction of parents who classify their child as obese is very close to 0 across all
categories and therefore is omitted. All p-values with NA values are not defined since those are variables upon which randomization was stratified. Thus, as we
include strata fixed effects in measuring the differences across groups, there is no within strata variation in these stratification variables.

Appendix Table 2: Baseline Characteristics - Overweight and Obese, Conditional on Filling Out Endline Survey
Mean
Control Basic

Risk

P-value
Compare

Treatment
= Control

All equal

Panel A: Child Measurement
N=124 N=112 N=115

N=121

0.61
9.74
[1.03]
22.10
[2.54]

0.48
9.72
[1.04]
22.44
[2.90]

0.55
9.83
[1.15]
22.48
[2.69]

0.59
9.85
[1.07]
22.46
[2.46]

0.26
0.83

0.16
0.52

0.69

0.40

0.61
0.39

0.59
0.41

0.55
0.45

0.53
0.47

NA
NA

NA
NA

N=91

N=85

N=85

N=85

Primary Caretaker: Mother
Primary Caretaker: Father
Primary Caretaker: Other

0.72
0.25
0.03

0.68
0.32
0.00

0.63
0.35
0.02

0.55
0.42
0.03

0.11
0.12
0.07

0.09
0.04
0.44

Less than High School
High School
More than High School

0.34
0.40
0.26

0.28
0.44
0.29

0.29
0.42
0.29

0.17
0.47
0.36

0.00
0.72
0.25

0.02
0.44
0.16

Concern about H1N1 [1-4]

3.32
[0.85]

3.16
[0.75]

3.37
[0.78]

3.36
[0.80]

0.18

0.92

Concern about child's weight [1-4]

3.26
[0.86]

3.29
[0.87]

3.28
[0.88]

3.29
[0.83]

0.99

0.97

Concern about own weight [1-4]

3.05
[0.98]

3.09
[1.02]

3.09
[0.98]

3.15
[0.86]

0.87

0.66

Concern about child's school performance [1-4]

3.75
[0.51]

3.71
[0.70]

3.68
[0.62]

3.62
[0.70]

0.44

0.21

0.02
0.57
0.11
0.30

0.02
0.54
0.15
0.29

0.01
0.54
0.09
0.36

0.01
0.59
0.13
0.27

0.92
0.85
0.77
0.59

0.85
0.85
0.82
0.92

-0.04
[0.79]

0.02
[0.77]

0.05
[0.61]

0.03
[0.71]

0.61

0.23

Happy with child's school performance [0/1]

0.64

0.67

0.78

0.75

0.07

0.09

Internet access at home [0/1]

0.39

0.40

0.44

0.43

0.92

0.54

Other children in experiment [0/1]

0.27

0.21

0.26

0.21

0.70

0.27

Response rate to baseline survey

0.73

0.76

0.74

0.70

NA

NA

Male
Age
BMI
Fraction Overweight
Fraction Obese
Panel B: Baseline Survey Responses by Primary Caretaker

Classifies child as underweight
Classifies child as healthy weight
Classifies child as overweight
Does not know weight classification
Child's school performance relative to peers [-2-2]

Notes: Table presents means and standard deviations in brackets for continuous variables. For child's school performance relative to peers, a response of 0 indicates that
the student is average; below 0 is below average and above 0 is above average. P-values are from regressions of these characteristics on a treatment dummy
[treatment=control] or the set of treatment dummies [all equal]; these regressions include randomization strata fixed effects based on the combination of weight status,
school, and whether the baseline survey was completed. The fraction of parents who classify their child as obese is very close to 0 across all categories and therefore is
omitted. All p-values with NA values are not defined since those are variables upon which randomization was stratified. Thus, as we include strata fixed effects in
measuring the differences across groups, there is no within strata variation in these stratification variables.

Appendix Table 3: Effects of Treatment on Behaviors/Outcomes among Healthy Weight and Underweight
Observed
Behavior

Endline Survey Questions
Correct
classification
Child
of child's
weighs too
weight
much?

Concern
about
child's
weight

Intend to
Intend to have child
have child get more
Number of
physical
eat less
actions
Any action
taken?
taken
food
activity

Endline Measurements

Attend
class

BMI

Weight
(Kg)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.114**
(0.029)

-0.015
(0.013)

-0.032
(0.071)

0.091
(0.073)

0.033
(0.028)

-0.018
(0.031)

0.019
(0.023)

-0.056**
(0.020)

0.031
(0.107)

-0.059
(0.295)

968
0.791

963
0.033

1,005
3.148

993
1.227

993
0.821

854
0.203

953
0.883

1,839
0.178

1,636
16.24

1,636
30.83

0.119
(0.188)

0.000
(0.000)

0.045
(0.250)

-0.049
(0.325)

-0.094
(0.124)

0.057
(0.095)

0.069
(0.089)

0.111
(0.094)

0.069
(0.260)

-0.166
(0.794)

52
0.538

50
0

53
3.385

51
1.308

51
0.923

47
0.077

48
0.923

83
0.143

71
13.04

71
23.61

Sample: Healthy Weight
Treatment

Observations
Dep. Var. Mean
Sample: Underweight
Treatment

Observations
Dep. Var. Mean

Notes: Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. * and ** denote statistical significance at the 5% and 1% level, respectively. The possible actions undertaken by parents are: discussed weight with
family/friends, discussed child's weight with him/her, seen doctor in regards to child's weight, put child on a diet, had child skip meals, engaged in physical activity with child, and signed child up for sport/exercise
class.

Appendix Table 4: Effects of Treatment on Behavior and BMI among Overweight and Obese
Endline Survey Questions
Discussed
Discussed child's Seen doctor in
weight with
regards to
weight with
family/friends
him/her
weight

Treatment
Observations
Dep. Var. Mean

Put child on a
diet

Engaged in
Had child skip physical activity
with child
meals

Signed child up
for
sport/exercise
class

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.031
(0.056)

0.095
(0.053)

0.078
(0.041)

-0.038
(0.033)

-0.070
(0.039)

-0.064
(0.053)

0.002
(0.043)

465
0.402

465
0.541

465
0.139

465
0.107

465
0.172

465
0.648

465
0.189

Notes: Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. * and ** denote statistical significance at the 5% and 1% level, respectively. The dependent variable mean is the mean for the
control group.

Appendix Table 5: Post-Survey-Pre-Survey Differences for Overweight and Obese in Control Group

Difference
Mean at Baseline
Observations

Classify child's weight
correctly

Child weighs too much?

Concern about child's
weight

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.020
(0.028)

0.041
(0.043)

0.152
(0.081)

0.28
102

0.56
98

3.41
105

Notes: Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. Estimates come from the regression of the difference in post-intervention and
pre-intervention survey measures on a constant. The reported coefficient estimate is the intercept.

Appendix Table 6: Overall Effects of Treatment on Behavior and BMI for Sample of Lone Overweight and Obese Children
Observed
Behavior

Endline Survey Questions

Correct
classification
Child
of child's
weighs too
weight
much?

Treatment

Observations
Dep. Var. Mean

Concern
about
child's
weight

Intend to
Intend to have child
have child get more
Number of
physical
eat less
actions
Any action
taken
taken?
food
activity

Endline Measurements

Attend
class

BMI

Weight
(Kg)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.118*
(0.059)

0.099
(0.062)

-0.037
(0.112)

0.150
(0.197)

0.035
(0.034)

0.028
(0.063)

-0.031
(0.023)

0.034
(0.047)

0.288
(0.208)

0.198
(0.592)

291
0.276

287
0.547

298
3.436

294
2.115

294
0.923

268
0.729

282
0.987

464
0.217

429
21.13

429
42.73

Notes: Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. * and ** denote statistical significance at the 5% and 1% level, respectively. The possible actions undertaken by parents are: discussed
weight with family/friends, discussed child's weight with him/her, seen doctor in regards to child's weight, put child on a diet, had child skip meals, engaged in physical activity with child, and signed
child up for sport/exercise class.

Baseline Survey

Primary School_______________________________________Grade |____| Class |____|

Survey
This survey seeks to collect information from parents about their children. It will enable us to carry out a
study, the results from which we will share afterwards.
We ask that the primary caretaker of this child fill out the survey and return it to school with your child
before January 19, 2010.
1. Please write YOUR first name and last names in CAPITAL LETTERS.
First Name:

Last Names:

_____________________

2. Please write the name of your CHILD in CAPITAL LETTERS. All of the questions in this survey
that refer to “your child,” should be answered with respect to THIS child.
First Name:

Last Names:

_____________________

3. What is your relationship to this child?
___Father

___Mother

___Grandfather
___Grandmother

___Brother
___Sister

___Other:_______________

4. Are you the primary caretaker of this child?
___Yes

___No

5. What is the highest level of education YOU have reached? Please DRAW A CIRCLE around the
highest level achieved.
School Level
Grade
Primary
1 2 3 4 5 6
Secondary
1 2 3
High School
1 2 3
•
Technical Career
•
Bachelors Degree
•
Masters/Doctorate/Professional
Other
Which:
•
Without Studies
6. What is your profession?
___Agricultural laborer
___Non-agricultural laborer
___Self-employed worker
___Supervisor

___Work in the home
___Union worker
___Unemployed
___Other
Please continue on to the next page

We are now going to ask you a few questions about your concerns related to certain issues.
7. How would you rate your concern about the H1N1 flu?
___Not concerned
___Somewhat concerned
___Moderately concerned
___Very concerned
8. How would you rate your concern about your child’s weight?
___Not concerned
___Somewhat concerned
___Moderately concerned
___Very concerned
9. How would you rate your concern about your own weight?
___Not concerned
___Somewhat concerned
___Moderately concerned
___Very concerned
10. How would you rate your concern about your child’s performance in school?
___Not concerned
___Somewhat concerned
___Moderately concerned
___Very concerned

We are now going to ask you a few questions about your child.
11. How would you classify your child’s weight?
___Underweight
___Healthy weight
___Overweight
___Obese
___Don’t know
12. How would you characterize your child’s weight?
___Weighs much too little
___Weighs too little
___Weighs just enough
___Weighs too much
___Weighs much too much
___Don’t know

Please continue on to the next page

13. How would you classify the weight of most of the children in your child’s class?
___Underweight
___Healthy weight
___Overweight
___Obese
___Don’t know

14. In terms of school performance, how would rate your child’s performance relative to his/her peers?
___Much below average
___Somewhat below average
___Average
___Moderately above average
___Much above average

15. Are you happy with your child’s performance in school?
___Yes

___No

16. Do you have a computer with internet at home?
___Yes

___No

17. Do you have any OTHER children enrolled in this school?
___Yes

___No

18. If yes, please write the grade, class number and the children’s first name and last names.
Grade: ___ Class:___ First Name: ____________ Last Names:
Grade: ___ Class:___ First Name: ____________ Last Names:
Grade: ___ Class:___ First Name: ____________ Last Names:

Please continue on to the next page

_________________
_________________
_________________

The next set of questions ask you how you would react to some imaginary situations. You will be asked to
pick the option you would prefer. Please react as if the situations were real. It is very important that you
try to give accurate and honest answers to these questions. Your answers will help us understanding how
people make decisions.
Suppose you win the lottery today. The lottery administrator gives you options for how you would like to
accept your cash prize.
Option 1: Accept a cash prize today
Option 2: Accept a larger cash prize but with a one month delay.

19. Do you prefer a 500 peso prize guaranteed today or a 625 peso prize guaranteed 1 month from now?
___500 pesos today
___625 pesos in 1 month

20. If the prize money changed, do you prefer a 500 peso prize guaranteed today or a 750 peso prize
guaranteed 1 month from now?
___500 pesos today
___750 pesos in 1 month

21. If you answered 500 pesos for both questions 19 & 20, how much would the prize have to be for you to
choose to wait?
___________________
Now imagine that the option would be to accept the lottery cash prize six months from now, or to accept a
larger cash prize seven months from now. Please make your decisions based on how you expect you
would answer if the choice were actual and not hypothetical.
22. Do you prefer 500 peso prize guaranteed 6 months from now, or a 625 peso prize guaranteed 7
months from now?
___500 pesos in 6 months
___625 pesos in 7 months

23. If the prize money changed, do you prefer a 500 peso prize guaranteed 6 months from now, or a 750
peso prize guaranteed 7 months from now?
___500 pesos in 6 months
___750 pesos in 7 months

24. If you answered 500 pesos for both questions 22 & 23, how much would the prize have to be for you
to choose to wait?
___________________

MANY THANKS!
Parent Signature:____________________________

Date:________________

Endline Survey
Primary School_______________________________________Grade |____| Class |____|
Follow-up Survey
About a month ago, you or another member of your household received a survey collecting information from
families about their children. The survey below is a further survey.
It would be greatly appreciated if the same person who answered the first survey could answer this new survey
as well. If your household never received the first survey, it would be greatly appreciated if the primary
caretaker could complete this survey.
The information collected will be used to carry out a study, the results of which will be shared afterwards.
1. Please write YOUR first name and last names in CAPITAL LETTERS.
Last Names:

First Name:

_____________________

2. Please write the name of your CHILD in CAPITAL LETTERS. All of the questions in this survey
that refer to “your child,” should be answered with respect to THIS child.
Last Names:

First Name:

_____________________

3. What is your relationship to this child?
___Father
___Mother

___Grandfather
___Grandmother

___Brother
___Sister

___Other:_______________

4. Are you the primary caretaker of this child?
___Yes

___No

We are now going to ask you a few questions about your concerns related to certain issues.
5. How would you rate your concern about the H1N1 flu?
___Not concerned
___Somewhat concerned
___Moderately concerned
___Very concerned
6. How would you rate your concern about your child’s weight?
___Not concerned
___Somewhat concerned
___Moderately concerned
___Very concerned
Please continue on to the next page

7. How would you rate your concern about your own weight?
___Not concerned
___Somewhat concerned
___Moderately concerned
___Very concerned
8. How would you rate your concern about your child’s performance in school?
___Not concerned
___Somewhat concerned
___Moderately concerned
___Very concerned
We are now going to ask you a few questions about your child.
9. How would you classify your child’s weight?
___Underweight
___Healthy weight
___Overweight
___Obese
___Don’t know
10. How would you characterize your child’s weight?
___Weighs much too little
___Weighs too little
___Weighs just enough
___Weights too much
___Weighs much too much
___Don’t know
11. How would you classify the weight of most of the children in your child’s class?
___Underweight
___Healthy weight
___Overweight
___Obese
___Don’t know
12. In terms of school performance, how would you rate your child’s performance relative to his/her
peers?
___Much below average
___Somewhat below average
___Average
___Moderately above average
___Much above average

Please continue on to the next page

13. During the last month, have you done any of the following activities? Mark all that apply.
___Discussed your child’s weight with family members or friends
___Seen a doctor, a nurse, or nutritionist in regards to your child's weight
___Put your child on a diet
___Had your child skip meals or snacks
___Encouraged your child to increase physical activity
___Engaged in physical activity with your child
___Signed your child up for a sport or exercise class
___Discussed your child's weight with him or her
14. What are your intentions related to your child's physical activity in the near future?
___I intend to have him or her get less physical activity.
___I intend to have him or her get more physical activity.
___I intend to have him or her not change his or her amount of physical activity.
15. What are your intentions related to the amount of food your child eats in the near future?
___I intend to have him or her eat less.
___I intend to have him or her eat more.
___I intend to have him or her not change his or her amount of food he or she eats.
16. An obese person is
___a person who does not exercise
___a person who exercises
___a person who likes fatty foods
___a person who does not like fatty foods
___a person who weighs less than the healthy level
___a person who weighs more than the healthy level
___I do not know.
17. Being overweight or obese increases one’s risk of cancer.
___Yes
___No
___I do not know.
18. Being overweight or obese increases one’s risk of the H1N1 flu.
___Yes
___No
___I do not know.
19. Being overweight or obese increases one’s risk of asthma.
___Yes
___No
___I do not know.
Please continue on to the next page

20. Which of the following is a cause of obesity?
___Bad joints
___Eating fruits and vegetables
___Eating too little
___Lack of exercise
21. What is the recommended amount of physical activity for children according to The Institución
Nacional de Salud Pública?
If you do not know the correct answer, select the one that seems most reasonable to you.
___10 minutes per day
___30 minutes per day
___45 minutes per day
___60 minutes per day
___90 minutes per day
22. Would a session on practical tips for improving your child’s eating habits and physical activity be of
value to you and your child?
___Yes
___No
23. Did you receive a report of your child’s height and weight from his or her school in the last month?
___Yes
___No
24. If you have any comments or suggestions, please let us know here. Thanks.

MANY THANKS!

Parent Signature:____________________________

Date:________________

February 8, 2010

Dear Parents or Guardians:

Recently, your child’s height and weight were measured at school. Together, height,
weight, age and gender can be used to determine whether a child is underweight,
healthy weight, overweight, or obese. Some children in Puebla have health problems
caused by their weight, so it is important to know your child’s weight. As you review
the results, remember:
● These results are for screening purposes only. Check with your pediatrician for
a full evaluation and referral.
● Please do not put your child on a weight loss/gain diet. Work with a doctor to
find the right strategies for your family.

If you have any questions, you can contact nutritionist Georgina Salgado Ramírez free
of charge, at phone number 2221 40 52 37 (Mondays and Wednesdays from 1 to 7 in
the afternoon, and Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays between 10 in the morning and
4 in the afternoon). At the same number, you can leave a message with your name
and number, and she will return your call. Alternatively, you can send her an email at:
geosalram11@gmail.com.

Sincerely,

Lic. Arturo Malpica Padierna
Responsable de Proyectos con Tecnología
Centro de Tecnología Educativa del Estado de Puebla

Basic Report
Card

Recently, (child’s name) height and weight were measured at school.

Height:

cm

Weight:

kg

According to this information, your child is (weight classification).

Your child is here

Condition	  
Underweight	  
Healthy weight	  
Overweight	  
Obese	  

Weight	  
A-AA	  
B-BB	  
C-CC	  
D-DD	  

You are invited to a class, “Practical Tips for Improving
Your Child’s Eating Habits and Physical Activity.”

The class is free. Choose the date and time that works best for you.
Wednesday, (date) at 8:15 am at (the school)
Friday, (date) at 8:15 am at (the school)

Risk Report Card

	  

Recently, (child’s name) height and weight were measured at school.

Height:

cm

Weight:

kg

According to this information, your child is (weight classification).

Obese/overweight [EITHER OBESE OR OVERWEIGHT SHOWS BUT
NOT BOTH] children are at higher risk of living shorter lives and
developing diseases such as diabetes, high blood pressure, heart
disease, asthma, and cancer.

Your child is here

Condition	  
Underweight	  
Healthy weight	  
Overweight	  
Obese	  

Weight	  
A-AA	  
B-BB	  
C-CC	  
D-DD	  

You are invited to a class, “Practical Tips for Improving
Your Child’s Eating Habits and Physical Activity.”

The class is free. Choose the date and time that works best for you.
Wednesday, (date) at 8:15 am at (the school)
Friday, (date) at 8:15 am at (the school)

Compare Report
Card
	  

Recently, (child’s name) height and weight were measured at school.

Height:

cm

Weight:

kg

According to this information, your child is (weight classification).
In your child’s class, out of () children,
() children are underweight.
() children are healthy weight.
() children are overweight.
() children are obese.

Your child is here

Condition	  
Underweight	  
Healthy weight	  
Overweight	  
Obese	  

Weight	  
A-AA	  
B-BB	  
C-CC	  
D-DD	  

You are invited to a class, “Practical Tips for Improving
Your Child’s Eating Habits and Physical Activity.”

The class is free. Choose the date and time that works best for you.
Wednesday, (date) at 8:15 am at (the school)
Friday, (date) at 8:15 am at (the school)

Control

You are invited to a class, “Practical Tips for Improving
Your Child’s Eating Habits and Physical Activity.”

The class is free. Choose the date and time that works best for you.
Wednesday, (date) at 8:15 am at (the school)
Friday, (date) at 8:15 am at (the school)

