NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE TWILIGHT ZONE:
OTC REGULATORY REGIMES AND MARKET QUALITY
Ulf Brüggemann
Aditya Kaul
Christian Leuz
Ingrid M. Werner
Working Paper 19358
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19358

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

We thank the following individuals for helping us with or providing data: Juan Alcacer; Burch
Kealey; Matthew Fuchs, Ed McCann and the OTC Markets Group; Frank Lovaglio and Standard
& Poor’s; Pedro Saffi; Michael Strauss and Mergent; Aysem Tkacik and NASDAQ. We also
thank two referees, the editor Itay Goldstein, Robert Bartlett, Chyhe Becker, John Cochrane,
Alixe Cormick, Holger Daske, Michael Erkens, Jennifer Marietta-Westberg, Maria Weigel, Josh
White as well as workshop participants at the University of Chicago, 2013 EAA Conference,
2014 EFA Conference, ETH Zürich, Goethe University Frankfurt, HEC Paris, Humboldt
University of Berlin, Securities and Exchange Commission, VfS-Annual Conference 2015 and
WHU for helpful discussions and comments. Samaar Haider, Maria Kamenetsky, Russell Ruch,
and Yingdi Wang provided excellent research assistance. Christian Leuz gratefully acknowledges
financial support by Chicago Booth’s Initiative on Global Markets and the Humboldt Research
Award. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2013 by Ulf Brüggemann, Aditya Kaul, Christian Leuz, and Ingrid M. Werner. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Twilight Zone: OTC Regulatory Regimes and Market Quality
Ulf Brüggemann, Aditya Kaul, Christian Leuz, and Ingrid M. Werner
NBER Working Paper No. 19358
August 2013, Revised October 2016
JEL No. G12,G14,G32,G33,K22,M13,M4,M41
ABSTRACT
We analyze a comprehensive sample of more than 10,000 U.S. OTC stocks. We provide much
needed descriptive evidence on this market and show that the OTC market is a large, diverse, and
dynamic trading environment with a rich set of regulatory and disclosure regimes, comprising
venue rules and state laws beyond SEC regulation. We also exploit the institutional richness of
the OTC market and analyze two key dimensions of market quality, liquidity and crash risk,
across firms and regulatory regimes. We find that OTC firms that are subject to stricter regulatory
regimes and disclosure requirements have higher market quality (higher liquidity and lower crash
risk). Our analysis points to an important trade-off in regulating the OTC market and protecting
investors: Lowering regulatory requirements (e.g., for disclosure) reduces the compliance burden
for smaller firms, but also reduces market quality.
Ulf Brüggemann
Wirtschaftswissenschaftliche Fakultät
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin
Unter den Linden 6, 10099 Berlin, Germany
u.bruggemann@hu-berlin.de
Aditya Kaul
Dept of Finance & Management Science
University of Alberta
2-32G Faculty of Business Building
Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2R6
CANADA
akaul@ualberta.ca

Christian Leuz
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637-1610
and NBER
cleuz@chicagobooth.edu
Ingrid M. Werner
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
werner@cob.osu.edu

1.

Introduction
Aside from its highly regulated traditional exchanges, the U.S. has a large OTC market in

which over 8,000 domestic stocks were publicly traded in 2010. For over 4,500 of these stocks, the
issuer is not an SEC registrant required to provide regular disclosure filings. OTC firms exempt
from federal securities laws are often referred to as “dark.” However, these firms are subject to
state corporate and state securities laws as well as trading venue-based rules requiring disclosures.
Thus, it may be more accurate to characterize the OTC market as a “twilight zone” with many
different regulatory regimes.
There is little research on this market and, in particular, on the relation between its many
regulatory regimes and market quality. The OTC market generally offers less investor protection
than the traditional exchanges.1 As such, it provides an opportunity to study the trade-off securities
regulators face between their desire to create a viable market for small growth firms and their
charter to ensure investor protection and market integrity. This trade-off also featured prominently
in the discussion about the JOBS Act in 2012.2 The Act intends to lower the regulatory burden on
firms when they access public capital markets, so as to spur the creation of “emerging growth
firms.” One of its key provisions is to loosen ownership limits for SEC registration, which will
increase the number of unregistered OTC securities without SEC disclosures. In light of this
debate, it is important to understand existing regulatory regimes in the OTC market and, in
particular, the roles that SEC registration and disclosure regulation play in shaping market quality.
1

2

Fraudulent and abusive practices are common in the OTC market. In 2011, state securities regulators conducted
over 6,000 investigations and took over 2,600 enforcement actions, resulting in prison sentences, fines or penalties
in excess of $290 million and more than $2.2 billion in investor restitution orders (NASAA, 2011). While not all
cases pertain to the OTC market, the largest category is fraud involving unregistered securities.
See, e.g., Coates’ (2011) testimony before Senate Subcommittee. There has also been substantial debate about the
regulatory burden facing smaller firms after the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. For an overview, see Coates and
Srinivasan (2014).

1

The purpose of this paper is twofold. First, it provides much needed descriptive evidence on
the broad cross-section of firms trading in different OTC market venues, for instance, with respect
to entry, survival, venue changes, reporting status and trading activity. Towards this end, we
compile and examine a comprehensive sample of stocks trading in the venues that comprise the
OTC market. Second, regarding the aforementioned trade-off, we analyze the effect of OTC
regulatory regimes on market quality. We focus on two key aspects of market quality: liquidity and
crash risk. Both are closely related to core objectives of securities regulation, which are to improve
the functioning of securities markets and to ensure market integrity and investor protection (e.g.,
Goshen and Parchomovsky, 2006; Mahoney, 2009). Liquidity provision is a primary purpose of
securities markets. But concerns about market fairness could result in lower investor participation
and impair liquidity (e.g., Guiso et al., 2008). Similarly, opacity and market manipulation increase
risks to investors, e.g., by making stocks more prone to crashes (Jin and Myers, 2006), which in turn
could hurt trust in market fairness and investor participation.
There are three venues in the OTC market: the Bulletin Board, the Pink Sheets and the Grey
Market. Bulletin Board firms have had to file with the SEC since the Eligibility Rule in 1999. The
other venues do not require SEC registration. However, until the JOBS Act, any publicly traded
firm with more than $10 million in assets and more than 500 record holders had to file with the
SEC.3 Thus, firms trading in the Pink Sheets or the Grey Market may be SEC filers and hence
provide regular disclosure. For SEC registrants, federal law preempts state regulation and hence
sets the relevant rules. For non-registrants, state corporate law and state securities law provide the
relevant rules for disclosure and registration. State corporate law, which depends on the state of
3

Rule 12g5-1, Securities and Exchange Act of 1934. Note that record holders are not beneficial shareholders. Many
shares are held in street name by financial institutions, in which case the latter is the holder of record.

2

incorporation, may stipulate that shareholders receive financial statements, or can obtain them on
request. State securities laws (also called “blue sky” laws) require registration, which in most states
amounts to a “merit review” of the issuer. State securities laws apply at the trade level, i.e., in every
state where a firm sells securities to the public, as well as in the home state of the issuers. There is
little research on the capital-market effects of state securities regulation.4
An important way in which firms can comply with state securities laws is to use the so-called
“manual exemption.” In 41 states and the District of Columbia, issuers are exempt from registration
and “blue-sky compliant,” if they appear in “a nationally recognized securities manual.” The
providers of manuals (e.g., Mergent, Standard & Poor’s) perform a basic review of documents
supplied by issuers, e.g., examine business description, corporate history and financial statements.
Manuals are published annually but frequent updates are available via print media and email. We
are not aware of any research on the effects of securities manual coverage on market quality.
In addition to federal and state regulation, there are venue-based regimes. Aside from the
Eligibility Rule for the Bulletin Board, the Pink Sheets market operator (now called OTC Markets
Group) introduced several tiers and information labels in 2007, differentiating firms for which
current, limited and no information is available. It also created a “Caveat Emptor” label to flag
firms with public interest or fraud concerns. All tier designations and labels are monitored by the
Pink Sheets, and revised as firms’ information status changes. Again, there is limited research on
venue-based regimes (e.g., Bushee and Leuz, 2005; Jiang et al., 2015).
Our sample consists of 10,583 domestic firms that trade in the OTC market from 2001 to 2010,

4

An exception is the study by Agrawal (2013) analyzing the link between investor protection and corporate policy
around the introduction of state securities regulation, which predates the SEC regime. State securities regulators
have been protecting investors from fraud and abusive sales practices since the passage of the first “blue sky” law
in Kansas in 1911 (e.g., Macey and Miller, 1991).

3

and are incorporated in the U.S., mostly in Delaware, Nevada, and Florida. The OTC market
consists primarily of micro-cap stocks, spanning a broad set of industries. The average market
value is about $52 million, but it is skewed by a few large firms with a capitalization exceeding $1
billion. Most firms have a market value below $20 million. The median share price is $1.01,
consistent with OTC firms being called “penny stocks.” About 17% of the sample firms enter the
OTC market because they delist from the traditional exchanges (“fallen angels”). But over 3,400
“new” firms appear in the OTC market between 2001 and 2010 without having been listed on an
exchange before. The latter finding is striking in light of the recent dearth of U.S. IPOs (e.g., Gao et
al., 2013; Doidge et al., 2015). However, less than 9% of the new OTC firms eventually trade up to
the traditional exchanges during our sample period.5 Even for these “rising stars,” the total return
over the sample period is often negative and on average merely 4% (annualized). Hence, our
analysis shows that the OTC market is not a breeding ground for growth firms that eventually
graduate to the traditional exchanges. At the same time, most OTC stocks survive for long periods
of time, even those delisted from the exchanges. The five-year survival rate is between 60% and
90%, and the median sample firm is quoted for 8.75 years. Thus, the OTC market is more than an
interim home for firms that are on their way out of the public markets.
The stock return for OTC firms over the sample period is negative for a majority of firms. At
the same time, average monthly volatility is more than twice as high as the volatility of NASDAQ
Small Cap stocks. In addition, a substantial fraction of OTC stocks exhibit episodes of extreme
returns over the sample period (e.g., returns above 100% or below -95%). These findings are
consistent with Ang et al. (2013) and Eraker and Ready (2015). In general, trading activity is much
5

One of these firms is NASDAQ, which traded on the Bulletin Board between 2002 and 2005. We describe the
NASDAQ case along with various other examples in Appendix 2. Trading up to the exchanges is most common
for banks, pharmaceuticals, biotech & health care firms, and oil & gas producers.

4

lower than on the traditional exchanges. On average, the proportion of trading days is 40% across
all firm-months in the OTC market (i.e., Bulletin Board, Pink Sheets and Grey Market) and, on days
with trading, the average daily volume is only around $37,000. But, as with other characteristics,
there is substantial heterogeneity in the cross-section. For example, about 10% of OTC stocks trade
almost every day, while a quarter of them have zero volume on 95% of trading days. While OTC
trading activity is clearly low, benchmarking against NASDAQ, we find that the average Small Cap
stock does not trade every day (83%) and has an average daily trading volume of about $163,000.
After this descriptive characterization of the OTC market, we analyze how OTC regulatory
regimes relate to market liquidity and crash risk, both in the cross-section and around regulatory
changes. An extensive body of theory links market liquidity to information asymmetry and adverse
selection in markets (e.g., Copeland and Galai, 1983; Glosten and Milgrom, 1985; Kyle, 1985;
Easley and O’Hara, 1987; Admati and Pfleiderer, 1988; Diamond and Verrecchia, 1991). Similarly,
information asymmetry between insiders and outsiders coupled with opacity about firm
fundamentals has been linked to negatively skewed returns and crash risk (Jin and Myers, 2006;
Hutton et al., 2009).6 Given the theoretical links, we expect disclosure regulation that enhances
transparency and reduces information asymmetries to increase liquidity and reduce crash risk.
We use principal components analysis to construct proxies for liquidity and crash risk based on
two variables for each measure. Given the low trading activity in the OTC market, we use the
proportion of zero-return days and share turnover as input variables for our liquidity proxy. For
crash risk, we follow Chen et al. (2001) and Hutton et al. (2009) by using the negative skewness of
returns and a binary indicator for a 95% or greater decline in the stock price. To validate these
6

Other mechanisms, such as short-sale constraints, can independently or in conjunction with opacity about
fundamentals contribute to negative skewness and crash risk (e.g., Hong and Stein, 2003). See also Campbell and
Hentschel (1992) and Kirschenheiter and Melumad (2002).

5

proxies, we provide evidence that our liquidity proxy is highly correlated with other commonly used
liquidity measures, and that our crash risk proxy increases when firms are subject to pump-anddump schemes.
Starting with trading venue regressions, we find lower market liquidity and higher crash risk in
the OTC market than on the traditional exchanges. Moreover, both market quality proxies change
monotonically when moving from the Bulletin Board to the Pink Sheets to the Grey Market. The
decline in liquidity and increase in crash risk are consistent with a ranking of these venues in terms
of their information environment. Even more directly related to disclosure regulation, we show that
OTC firms that have to file 10-Ks and 10-Qs with the SEC have higher market liquidity and lower
crash risk. These results hold with firm fixed effects and, additionally, propensity matched SEC
and non-SEC filers. Similarly, OTC firms that are covered in Mergent’s or Standard & Poor’s
securities manuals exhibit higher liquidity and lower crash risk, though the latter relation is not
robust to firm fixed effects. At a minimum, the results show that investors recognize differences in
the information regimes across OTC stocks and trading venues. To further tighten identification,
we exploit venue transitions, ticker changes tied to changes in SEC filing status, and differential
regulatory oversight for financial institutions in order to provide evidence that the results are likely
attributable to the venues, the SEC disclosure regime and manual inclusion, rather than endogeneity
stemming from unobserved heterogeneity, changes in firm fundamentals or reverse causality.
Next, we analyze the effects of differences in states’ blue sky laws. As state securities laws
generally rely on merit reviews by state regulators, the mechanism by which they affect markets is
less obvious than in the case of federal securities laws, which are based on a disclosure doctrine.
Firms’ registration filings with the state regulators are generally not easily accessible. Hence the
6

information contained in these filings is unlikely to directly contribute to an increase in market
liquidity or a decrease in opacity-induced crash risk. However, merit reviews by state securities
regulators could contribute indirectly by screening out firms for which adverse selection and
concerns about investor protection are more severe. Consistent with this notion, we find that market
liquidity is higher for firms located in states with tougher merit review regimes, although the results
for crash risk are statistically and economically insignificant. To increase our confidence that the
liquidity results are indeed driven by differences in state securities regulation, we show that the
results are stronger in states that do not allow manual publication to substitute for state registration
and merit review. We also exploit changes in firms’ headquarters and show that the results continue
to hold with firm fixed effects.
Turning to venue-based regulation, we analyze whether firms in higher Pink Sheets information
tiers exhibit higher market liquidity and lower crash risk, as disclosure theory would predict. Again
using firm fixed effects, we find that market liquidity (crash risk) increases (decreases)
monotonically from the lowest to the highest Pink Sheets tier. The Caveat Emptor label for stocks
with investor protection concerns is associated with lower liquidity and higher (future) crash risk.
To further tighten identification, we again exploit differential regulatory oversight for financial and
non-financial firms, and find that the results are present only for the less regulated non-financials.
This is consistent with the results being attributable to the Pink Sheets information tiers.
Furthermore, we exploit four regulatory changes in the Pink Sheets in order to perform a withinfirm, difference-in-differences analysis relative to the Bulletin Board. We show that market
liquidity (crash risk) increases (decreases) as the regulatory regime in the Pink Sheets becomes

7

tighter. Following the implementation of these regulatory changes, market quality in the Pink
Sheets has essentially caught up with that in the Bulletin Board.
Our paper makes several contributions to the literature. First, our study paints the most
complete picture of the U.S. OTC market to date. We create a novel dataset that allows us to make
distinctions within the OTC market in terms of trading venue, reporting status and regulatory
regimes. We provide extensive descriptive statistics on industry, location, state of incorporation,
market entry, survival, venue changes, and trading activity. Such descriptive evidence is important
considering how little is known about this market and its regulatory regimes.
Second, we examine federal-, state-, and venue-specific regulatory regimes in the OTC market
and provide evidence on the link between these regimes and market quality. The OTC market is
often viewed as dark and unregulated but in fact there is a thicket of regulatory regimes. We exploit
this institutional richness to show that market quality increases with stricter disclosure regulation
and regulatory oversight. As such, our analysis points to an important trade-off in regulating the
OTC market and protecting investors: While lowering regulatory requirements (e.g., for disclosure)
reduces the compliance burden for smaller firms, it also significantly reduces market liquidity and
increases crash risk for investors.
Two important papers, Ang et al. (2013) and Eraker and Ready (2015), also examine the OTC
market. Their analyses focus on asset pricing, stock returns, and investor preferences.7 Our study
adds to these studies by focusing on market quality and its link to previously unavailable trading
venue and regulatory distinctions for a much broader cross-section of firms. We provide a novel
crash risk analysis and our liquidity analysis contributes to a more nuanced understanding of
7

There are a few other OTC market studies (Luft et al., 2001; Luft and Levine, 2004; Bushee and Leuz, 2005;
Marosi and Massoud, 2007; Leuz et al., 2008; Bollen and Christie, 2009; Jiang et al., 2015). These studies have
specific or smaller OTC samples, cover specific events and/or do not make venue and reporting status distinctions.

8

investor behavior in the OTC market, suggesting that investors recognize regulatory and
information differences across the OTC regimes and trade (or abstain from trading) accordingly.
Our paper is also related to the international literature on legal institutions, investor protection
and equity market development, starting with La Porta et al. (1997, 1998). Work in this literature
demonstrates that disclosure requirements exhibit significant associations with other institutional
factors (e.g., investor protection, rule of law) and with various market outcomes (e.g., cost of
capital, size of the equity market, IPO activity, and market liquidity).8 However, the focus is on
countries’ main equity markets, which have extensive disclosure requirements and are populated by
much larger firms than those in our sample. Our findings from a much more opaque market are
therefore of relevance to the regulatory regimes of countries’ markets for younger firms.
Lastly, we provide novel evidence on institutions in the OTC market, including state merit
reviews, manual exemptions, manual publications as well as Pink Sheets information tiers. We
know very little about these institutions, yet they govern trading for over 7,500 U.S. publicly traded
stocks that are not covered by federal securities laws at some point during our sample period.
2.

Regulatory regimes in the OTC market
In this section, we introduce the regulatory regimes for quoting and trading securities in the

OTC market during the sample period (see Figure 1 and Appendix 1 for further institutional detail).
2.1

OTC trading venues: Bulletin Board, Pink Sheets and Grey Market
The Penny Stock Act of 1990 mandated that the SEC create an electronic system for the OTC

market that displays quotes and last-sale information. The Bulletin Board (BB) opened in June

8

See e.g., Hail and Leuz (2006), La Porta et al. (2006), Lang et al. (2012). See also Karolyi (2015) for an overview.
As these studies rely mostly on cross-country variation, the identification of particular institutional factors (e.g.,
the disclosure regime) is limited, and our results could not be inferred from these papers.

9

1990 and is currently operated and regulated by FINRA. It is an electronic interdealer quotation
system that transmits real-time quotes, trade prices and volume information to subscribing FINRA
market makers. The BB does not have any minimum size or corporate governance requirements. A
series of changes were made to the BB during the 1990s, culminating in the 1999 Eligibility Rule
(Bushee and Leuz, 2005). This rule states that issuers of securities traded on the BB have to file
current financial information with the SEC or other regulatory authorities (banking or insurance).
Therefore, in our sample, all BB firms provide disclosures to the SEC or other regulators.
The second venue in the OTC market is widely known as the Pink Sheets, which are operated
by the OTC Markets Group.9 The Pink Sheets compete with the BB by providing an electronic
real-time quotation and execution system for OTC securities. Virtually all BB securities are now
also quoted and traded on the OTC Markets Group’s platform. 10 In addition, the Pink Sheets
provide an electronic real-time quotation and execution system for ineligible firms that do not file
regularly with the SEC and hence cannot be quoted on the BB by virtue of the Eligibility Rule.
In August 2007, the Pink Sheets introduced a tier system to indicate the levels of financial
disclosure for companies quoted on its platform. This system was revised in 2010. It distinguishes
OTCQB and OTCQX firms, which are subject to SEC or regulatory reporting requirements (and
more), from OTC Pink firms, which have no SEC or equivalent reporting requirements. Firms in
the latter category are further divided into three tiers, Pink Current, Pink Limited and Pink No
Information, based on the level and timeliness of the information they provide to investors (see
Appendix 1.1 for more details). The Pink Sheets also apply a Caveat Emptor label and block quotes
9

10

The market was first established in 1913 as the National Quotation Bureau (NQB). For decades, the NQB reported
stock quotations via the paper-based Pink Sheets. The NQB changed its name to Pink Sheets LLC in 2000, to Pink
OTC Markets in 2008, and adopted its current name, OTC Markets Group, in 2010. We use the term “Pink Sheets”
as the market went by this name for most of our sample period and “Pink” is still used for one market segment.
By October 2010, our dataset contains only eight BB securities that are not also quoted in the Pink Sheets.

10

on its website when there are investor protection concerns about a company.
Finally, the Grey Market contains firms that are not quoted in any market, i.e., no bid and ask
prices are available. However, trades in Grey Markets stocks may occur and, if so, are reported by
broker-dealers to their Self-Regulatory Organization (SRO).
2.2

OTC quoting and trading
In order to quote and trade non-reporting OTC securities, broker-dealers have to rely on Rule

15c2-11 of the 1934 Exchange Act. This rule prescribes information review and maintenance
requirements for broker-dealer firms that publish quotations. Specifically, the rule prohibits a
broker-dealer from quoting unless it has obtained and reviewed current information about the issuer
that the broker-dealer believes is accurate and obtained from a reliable source.
Such information can be a prospectus for a SEC registered security; an offering circular, the
most recent annual report as well as any quarterly report that has been filed after the annual report.
Moreover, the broker-dealer shall keep this information “reasonably” current, and make this
information “reasonably” available to a potential investor upon request. A broker-dealer may
initiate or resume quotations for an OTC security by filing Form 211 with FINRA.11 Rule 15c2-11
also includes a piggy-back exemption stating that a broker-dealer may begin quoting a security
without filing Form 211, provided another dealer has been publishing quotations for the security
with some frequency over the last 30 days. Hence, only one broker-dealer needs to file Form 211
for a particular security. Importantly, as broker-dealers can subsequently piggy-back on their own
quotations, non-reporting OTC firms do not have to provide regular disclosures to broker-dealers.

11

The form certifies that the broker-dealer has satisfied all applicable requirements of SEC Rule 15c2-11 and the
filing and information requirements of NASD Rule 6640. Rule 15c2-11 also contains an exception for quotations
representing a customer’s unsolicited orders or indications of interest, provided there are adequate records.

11

2.3

OTC market regulation: State registration and manual exemption
The Securities Act of 1933 requires that securities offered or sold to the public in the U.S. are

registered with the SEC. Once a firm’s Securities Act registration is effective, the Exchange Act of
1934 requires the firm to file reports with the SEC on a continuing basis unless the firm falls below
certain size and ownership thresholds.12
However, issuers can avoid registering securities with the SEC by issuing securities under one
of several exemptions for limited circulation offerings.13 As long as an issuer using one of these
exemptions does not surpass the Exchange Act size and ownership thresholds, it does not have to
file reports with the SEC. These firms still face state laws and venue-based rules regulating
examinations of issuers, financial reporting and secondary trading. This section briefly describes
state securities laws (also called blue sky laws). Appendix 1.2 provides further details.
State securities laws require registration of offers, sales of securities and of brokers and
investment advisors. Most states also assign liability for securities fraud. Historically, states
examined applications for registration, i.e., conducted merit reviews, to determine whether or not to
allow securities to be sold in the state. However, federal regulation exempts so called “federally
covered securities,” i.e., stocks of SEC registrants that are listed on national exchanges, from merit
reviews. As a result, merit reviews apply primarily to non-reporting OTC firms’ securities.
To register with the state, applicants have to provide information to the state regulator similar
to what is required for registration under the 1933 Act. State securities registrations are usually

12

13

A firm is exempt from SEC registration if it has fewer than 300 holders of record, or it has fewer than 500
shareholders (of record) and less than $10 million in total assets for each of its last three fiscal years. The JOBS
Act of 2012, which became effective after our sample period, raises the threshold to 2000 record holders and
excludes employees and investors that obtain shares via crowd-funding from the definition.
Examples are Rule 144A; Regulation S; the intrastate offering exemption (Section 3(a)(11)); Regulation A
(Section 3(b)); Regulation D (Rule 504, 505, and 506) and the accredited investor exemption.

12

valid for one year only, and many states require the issuer to update the offering information
(prospectus including financial statements) periodically. However, the information filed with the
state securities regulator is used in the merit review, but typically not made publicly available in the
way SEC filings are made available on EDGAR.14 Anecdotal evidence suggests that it is difficult to
obtain registration filings even by visiting the state securities regulators’ offices in person. In fact,
less than half the states require that investors be furnished with a prospectus; even fewer
jurisdictions specify that the distributed prospectus should include recent financial statements.
As long as the state securities registration is effective, secondary trading of the security is
allowed, provided the trades involve only residents of states where the security is registered. In
other words, if a trade involves investors from two states, the security has to be registered in both
states for the trade to be legal. In addition, issuers are typically required to register in the state of
their headquarters (home-state registration).

Issuers have to renew their state securities

registration(s) on a regular basis for secondary trading to continue.
The requirement to maintain effective registrations in multiple states is clearly a cumbersome
way to support secondary trading. Thus, issuers may seek to qualify for one of the exemptions to
state securities registration (see also Appendix 1.2). Perhaps the most effective way for a firm to
obtain an exemption from registering the securities in each state where investors may reside is to be
included in a nationally recognized securities manual (Manual Exemption). The providers of
manuals perform a basic review of a company’s business and its financial statements, and publish
this information in a standardized form. The two most prominent manuals are Mergent (previously
Moody’s) Manual and Standard & Poor’s Corporation Records, and 42 jurisdictions explicitly
14

In addition, state corporation laws can require firms to provide financial statements to its owners on a regular basis
or upon request. However, these laws apply at the level of the record holder and hence, to our understanding, do
not lead to disclosure to beneficial owners or prospective shareholders. See Appendix 1.3 for more details.

13

recognize these two manuals when granting exemption from state securities registration.
3.

Data and sample
Our sample is based by two data sources: a proprietary dataset provided by NASDAQ and

Datastream. The NASDAQ dataset includes the venue history of all equity securities that traded in
the OTC market or the NASDAQ Small Cap Market (SCM) at some point during the period
January 2001 through October 2010.15 Datastream provides capital market data (e.g., stock prices
and returns, market values, trading volume) and industry information for a large set of equity
securities around the world. 16 We match the NASDAQ venue history and Datastream via the
security identifier CUSIP and/or the company name resulting in an initial sample of 16,965 firms.
We eliminate firms that are incorporated outside the United States or file Form 20-F with the SEC.
Furthermore, we exclude REITs and firms whose securities are very rarely traded (see Table 1,
Panel A, for details). Our final sample consists of 10,803 firms.
Since the NASDAQ venue history distinguishes only between the Bulletin Board (BB) and all
other segments (NBB) within the OTC market, we collect information on specific OTC segments
using two additional proprietary datasets provided by the OTC Markets Group. The first dataset
(PS venue history) allows us to identify firms that are dually quoted on the BB and Pink Sheets and
to distinguish Grey Market and Pink Sheets firms within the NBB. However, the PS venue history
covers a shorter period (February 2003 to October 2010) and includes fewer firms during this period
than the NASDAQ venue history (about 60% of BB/NBB). The second dataset (PS tier history)
enables us to disaggregate the NBB into several information tiers (Pink Current Information, Pink
15
16

The NASDAQ dataset comprises the full venue history of each security it covers. This feature enables us to
identify firms that trade up to (“rising stars”) or down from (“fallen angels”) the traditional exchanges.
Datastream also offers information on trading venues. However, the item is static and, thus, does not allow us to
identify a venue history, including potential switches between venues.

14

Limited Information and Pink No Information) and to identify firms flagged as Caveat Emptor. The
PS tier history also covers a shorter time period (October 2007 to October 2010) and includes only a
subset of firms in the NASDAQ venue history (about 50% of NBB).
We use directEDGAR to retrieve 10-K and 10-Q filings by our sample firms during the sample
period in order to develop a precise SEC filing history for each firm. We also use directEDGAR to
identify the state of headquarters (SoHqt) and the state of incorporation (SoInc) for SEC filers. For
non-filing firms, we gather SoHqt/SoInc details from a proprietary NASDAQ dataset that includes
issuer profiles for most of the firms in our sample. For non-filing firms that are not covered by the
NASDAQ issuer profiles, we attempt to gather SoHqt/SoInc information manually (e.g., from the
website of the OTC Markets Group).17 Finally, we use Mergent’s Manuals (yearly company lists
from 2001 to 2010) as well as Standard & Poor’s Corporation Records (half-yearly company lists
from 2003 to 2010) to identify firms that are covered in the two key securities manuals.
Our data collection process results in a dataset that comprises 955,716 firm-month observations
over the period January 2001 through October 2010.18
4.

Descriptive analysis

4.1.

Sample groups
Table 1, Panel B, classifies our sample into various groups with similar venue histories. 10,583

firms trade in the OTC market at some point. The remaining 220 firms trade in NASDAQ’s small
cap segment throughout; they serve as a benchmark (NASDAQ SCM). The vast majority (77%) of
the OTC sample firms remain in the OTC market throughout, either from January 2001 onwards (In
17
18

We were not able to identify SoHqt (SoInc) information through directEDGAR, the NASDAQ issuer profiles or
manual collection for 374 or 3.5% (254 or 2.4%) of our sample firms.
However, most of the analyses are based on fewer observations due to missing information or sample filters. We
truncate all capital market variables at the top and bottom 1% unless the variable is naturally bounded or logged.

15

OTC only (start in 2001): 5,016 firms) or as new firms that enter the sample after January 2001
(New firms (remain in OTC): 3,134 firms). 1,787 firms (17%) trade down from the traditional
exchanges to the OTC market (Fallen angels (from exchange)). Only 646 firms (6%) trade up from
the OTC market to the traditional exchanges (Rising stars (start in 2001): 370 firms; Rising stars
(new firms): 276 firms). Untabulated statistics show that the number of “new” firms that enter the
OTC market each year without any prior listing is between 300 and 500 for most of the sample
period, declining to about 100 after the financial crisis in 2008. This evidence on new firms is in
contrast to the drop in IPOs on traditional U.S. exchanges starting in the early 2000s (e.g., Gao et
al., 2013; Doidge et al., 2015).
Table 1, Panel C, shows that 78% of the OTC sample (8,307 of 10,583 firms) files 10-Ks and
10-Qs with the SEC at some point during the sample period. The column Fraction SEC filing while
in OTC shows that, while many Fallen angels tend to stop filing with the SEC after trading down to
the OTC market (fraction of SEC filings: 43%), the vast majority of Rising stars already register
with the SEC before trading up to the exchange (fraction SEC filing: more than 85%). Half of the
OTC sample (5,246 firms) is included in securities manuals in at least one year. While in the OTC,
Fallen angels appear in securities manuals relatively more often than any other sample group. Only
2,126 firms (20%) are completely dark over the entire sample period, i.e., they never file with the
SEC and never appear in the two securities manuals. Since trading venues outside the NBB require
SEC filings, firms that are classified as Rising stars or Fallen angels cannot be completely dark.
In the Internet Appendix, we break down each sample group by industry, state of headquarters
and state of incorporation (see section IA.1). Financial firms represent the largest group (3,242
firms or 31% of the OTC sample). Firms from industries that face high fundamental uncertainty
16

(e.g., information technology) are relatively frequent in the Rising stars and Fallen angels groups.
While almost 60% of the OTC firms are incorporated in Delaware or Nevada, their headquarters
tend to cluster in larger states (e.g., California, Florida, New York and Texas). In fact, 74% of the
OTC firms choose to incorporate in a state that is different from their state of headquarters.
In Appendix 2, we provide an example of a typical firm in each of the OTC sample groups,
giving details on its main business, corporate evolution, trading and reporting history.
4.2.

Survival statistics and trading venue transitions
Table 2 presents descriptive statistics on firm entries to and exits from the OTC market and our

sample (Panel A), venue transitions (Panel B) and stock price crashes (Panel C). Panel A shows
that 66% (71%) of the OTC firms are part of the sample at the beginning (end) of the sample period
in January 2001 (October 2010). This means that 34% of the OTC firms enter the sample later,
either as new firms or fallen angles, while 29% are removed from the OTC market prior to the end
of the sample period. As expected, the attrition rate is relatively low among new OTC firms. For
example, while only 14% in the New firms (remain in OTC) category fail to survive until the end of
the sample period, this proportion is more than twice as high (at 34%) in the In OTC only (start in
2001) category. The Fallen angels (from exchange) category experiences the highest attrition rate
(46%), which is not surprising given that these firms often delist from the exchanges due to
financial difficulties (see also Harris et al., 2008; Macey et al., 2008).
In Panel B, we track trading venue changes for the sample firms over three different five-year
windows starting in June 2001, June 2003 and June 2005, respectively. Very few NBB firms trade
up to the BB or the traditional exchanges. For example, of the 3,788 firms on the NBB as of June
2003, only 7% (1%) are trading on the BB (on a traditional exchange) in June 2008; 76% of the
17

firms continue to trade on the NBB, while 15% have been removed from the OTC market. BB
firms are also unlikely to trade up. For example, of 2,688 BB firms as of June 2005, only 6% trade
on a traditional exchange in June 2010, with 42% still trading on the BB, 36% demoted to the NBB,
and 16% having exited the OTC market. Taken together, this evidence suggests that venue changes
in the OTC market are not uncommon but typically involve transitions to lower ranked venues.
Panel B shows that the vast majority of the OTC firms “survive” for more than five years, in
that they continue to be quoted. However, it is possible that firms crash and essentially die, yet
continue to trade as shells. To explore this possibility, Panel C tracks the incidence of what we
label a Crash over the same five-year windows.19 Firms are flagged as having crashed if they
experience (i) a cumulative monthly return of -95% at some point during the five-year window and
(ii) subsequently have a stock price below 0.01 USD for at least six months. Depending on the time
period, between 12% and 27% of NBB firms experience such a Crash in the subsequent five years.
The proportion of crashes is slightly lower for BB firms (between 10% and 17%). Thus, even with
this stricter definition of survival, the majority of OTC firms survive for more than five years.
4.3.

Market-based firm characteristics and trading activity
We present descriptive statistics for a variety of market-based firm characteristics in the

Internet Appendix (see section IA.2). The average (median) company in the OTC sample has a
market value of about $52 million ($17 million) and a stock price of $6.81 ($1.01). While firms in
the Rising stars groups tend to be larger (median market cap of more than $100 million), most firms
that start and remain in the OTC market have fairly low market values (median of about $7 million).
The stock performance of firms in the OTC market is negative on average (over the entire sample
19

Panel C analyzes sample firms that are not flagged as having crashed at the beginning of the tracking period. The
number of firms in Panel C is therefore lower than in Panel B.

18

period) but varies considerably across sample groups (e.g., Fallen angels vs. Rising stars). In
addition, each sample group contains firms with positive and sometimes extremely high stock
returns (see also Figure 3).20 The volatility of monthly stock returns in the OTC sample is very high
(e.g., a median of 37% per month versus 12% for benchmark firms on NASDAQ SCM). In
summary, OTC firms tend to be small, have low stock prices (consistent with the penny stocks
label), and lottery-like payoffs, that is, negative average but sometimes extremely positive stock
returns and high return volatility. There is substantial variation in these characteristics, both within
and across OTC sample groups.
Section IA.3 in the Internet Appendix provides statistics on trading activity by trading venue.
In contrast to the statistics discussed thus far, we perform this analysis at the firm-month level (and
not at the firm level). Across all firm-months in the OTC market (i.e., BB and NBB), the mean
(median) proportion of trading days is about 40% (29%). On days with trading activity, the mean
(median) daily trading volume is about $37,000 ($2,500). There is again considerable variation,
with 10% of OTC stocks being traded almost every day and others hardly at all.
4.4.

Market quality proxies
To examine how regulatory regimes in the OTC market related to market quality, we focus on

two characteristics of market quality: liquidity and crash risk. We use two variables to measure
each characteristic and then combine them into two summary proxies.
For the liquidity proxy, we use the proportion of zero return days as proposed by Lesmond et
al. (1999) and share turnover following Ibbotson et al. (2012) as input variables due to the low
levels of trading activity in the OTC market. The proportion of zero return days is the fraction of
20

The statistics in Table IA.2 are based on firm-level log returns, whereas Figure 3 shows the distribution of discrete
returns at the firm-year level.

19

trading days in a given month with zero returns. Share turnover is the average number of shares
traded per day divided by the average number of shares outstanding in a given month. The liquidity
proxy is the first principal component of these two variables, both measured over the current month
(t). Higher (less negative) values of this proxy indicate greater market liquidity. In section IA.4 of
the Internet Appendix, we validate our liquidity proxy by showing that it is highly correlated with
two other liquidity measures that are commonly used in the literature (i.e., price impact and bid-ask
spread) but not as frequently available for our sample. We also check that differences in free float
do not unduly influence the measurement of share turnover.
For the (future) crash risk proxy, we follow Chen et al. (2001) and Hutton et al. (2009) by using
the negative skewness of returns and a dummy variable capturing large negative returns as input
variables. The negative skewness of returns is the negative coefficient of skewness, i.e., the
negative of the third moment of daily returns divided by the standard deviation of daily returns
raised to the third power. The dummy variable indicates a cumulative return below -95%.21 The
crash risk proxy is the first principal component of these two variables, both measured over rolling
three-month windows that include the current month and two subsequent months (t to t+2). Higher
values of this proxy imply higher future crash risk. We also validate this proxy by providing
evidence that it increases significantly when OTC firms are subject to pump-and-dump schemes
(see section IA.4 in the Internet Appendix).
Table 3 reports descriptive statistics on both proxies and their input variables by trading venue.
These statistics are computed using pooled data at the firm-month level. Liquidity (crash risk) tends
to be higher (lower) in venues with stricter regulatory and disclosure regimes. For instance, the
21

We compute the input variables of the crash risk proxy based on log returns because discrete returns exhibit
extreme outliers (see Figure 3). The use of log returns is also consistent with Chen et al. (2001).

20

median values of both proxies for the BB are between those for the Grey Market and the NASDAQ
Small Cap market. This association between the strength of OTC market regimes and market
quality is analyzed in the remainder of the paper.
5.

Regression analysis of market quality

5.1.

Trading venues
In this section, we use multiple regressions to test whether market quality varies systematically

across OTC trading venues. We hypothesize that market quality increases with the strength of the
regulatory and information regime of the trading venue (see Figure 2), and expect market quality to
be the highest for the traditional stock exchanges and lowest for the Grey Market. Table 4 reports
the results. The analyses are based on either the full sample as described in Table 1 (NASDAQ
venue history; January 2001 to October 2010) or a subsample based on the PS venue history
(February 2003 to October 2010), for which we can separate Pink Sheets and Grey Market firms
within the NBB. All regressions are estimated at the firm-month level, and include year-month and
either industry or firm fixed effects.
The key variables in these regressions are the trading venue indicators: Pink Sheets, BB, SCM
and Exchange. The omitted categories capture the least regulated trading venues (NBB firms when
using the full sample or firms trading solely on the Grey Market when using the PS venue history).
We include lagged Log(Market value) and lagged Return volatility as control variables in the
market liquidity regressions. For the crash risk regressions, we follow Chen et al. (2001) and
include lagged Log(Market value), lagged Return volatility, lagged Share turnover and lagged
Cumulative return as controls. In addition, all regressions include price-level dummy variables that

21

indicate whether the lagged stock price is below $0.01, $0.10 or $1.00, respectively. The t-statistics
in these and all subsequent regression models are based on standard errors clustered by firm.
To address potential concerns about reverse causality, we impose sample filters eliminating
observations shortly before trading venue transitions. Specifically, for the liquidity regressions, we
exclude the month in which firms change trading venues. For the crash risk regressions, we impose
a stricter filter to account for the longer estimation window of the crash risk proxy (i.e., we exclude
the month of, and the six months before, venue changes).
Table 4, Panel A, presents the analysis for the liquidity proxy. The estimated coefficients on
the trading venue indicators are positive and highly significant in all specifications. Thus, the
omitted categories (NBB firms and Grey Market firms, respectively) contain the least liquid stocks.
Furthermore, the coefficient estimates increase monotonically as the venues’ information regimes
become stronger, i.e., they are lowest for Pink Sheets, larger for BB and largest for SCM and
Exchange. The magnitudes of the coefficients are also economically meaningful. For example, the
coefficient estimate on BB (about 0.24) in the full sample regressions corresponds to more than onethird of the standard deviation of the liquidity proxy of 0.6895 (see Table 3). The results are similar
when we include firm instead of industry fixed effects, mitigating concerns about omitted variables
and suggesting that unobserved firm-level heterogeneity has a limited effect on the association
between trading venue and market liquidity.

The coefficients on the control variables are

significant and have the expected signs.
Table 4, Panel B, presents the analysis for crash risk. The venue coefficients are again highly
significant with the expected signs and relative magnitudes in all specifications. That is, crash risk
decreases as the information regime of the trading venue strengthens, after controlling for market
22

value, return volatility, stock performance, and share turnover. The results are similar when using
firm instead of industry fixed effects, again mitigating concerns about omitted variables. The
positive coefficients on the control variables are broadly consistent with Chen et al. (2001).
To further tighten identification, we study the monthly changes in market quality in a short
window from 6 months before through 6 months after the date of a firm’s transition from one
trading venue to another. As this analysis requires a market quality variable that can be measured
over short intervals, we focus on liquidity and map out the liquidity response by estimating a
separate coefficient for each month in event time, while including year-month and transition fixed
effects. The results are reported in the Internet Appendix (see section IA.5). We find that market
liquidity increases (declines) significantly right around the transition month when firms move to a
trading venue with a stronger (weaker) information regime. The effect is fairly sharp and there is
little evidence of the pre-transition trends in liquidity we would have expected to see if there was
reverse causality. This supplementary analysis supports the interpretation that informational and
regulatory differences across trading venues drive the results in Table 4. The subsequent analyses
dig deeper into the associated regulatory regimes.
5.2.

SEC filings and securities manuals
Next, we examine the relation between firms’ disclosure status and market quality, while

controlling for venue differences. Specifically, we analyze SEC filings and a firm’s inclusion in
two prominent securities manuals (Mergent’s Manuals and S&P Corporation Records). Both types
of disclosure provide basic but important financial information to investors that otherwise is not
readily available (see section 2). Table 5 reports the regression results.

23

The analyses are based on the NASDAQ venue history and include observations from all
venues or from the NBB only (i.e., Pink Sheets and Grey Market). All regressions are estimated at
the firm-month level and include year-month and either industry or firm fixed effects. The key
variables of interest in these regressions are the dummy variables SEC and Manual. SEC is equal to
one for firms that provide 10-Ks and 10-Qs to the SEC, and zero otherwise. All firms outside the
NBB are SEC registrants by definition, that is, SEC equals zero only for those firms in the Pink
Sheets or the Grey Market that do not file with the SEC. Manual is equal to one for firms that are
included in either Mergent’s Manual or the Standard & Poor’s Corporation Records in a given year,
and zero otherwise. In addition, and consistent with the analyses in the previous section, we include
trading venue indicators, lagged control variables and price-level controls.

As in the venue

regressions, we eliminate the month when disclosure changes for the liquidity regressions and the
preceding six months for the crash risk regressions.
We estimate regressions based on the full sample, but also provide results for a propensitymatched sample to mitigate concerns that the results are driven by changes in (observable) firm
characteristics, rather than disclosure regime changes. We perform the matching at the half-year
level without replacement and match on Manual (SEC), respectively, using SEC (Manual), lagged
market value, lagged return volatility and lagged stock price, as well as industry, state of
headquarters and half-year indicators.
In Table 5, Panel A, we present results for liquidity. The estimated coefficients on SEC and
Manual are positive and statistically significant in all specifications, including industry and firm
fixed effects. The latter specifications control for any time-invariant heterogeneity across firms. In
the propensity-matched sample, we also control for time-varying differences in observable firm
24

characteristics and still find significant, albeit slightly smaller, coefficients. The results indicate that
firms that file with their financial statements with the SEC and/or are included in at least one of the
securities manuals exhibit higher market liquidity.
In Table 5, Panel B, we present results for crash risk. The coefficient estimate on SEC is
negative and statistically significant in all specifications, indicating that firms filing with the SEC
exhibit lower crash risk. The results tend to become stronger when including firm instead of
industry fixed effects and when using a propensity matched sample. Manual inclusion is also
associated with significantly lower crash risk in most specifications. However, this association
becomes insignificant when we include firm fixed effects.
In the Internet Appendix, we provide several analyses to tighten identification and corroborate
the interpretation that the aforementioned results are attributable to SEC filings and manual
inclusion. First, we exploit the fact that the Bulletin Board (BB) adds an “E” suffix to a firm’s
ticker to flag to the market that the firm is delinquent in its SEC reporting. Hence, the ticker suffix
is a timely indicator of a firm’s reporting status tied only to SEC reporting. In section IA.6, we
show that firms that are flagged as being delinquent in their SEC reporting experience an immediate
drop in liquidity as well as an immediate increase in future crash risk. These effects are stronger for
firms that never return to SEC compliance and weaker for firms that are only temporarily noncompliant in their SEC reporting, precisely as one would expect if SEC reporting drives the
deterioration in market quality. Second, we exploit the fact that banks and insurance companies are
required to provide disclosures to their respective regulators and are subject to separate oversight.
We therefore expect SEC filings and manual inclusion to have smaller market quality effects for
financial firms. Our results reported in section IA.7 are in line with this expectation. Finally, in
25

section IA.11, we show that the coefficients on SEC and Manual are robust to more extensive fixed
effects structures, further mitigating concerns about omitted variables or unobserved shocks. In
summary, the analysis in this section shows that OTC market quality is higher when firms provide
disclosures through SEC filings and securities manuals.
5.3.

State securities laws
In this section, we examine whether observed market quality reflects differences in the strength

of states’ securities (or blue sky) laws. In contrast to federal securities laws, state securities laws
generally rely on merit reviews instead of a disclosure doctrine. We therefore expect state securities
regulation to have a more indirect effect on market quality, e.g., by screening out firms with
investor protection concerns or by encouraging firms to satisfy blue sky laws via the manual
exemption and hence manual disclosure. However, blue sky laws apply at the trade level or in a
firm’s state of headquarters. Hence, we assign state securities laws according to a firm’s state of
headquarters because most states require home-state registration and trades are often likely to
involve buyers and sellers in the home state. We then test whether firms headquartered in states
with tougher merit reviews enjoy higher market liquidity and lower crash risk.
The analyses are based on the NASDAQ venue history and include only observations from the
OTC market (BB and NBB) because firms traded on traditional exchanges are exempt from state
merit reviews. All regressions are estimated at the firm-month level and include year-month and
industry fixed effects. The key variable of interest in these regressions is Merit review, which is an
average of three scores for the strictness of state merit reviews.22 In a second specification, we

22

We combine scores from three sources: (1) Nancy Fallon-Houle (www.nfhlaw.com), a law firm that specializes in
blue sky laws and tabulates merit review for Regulation A filings on a scale from 0 to 3; (2) Wolters Kluwer Tax
& Accounting’s CCH Intelliconnect ranks merit reviews for S-33 filings participating in the North American

26

estimate separate coefficients on Merit review for states with and without a manual exemption.
This model allows us to examine whether merit reviews matter more in states that do not offer a
manual exemption. We also include a dummy variable SoInc ≠ SoHqt that is equal to one when a
firm’s state of headquarters is not the same as its state of incorporation, and zero otherwise. Since
firms that incorporate outside their home state are probably different (e.g., more sophisticated) than
firms that do not, this control variable is intended to capture unobserved firm characteristics (see
also Litvak, 2011). We include indicators for SEC filings and manual inclusion as well as the same
control variables for firm characteristics as before.
Table 6 reports the results. Starting with liquidity, we find a significantly positive coefficient
for Merit review. Thus, firms headquartered in states with tougher merit review laws have more
liquid stocks. The second column shows that the estimated coefficient on Merit review is larger in
magnitude for firms from states without the manual exemption. This result lines up nicely with the
role of manual exemptions in state securities laws.

Turning to crash risk, we find that the

coefficient estimates on Merit review are insignificant and close to zero in both specifications.
In the Internet Appendix, we provide results based on the same regressions using firm fixed
effects (see section IA.8). In this analysis, the coefficients on Merit review are identified by firms
that move their headquarters to states that differ in the strictness of their merit reviews. We find
that the results for liquidity become even stronger with firm fixed effects, but the relevant
coefficients remain insignificant in the crash risk regressions. Thus, while the results indicate a

Securities Administrators Association’s Coordinated Equity Review Program on a scale from 0 to 3; and (3) the
Small Business Guide codes SCOR merit reviews on a scale from 0 to 3. In the empirical analysis, we use the
simple average of these three scores as a measure of the strictness of merit reviews. Our results are robust to
replacing the average with individual indicators for the strictness of merit reviews.

27

positive relation between the strictness of state merit reviews and liquidity, they also suggest that
state merit reviews could be ineffective in terms of screening out securities with higher crash risk.
5.4.

Pink Sheets information tiers and Caveat Emptor label
In August 2007, the Pink Sheets introduced tiers and labels differentiating firms by information

status as well as flagging firms with a public interest or investor protection concern. 23 These
designations are monitored by the Pink Sheets and modified when disclosures change. In this
section, we examine whether market quality varies across these tiers and information labels.24 We
expect market quality to increase for tiers and labels indicating a higher information status.
The analyses are based on the PS tier history spanning the period October 2007 to October
2010, and include observations solely from the NBB (i.e., Pink Sheets and Grey Market). All
regressions are estimated at the firm-month level and include year-month and either industry or firm
fixed effects. We examine effects associated with the information regimes by adding dummy
variables for firms in the Pink No Info, Pink Limited Info and Pink Current Info tiers, with Grey
Market firms being the omitted category. We also include a dummy variable indicating a Caveat
Emptor flag. Furthermore, we add an indicator for SEC filings, an indicator for manual inclusion
and the same set of controls as in the previous analyses (except that we do not need venue indicators
given the sample restriction). We drop the months in which a firm’s information status changes to
mitigate reverse causality concerns.

23
24

See section 2 and Appendix 1.1 for more details.
Jiang et al. (2015) examine whether the new labels attract investor attention and affect prices and liquidity. Their
analysis is based on three-month windows before and after the introduction of the labels. They find that liquidity
improves for Pink Current Information firms and deteriorates for Pink No Information firms. They also find a
positive association between announcement abnormal returns and subsequent liquidity changes. Their analysis
discards Caveat Emptor firms. Litvak (2009) examines prices around the announcement of the initiative and finds
that firms subsequently classified as low information providers have negative abnormal returns, suggesting that
investors have some ability to predict how firms will be classified.

28

Table 7 reports the results. The first set of columns shows that liquidity is positively associated
with the Pink Sheet information tiers. Including firm fixed effects, the estimated coefficients
suggest that liquidity decreases monotonically from stocks in the Pink Current Info tier, to stocks in
the Pink Limited Info tier, to stocks in the Pink No Info tier, and declines further for Grey Market
firms. In this specification, firms with a Caveat Emptor label are even less liquid than Grey Market
stocks, suggesting that investors avoid stocks with this flag. The second set of columns illustrates
that crash risk is negatively associated with the Pink Sheets information tiers. The magnitudes of
the estimated coefficients decrease monotonically, indicating a steady decrease in crash risk as
information provision improves. With industry fixed effects, Caveat Emptor stocks have the
highest future crash risk, consistent with the label’s purpose.
We perform additional analyses in the Internet Appendix to tighten identification and
corroborate the interpretation that the documented differences in market quality reflect the Pink
Sheets information tiers. In section IA.9, we show that the results are confined to non-financial
firms. The effects of the information tiers are expected to be weaker or perhaps even non-existent
for financial firms, considering that they have to report to their respective regulators (and these
filings can be accessed by investors). In section IA.10, we exploit the strengthening of the Pink
Sheets regulatory regime over our sample period through the staggered adoption of four major
initiatives. Since these initiatives are set at the market level, they are exogenous to a given firm.
Our analysis shows that liquidity improves and crash risk declines for NBB stocks relative to BB
stocks following the adoption of the four regulatory initiatives in the Pink Sheets. By the end of the
sample period, NBB stocks have essentially caught up to BB stocks in terms of market quality. As
we also estimate these effects with firm fixed effects, they do not simply reflect the decline in BB
29

firms over time. Taken together, the analyses in this section provide evidence that firms in higher
Pink Sheets information tiers exhibit superior liquidity and lower crash risk.
5.5.

Information regimes and return performance
The previous analyses show that market liquidity and crash risk vary systematically across the

OTC information regimes. A natural question is whether these differences in information regimes
also result in differential return performance. We assess return performance by estimating alphas
for portfolios of stocks in the various information regimes using standard asset pricing models. In
each month, we collect stocks belonging to each information regime, and compute equally-weighted
and value-weighted returns for this portfolio. For instance, we take all Pink Sheets stocks that are
non-SEC filers and not covered in a manual and compute the returns for this portfolio in every
month. If a stock switches regimes, we drop its return in the transition month when computing the
portfolio returns. As in Ang et al. (2013), we estimate a five-factor model including market, size,
value, momentum, and liquidity factors.25 In order to account for thin trading, we include three lags
of each factor in addition to its contemporaneous value.26
Table 8 reports the alpha estimates for Grey Market and Pink Sheets stocks (NBB) in Panel A,
and for Bulletin Board (BB) and NASDAQ Small Cap market (SCM) stocks in Panel B. Two
conclusions emerge from this analysis. First, the alphas for BB and NBB stocks suggest severe
underperformance for OTC stocks. In contrast, the alphas for SCM stocks are either insignificantly
different from zero or negative but very small in magnitude. The alphas are around -5% per month
for OTC stocks. This underperformance is in line with the results in Eraker and Ready (2015). The
25
26

We recognize that these factors are constructed based on exchange-traded rather than OTC stocks. However, our
intention is simply to examine (relative) abnormal performance of OTC stocks across information regimes.
The models are estimated using log returns given the relative large frequency of extreme discrete returns (see
Figure 3). Alphas based on discrete returns yield very similar inferences across information regimes but are less
precisely estimated, which is likely due to large positive outliers in the discrete return series.

30

negative alphas are also consistent with the distribution of raw returns for OTC stocks shown in the
Internet Appendix (see section IA.2) and in Figure 3.
Second, the alphas are similar across the various OTC information regimes that arise from SEC
registration and manual inclusion. In the NBB, the alphas for SEC filers are no larger than those for
non-filers (e.g., for firms not covered in a manual, the alpha based on equal-weighted portfolio
returns is -4.8% for non-SEC filers versus -4.9% for SEC filers). Similarly, the alphas for stocks
with and without manual coverage are generally very similar.
Thus, in contrast to our market quality results, the information regimes in the OTC market do
not appear to be associated with differential return performance. A potential explanation is that
returns and market quality reflect conditions in the OTC market differently. In the presence of
short-sale constraints and with many retail investors seeking securities with lottery-like payoffs, as
discussed by Ang et al. (2013) and Eraker and Ready (2015), it is difficult for more sophisticated
investors to arbitrage OTC stocks.27 In section IA.12 of the Internet Appendix, we provide novel
evidence that short selling is indeed very difficult in the OTC market. Thus, more sophisticated
investors may simply refrain from trading as the information problems for OTC stocks become
more severe and this response is reflected in the market quality proxies, in particular, liquidity.

27

Conrad et al. (2014) find that firms with a high probability of death also have a larger predicted probability of a
high return over the subsequent year. These firms tend to have low and declining institutional ownership and, thus,
are mainly held by retail investors. Since retail investors have skewness preference (Barberis and Huang, 2008),
they are likely to overpay for the chance of a jackpot which, in turn, leads to low expected returns. Furthermore,
these low returns are not arbitraged away because jackpot stocks tend to be small, have low institutional ownership
and low analyst coverage, and thus are hard to arbitrage. This evidence reconciles negative returns and crash risk
with the chance of extreme positive payoffs via a ‘limits to arbitrage’ argument. The similarity of returns across
regimes is also consistent with the evidence and explanations by Conrad et al. (2014).

31

6.

Conclusion
In this paper, we analyze a comprehensive sample of over 10,000 U.S. stocks that publicly

trade in the OTC market. Many of these issuers are not required to register with the SEC and hence
are often referred to as “dark.” However, OTC firms that are exempt from federal securities laws
are subject to state securities laws as well as venue-based rules stipulating disclosures, and hence
not necessarily dark. It is therefore more appropriate to view the OTC market as a twilight zone of
different regulatory and information regimes.
We characterize this twilight zone and the regulatory regimes in the OTC market. We provide
much-needed descriptive statistics on industry, entry, survival, venue changes, and trading activity
by OTC venue as well as trading history. OTC firms tend to be small, trade at low prices, have
negative average returns and exhibit high return volatilities. We show that a large number of stocks
enter the OTC market without an IPO or prior listing in the major markets. However, relatively few
of these new OTC firms are able to graduate to the traditional exchanges. Yet, firms tend to survive
in the OTC market for extended periods of time, including those delisting from an exchange.
Next, we examine the role of venues and relevant regulatory regimes in market quality using
two important constructs: liquidity and crash risk. We show that OTC firms that provide SEC
disclosures, publish information in a recognized securities manual, are headquartered in states with
stricter merit reviews, and are in higher-level Pink Sheets information tiers exhibit higher market
liquidity and lower crash risk. In short, we find that differences in OTC regulatory and information
regimes map into differences in market quality. This finding suggests that (at least some) investors
recognize information and regulatory differences across the OTC regimes and trade (or abstain from
trading) accordingly. Thus, our study contributes to a more nuanced understanding of investor
32

behavior in the OTC markets. Theories on information asymmetry and adverse selection continue
to hold in the OTC market. We emphasize that this conclusion is not at odds with the findings in
Ang et al. (2013) and Eraker and Ready (2015). Their asset pricing results suggest that behavioral
biases of retail investors, gradual diffusion of information, and short-selling constraints explain why
OTC stocks consistently underperform and display very different return characteristics compared to
stocks listed on the traditional exchanges. Our results suggest that some, likely more sophisticated,
investors abstain from trading stocks when information problems become severe, a response that is
likely reflected in the market quality proxies, in particular, liquidity.
Overall, our study points to an important trade-off facing OTC market regulators aiming to
create a viable market for small growth firms while protecting investors. While lowering regulatory
requirements reduces the compliance burden for smaller firms, it also significantly reduces market
liquidity and increases crash risk for investors. Our paper also highlights the relevance of state
securities laws for the OTC market, including merit reviews, manual exemptions as well as
associated securities manual publications. The OTC market is often viewed as dark and unregulated
but in fact there are many alternative regimes and a thicket of complicated state regulations. We
know very little about the effects of these regimes, which govern the trading of securities that are
not covered by federal securities laws. This study is, to our knowledge, the first to provide evidence
on how these regimes are related to secondary trading, market liquidity and crash risk.
We conclude with a few cautionary words about the interpretation of our results. Identifying
the causal effects of OTC regulatory regimes is difficult.

For instance, it is possible that

unobservable changes in firm performance or other economic shocks influence market quality
proxies and at the same time are related to trading venues, SEC filing status, manual publication or
33

Pink Sheets tiers. To the extent that our analyses do not control for the effect of performance
changes on liquidity and crash risk, our results are biased. We exploit several institutional features
and provide extensive sensitivity analyses to mitigate such concerns, but ultimately we interpret the
regression results as associations, rather than causal effects.

34

Appendix 1: Additional institutional details
1.1

Pink Sheets tiers
Starting in 2007, the Pink Sheets introduced a tier system for companies whose stock is quoted on its

platform (www.otcmarkets.com). All securities are assigned a tier based on their reporting method (SEC
Reporting or Alternative Reporting Standard) and disclosure category (Current, Limited or No Information).
Each stock’s tier is displayed next to the ticker symbol on the Pink Sheets website.
Securities in the highest tier, OTCQX, are required to have a current disclosure status and meet
minimum financial qualifications. To be traded on this tier, companies undergo a qualitative review by the
Pink Sheets operator (now called the OTC Markets Group). Companies are not required to be registered
with or reporting to the SEC, but must submit financial information to the Pink Sheets for review and display
on their website. In addition, U.S. companies must be ongoing operations; i.e., they cannot be shells or in
bankruptcy. As the number of U.S. firms in this tier is still very small, we do not analyze it separately.
Securities in the next tier, OTCQB, must be current in their disclosure and report to the SEC or a U.S.
banking or insurance regulator. This tier was introduced in April 2010 and its requirements were extended in
May 2014. By contrast, securities in the OTC Pink tier have no SEC or equivalent reporting requirements.
They are placed in one of three categories based on the amount and timeliness of financial disclosure:
1. Pink Current Information companies have submitted information no older than six months to the
OTC Markets data and news service, or have made a filing on the SEC’s EDGAR system in the
previous six months. This category can include shell companies or development stage companies
with little or no operations as well as companies without audited financial statements.
2. Pink Limited Information companies are unwilling or unable to meet OTC Markets’ guidelines for
providing adequate current information but have submitted some of the information required. These
are often firms with financial reporting problems, in distress, or in bankruptcy.
3. Pink No Information companies are unwilling or unable to provide disclosure to the public markets.
Firms in this category do not make current information available via the OTC Markets disclosure
and news service, or if they do, the available information is older than six months. This category
includes defunct firms that have ceased operations as well as “dark” firms.
Companies that are deemed to have a public interest or investor protection concern, for example, due to
stock promotion, disruptive corporate actions, or legal proceedings receive a Caveat Emptor flag.

35

1.2

State securities (blue sky) laws
State securities laws predate the 1933 and 1934 Acts. While the latter Acts are based on a disclosure

doctrine, state securities laws rely on a merit-based regime.28 In other words, state securities regulators have
the authority to examine applications for registration, and to approve only those applications that are “fair” to
investors. Over the years, several attempts have been made to create more uniform securities laws across
states, via the Uniform Securities Acts (USAs) of 1930, 1956, 1988, and 2002. However, there is still
significant variation across blue sky laws, making compliance challenging for issuers whose stock is traded
by investors in multiple states.
Recent federal acts have to some extent preempted blue sky laws. 29 For our purposes, the most
important of these is the National Securities Markets Improvement Act (NSMIA) of 1996. This legislation
creates a class of securities called “federal covered securities,” which includes securities listed on national
exchanges, securities issued by a registered investment company, secondary trading of securities issued by
federally registered and SEC reporting companies, as well as securities offered or sold without SEC
registrations based on one of the exemptions mentioned in footnote 35. NSMIA prevents states from
imposing additional disclosure or “merit” standards on such offerings, requiring registration by qualification
of such securities as well as prohibiting or limiting the use of any offering document prepared by or on behalf
of any issuer of such securities. However, NSMIA allows states to impose filing requirements for documents
filed with the SEC (such as a prospectus and Form D) and states may impose filing fees.
Securities Registration
There are four types of state securities registration: coordination, notification, Small Corporation
Offering (SCOR), and qualification.30 Registration by coordination is used for issues that are simultaneously
registering under the 1933 Act and in the states where the offering is to be sold. Registration by notification
(also called filing) is available for issuers with a class of widely-held equity securities registered under the

28

29

30

This section draws primarily on individual states’ blue sky laws as reported by Wolters Kluwer Tax &
Accounting’s CCH Intelliconnect. Virtually all states’ blue sky laws originally included a merit review, but the
nature of merit review today ranges from the very stringent in states like California and Texas, to a regime which
in practice mimics the federal disclosure-based process.
These include the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (“PSLRA”), the 1998 Securities Litigation
Uniform Standards Act (“SLUSA”), the National Securities Markets Improvement Act of 1996 (“NSMIA”), SOX,
and the 2010 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (“Dodd-Frank”).
Arizona and Ohio allow registration by description while Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, and Rhode Island use the term
registration by filing for processes similar to registration by notification.

36

Exchange Act of 1934 that can provide evidence of meeting certain minimum standards.31 In both cases,
NSMIA essentially usurps the state securities regulator’s ability to deny state registration.
Many states also offer securities registration under the SCOR definition.32 These offerings are designed
to help small businesses raise capital, and are limited in size to no more than $1 million. SCOR offerings are
exempt from SEC Registration following Rule 504 of Regulation D and the Intrastate offering exemption
(Rule 147). Unlike other exemptions under Regulation D (see below), SCOR offerings may be marketed by
brokers and selling agents, and there is no limitation on the number of investors. Security offers and sales
exempt from SEC registration following Rule 505 (up to $5 million) and Rule 506 (unlimited) offerings
under Regulation D still need to be registered in the states where the investors are located. Most jurisdictions
have a simplified process which considers the offer or sale as registered in the state provided the issuer files a
copy of the federal Form D with the state regulator.
All jurisdictions except New York have statutes that allow registration of securities by qualification, if
none of the other registration types apply.33 When seeking registration by qualification, information similar
to the registration requirements under the 1933 Act has to be provided to the state securities regulator. The
regulator then decides after conducting a merit review whether or not to make the registration effective.
Costs for securities registration vary widely across states, but the typical state has a fee that is
proportional to the value of the securities offered in the state.34 State securities registrations are usually valid
for one year, and many states require the issuer to update the offering information (prospectus including
financial statements) periodically. As discussed in section 2, information filed with regulators in connection
with a state securities registration is typically not made publicly available in the way SEC filings are made
available on EDGAR.

31

32
33
34

Eligibility requirements for registration by notification/filing are: that the SEC registered securities are held by
more than 500 persons on record; that the issuer has a net worth of more than $4 million or a pre-tax net income of
more than $2 million for two out of the three fiscal years preceding the offering; that the issuer has actively
engaged in business operations for 36 consecutive months preceding the offering; that at least four market makers
have been quoting the SEC registered securities for at least 30 days out of the three months preceding the offering;
that the underwriter commissions will not exceed 10% of the offering; that neither the issuer nor any of its
subsidiaries have failed to pay a preferred stock dividend or defaulted on any bond or long-term lease; and that the
price of the offered security is no less than $5.00.
Further information on SCOR requirements and applicable laws can be found at www.nasaa.org/industryresource/corporation-finance/scor-overview.
This type of registration is used by states for Rule 144A offerings, Regulation A offerings, Intrastate offerings
larger than $1 million (Rule 147), and offerings to accredited investors.
Typically, the rule is 1/10 of 1% or 1/20 of 1%. Note that there are some states with flat fees, and others with no
maximum fee. The average across states is a minimum fee of $390 and a maximum of $2,525.

37

Secondary Trading and Exemptions
As long as the state securities registration is effective, secondary trading of the security is allowed
provided the trades involve only residents of states where the security is registered. In addition, most states
require firms to register in the state in which their headquarters are based (home state registration). An issuer
has to renew its state registration(s) in order for secondary trading to continue beyond one year.
The requirement to maintain effective registrations in multiple states is costly, and issuers may therefore
seek to qualify for one of the exemptions to state securities registration. In addition to federal covered
securities, many states exempt, for example, bank stocks, savings & loans, insurance companies, credit
unions, and public utilities from registration provided that the issuers are regulated by federal and/or state
laws.

USA 2002 also includes twelve exemptions for transactions in securities, and seven of these

exemptions directly address equity trading:35 However, the adoption of the USA 2002 exemptions varies
significantly across states.
One way for a firm to obtain an exemption from registering the securities in each state where investors
may reside is to list the firm in a nationally recognized securities manual. The most prominent manuals are
Mergent’s (previously Moody’s) Manual and the Standard & Poor’s Corporation Records. These two
manuals are explicitly recognized in 41 jurisdictions (including the District of Columbia) and one state
recognizes Fitch’s manual. To be covered in Mergent’s Manual, for instance, the firm pays an initial listing
fee of $3,600 and an annual renewal fee of $975.
The manuals contain a company profile which includes the company history, business description,
subsidiaries, plant & property, and management listing.

The manuals also include financials: income

accounts for the most recent 3 years, balance sheets for the last 2 years, as well as a description of the capital
stock. If available, company information is provided, including contact information, website, annual meeting
date, counsel, auditors, long-term debt, number of shareholders, transfer agent, shareholder relations contact,
five-year stock pricing range, and the number of employees.
The manuals are available in print and online for industry professionals and major research libraries.
Once a firm is listed in a recognized manual, investors from most states can freely trade unregistered shares

35

The USA 2002 exemptions relevant for transactions in securities are: (1) isolated non-issuer transactions, (2)
securities listed in a recognized manual, (3) unsolicited orders, (4) transactions involving institutional
investors/financial institutions, (5) limited offerings, (6) existing security holders, and (7) transactions involving
securities registered under the 1933 Act. USA 2002 exemptions with the most common adoptions are the limited
offering exemption (51 jurisdictions), the institutional investor/financial institution exemption (45 jurisdictions),
and the manual exemption (42 jurisdictions).

38

on the secondary market.36 Thus, a manual listing significantly enhances information disclosures to potential
investors and enlarges the pool of investors for which secondary trading would be permitted.

1.3

State corporate laws
State corporate laws may also contain financial reporting requirements that are relevant to firms not

subject to federal laws. Companies are free to incorporate in the state of their choice, no matter where their
headquarters or operations, and approximately 50% of U.S. firms have chosen to incorporate in Delaware.
The Model Business Corporation Act (MBCA), which is the basis for corporate laws in 24 states, describes
reporting requirements and penalties.

According to the MBCA, firms are required to provide annual

financial statements to shareholders within 120 days of the end of the fiscal year. If a shareholder is not
mailed financial statements and submits a written request, these statements must be mailed. However,
several states (e.g., California, New York, and Delaware) do not follow the MBCA.
According to the American Bar Association (2002), 15 states require the automatic provision of annual
reports and 26 states require companies to furnish an annual report only upon receipt of a written shareholder
request. The other states do not require annual financial statements to be furnished. Of the states with some
reporting requirement, sixteen states require financials to be mailed within 120 days of the fiscal year end,
while a few states give companies 180 days after the fiscal year end or “a reasonable time” following the
receipt of a request. Several states impose penalties such as fines or the right to legal costs or remedies, if the
firm fails to deliver the financial statements.

However, while state corporation laws sometimes require firms to provide financial statements
to shareholders, these laws apply at the level of the record holder and hence, to our understanding,
do not necessarily lead to disclosure to beneficial owners or prospective shareholders. For this
reason, the effect of financial reporting mandated by state corporation laws on liquidity and crash
risk is not clear.
We investigate the associations using the American Bar Association’s (2002) description of
reporting requirements. We define states as having weak (10), medium (26), and strong (15)
financial reporting requirements, and assign firms to each category based on their state of
incorporation. We run the same regression model used to evaluate state securities laws (Table 6).
Overall, the results (untabulated) are inconclusive. In the base specification with industry fixed
effects, firms incorporated in a state with strong state corporate law reporting requirements do not
36

Exceptions are Alabama, California, Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana, New York, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, and
Virginia.

39

exhibit higher liquidity, although they do have significantly lower crash risk in states with medium
and strong requirements. When we add firm fixed effects, the positive association with liquidity
becomes stronger, but the crash risk associations are now weaker and insignificant. However, there
are only few OTC firms that change their state of incorporation over the sample period and hence
can contribute to the identification of state . We therefore also run specifications, excluding
Delaware and Nevada, the two most commonly chosen states of incorporation, as well as including
a binary indicator for out-of-state incorporation. These two choices should mitigate concerns about
self selection. The results remain mixed. Hence, we conclude that there are no reliable associations
between reporting requirements in the state corporate laws and the two market quality proxies,
potentially reflecting that the financial reports are generally not furnished to beneficial owners.

40

Appendix 2: Example firms
This appendix provides details on seven typical OTC firms. For each firm, we state its sample group (as
defined in Table 1) and describe its main business (as of the end of our sample period or the last available
date), sales and employee information (if available), its place of incorporation and location, its evolution
including important corporate events, trading venue and reporting history.

ZYTO Corp. (OTC only)

2.1

ZYTO is engaged in the manufacturing and distribution of “biocommunication” devices and software
designed to facilitate communication between computers and the human body in a process called a
“biosurvey.” It markets its applications primarily to health care professionals. The firm is in the Surgical
and Medical Instruments industry (SIC 3841). At the end of 2011, ZYTO had approximately 30 employees.
Sales in recent years were $1.7 million (2007), $1.9 million (2008) and $4 million (2011).
ZYTO is headquartered in Utah and incorporated in Delaware. The firm was created in September 2006
following a reverse merger of Nevada-based ZYTO Corp. with Delaware-based Quiver Corp. In July 2007,
it raised $1.4 million in a Reg D offering from 36 investors (18 of which were unaccredited). As of March
2012, it had 221 holders of record.
The firm traded in the Pink Sheets from 2006 to April 2011 before it became dually quoted on the
Bulletin Board (BB). The firm has a website (www.zyto.com), which includes a press release section with
quarterly performance reports and other information of interest. The firm did not report any financial
statements before 2008. While solely in the Pink Sheets, its information label fluctuated between No
Information, Limited Information and Current Information. It filed for SEC registration in July 2010 and
made its first 10-K filing in March 2011. In December 2012, the firm announced its voluntary termination of
SEC registration and return to the Pink Sheets, largely for cost reasons. As of April 2013, the firm is labeled
as Current Information, as it continues to provide financial statements (certified by its attorney), despite
being no longer registered with the SEC. Since February 2010, the firm has been covered in the S&P
manual.

2.2

Quri Resources Inc. (OTC only)
Quri Resources is engaged in the discovery, exploration, and development of gold, silver, copper, and

other mineral resources. Its properties include the Wellington mining project in Ecuador and the Oatman
gold project consisting of various mining concessions in Arizona. The firm is in Metal Mining Services (SIC
108). In 2011, Quri had two employees. Its revenue was $89,000 (2011) and $97,000 (2010). The company

41

is incorporated in Delaware, with principal places of business in Miami, Florida and Quito, Ecuador. Before
February 2009, Quri was named Transoft Technologies, Inc.
The firm was quoted in the Grey Market through November 2006 and in the Pink Sheets since then. In
May 2009, the Pink Sheets information label switched from Limited Information to No Information. Since
October 2010, Quri has been labeled Caveat Emptor, warning investors that the OTC Markets Group has
been unable to contact the company or confirm its location. The Pink Sheets website shows Quri’s last
financial report as of November 30, 2008.
The Quri Resources website (www.quriresources.net) is no longer active, and has been replaced by a
new one (www.quriresources.com). The latter website provides no financial information and calls itself a
“blog.” It describes the company as being “interested in the technology surrounding the recovery of precious
metals and rare gems from the earth’s soil.” The firm is not covered in our two manuals. In September
2010, the SEC charged Quri with orchestrating a “pump and dump” scheme.37 The SEC alleges that the firm
issued several false and misleading press releases about impending acquisitions between February and June
2009, allowing CEO Jaime Gomez to sell shares at inflated prices for a total gain of $27,100.

2.3

Clarent Hospital Corp. (OTC only)
Clarent Hospital owned and operated acute health-care hospitals and related healthcare businesses. It is

in Health Care Equipment & Services (SIC 8062). The firm was based in Houston, Texas and incorporated
in Delaware in 1980. Its predecessor was Paracelsus Healthcare Corporation, which filed for bankruptcy in
2000. Clarent emerged from these bankruptcy proceedings and reincorporated as a private company in 2001.
In November 2001, Clarent sold its Westwood Medical Center and used the proceeds to boost liquidity and
pay down a portion of its debt. On October 14, 2008, the firm announced that it would pay a dividend of
0.10 per share and the remaining assets would be placed in a liquidating fund. The proceeds of this fund
would go to the shareholders of record as of Dec 19, 2008. As of December 20, 2008 Clarent Hospital Corp.
went out of business.
Clarent was quoted in the Grey Market and the Pink Sheets. The firm did not have a website and never
filed with the SEC. Neither Mergent nor S&P covered the firm in their manuals.

2.4

Miracor Diagnostics, Inc. (Fallen angel)
Miracor Diagnostics, Inc. provided medical diagnostic imaging services in the U.S. Its industry is

Services – Specialty Outpatient Facilities (SIC 8093). Originally in the oil and gas sector, the firm became
solely a medical firm in January 1994. Starting in July 1998, it moved into the diagnostic business through
37

See http://www.sec.gov/litigation/complaints/2010/comp21675.pdf.

42

asset acquisitions. By 2005, the firm operated 13 wholly owned centers in California, Florida, Illinois, Ohio,
and Oregon. These centers offered magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography and other diagnostic
imaging services in a patient-friendly environment. The number of employees remained constant between
2003 and 2005 at approximately 100. Revenues increased steadily to a level of $20 million in 2005.
The company was incorporated in Utah in February 1980 and headquartered in California.38 In 2006,
the firm started to lose money and, in March 2007, it suspended payments to secured lenders and sought to
restructure its debt. In April 2007, Miracor filed for bankruptcy. The firm emerged from bankruptcy in
December 2007 and subsequently abandoned all significant operations. In June 2009, the state of Utah
effectively ordered the company’s administrative dissolution.
The firm’s shares traded on the NASDAQ SCM until March 1998, when it was delisted and moved to
the BB. It traded in this market until May 2007—between February 2003 and May 2007 it was duallyquoted on the BB and the Pink Sheets. As of June 2007, the firm was removed from the BB and traded
exclusively in the Pink Sheets, after it filed for bankruptcy and stopped reporting. Consequently, its Pink
Sheets information tier was No Information. In July 2010, the stock was finally removed from the OTC
market.
The company had a website (www.miracor.com). It was listed in Mergent’s Manual through December
2006, but not covered by S&P. The firm was an SEC filer through 2007. In April 2007, the firm notified the
SEC that it was unable to file its 2006 annual report, and might never file again. In June 2010, the SEC cited
Miracor for being delinquent in its filings.

2.5

True Religion Apparel (Rising star)
True Religion Apparel, Inc. designs and sells premium clothing (denim jeans and assorted sportswear)

to consumers globally. Its industry is Apparel & Clothing Manufacturers (SIC 2300). As of March 2013, the
company operated 124 stores in the U.S. and 31 international stores. Its products are also sold at major
department stores and the firm licenses its name for selected products. In December 2012, True Religion had
3,086 employees. Its net sales have grown rapidly over the years from $270.0 million in 2008 to $467.3
million in 2012.
The firm was incorporated in Nevada in 2001 under the name Gusana Explorations Inc. At the time, it
was based in Vancouver, Canada and its business plan was to explore and develop mineral properties. Later,
the firm searched for opportunities in the clothing industry as an extension of its existing operations, and

38

The firm was incorporated as Gold Probe in 1980 and changed its name to Hailey Energy Corporation in
September 1981 after acquiring Hailey Energy Company. There were further name changes to Cytoprobe in 1992,
to Medical Device Technologies in April 1995, and to Miracor in October 1999.

43

eventually decided to let its mining claims lapse. In June 2003, the firm acquired all the shares of Guru
Denim, Inc. via a reverse merger and, in August 2003, changed its name to True Religion Apparel, Inc., with
headquarters in California. In 2008, it changed its state of incorporation to Delaware. On May 10, 2013, the
firm announced that it would be acquired by the investment management firm TowerBrook Capital Partners
LP in an $835 million deal. The price of $32 per share in cash represented a 9 percent premium over the
previous day’s closing price and a 52 percent increase over the price in October 2012.
The firm’s shares were quoted on the BB starting in March 2003, and migrated to NASDAQ in August
2005. As of February 2013, True Religion had only 56 holders of record but roughly 11,500 beneficial
shareholders. The firm has a website (www.truereligionbrandjeans.com). It has filed reports with the SEC
every year since 2002 (which are also available on the firm’s website). It has not been covered by the
securities manuals.

2.6

Broadwind Energy (Rising star)
Broadwind Energy provides technologically advanced products and services to customers in the wind

energy, oil and gas, mining, and infrastructure industries, primarily in the U.S. but also in other industrial
markets. Its operations include the production of wind turbine towers, fabrication of specialty weldments,
production and repair of precision gears and gearing systems, and blade and gearbox maintenance services.
The firm is in the Electrical Apparatus & Equipment industry (SIC 5063).

On December 31, 2012,

Broadwind Energy had 753 employees. Its total revenues were $185.9 million (2011) and $210.7 million
(2012).
The firm incorporated in Nevada in 1996 as Blackfoot Enterprises, Inc. The business plan was to sell
replica totem poles and cigar store Indians but the firm ran out of funds and became a shell company in
January 1997. In February 2006, following a reverse merger between Blackfoot and privately-held Tower
Tech Systems Inc., Blackfoot changed its name to Tower Tech Holdings Inc., and moved its headquarters to
Wisconsin. In January 2008, the firm reincorporated in Delaware and shifted its headquarters to Illinois,
changing its name to Broadwind Energy, Inc. in February 2008. Over the years, it grew and evolved through
several acquisitions. In 2011, the firm faced class-action lawsuits related to officer breach of fiduciary trust
and SEC inquiries related to accounting irregularities. As of April 2013, these legal matters had not been
resolved entirely. Broadwind Energy had 66 holders of record as of February 2013.
The firm’s common stock was quoted in the OTC market since March 2004. It was dually quoted in the
BB starting in June 2005. The stock began trading on NASDAQ’s National Market in April 2009, and
changed its listing to the NASDAQ SCM in December 2011.

The firm has a website

(www.broadwindenergy.com), where it provides 10-K, 10-Q and 8-K reports. It has voluntarily reported to

44

the SEC since its beginnings in 1996. The firm was listed in Mergent’s securities manual as of January 2009
and in the S&P manual as of July 2009.

2.7

The NASDAQ OMX Group (Rising star)
NASDAQ OMX Group, Inc. is a holding company providing trading, clearing, securities listing, and

technology services on a global scale. It is in the Security and Commodity Brokers, Dealers, Exchanges, and
Services industry (SIC code 6200). The firm operates the NASDAQ stock market, eSpeed (a new Treasuries
trading platform) in the US, several exchanges in Europe, including those in Stockholm, Copenhagen,
Helsinki, Iceland and the Baltic states. It also operates a derivatives market for power and a clearing house
for freight and seafood in Norway, an interest rates derivatives market in London, as well as energy and
carbon derivatives products (NASDAQ OMX Commodities). As of December 31, 2013, NASDAQ OMX
had 3365 employees. Total revenues were 3.21 billion in 2013 compared to 3.12 billion in 2012 and 3.44
billion in 2011. The firm is incorporated in Delaware and headquartered in New York.
Nasdaq was founded in 1971 as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the National Association of Securities
Dealers, Inc. (NASD; now FINRA). In 2006, Nasdaq reorganized into a holding company. The NASDAQ
Stock Market became an independent registered national securities exchange in 2007. In February, 2008,
Nasdaq and OMX AB merged their businesses to form the NASDAQ OMX Group, Inc.
Commencing June 2000, the NASD began the process of separating Nasdaq from the NASD, as well as
raising financing for both entities, via a private placement of common stock to NASD members, investment
companies and issuers listed on NASDAQ. Following the expiration of trading restrictions on these shares,
public trading in the common stock started July 1, 2002 on the BB under the ticker symbol NDAQ. The
stock was quoted on the BB through February 9, 2005, then migrated to NASDAQ, following a secondary
offering of shares priced at $9 per share. On February 7, 2014, the firm’s share price was $37.54, and it had
approximately 586 holders of record.
The firm has a website, http://www.nasdaqomx.com/, where it provides 10-K, 10-Q and 8-K reports.
As a result of the private placement of its stock, the firm became an SEC filer as of June 2001. The firm was
listed in Mergent’s Manual as of January 2008 and in the S&P manual as of July 2008.

45

References
Admati, A. R., and P. Pfleiderer, 1988, A theory of intraday patterns: volume and price
variability, Review of Financial Studies 11 (1) 3-40.
Agrawal, A. K., 2013, The impact of investor protection law on corporate policy and
performance: Evidence from the blue sky laws, Journal of Financial Economics 107, 417435.
American Bar Association, 2002, Model Business Corporation Act Annotated, Third Edition,
2000/2001/2002 Supplement, Volume 4.
Ang, A., A. Shtauber and P. Tetlock, 2013, Asset pricing in the dark: The cross section of OTC
stocks, Review of Financial Studies 26, 2985-3028.
Barberis, N., and M. Huang, 2008, Stocks as lotteries: The implications of probability weighting
for securities prices, American Economic Review 98 (5), 2066-2100.
Bollen, N. and W. Christie, 2009, Market microstructure of the pink sheets, Journal of Banking
and Finance 33, 1326−1339.
Bushee, B. and C. Leuz, 2005, Economic consequences of SEC disclosure regulation: Evidence
from the OTC Bulletin Board, Journal of Accounting and Economics 39, 233–264.
Campbell, J. Y., and L. Hentschel, 1992, No news is good news: an asymmetric model of
changing volatility in stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 31, 281-318.
Chen, J., H. Hong, J. Stein, 2001, Forecasting crashes: trading volume, past returns, and
conditional skewness in stock prices, Journal of Financial Economics 61, 345–381
Coates, J., 2007, The goals and promise of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act, Journal of Economic
Perspectives 21, 91–116.
Coates, J., 2011, Testimony of Professor John C. Coates IV, John F. Cogan, Jr. Professor of Law
and Economics, Harvard Law School, before the Subcommittee on Securities, Insurance,
and Investment of the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, United States
Senate, on Examining Investor Risks in Capital Raising (December 14, 2011).
Coates, J., and S. Srinivasan, 2014, SOX after ten years: A multidisciplinary review, Accounting
Horizons 28, 627-671.
Conrad, J., N. Kapadia and Y. Xing, 2014, Death and jackpot: Why do individual investors hold
overpriced stocks? Journal of Financial Economics 113, 455-475.
Copeland, T. E., and D. Galai, 1983, Information effects on the bid-ask spread, Journal of
Finance 38 (5), 1457-1469.
Diamond, D. W., and R. E. Verrecchia, 1991, Disclosure, liquidity and the cost of capital,
Journal of Finance 46 (4), 1325-1359.
Doidge, C., G. A. Karloyi, and R. M. Stulz, 2015, The U.S. listing gap, NBER working paper
No. 21181.
46

Easley, D., and M. O’Hara, 1987, Price, trade size, and information in securities markets,
Journal of Financial Economics 19 (1) 69-90.
Eraker, B. and M. Ready, 2015, Do investors overpay for stocks with lottery-like payoffs? An
examination of the returns on OTC stocks, Journal of Financial Economics 115, 486-504.
Gao, X., J. R. Ritter, and Z. Zhu, 2013, Where have all the IPOs gone?, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 48, 1663-1692.
Gardner, G., 2010, Micro-IPOs: An analysis of the small corporate offering registration (SCOR)
procedure with national data, Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 14, 69-89.
Glosten, L. R., and P. R. Milgron, 1985, Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist market
with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics 14 (1), 71-100.
Goshen, A. and G. Parchomovsky, 2006, The essential role of securities regulation, Duke Law
Journal 55 (4), 711-782.
Greenstone, M., P. Oyer and A. Vissing-Jorgenson, 2006, Mandated disclosure, stock returns and
the 1964 Securities Acts Amendments, Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 399-460.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales, 2008, Trusting the stock market, Journal of Finance 63,
2557-2600.
Hail, L., and C. Leuz, 2006, International differences in the cost of equity capital: Do legal
institutions and securities regulation matter? Journal of Accounting Research 44 (2), 485531.
Harris, J., V. Panchapagesan and I. M. Werner, 2008, Off but not gone: A study of NASDAQ
delistings, Dice Center Working Paper. Available at SSRN.
Hilke, J.C., 1987, Minimum quality versus disclosure regulations: State regulation of interstate
open-end investment company and common stock issues, CFTC Bureau of Economics
Report.
Hong, H. and J. C. Stein, 2003, Differences in opinion, short-sales constraints, and market
crashes, Review of Financial Studies 16, 487-525.
Hutton, A., A. Marcus, and H. Tehranian, 2009, Opaque financial reports, R 2, and crash risk,
Journal of Financial Economics 94, 67-86.
Ibbotson, R.G., Z. Chan, D. Y-J, Kim, and W.Y. Hu, 2012, Liquidity as an investment style,
Yale University Working Paper.
Ivanov, V. and S. Bauguess, 2012, Capital raising in the U.S.: The significance of unregistered
offerings using the Regulation D exemption, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission,
Division of Risk, Strategy, and Financial Innovation, Memorandum.
Karolyi, G. A., 2015, Cracking the emerging markets enigma, Oxford University Press.
Kirschenheiter, M., and N. D. Melumad, 2002, Can “big bath” and earnings smoothing co-exist
as equilibrium financial reporting strategies? Journal of Accounting Research 40, 761-796.
Kyle, A. S., 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53 (6), 1315-1335.
47

Jennings, M.M, 1992, The efficacy of merit review of common stock offerings: Do regulators
know more than the market? BYU Journal of Public Law 7, 211-244.
Jiang, J., K. Petroni and I. Wang, 2015, Private intermediary innovation and market liquidity:
Evidence from the Pink Sheets® Market, Contemporary Accounting Review, forthcoming.
Jin, L., and S. C. Myers, 2006, R2 around the world: New theory and new tests, Journal of
Financial Economics 79 (2), 257-292.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez‐de‐Silanes, and A. Shleifer, 2006, What works in securities laws?,
Journal of Finance 61, 1-32.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1997, Legal determinants of
external finance, Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1998, Law and finance, Journal of
Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.
Lang, M., K. Lins, and M. Maffett, 2012, Transparency, liquidity, and valuation: International
evidence on when transparency matters most, Journal of Accounting Research 50, 729-774.
Lesmond, D.A., J.P. Ogden, and C.A. Trzcinka, 1999, A new estimate of transaction costs,
Review of Financial Studies 12, 1113-1141.
Litvak, K., 2009, Summary disclosure and the efficiency of the OTC market: Evidence from the
recent Pink Sheets experiment, Northwestern working paper. Available at SSRN.
Litvak, K., 2011, How much can we learn by regressing corporate characteristics against the
wtate of incorporation? Available at SSRN.
Leuz, C., A. Triantis, and T. Wang, 2008, Why do firms go dark? Causes and economic
consequences of voluntary SEC deregistrations, Journal of Accounting and Economics 45,
181−208.
Luft, C., L. Levine, S. Larson, 2001, Over the counter bulletin board exchange: Market structure,
risk, and return, Journal of Alternative Investments 4, 33–42.
Luft, C., and L. Levine, 2004, Over the counter bulletin board exchange: The impact of liquidity
and size to return, volatility, and bid/ask spread, Journal of Alternative Investments 7,
95−106.
Macey, J. and G. Miller, 1991, Origin of the Blue Sky laws, Texas Law Review 70, 347 - 397.
Macey, J., M. O’Hara and D. Pompilio, 2008, Down and out in the stock market: The law and
economics of the felisting process, Journal of Law and Economics 51, 683−713.
Mahoney, P., 2009, The development of securities law in the United States, Journal of
Accounting Research 47, 325-347.
Marosi, A. and N. Massoud, 2007, Why do firms go fark?, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 42, 421-442.
Martin, T., 2012, The JOBS Act of 2012: Balancing fundamental securities law principles with
the demands of the crowd, Working paper.
48

Pastor, L. and R. F. Stambaugh, 2003, Liquidity risk and expected stock returns, Journal of
Political Economy 111, 642-658.
Silvio V., S. Paleari and J. Ritter, 2012, Europe's second markets for small companies, European
Financial Management 18, 352–388.
Westbrook, A., 2011, Blue skies for 100 Years: Introduction to the special Issue on corporate
and Blue Sky law, The Washburn Law Journal 50.

49

Figure 1
Regulatory regimes in U.S. OTC markets

Figure 1 schematically summarizes the regulatory regimes in U.S. OTC markets.

Figure 2
Regulatory and disclosure regimes in U.S. capital markets

Figure 2 summarizes the regulatory and disclosure regimes in U.S. capital markets. The hierarchy of markets, going
from the most to the least regulated, is: Exchange (i.e., traditional non-OTC markets including the NASDAQ Small
Cap Market or SCM), the Bulletin Board (BB), the Pink Sheets (PS) and the Grey Market (GM). The regulatory
regimes, going from mandatory disclosure (denoted M) to voluntary disclosure (denoted V), are: SEC reporting
(SEC) mandated by trading venue, SEC reporting for issuers above the thresholds on total assets ($10M) and
shareholders (500) that trigger automatic SEC reporting obligations, voluntary appearance in a securities manual
(Manual), and State Securities Laws. Within the Pink Sheets, there are PS regimes which include initiatives
undertaken by its operator, the OTC Markets Group: the introduction of PS information tiers (OTCQX, OTCQB,
OTC Pink) as well as the move to greater transparency in pricing. Over our sample period, SEC filing has been
mandatory for Exchange, SCM and BB firms (denoted M). PS and GM firms are not required to file with the SEC
unless they exceed asset or shareholder thresholds, but they may do so voluntarily. State securities laws apply in
every state where the firm sells its shares, as well as in the states of both buyer and seller. Finally, state securities
regulation is pre-empted (denoted PE) if issuers are either registered with the SEC or if their securities trade in one
of 42 states where issuers are exempt from state registration requirements in case they are included in “a nationally
recognized securities manual” such as Mergent’s Manuals and Standard & Poor’s Corporation Records.

Figure 3

0

.05

.1

.15

Stock returns in the OTC sample

-100%

0%

100%

500%

>=1000%

Yearly Returns

Figure 3 presents a histogram of the distribution of yearly discrete stock returns for all firm-years in the OTC sample
(i.e., firms from the NASDAQ SCM benchmark group are excluded). The rightmost bar comprises firm-years with
returns equal to or higher than 1000%.

Table 1
Sample selection and sample group classification
Panel A: Sample selection
Sample selection steps

# Firms

Match NASDAQ venue history - Datastream

16,965

- Firms incorporated outside USA

4,114

- 20-F filers

26

- REITs

91

- Firms with DS time series < 50 days

603

- Rarely traded firms

1,328

Final sample (Jan 2001- Oct 2010)

10,803

Panel B: Sample group classification
Sample group

# Firms

Fraction

In OTC only (start in 2001)

5,016

47%

New firms (remain in OTC)

3,134

30%

Rising stars (start in 2001)

370

3%

Rising stars (new firms)

276

3%

1,787

17%

10,583

100%

Fallen angels (from exchange)
Total OTC
Benchmark: NASDAQ SCM
Total Sample

220
10,803

Panel C: Dark firms across sample groups
Dark firms
Sample group

# Firms

SEC at some point
# Firms

Fraction
SEC filing
while in OTC

Manual at some point
# Firms

Fraction
Manual inclusion
while in OTC

In OTC only (start in 2001)

1,407

3,501

59%

2,104

24%

New firms (remain in OTC)

719

2,373

80%

1,006

18%

Rising stars (start in 2001)

0

370

88%

309

31%

Rising stars (new firms)

0

276

86%

222

26%

Fallen angels (from exchange)
Total OTC
Benchmark: NASDAQ SCM
Total Sample

0

1,787

43%

1,605

39%

2,126

8,307

63%

5,246

24%

0

220

-

206

-

2,126

8,527

-

5,452

-

This table presents the sample selection process (Panel A) and describes the sample composition (Panels B and C).
The sample is based on a proprietary dataset provided by NASDAQ that includes the venue history of all equity
securities that are traded in the OTC market (i.e., the Bulletin Board, the Pink Sheets or the Grey Market) or the
NASDAQ Small Cap Market (SCM) at some point during the period January 2001 through October 2010. Matching

Table 1 (continued)
this dataset with capital market data from Datastream results in an initial sample of 16,965 firms. We eliminate firms
that are incorporated outside the U.S. or file Form 20-F. We also exclude Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) and
firms with short capital market histories (i.e., Datastream provides data for less than 50 trading days) or whose
securities trade rarely (i.e., less than five trading days in total and/or no stock price changes throughout). The final
sample comprises 10,803 firms. The sample groups in Panels B and C are defined as follows: In OTC only (start in
2001) includes firms that trade in the OTC market throughout the sample period, i.e. from January 2001 onwards. New
firms (remain in OTC) comprises firms that trade in the OTC market throughout, but enter the sample as new firms
after January 2001. Rising stars (start in 2001) are firms that are in the OTC market as of January 2001 but
subsequently trade up to the traditional exchanges (AMEX, NASDAQ or the NYSE) or the NASDAQ Small Cap
market. Rising stars (new firms) enter the sample after January 2001 as OTC firms and later trade up. Fallen angels
(from exchange) are firms that enter the sample by delisting from the traditional exchanges and trading down to the
OTC market (in or after January 2001). NASDAQ SCM is a benchmark group comprising firms that remain on the
NASDAQ Small Cap market throughout the sample period. In Panel C, we define dark firms as firms that never file
with the SEC and are never included in securities manuals (Mergent’s Manual or the Standard & Poor’s Corporation
Records). The fractions within the OTC are computed by dividing the number of OTC firm-months with SEC filings
or with inclusion in securities manuals by the total number of OTC firm-months.

Table 2
Survival statistics and trading venue transitions
Panel A: Firm entries and exits
Sample group

Start in sample

# Firms

= Jan 2001

End in sample

> Jan 2001

< Oct 2010

= Oct 2010

In OTC only (start in 2001)

5,016

5,016

0

1,684

3,332

New firms (remain in OTC)

3,134

0

3,134

454

2,680

370

370

0

74

296

Rising stars (start in 2001)
Rising stars (new firms)
Fallen angels (from exchange)
Total OTC
Benchmark: NASDAQ SCM

276

0

276

62

214

1,787

1,634

153

818

969

10,583

7,020

3,563

3,092

7,491

220

178

42

110

110

Panel B: Trading venue transitions across years
Venue
NBB

Sample: existing in 2001
2001
2,706 100%

BB
SCM/Exchange
Removed
NBB

Sample: existing in 2003

2006

2003

2,174

80%

302

2005

76%

11%

281

30

1%

200

7%

1,095

37%
42%

SCM/Exchange

201

Removed

411

2,961 100%

2008
2,895

1,254

BB

3,788 100%

64%

7%

232

5%

47

1%

46

1%

565

15%

1,404

30%

925

32%
45%

7%

232

14%

434

4,625 100%

2010
2,943

1,282

2,873 100%

Sample: existing in 2005

967

36%

1,128

42%

8%

167

6%

15%

426

16%

2,688 100%

Panel C: Firm survival and crashes across years
Status
NBB

Sample: existing in 2001
2001

Sample: existing in 2003

2006

2003

2,586 100%

2008

2,588 100%

Sample: existing in 2005
2005

2010

3,166 100%

Alive

1,699

66%

1,902

73%

1,887

60%

Crash

700

27%

302

12%

484

15%

Removed

187

7%

384

15%

795

25%

Alive

2,047

69%

2,071

74%

1,804

70%

Crash

491

17%

290

10%

367

14%

Removed

410

14%

427

15%

411

16%

BB

2,948 100%

2,788 100%

2,582 100%

This table presents statistics on survival and trading venue transitions. Panel A illustrates how many firms enter the
sample at or after the beginning of the sample period (January 2001) and how many firms leave the sample at or before
the end of the sample period (October 2010). These statistics are presented by sample group. For details on the sample
group composition, see Table 1. Panel B shows 5-year venue transition matrices for firms that are part of the sample
in 2001, 2003 and 2005, respectively. The matrices illustrate whether and how the trading venue changes

Table 2 (continued)
over the subsequent five years. NBB includes both Pink Sheets and Grey Market firms. BB refers to firms on the
Bulletin Board. SCM/Exchange comprises firms listed on the NASDAQ Small Cap market or on the traditional
exchanges (AMEX, NASDAQ or the NYSE). Removed refers to firms that are no longer traded on any exchange or
venue (including the OTC market). Panel C presents survival statistics for firms that are part of the sample in 2001,
2003 and 2005, respectively, and have not crashed previously. Crash (Alive) covers firms that (i) experience (do not
experience) a cumulative monthly return of -95% at some point during the five-year window and (ii) subsequently
have a stock price below 0.01 USD for at least six months.

Table 3
Descriptive statistics on market quality proxies
Panel A: Liquidity (t)
Venue

# Firms months

NBB

Missing

NBB
NBB

Mean

StDev

P25

P50

P75

145,888

-0.3712

0.4628

-0.6118

-0.5549

-0.3475

Grey Market

20,246

-0.4925

0.3118

-0.6118

-0.6112

-0.5307

Pink Sheets

152,072

-0.2577

0.5211

-0.6053

-0.4670

-0.1239

BB

298,477

0.0564

0.6136

-0.4186

-0.0703

0.3780

Total OTC

616,683

-0.1403

0.5847

-0.5732

-0.3569

0.1304

SCM (Benchmark or to/from OTC)

39,489

0.5665

0.6477

0.1566

0.5023

0.7890

Exchange (to/from OTC)

68,409

0.9121

0.7192

0.5059

0.7555

1.1650

P25

P50

P75

Panel A1: Proportion of zero return days (t)
Venue

# Firms months

Mean

StDev

NBB

Missing

145,888

0.8677

0.2142

0.8421

0.9545

1.0000

NBB

Grey Market

20,246

0.9300

0.1573

0.9500

1.0000

1.0000

NBB

Pink Sheets

152,072

0.7974

0.2489

0.6818

0.9048

1.0000

BB

298,477

0.5805

0.3013

0.3182

0.6087

0.8571

Total OTC

616,683

0.7134

0.2972

0.5000

0.8182

1.0000

SCM (Benchmark or to/from OTC)

39,489

0.2642

0.2372

0.0526

0.1905

0.4211

Exchange (to/from OTC)

68,409

0.1412

0.1818

0.0000

0.0870

0.1905

P25

P50

P75

Panel A2: Share turnover (t)
Venue

# Firms months

Mean

StDev

NBB

Missing

145,888

0.0728

0.2507

0.0000

0.0033

0.0335

NBB

Grey Market

20,246

0.0316

0.1692

0.0000

0.0002

0.0060

NBB

Pink Sheets

152,072

0.0991

0.2733

0.0013

0.0144

0.0689

BB

298,477

0.1492

0.3150

0.0091

0.0423

0.1413

Total OTC

616,683

0.1149

0.2890

0.0015

0.0198

0.0918

SCM (Benchmark or to/from OTC)

39,489

0.2671

0.4197

0.0437

0.1119

0.2884

Exchange (to/from OTC)

68,409

0.4401

0.5316

0.0955

0.2372

0.5665

P25

P50

P75

Panel B: Crash risk (t to t+2)
Venue

# Firms months

NBB

Missing

NBB

Grey Market

NBB

Pink Sheets

Mean

StDev

84,825

0.0804

0.6837

-0.2619

-0.1038

0.4891

6,251

0.1393

0.8139

-0.3242

-0.0926

0.7456

108,324

0.0567

0.5994

-0.2232

-0.1068

0.1997

BB

253,936

-0.0460

0.4092

-0.2011

-0.1227

-0.0368

Total OTC

453,336

0.0047

0.5288

-0.2120

-0.1147

0.0266

SCM (Benchmark or to/from OTC)

34,344

-0.1261

0.2009

-0.1948

-0.1335

-0.0800

Exchange (to/from OTC)

59,079

-0.0957

0.2439

-0.1851

-0.1284

-0.0728

Table 3 (continued)
Panel B1: Negative skewness of returns (t to t+2)
Venue

# Firms months

NBB

Missing

NBB

Grey Market

NBB

Pink Sheets

Mean

StDev

P25

P50

P75

84,825

0.2161

4.1159

-1.4156

0.0053

1.9154

6,251

-0.1012

4.6100

-1.9715

0.0104

1.6640

108,324

0.2328

3.5271

-1.0598

-0.0091

1.2685

BB

253,936

-0.1508

2.2777

-0.8514

-0.1533

0.4762

Total OTC

453,336

0.0102

3.0620

-0.9540

-0.0892

0.7495

SCM (Benchmark or to/from OTC)

34,344

-0.3057

1.2180

-0.7777

-0.2218

0.2554

Exchange (to/from OTC)

59,079

-0.1622

1.2125

-0.6937

-0.1813

0.3034

Panel B2: Cumulative return less than -95% (t to t+2)
Venue

# Firms months

NBB

Missing

NBB

Grey Market

NBB

Pink Sheets

84,825

Mean
0.1559

StDev
0.3627

6,251

0.2435

0.4292

108,324

0.1321

0.3386

BB

253,936

0.0753

0.2639

Total OTC

453,336

0.1063

0.3082

SCM (Benchmark or to/from OTC)

34,344

0.0163

0.1266

Exchange (to/from OTC)

59,079

0.0300

0.1706

This table presents descriptive statistics on our market quality proxies by trading venue at the firm-month level. We
use two proxies: liquidity (Panel A) and crash risk (Panel B). Liquidity is the first principal component of the
proportion of zero return days and share turnover, both measured over the current month (t). The proportion of zero
return days is the fraction of trading days in a given month with zero returns (Panel A1). Share turnover is the average
number of shares traded per day divided by the average number of shares outstanding in a given month (Panel A2).
Crash risk is the first principal component of the negative skewness of returns and a dummy variable capturing large
negative returns, both measured over rolling three-month windows that include the current month and two subsequent
months (t to t+2). The negative skewness of returns is the negative coefficient of skewness, i.e. the negative of the
third moment of daily log returns divided by the standard deviation of daily log returns raised to the third power (Panel
B1). The dummy variable is also based on daily log returns and indicates a cumulative return less than -95% over the
three-month window (Panel B2). NBB includes both Grey Market and Pink Sheets firms. A proprietary dataset
provided by the OTC Markets Group (the PS venue history) allows us to identify these subsamples. The remaining
firms for which this separation is not possible are flagged as NBB Missing. BB refers to firms on the Bulletin Board.
SCM indicates firms on the NASDAQ Small Cap market and comprises firms in the benchmark group (see Table 1)
as well as firms that come from or will switch to the OTC market. Exchange captures firms listed on the traditional
exchanges (AMEX, NASDAQ or the NYSE) that come from or will switch to the OTC market. For consistency with
the regression analysis reported in Table 4 (based on the NASDAQ venue history), we apply the same filters: for
liquidity, we exclude months in which firms change trading venues; for crash risk, the month of and the six months
before venue changes are excluded.

Table 4
Regression analysis: Trading venues
Panel A: Liquidity (t)
Dependent variable: Liquidity (t)
Independent variables

NASDAQ venue history:
Jan 2001 - Oct 2010

PS venue history:
Feb 2003 - Oct 2010

Trading venue indicators
Pink Sheets
BB
SCM (Benchmark or to/from OTC)
Exchange (to/from OTC)

0.095***

0.128***

(7.28)

(7.54)

0.238***

0.246***

0.280***

0.317***

(29.47)

(32.64)

(17.55)

(16.97)

0.795***

0.681***

0.945***

0.806***

(51.02)

(46.10)

(37.12)

(31.01)

1.004***

0.700***

1.095***

0.792***

(68.42)

(54.45)

(48.60)

(34.64)

0.102***

0.074***

0.119***

0.070***

(47.83)

(35.70)

(44.69)

(26.31)

0.116***

0.046***

0.114***

0.052***

(15.39)

(8.12)

(10.82)

(6.68)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Control variables (lagged)
Log(Market value)
Return volatility
Price-level indicators
Firm fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Industry fixed effects

Yes

Year-month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

724,581

724,581

431,928

431,928

0.40

0.62

0.41

0.65

# Firm months
R-squared

Yes

Table 4 (continued)
Panel B: Crash risk (t to t+2)
Dependent variable: Crash risk (t to t+2)
Independent variables

NASDAQ venue history:
Jan 2001 - Oct 2010

PS venue history:
Feb 2003 - Oct 2010

Trading venue indicators
Pink Sheets
BB
SCM (Benchmark or to/from OTC)
Exchange (to/from OTC)

-0.050**

-0.110***

(-2.57)

(-4.74)

-0.096***

-0.163***

-0.137***

-0.245***

(-22.42)

(-28.14)

(-6.74)

(-10.26)

-0.139***

-0.219***

-0.183***

-0.305***

(-24.98)

(-24.46)

(-8.63)

(-11.89)

-0.123***

-0.243***

-0.173***

-0.315***

(-21.10)

(-29.42)

(-8.15)

(-12.67)

0.012***

0.052***

0.011***

0.054***

(10.79)

(32.34)

(8.57)

(26.27)

0.283***

0.122***

0.247***

0.102***

(33.96)

(13.06)

(23.77)

(8.76)

0.062***

0.091***

0.062***

0.091***

(32.69)

(47.42)

(26.28)

(38.81)

0.017***

0.009***

0.015***

0.006

(6.44)

(2.66)

(4.59)

(1.61)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Control variables (lagged)
Log(Market value)
Return volatility
Cumulative return
Share turnover
Price-level indicators
Firm fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Industry fixed effects

Yes

Year-month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

546,759

546,759

335,322

335,322

0.07

0.16

0.06

0.16

# Firm months
R-squared

Yes

Table 4 (continued)
This table presents regression analyses relating liquidity (Panel A) and crash risk (Panel B) to the trading venues of
the sample firms. For details on the proxies for liquidity (t) and crash risk (t to t+2), see Table 3. All regressions are
estimated at the firm-month level and include year-month and either industry or firm fixed effects. The first two
specifications in each panel are based on the full sample as described in Table 1 (NASDAQ venue history; period:
January 2001 to October 2010), and include the following trading venue indicators: BB (firms traded on the Bulletin
Board), SCM (firms on the NASDAQ Small Cap market) and Exchange (firms listed on AMEX, NASDAQ or the
NYSE) with NBB firms (firms traded on the Pink Sheets or the Grey Market) being the omitted category. The third
and fourth specifications exploit the PS venue history as described in Table 3 (period: February 2003 to October 2010),
and refine the analysis by including an additional venue dummy for Pink Sheets firms, with Grey Market firms being
the omitted category. We include the following lagged control variables: Log(Market value) is the natural logarithm
of the median market value over the previous three months (t-3 to t-1); Return volatility is the standard deviation of
weekly log returns over the previous six months (t-6 to t-1); Cumulative return is the cumulative log return over the
previous three months (t-3 to t-1); and Share turnover is average number of shares traded per day divided by the
average number of shares outstanding over the previous three months (t-3 to t-1). We also include, but do not report
the coefficients on, three price-level dummy variables that indicate whether the median stock price over the three
previous months (t-3 to t-1) is below $0.01, $0.10 or $1.00, respectively. The analyses are subject to the following
transition filters: for the liquidity regressions, we exclude months in which firms change trading venues; for the crash
risk regressions, the month of and the six months before venue changes are excluded. The table reports OLS coefficient
estimates and (in parentheses) t-statistics. The t-statistics are based on standard errors clustered by firm. ***, **, *
indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels (two-tailed), respectively.

Table 5
Regression analysis: SEC filings and manual inclusions
Panel A: Liquidity (t)
Dependent variable: Liquidity (t)

Independent variables
Manual

All venues

NBB only

0.054***

0.057***

0.111***

0.090***

(7.64)

(9.89)

(10.09)

(12.14)

0.034***

0.050***

0.055***

0.047***

(3.29)

(6.50)

(5.27)

(6.16)

Trading venue indicators

Yes

Yes

Control variables (lagged)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Price-level indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

SEC

Firm fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Industry fixed effects

Yes

Year-month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

713,217

713,217

311,252

311,252

0.40

0.63

0.14

0.50

0.044***

0.041***

(5.84)

(6.09)
0.028**

0.027***

(2.36)

(2.70)

# Firm months
R-squared

Yes

Prop. matched sample
Manual
SEC

Table 5 (continued)
Panel B: Crash risk (t to t+2)
Dependent variable: Crash risk (t to t+2)

Independent variables
Manual

All venues

NBB only

-0.030***

-0.004

-0.046***

-0.012

(-11.30)

(-0.86)

(-5.15)

(-1.04)

-0.057***

-0.070***

-0.044***

-0.069***

(-7.47)

(-8.25)

(-5.33)

(-5.74)

Trading venue indicators

Yes

Yes

Control variables (lagged)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Price-level indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

SEC

Firm fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Industry fixed effects

Yes

Year-month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

501,286

501,286

178,255

178,255

0.07

0.16

0.07

0.20

-0.024***

-0.003

(-8.89)

(-0.69)
-0.050***

-0.082***

(-5.29)

(-3.78)

# Firm months
R-squared

Yes

Prop. matched sample
Manual
SEC

This table presents regression analyses relating liquidity (Panel A) and crash risk (Panel B) to the SEC filing and
manual inclusion status of the sample firms. For details on the proxies for liquidity (t) and crash risk (t to t+2), see
Table 3. All regressions are estimated at the firm-month level and include year-month and either industry or firm fixed
effects. The analyses are based on the NASDAQ venue history (period: January 2001 to October 2010) and include
firm-month observations either from all venues or from the NBB only (Pink Sheets and Grey Market). SEC is a dummy
variable equal to one for firms that file 10-Ks and 10-Qs with the SEC, and zero otherwise. All firms outside the NBB
are defined as SEC registrants, that is, SEC equals zero only for firms in the Pink Sheets or the Grey Market that do
not file with the SEC. Manual is a dummy variable equal to one for firms that are included in either Mergent’s Manual
or the Standard & Poor’s Corporation Records in a given year and zero otherwise. We also include, but do not report
the coefficients on, trading venue indicators, lagged control variables and price-level controls (see Table 4 for details).
The analyses are subject to the following filters: for the liquidity regressions, we exclude months in which firms
change their SEC filing and/or manual inclusion status; for the crash risk regressions, the month of and the six months
before such changes are excluded. The upper (lower) part of each panel reports regressions results based on the full
sample (a propensity-matched sample). We perform the propensity-matching at the half-year level without
replacement using a caliper of 0.0001. In the regressions based on observations from all

Table 5 (continued)
venues (from the NBB only), we match on Manual (SEC) using SEC (Manual), lagged market value, lagged return
volatility and lagged stock price, as well as dummy variables for industry, state of headquarters and half-years as
matching variables. The table reports OLS coefficient estimates and (in parentheses) t-statistics. The t-statistics are
based on standard errors clustered by firm. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels
(two-tailed), respectively.

Table 6
Regression analysis: State merit reviews
Independent variables
Merit review

Dependent variable:
Liquidity (t)

Dependent variable:
Crash risk (t to t+2)

0.019***

0.001

(2.99)

(0.30)

Merit review
(with manual exemption)

0.013*

0.001

(1.85)

(0.33)

Merit review
(w/o manual exemption)

0.022***

0.001

(3.35)

(0.25)

SoInc ≠ SoHqt

0.085***

0.084***

0.034***

0.034***

(10.91)

(10.76)

(9.54)

(9.55)

Trading venue indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Manual and SEC indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Control variables (lagged)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Price-level indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Industry fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year-month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

550,930

550,930

433,215

433,215

0.23

0.23

0.06

0.06

# Firm months
R-squared

This table presents regression analyses relating liquidity and crash risk to the strictness of Blue Sky laws at the state
level. For details on the proxies for liquidity (t) and crash risk (t to t+2), see Table 3. All regressions are estimated at
the firm-month level and include year-month and industry fixed effects. The analyses are based on the NASDAQ
venue history (period: January 2001 to October 2010) and include only firm-month observations from the OTC market
(BB and NBB). Merit review is a measure of the strictness of the state’s merit review as described in section 5.3. For
each sample firm, we use Merit review for its state of headquarters because most states require home state registration.
In the second specification, we distinguish between states that offer a manual exemption and those that do not (with
or w/o manual exemption). Thus, Merit review (with manual exemption) takes the value of Merit review only when
firms are headquartered in a state with a manual exemption, and is zero otherwise. SoInc ≠ SoHqt is a dummy variable
that equals one for firms incorporated outside the state of their headquarters, and zero otherwise. We also include, but
do not report the coefficients on, trading venue indicators, indicators for SEC filing and manual inclusion status,
lagged control variables and price-level controls (see Tables 4 and 5 for details). No filters are imposed in these
analyses. The table reports OLS coefficient estimates and (in parentheses) t-statistics. The t-statistics are based on
standard errors clustered by firm. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels (two-tailed),
respectively.

Table 7
Regression analysis: Pink Sheets tiers and Caveat Emptor
Independent variables
Caveat Emptor

Dependent variable:
Liquidity (t)

Dependent variable:
Crash risk (t to t+2)

0.007

-0.059*

0.066***

-0.043

(0.21)

(-1.78)

(2.78)

(-0.80)

0.139***

0.212***

-0.029

-0.314***

(5.44)

(5.97)

(-0.98)

(-4.66)

0.447***

0.340***

-0.063**

-0.390***

(14.41)

(8.71)

(-2.02)

(-5.68)

0.355***

0.456***

-0.135***

-0.517***

(10.39)

(10.16)

(-4.15)

(-7.00)

Manual and SEC indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Control variables (lagged)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Price-level indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Pink No Info
Pink Limited Info
Pink Current Info

Firm fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Industry fixed effects

Yes

Year-month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

79,760

79,760

45,788

45,788

0.17

0.60

0.06

0.27

# Firm months
R-squared

Yes

This table presents regression analyses relating liquidity and crash risk to indicators for the Pink Sheets information
tiers and the Caveat Emptor label. For details on the proxies for liquidity (t) and crash risk (t to t+2), see Table 3. All
regressions are estimated at the firm-month level and include year-month and firm fixed effects. The analyses are
based on a proprietary dataset provided by the OTC Markets Group (PS tier history; period: October 2007 to October
2010) and include only firm-month observations from the NBB (Pink Sheets and Grey Market). Caveat Emptor is a
dummy variable indicating firms that are flagged by the OTC Markets Group as having a public interest concern. Pink
No Info, Pink Limited Info and Pink Current Info are dummy variables for firms in the respective Pink Sheets
information tier which were introduced by the OTC Markets Group in 2007. Grey Market firms are the omitted
category. We also include, but do not report the coefficients on, indicators for SEC filing and manual inclusion status,
lagged control variables and price-level controls (see Tables 4 and 5 for details). The analyses are subject to the
following sample filters: for the liquidity regressions, we exclude months in which firms change Pink Sheets
information tiers and/or their Caveat Emptor status; for the crash risk regressions, the month of and the six months
before such changes are excluded. The table reports OLS coefficient estimates and (in parentheses) t-statistics. The tstatistics are based on standard errors clustered by firm. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and
10% levels (two-tailed), respectively.

Table 8
Return analysis by information regime
Panel A: NBB firm months
Portfolio
weighting
Equal
Value

NBB
SEC no

SEC yes

Manual no

Manual yes

Manual no

Manual yes

-0.048***

-0.049***

-0.049***

-0.059***

(-10.15)

(-6.76)

(-7.73)

(-8.67)

-0.049***

-0.015**

-0.042***

-0.033***

(-8.59)

(-2.41)

(-4.75)

(-4.20)

Panel B: BB and SCM firm months
Portfolio
weighting
Equal
Value

BB

SCM

SEC required

SEC required

Manual no

Manual yes

Manual no

Manual yes

-0.052***

-0.050***

-0.008

-0.004

(-11.73)

(-8.94)

(-0.76)

(-1.06)

-0.056***

-0.041***

-0.018

-0.009***

(-13.08)

(-6.04)

(-1.58)

(-2.64)

This table presents alpha estimates from monthly time-series regressions that relate equal- and value-weighted
portfolio log returns at the information regime-level (venue, SEC filing and manual inclusion status) to a five factor
asset pricing model comprising market, size, value, momentum and the Pastor-Stambaugh (2003) liquidity factors.
The liquidity factor is available at Lubos Pastor’s website. The other factors come from Kenneth French’s website.
We include the contemporaneous value and three lags of each factor to account for thin trading. Firm-months in which
the information regime changes (e.g., due to a venue switch and/or a change in the SEC filing or manual inclusion
status) are excluded from the regressions. Panel A reports estimates for Grey Market and Pink Sheets firms (NBB).
Panel B reports estimates for firms on the Bulletin Board (BB) and on the NASDAQ Small Cap market (SCM),
respectively. The table reports OLS coefficient estimates and (in parentheses) t-statistics based on Newey-West
standard errors. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels (two-tailed), respectively.

For Online Publication
Internet Appendix
“The Twilight Zone: OTC Regulatory Regimes and Market Quality”
This appendix provides supplemental discussion and analysis for our manuscript “The Twilight
Zone: OTC Regulatory Regimes and Market Quality”.
Table of Contents
IA.1

Industry and geographic characteristics by sample group

IA.2

Market-based firm characteristics by sample group

IA.3

Trading activity in the OTC market

IA.4

Validation of market quality proxies

IA.5

Liquidity changes around trading venue transitions

IA.6

E-Ticker analysis

IA.7

SEC filing and manual inclusion for financial companies

IA.8

Adding firm fixed effects to the analysis of state merit reviews

IA.9

Pink Sheets information tiers and financial companies

IA.10

Regime changes in the Pink Sheets

IA.11

Extending the fixed effects structure

IA.12

Short selling in the OTC market

1

IA.1

Industry and geographic characteristics by sample group

Table IA.1 presents statistics on the distribution of industry (Panels A and B), state of
headquarters (Panel C) and state of incorporation (Panel D) for each sample group.
Panel A shows that financials are the largest group, followed by firms in cyclical services,
information technology and non-cyclical consumer products.

However, there are notable

differences across sample groups. For instance, while financials dominate in most groups, firms
operating in cyclical services and information technology constitute a larger fraction of the
Fallen angels category.

The latter finding is intuitive as these industries face significant

fundamental uncertainty. Panel B provides a more detailed industry classification. Financial
services companies and banks represent the two largest industry groups for firms that remain in
the OTC throughout, while pharmaceuticals and health care firms are among the top five
industries in the Rising stars category and the benchmark group NASDAQ SCM.
Panel C illustrates that most sample firms are headquartered in California, New York,
Florida or Texas, and shows that the distribution of headquarters across states is related to
population. A relatively large proportion of firms that enter the sample after January 2001 is
based in a country other than the U.S. or Canada (New firms (remain in OTC): 9%; Rising stars
(new firms): 14%). This suggests that the OTC market has become popular among foreign
companies in recent years. Panel D shows that the majority of the OTC firms is incorporated in
Delaware or Nevada. While Delaware dominates in most sample groups, firms in the New firms
(remain in OTC) category are more likely to be incorporated in Nevada. Untabulated statistics
show that 74% of the sample firms choose to incorporate in a state that is different from their
state of headquarters. These numbers are comparable to those in Litvak (2011) showing that
over

80%

of

Compustat

firms

are

incorporated

outside

their

home

state.
2

Table IA.1
Panel A: Broad industry categories by sample group
Sample group
In OTC only
(start in 2001)

Industry group

# Firms

New firms
(remain in OTC)

Rising stars
(start in 2001)

Share

# Firms

Share

# Firms

Share

Rising stars
(new firms)
# Firms

Fallen angels
(from exchange)

Share

# Firms

Benchmark:
NASDAQ SCM

Total OTC

Share

# Firms

Share

# Firms

Share

Basic industries

173

3%

98

3%

14

4%

23

8%

88

5%

396

4%

7

3%

Cyclical consumer goods

106

2%

59

2%

9

2%

12

4%

59

3%

245

2%

7

3%

Cyclical services

894

18%

540

17%

35

9%

55

20%

404

23%

1,928

18%

21

10%

1,659

33%

1,179

38%

130

35%

35

13%

239

13%

3,242

31%

115

52%

Financials
General industrials

383

8%

141

4%

24

6%

26

9%

161

9%

735

7%

12

5%

Information technology

615

12%

289

9%

31

8%

21

8%

410

23%

1,366

13%

18

8%

Non-cyclical consumer

558

11%

331

11%

74

20%

52

19%

262

15%

1,277

12%

30

14%

Non-cyclical services

114

2%

63

2%

5

1%

18

7%

81

5%

281

3%

1

0%

Resources

362

7%

321

10%

43

12%

21

8%

51

3%

798

8%

8

4%

Unclassified

9

0%

9

0%

0

0%

0

0%

2

0%

20

0%

0

0%

143

3%

104

3%

5

1%

13

5%

30

2%

295

3%

1

0%

5,016

100%

3,134

100%

370

100%

276

100%

1,787

100%

10,583

100%

220

100%

Utilities
Total

Panel B: Top 5 industries by sample group (within-group share)
Sample group
Rank

In OTC only
(start in 2001)
Industry

Share

New firms
(remain in OTC)
Industry

Share

Rising stars
(start in 2001)
Industry

Share

Rising stars
(new firms)
Industry

Fallen angels
(from exchange)

Share

Industry

9% Software

Share

Benchmark:
NASDAQ SCM

Total OTC
Industry

1

Financial Svc

19% Financial Svc

25% Banks

33% Pharma

14% Financial Svc

2

Banks

12% Banks

11% Pharma

9% Banks

8% Technology

9% Banks

3

Software

9% Software

7% Health care

7% Retailers

5% Banks

4

Support Svc

5% Oil & gas

5% Oil & gas

7% Food

5% Support Svc

5

Health care

4% Media

5% Software

4% Electronics

5% Health care

Share

Industry

17% Banks

Share
45%

11% Health care

6%

6% Software

9% Software

6%

6% Support Svc

5% Electronics

5%

5% Media

4% Pharma

5%

3

Panel C: Top 5 states of headquarters by sample group (within-group share)
Sample group
Rank

In OTC only
(start in 2001)
State

Share

New firms
(remain in OTC)
State

15% California

Share

Rising stars
(start in 2001)
State

1

California

16% California

2

Florida

9% Other country

9% Texas

3

New York

8% Florida

4

Texas

5

Not found

Share

Rising stars
(new firms)
State

Fallen angels
(from exchange)

Share

16% Other country

State

Share

Benchmark:
NASDAQ SCM

Total OTC
State

Share

14% California

21% California

9% California

12% New York

10% Florida

9% Florida

7% New York

11% Texas

7% Canada

8% New York

7% Texas

5% New York

7% New Jersey

5% Florida

State

Share

17% New York

11%

8% California

10%

8% New York

8% Ohio

6%

8% Florida

6% Texas

7% Florida

6%

4% Massach.

5% Other country

5% N. Carolina

6%

Panel D: Top 5 states of incorporation by sample group (within-group share)
Sample group
Rank

In OTC only
(start in 2001)
State

Share

New firms
(remain in OTC)
State

Share

Rising stars
(start in 2001)
State

Share

Rising stars
(new firms)
State

Fallen angels
(from exchange)

Share

State

Share

Benchmark:
NASDAQ SCM

Total OTC
State

60% Delaware

Share

State

Delaware

30% Nevada

46% Delaware

34% Delaware

54% Delaware

2

Nevada

23% Delaware

22% Nevada

12% Nevada

21% Nevada

3

Florida

7% Florida

6% California

5% Florida

4% California

4% Florida

6% Virginia

5%

4

Colorado

5% California

5% Florida

5% Colorado

3% New York

3% California

4% New York

5%

5

California

4% Colorado

3% Colorado

4% California

3% Florida

3% Colorado

4% Florida

4%

4% Nevada

34% Delaware

Share

1

26% Ohio

43%
6%

This table presents firm-level statistics on industry, state of headquarters and state of incorporation by sample group. Panel A provides information on broad
industry categories. Panel B shows the top 5 industries using a more detailed industry categorization. Panel C reports the top 5 states in which the sample firms
have their headquarters. Panel D focuses on the top 5 states of incorporation. For firms that switch industries or state of headquarters/incorporation, we use the
industry or state where the firm spends the longest time during the sample period. For details on the sample groups, see Table 1 in the paper.

4

IA.2

Market-based firm characteristics by sample group

Table IA.2 provides descriptive statistics on market-based firm characteristics for our OTC
sample by sample group.
Panel A shows that the mean (median) volume-weighted market value is about $52 million
($17 million) across all OTC sample firms. The large difference between the mean and median
indicates a highly right-skewed distribution. Firms in the In OTC only (start in 2001) group tend
to be smallest: the median is about $7.2 million and more than a quarter have market values of
less than $2 million. Firms in the Rising stars (new firms) category tend to be largest, with a
median of about $125 million.
Panel B shows that the volume-weighted stock price is also skewed with a mean (median) of
$6.81 ($1.01) across all OTC sample firms. The In OTC only (start in 2001) group has a
particularly high proportion of low-priced stocks. In contrast, a large fraction of Benchmark
firms from the NASDAQ SCM trade above one U.S. dollar.
Panel C shows that firms in the OTC market exhibit, on average, negative annualized returns
over the entire sample period (mean: -60.19%; median: -45.98%). There is substantial variation
across sample groups. For example, while the median annualized return for the New firms
(remain in OTC) group is -59.15% over the sample period, it is 2.54% for firms in the Rising
stars (new firms) category.

Each sample group has firms with large positive returns.

Untabulated statistics show that even among firms that remain in the OTC market there are more
than 1,000 stocks with cumulative returns above 10% over the entire sample period. Figure 3 in
the paper illustrates this heterogeneity with a histogram of returns for all firm years in the OTC
sample. While stock returns are indeed negative for the majority of firm years, some annual

5

returns are extremely high.1 Taken together, these results are consistent with Eraker and Ready
(2015).
Panel D shows that return volatility (measured as the standard deviation of monthly returns)
is high in the OTC market. Again, large differences are visible across OTC sample groups. For
instance, the median volatility for new firms that remain in the OTC market (0.39) is almost
twice the volatility of firms in the Rising stars groups and three times the volatility of NASDAQ
SCM Benchmark firms.
Table IA.2
Panel A: Average market value in $US across months (volume weighted)
Sample group

# Firms

Mean

StDev

In OTC only (start in 2001)

4,433

25,842,486

68,452,482

1,809,716

7,238,550

22,678,626

New firms (remain in OTC)

2,659

45,232,324

79,665,907

8,070,141

21,087,173

48,353,415

Rising stars (start in 2001)

370

132,300,000

112,500,000

47,387,900

99,475,202

189,300,000

Rising stars (new firms)

259

194,700,000

177,100,000

65,124,142

124,600,000

293,200,000

Fallen angels (from exchange)

1,776

90,542,786

125,200,000

12,100,150

36,063,789

118,100,000

Total OTC

9,497

52,123,936

98,250,939

4,656,899

16,676,756

50,221,229

220

54,290,381

54,614,188

20,104,104

38,353,974

68,975,586

P25

P50

P75

Benchmark: NASDAQ SCM

P25

P50

P75

Panel B: Average stock price in $US across months (volume weighted)
Sample group

Mean

StDev

In OTC only (start in 2001)

5,015

7.81

23.15

0.12

0.48

2.13

New firms (remain in OTC)

3,134

4.96

17.08

0.35

0.92

2.46

Rising stars (start in 2001)

370

11.15

10.05

3.94

7.72

16.29

Rising stars (new firms)

267

10.21

10.01

3.75

6.53

13.77

Fallen angels (from exchange)
Total OTC
Benchmark: NASDAQ SCM

1

# Firms

1,782

5.83

9.70

1.10

2.81

7.05

10,568

6.81

19.11

0.27

1.01

4.48

220

11.95

10.66

4.07

9.70

15.02

Note that the statistics in Table IA.2 are based on log returns at the firm level, whereas Figure 3 shows the
distribution of discrete returns at the firm-year level.

6

Panel C: Annualized returns over entire sample period
Sample group

# Firms

Mean

In OTC only (start in 2001)

4,914

-55.74%

New firms (remain in OTC)

StDev

P25

P50

71.63%

-87.74%

-42.72%

P75
-2.18%

3,070

-69.90%

97.87%

-127.44%

-59.15%

-9.82%

Rising stars (start in 2001)

362

-5.18%

31.30%

-18.60%

1.33%

16.52%

Rising stars (new firms)

270

-6.54%

48.89%

-25.18%

2.54%

21.36%

1,751

-75.28%

85.16%

-100.63%

-58.07%

-17.34%

10,367

-60.19%

82.73%

-97.45%

-45.98%

-3.72%

214

12.63%

28.22%

-2.33%

10.32%

27.04%

Mean

StDev

P25

P50

P75

Fallen angels (from exchange)
Total OTC
Benchmark: NASDAQ SCM

Panel D: Volatility of monthly stock returns
Sample group

# Firms

In OTC only (start in 2001)

5,016

0.3471

0.1828

0.2134

0.3767

0.4763

New firms (remain in OTC)

3,134

0.3901

0.1854

0.2624

0.4055

0.5140

Rising stars (start in 2001)

370

0.2205

0.1141

0.1154

0.2155

0.2922

Rising stars (new firms)

276

0.2415

0.1194

0.1527

0.2293

0.3190

1,787

0.3399

0.1405

0.2430

0.3316

0.4335

10,583

0.3514

0.1776

0.2223

0.3657

0.4755

220

0.1378

0.0736

0.0785

0.1210

0.1876

Fallen angels (from exchange)
Total OTC
Benchmark: NASDAQ SCM

This table presents firm-level descriptive statistics by sample group. Panel A (Panel B) reports statistics for average
market value (average stock price) in U.S. dollars weighted by trading volume. Panel C summarizes the distribution
of annualized log returns over the entire sample period. Panel D provides statistics on the volatility (i.e., the standard
deviation) of monthly log returns. For details on the sample groups, see Table 1 in the paper.

7

IA.3

Trading activity in the OTC market

Table IA.3 provides descriptive statistics on trading activity in the OTC market by trading
venue at the firm-month level.
Panel A shows that the mean (median) proportion of trading days is 40.12% (28.57%) across
all firm-months in our OTC sample. These statistics are consistent with Ang et al. (2013) who
report a mean proportion of trading days of about 53% across their sample of OTC stocks (see
also Bollen and Christie, 2009). Trading frequency varies substantially in the cross-section of
our sample. For example, while about 10% of OTC stocks trade almost every day (untabulated),
a quarter of all OTC stocks have zero volume on 95% of the days. There is also systematic
variation in trading frequency across venues. For example, the median proportion of trading
days is 57.14% for firms on the Bulletin Board (BB) but only 4.55% for Grey Market firms.
Panel B shows that trading volume on trading days is generally low, with a mean (median)
of $37,220 ($2,456) across all firm-months in our OTC sample. Again, there is substantial
variation across trading venues. For example, while BB firms have a median volume of $7,258,
the median volume of firms in the Pink Sheets (Grey Market) is merely $428 ($15). In several
instances, the mean values are influenced by large outliers (e.g., for firms in the Grey Market).
Taken together, this analysis shows that trading activity tends to be low in the OTC market
but also that it varies predictably across venues. By and large, more regulated venues have more
actively traded securities.

8

Table IA.3
Panel A: Proportion of trading days over firm month
Venue

# Firms months

Mean

StDev

P25

P50

P75

209,511

23.46%

30.90%

0.00%

9.52%

35.00%

NBB

Missing

NBB

Grey Market

30,238

14.03%

23.19%

0.00%

4.55%

15.79%

NBB

Pink Sheets

184,903

36.74%

34.36%

5.00%

25.00%

65.00%

BB

321,812

55.36%

35.87%

21.05%

57.14%

94.74%

Total OTC

746,464

40.12%

36.68%

5.00%

28.57%

75.00%

SCM (Benchmark or to/from OTC)

41,584

82.77%

22.93%

70.00%

95.24%

100.00%

Exchange (to/from OTC)

75,717

94.01%

15.23%

100.00%

100.00%

100.00%

P50

P75

Panel B: Average daily trading volume in $US - non-zero trading volume days only
Venue

# Firms months

Mean

StDev

137,770

33,429

505,506

23

438

4,052

Grey Market

16,304

99,089

945,801

0

15

692

Pink Sheets

153,787

25,415

249,164

44

428

3,701

BB

296,875

41,696

190,896

1,945

7,258

24,036

Total OTC

NBB

Missing

NBB
NBB

P25

604,736

37,220

340,823

220

2,456

12,951

SCM (Benchmark or to/from OTC)

41,118

162,524

470,128

10,829

29,757

95,063

Exchange (to/from OTC)

67,127

578,152

996,176

28,840

124,119

606,465

This table presents descriptive statistics on trading activity in the OTC market by trading venue at the firm-month
level. Panel A provides statistics on the proportion of trading days (i.e., days with non-zero trading volume). Panel B
reports statistics on the average daily trading volume in U.S. dollars on trading days (i.e., conditional on daily
trading volume being non-zero). NBB includes both Grey Market and Pink Sheets firms. A proprietary dataset
provided by the OTC Markets Group (the PS venue history) allows us to identify these subsamples. The remaining
firms for which this separation is not possible are flagged as NBB Missing. BB refers to firms on the Bulletin Board.
SCM indicates firms on the NASDAQ Small Cap market and comprises firms in the benchmark group (see Table 1
in the paper) as well as firms that come from or will switch to the OTC market. Exchange captures firms listed on
the traditional exchanges (AMEX, NASDAQ or the NYSE) that come from or will switch to the OTC market. No
filters are imposed in these analyses.

9

IA.4

Validation of market quality proxies

In this section, we validate our market quality proxies. First, in Table IA.4a, we compare
our liquidity proxy and its input variables with two commonly used liquidity measures: the price
impact measure suggested by Amihud (2002) and the bid-ask spread. For both measures, higher
values indicate more illiquid stocks. As expected, our liquidity proxy is negatively correlated
with both the Amihud measure and the bid-ask spread (see Panel B). These correlations are
sizeable (between -0.6499 and -0.5379) and statistically significant, suggesting that our proxy
does indeed capture stock liquidity. Note that we do not use the Amihud measure or the bid-ask
spread in our main analyses because both measures are available for only a subset of our sample.
Specifically, the Amihud measure (bid-ask spread) is available for merely 53% (23%) of the
firm-months used in the liquidity analysis reported in Table 4, Panel A, of the paper.
Second, in Table IA.4b, we use data on pump and dump (or P&D) schemes to validate our
proxy for crash risk. A P&D scheme is a fraudulent form of market manipulation that involves
the manipulator taking a long position in a stock before artificially increasing demand through an
unsolicited campaign (e.g., via email, phone or fax). Prior research shows that P&D campaigns
often lead to temporary price increases and subsequent corrections or crashes (e.g., Frieder and
Zittrain, 2008; Hanke and Hauser, 2008). Thus, if our proxy (measured over the current and the
two subsequent months) captures (future) crash risk, we expect it to increase significantly for
stocks that are subject to P&D schemes. We test this relation for a large sample of P&D
schemes based on four different data sources. The regression results confirm the expectation that
the crash risk proxy increases following P&D schemes. The coefficient on the Pump and Dump
indicator is positive and statistically significant in each panel. This increase in crash risk is also
10

economically large in all specifications. For example, the coefficient estimate of the Pump and
Dump indicator in the first specification in Panel A (0.169) corresponds to roughly one-third of
the standard deviation of the crash risk proxy of 0.4919 (not tabulated, but very similar to the
statistic reported in Table 3, Panel B in the paper; the small difference is due to differences in the
sample filters employed in the main analysis).
Taken together, the results reported in this section provide evidence that our market quality
proxies capture liquidity and crash risk, respectively.
Table IA.4a
Panel A: Descriptive statistics
Variable

# Firms months

Mean

StDev

P25

P50

P75

[1] Liquidity

724,581

-0.0024

0.6895

-0.5519

-0.2317

0.3736

[2] Prop. of zero return days

724,581

0.6349

0.3422

0.3182

0.7368

0.9524

[3] Share turnover

724,581

0.1539

0.3422

0.0030

0.0307

0.1347

[4] Log(Amihud measure)

383,485

-5.0477

3.1586

-7.1610

-5.0467

-2.8990

[5] Log(Bid-ask spread)

163,364

-2.4023

1.5972

-3.4329

-2.2513

-1.2528

Panel B: Correlation matrix
Variable

# Firms months

[1]

[2]
-0.9705

[3]

[1] Liquidity

724,581

[2] Prop. of zero return days

724,581

-0.8644

[3] Share turnover

724,581

0.8584

[4] Log(Amihud measure)

383,485

-0.5379

0.6522

-0.3391

[5] Log(Bid-ask spread)

163,364

-0.6241

0.6615

-0.4190

[4]

[5]

0.9120

-0.5837

-0.6499

-0.8212

0.6564

0.6761

-0.4103

-0.5660

-0.4842

0.8857
0.8839

This table compares our liquidity proxy and its input variables (see Table 3 in the paper for details) with two
commonly used liquidity measures: The Amihud measure is the median daily price impact in a given month. We
follow Amihud (2002) and compute the daily price impact as the absolute log return divided by U.S. dollar trading
volume (measured in thousands). We compute monthly medians using days with non-zero returns (e.g., Daske et al.,
2008). The bid-ask spread is the median daily percent spread in a given month. The daily percent spread is the
difference between the closing ask price and the closing bid price, divided by the midpoint. We use the natural
logarithm of the Amihud measure and the bid-ask spread because both variables are right-skewed. Panel A presents
descriptive statistics at the firm-month level. Panel B reports Spearman (above the diagonal) and Pearson (below the
diagonal) correlations at the firm-month level. All correlations are statistically significant at the 1% level (twotailed). For consistency with the regression analysis reported in Table 4 in the paper (based on the NASDAQ venue
history), we exclude months in which firms change trading venues.

11

Table IA.4b
Panel A: All P&D firm months

Panel B: Matched P&D firm months only
Dependent variable: Crash risk (t to t+2)

Independent variables
Pump and Dump

All venues

NBB only

0.169***

0.100***

0.209***

0.082***

(6.57)

(2.81)

(9.91)

(6.26)

Trading venue indicators

Yes

Yes

Manual and SEC indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Control variables (lagged)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Price-level indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm fixed effects
Industry fixed effects
Year-month fixed effects
# Firm months
R-squared

Yes
Yes

Dependent variable: Crash risk (t to t+2)

Independent variables

Yes
Yes

Pump and Dump

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

501,286

178,255

178,255

0.07

0.16

0.07

0.20

NBB only

0.141***

0.283***

0.117**

(5.66)

(2.54)
Yes

(7.68)

(5.26)

Trading venue indicators

Yes

Yes

Manual and SEC indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Control variables (lagged)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Price-level indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm fixed effects
Industry fixed effects

501,286

All venues
0.220***

Year-month fixed effects
# Firm months
R-squared

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

501,286

501,286

178,255

178,255

0.07

0.16

0.07

0.20

This table presents regression analyses relating crash risk to pump and dump (P&D) schemes. For details on the proxy for crash risk (t to t+2), see Table 3 in the
paper. The basic research design is the same as in Table 5, Panel B of the paper including the sample filter (i.e., the month of and the six months before changes
in SEC filing and/or manual inclusion status are excluded). Pump and Dump is a dummy variable equal to one for months in which firms are subject to market
manipulation by the P&D schemes, and zero otherwise. We identify P&D schemes from four data sources: (1) the database compiled by Frieder and Zittrain
(2008); for details, see www.cyber.law.harvard.edu/stockspam; (2) the Stock Spam Effectiveness Monitor that is used by Hanke and Hauser (2008); for details,
see www.crummy.com/features/StockSpam; (3) www.spamnation.info; this website is now offline, we use a copy from February 2012; (4) the Qwoter's Spam
Report; for details, see www.qwoter.com/spam. In Panel A, the Pump and Dump indicator equals one for 1,077 firm-months with a P&D scheme according to at
least one data source. In Panel B, the Pump and Dump indicator equals one for a subset of 356 firm-months with a P&D scheme according to all four data
sources. The table reports OLS coefficient estimates and (in parentheses) t-statistics. The t-statistics are based on standard errors clustered by firm. ***, **, *
indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels (two-tailed), respectively

12

IA.5

Liquidity changes around trading venue transitions

We examine liquidity changes around trading venue transitions to tighten identification. If
venue differences and the associated disclosure regimes drive the differences in liquidity in the
main analysis reported in the paper, we should find a change in liquidity around venue
transitions, with liquidity deteriorating when the regime weakens and improving when the
regime strengthens. Accordingly, we study the change in monthly liquidity in a short window
from 6 months before through 6 months after the date of a firm’s transition from one trading
venue to another. We map out the liquidity response by estimating a separate coefficient for
each month in event time, while including year-month and transition fixed effects.
Table IA.5 presents the key coefficient estimates.

Figure IA.5 plots these coefficient

estimates for selected specifications. For transitions from NBB (Pink Sheets or Grey Market) to
BB (Bulletin Board), the coefficient estimates on the pre-transition indicators are significantly
negative, while those on the post-switch indicators are significantly positive. Since the base case
is liquidity in the transition month, these coefficients imply that liquidity is lower before the
transition and higher afterwards. The pre-transition coefficients are fairly uniform with no
apparent trend. The difference in the coefficients around the transition (month m+1 relative to
month m-1) is four times larger than the next largest difference in the coefficients for adjacent
months. For BB to NBB transitions, this pattern is reversed.
These results imply that liquidity improves significantly when a firm moves from the NBB
to the BB (i.e., when the regulatory regime strengthens) and declines significantly when a firm
moves from the BB to the NBB (i.e., when its regulatory regime weakens). The effects occur
right around the transition month. There is little evidence of pre-transition trends in liquidity, as
would be expected with reverse causality.
13

Table IA.5

Dependent variable: Liquidity (t)
Independent variables

NBB to BB

BB to NBB

All

Clean only

All

Clean only

Pre-Transition (m-6)

-0.086***

-0.076***

0.185***

0.141***

Pre-Transition (m-5)

-0.068***

-0.072***

0.182***

0.125***

Pre-Transition (m-4)

-0.075***

-0.064***

0.173***

0.140***

Pre-Transition (m-3)

-0.091***

-0.090***

0.175***

0.142***

Pre-Transition (m-2)

-0.068***

-0.069***

0.168***

0.127***

Pre-Transition (m-1)

-0.042***

-0.037**

0.119***

0.107***

Post-Transition (m+1)

0.047***

0.044**

-0.036***

-0.057***

Post-Transition (m+2)

0.063***

0.064***

-0.033***

-0.065***

Post-Transition (m+3)

0.066***

0.064***

-0.026**

-0.054**

Post-Transition (m+4)

0.094***

0.082***

-0.006

-0.013

Post-Transition (m+5)

0.101***

0.078***

-0.023*

-0.010

Post-Transition (m+6)

0.115***

0.101***

-0.026**

-0.020

Manual and SEC indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Control variables (lagged)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Price-level indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Transition fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year-month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

# Firm months

8,621

5,631

32,074

6,976

R-squared

0.70

0.70

0.66

0.68

This table presents regression analyses relating liquidity to trading venue transitions. For details on the proxy for
liquidity, see Table 3 in the paper. The regressions focus on 13-month windows around venue transitions. We
exclude transitions of firms that switch venues multiple times during this window. All regressions are estimated at
the firm-month level and include year-month and transition fixed effects. The first specification examines 842
transitions from the NBB (Pink Sheets or Grey Market) to the BB (Bulletin Board). The second specification
analyzes a subset of 554 clean transitions from the NBB to the BB. This subset includes only those firms that do not
change their SEC filing status during the transition window. The third (fourth) specification focuses on 2,595
transitions (a subset of 567 clean transitions) from the BB to the NBB. All specifications include indicators for each
of the 6 months before and the 6 months after the transition (i.e., the transition month, m, is the omitted category).
We also include, but do not report the coefficients on, indicators for SEC filing and manual inclusion status, lagged
control variables and price-level controls. The table reports OLS coefficient estimates. ***, **, * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels (two-tailed), respectively, based on standard errors clustered by firm.

14

Figure IA.5

pre_6
pre_5
pre_4
pre_3
pre_2
pre_1
post_1
post_2
post_3
post_4
post_5
post_6
-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

Liquidity factor
BB to NBB

NBB to BB

This figure plots the coefficient estimates on the transition indicators, together with upper and lower 95% confidence
values, for the first and third specifications reported in Table IA.5.

15

IA.6

E-Ticker Analysis

In this analysis, we exploit the fact that the Bulletin Board (BB) adds an “E” suffix to a
firm’s ticker to flag to the market that the firm is delinquent in its SEC reporting.

This

institutional feature enables us to tighten the link between market quality and SEC reporting,
since the ticker suffix is a timely indicator of the firm’s reporting status and tied only to SEC
reporting. As an additional test, we can compare the estimated market quality effects for firms
that subsequently return to compliance with SEC reporting requirements – causing the “E” to be
removed – and firms that are eventually forced off the Bulletin Board to the Pink Sheets or the
Grey Market (NBB) due to non-compliance. If SEC reporting drives the market quality results
reported in the paper, we expect market quality to deteriorate following the addition of the “E”
suffix. Furthermore, the effect should be smaller for firms that are only temporarily noncompliant.
The first specification in each panel shows that the coefficient on E-Ticker is negative for
liquidity and positive for crash risk, and statistically significant in each case. Thus, as soon as
the ticker indicates delinquency in SEC reporting, market quality declines, i.e., liquidity drops
and crash risk increases. The second specification shows that the coefficients are larger in
magnitude for E-Ticker BB-to-NBB than E-Ticker BB-to-BB. Thus, the reduction in liquidity and
the increase in crash risk are larger for firms that never return to SEC compliance compared to
firms that are only temporarily non-compliant. These findings support our interpretation that
SEC reporting requirements drive the stock liquidity and crash risk effects reported in the paper.

16

Table IA.6

Independent variables
[1] E-Ticker

Dependent variable:
Liquidity (t)

Dependent variable:
Crash risk (t to t+2)

-0.035***

0.123***

(-5.84)

(21.13)

[2a] E-Ticker BB-to-BB
[2b] E-Ticker BB-to-NBB
[2a] - [2b] = 0 [p-value]

-0.027***

0.020***

(-3.65)

(3.40)

-0.049***

0.310***

(-5.25)

(27.84)

[0.05]

[<0.01]

Trading venue indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Manual and SEC indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Control variables (lagged)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Price-level indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year-month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

732,584

732,584

593,243

593,243

0.62

0.62

0.16

0.16

# Firm months
R-squared

This table presents regression analyses relating liquidity and crash risk to delinquency in SEC reporting on the
Bulletin Board. For details on the proxies for liquidity and crash risk, see Table 3 in the paper. All regressions are
estimated at the firm-month level and include year-month and firm fixed effects. The analyses are based on the
NASDAQ venue history (period: January 2001 to October 2010) and include firm-month observations from all
venues. E-Ticker is a dummy variable equal to one if a firm’s ticker is temporarily suffixed with the letter “E”, and
zero otherwise. The Bulletin Board adds this suffix to flag firms that are delinquent in their SEC reporting. E-Ticker
BB-to-BB indicates one subset of the E-Ticker cases where firms subsequently return to compliance with SEC
reporting requirements and are therefore allowed to stay on the Bulletin Board. E-Ticker BB-to-NBB indicates the
other subset of the E-Ticker cases where firms never return to compliance with SEC reporting requirements and are
forced to leave the Bulletin Board. We also include, but do not report the coefficients on, trading venue indicators,
indicators for SEC filing and manual inclusion status, lagged control variables and price-level controls (see Tables 4
and 5 in the paper for details). No filters are imposed in these analyses. The table reports OLS coefficient estimates
and (in parentheses) t-statistics. The t-statistics are based on standard errors clustered by firm. ***, **, * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels (two-tailed), respectively.

17

IA.7

SEC filing and manual inclusion for financial companies

This analysis exploits the fact that financial companies (i.e., banks and insurance companies)
are regulated and required to provide disclosure filings to their respective regulators. As a result
of this institutional feature, we expect that SEC reporting and manual inclusion are less
important for the information environment of financial companies. Thus, the effects of SEC and
manual reporting on liquidity and crash risk should be smaller for banks and insurance
companies, all else equal. We consider this analysis as an alternative way to test whether SEC
reporting and manual inclusion drive the market quality results reported in the paper.
We retrieve industry details from several databases (SNL, Datastream, Worldscope and
Factset) and focus on the subset of firms for which at least two of these databases provide
coincident information. We estimate the models reported in Table 5 in the paper, but add terms
that interact the variables Manual and SEC with a Financials indicator variable that is equal to
one for banks and insurance companies, and zero otherwise.
Table IA.7 shows that the coefficients on SEC*Financial and Manual*Financial are, as
expected, significantly negative for liquidity and significantly positive for crash risk when using
firm-month observations from all venues. When focusing on the subset of NBB firms (i.e., firms
traded in the Pink Sheets or the Grey Market) that do not report to the SEC, the coefficients on
Manual*Financial are significantly negative for liquidity, but not significant for crash risk.
Thus, in this sample, the manual results are somewhat weaker.

Overall, however, the

coefficients on the interactions are generally significant and of the opposite sign to the main
effects, indicating weaker or even non-existent effects for financial companies. These findings
corroborate our interpretation that SEC reporting and manual inclusion drive market quality and
ease concerns about alternative explanations (such as omitted variables).
18

Table IA.7
Panel A: Liquidity (t)

Panel B: Crash risk (t to t+2)
Dependent variable: Liquidity (t)

Independent variables

All venues

NBB with SEC = 0 only

[1a] Manual

0.075***

0.066***

0.141***

(8.69)

(9.62)

(9.57)

(10.92)

[1b] Manual * Financials

-0.095***

-0.046***

-0.118***

-0.049**

(-5.99)

(-3.12)

(-3.09)

(-2.03)

[2a] SEC

0.065***

0.060***

(5.24)

(6.83)

[2b] SEC * Financials

-0.178***

-0.088***

(-8.97)

(-3.88)

[1a] + [1b] = 0 [p-value]

[0.14]

[0.11]

[2a] + [2b] = 0 [p-value]

[<0.01]

[0.21]

Trading venue indicators

Yes

Yes

Control variables (lagged)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Price-level indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm fixed effects

[0.53]

Yes

0.109***

NBB with SEC = 0 only

-0.032***

-0.006

-0.036***

-0.020

[1b] Manual * Financials

(-10.68)

(-1.23)

(-2.92)

(-1.23)

0.045***

0.026**

-0.019

0.015

[2a] SEC

(7.48)

(2.46)

(-0.50)

(0.32)

-0.057***

-0.060***

(-6.70)

(-6.52)

[2b] SEC * Financials

0.090***

0.057**
[0.12]

[0.90]

Yes

(5.89)

(2.35)

[0.02]

[0.04]

[2a] + [2b] = 0 [p-value]

[0.05]

[0.90]

Trading venue indicators

Yes

Yes

Control variables (lagged)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Price-level indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Year-month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

586,435

586,435

201,378

201,378

0.42

0.63

0.14

0.50

R-squared

All venues

[1a] Manual

[1a] + [1b] = 0 [p-value]

[<0.01]

Industry fixed effects
# Firm months

Dependent variable: Crash risk (t to t+2)

Independent variables

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Industry fixed effects

Yes

Year-month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

421,539

421,539

118,092

118,092

0.07

0.16

0.08

0.21

# Firm months
R-squared

Yes

This table presents regression analyses relating liquidity (Panel A) and crash risk (Panel B) to SEC filing and manual inclusion status for financial companies.
For details on the proxies for liquidity and crash risk, see Table 3 in the paper. The basic research design is the same as in Table 5 in the paper. In addition, we
interact the key variables Manual and SEC with the dummy variable Financials that is equal to one for banks and insurance companies, and zero otherwise. For
this analysis, we retrieve industry details from several databases (SNL, Datastream, Worldscope and Factset) and focus on the subset of firms for which at least
two of these databases provide coincident information. The first two specifications include firm-month observations from all venues. The third and fourth
specifications focus on firm-month observations from the NBB (Pink Sheets and Grey Market) for firms that are not registered with the SEC. The table reports
OLS coefficient estimates and (in parentheses) t-statistics. The t-statistics are based on standard errors clustered by firm. ***, **, * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels (two-tailed), respectively.

19

IA.8

Adding firm fixed effects to the analysis of state merit reviews

In order to tighten identification in our state merit review analysis, we employ a more
restrictive fixed effects structure. The regressions in the paper use industry fixed effects. Here,
we employ firm fixed effects. Recall that the state merit review variable is assigned on the basis
of the state in which a firm’s headquarters is located. The inclusion of firm fixed effects means
that the merit review coefficients are identified based on changes in firms’ state of headquarters.
We identify 1,472 cases in which firms change their state of headquarters during the sample
period. Table IA.8 shows that the results for liquidity become even stronger when we include
firm fixed effects. For example, the coefficient estimate on Merit Review is 0.019 (t-statistic
2.99) with industry fixed effects (see Table 6 in the paper), but is twice as large with firm fixed
effects (0.038; t-statistic 2.56). The coefficient on Merit review (w/o manual exemption) also
doubles. The result that the coefficient on Merit review is larger in states without a manual
exemption than in states with a manual exemption is similar to that reported in Table 6 of the
paper. For crash risk, the coefficients remain insignificant and close to zero, similar to the
results reported in the paper. Overall, these results should ease concerns about alternative
explanations or omitted variables.

20

Table IA.8

Independent variables
Merit review

Dependent variable:
Liquidity (t)
0.038**

0.010

(2.56)

(1.18)

Merit review
(with manual exemption)
Merit review
(w/o manual exemption)
SoInc ≠ SoHqt

Dependent variable:
Crash risk (t to t+2)

0.024

0.003

(1.47)

(0.36)

0.046***

0.014

(2.89)

(1.53)

0.013

0.009

-0.015

-0.017

(0.60)

(0.41)

(-1.11)

(-1.26)

Trading venue indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Manual and SEC indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Control variables (lagged)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Price-level indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year-month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

550,930

550,930

433,215

433,215

0.53

0.53

0.16

0.16

# Firm months
R-squared

This table presents regression analyses relating liquidity and crash risk to the strictness of Blue Sky laws at the state
level. For details on the proxies for liquidity (t) and crash risk (t to t+2), see Table 3 in the paper. The basic research
design is the same as in Table 6 in the paper except that the regressions in this table include firm fixed effects
instead of industry fixed effects. The table reports OLS coefficient estimates and (in parentheses) t-statistics. The tstatistics are based on standard errors clustered by firm. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and
10% levels (two-tailed), respectively.

21

IA.9

Pink Sheets information tiers and financial companies

In this section, we exploit the fact that financial companies (i.e., banks and insurance
companies) are subject to additional disclosure requirements. Consequently, market quality is
less likely to be affected by information regimes in the Pink Sheets. The analysis is similar to
the analysis in section IA.7. Namely, we use the same research design as in our main tests
(Table 7 in the paper) but add terms that interact the key variables with a Financials indicator
variable. This indicator is equal to one for banks and insurance companies, and zero otherwise.
For this analysis, we combine firms in the Pink Limited Information and Pink Current
Information tiers.2
Table IA.9 shows that the coefficient estimates on Pink No Info*Financial and Pink
Limited/Current*Financial are negative for the liquidity and positive for crash risk. More
importantly, the sum of the main effect and the corresponding interaction term is insignificantly
different from zero in all specifications, which implies that liquidity and crash risk for financial
companies does not vary across the Pink Sheets information tiers. These findings support our
interpretation that Pink Sheets information regimes drive the market quality effects in our main
analysis.

2

Untabulated statistics show that about 60% of all firm-month observations in the PS tier history belong to the
Pink No Information tier followed by the Pink Limited Information tier (about 20%) and the Pink Current
Information tier (about 15%). To boost power, we combine the latter two categories, for which information
availability is substantially greater than for the first group.

22

Table IA.9

Independent variables
[1a] Pink No Info

Dependent variable:
Liquidity (t)

Dependent variable:
Crash risk (t to t+2)

0.163***

0.195***

-0.066**

-0.325***

(5.32)

(5.43)

(-2.02)

(-4.57)

-0.123

-0.373

0.134

0.479

(-0.99)

(-1.43)

(1.34)

(1.06)

0.452***

0.335***

-0.112***

-0.427***

(12.62)

(8.49)

(-3.31)

(-5.96)

-0.344***

-0.419

0.120

0.600

(-2.77)

(-1.64)

(1.20)

(1.37)

[1a] + [1b] = 0 [p-value]

[0.74]

[0.50]

[0.47]

[0.73]

[2a] + [2b] = 0 [p-value]

[0.36]

[0.74]

[0.93]

[0.69]

Caveat Emptor indicator

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Manual and SEC indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Control variables (lagged)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Price-level indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

[1b] Pink No Info *
Financials
[2a] Pink Limited/Current
[2b] Pink Limited/Current *
Financials

Firm fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Industry fixed effects

Yes

Year-month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

60,785

60,785

36,233

36,233

0.17

0.61

0.06

0.27

# Firm months
R-squared

Yes

This table presents regression analyses relating liquidity and crash risk to Pink Sheets information tiers for financial
companies. For details on the proxies for liquidity and crash risk, see Table 3 in the paper. The basic research design
is the same as in Table 7 in the paper except that we combine firms in the Pink Limited Information and Pink
Current Information tiers. In addition, we interact the key variables Pink No Info and Pink Limited/Current Info with
a Financials dummy variable that is equal to one for banks and insurance companies, and zero otherwise. For this
analysis, we retrieve industry details from several databases (SNL, Datastream, Worldscope and Factset) and focus
on the subset of firms for which at least two of these databases provide coincident information. The table reports
OLS coefficient estimates and (in parentheses) t-statistics. The t-statistics are based on standard errors clustered by
firm. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels (two-tailed), respectively.

23

IA.10 Regime changes in the Pink Sheets
In this section, we examine the effects of four major regime changes in the Pink Sheets that
were aimed at enhancing transparency in this market. 3 This analysis tightens identification
related to the role of information regimes in the OTC market because the regime changes are set
at the market level and hence exogenous to any given firm. If these initiatives are valued by
investors, we expect the changes to increase market quality.
A first indication that these regime changes have been influential is the steady decline in the
number of firms quoted on the Bulletin Board (BB) but not the Pink Sheets.4 To analyze the
regime changes more formally, we create a Regime index that starts at zero and increases to 0.25
(as of June 2003), 0.50 (as of August 2007), 0.75 (as of June 2009) and to 1.00 (as of April
2010). We then introduce the interaction term BB × Regime index in order to capture the effects
of these regime changes on BB firms (for which the indicator variable BB is one) relative to
NBB firms (i.e., firms traded in the Pink Sheets or the Grey Market).
Table IA.10 presents the results of regressions that relate liquidity and crash risk to the BB
indicator and the interaction term between BB and Regime Index. The analyses are based on BB
and NBB firm-month observations from the NASDAQ venue history (period: January 2001 to
October 2010). We present models with year-month and either industry or firm fixed effects.

3

4

In June 2003, the Pink Sheets introduced Pink Link, an electronic messaging and automated trade negotiation
service to replace the telephone-based communication process. In August 2007, they introduced the
information tiers. In June 2009, they introduced Real-Time+, which offers real-time pricing data to all
investors at no cost. Traditional exchanges make such data available only with a 15-minute delay. In April
2010, the Pink Sheets refined their information tiers and introduced the OTCQB category (see Appendix 1.1 in
the paper).
Untabulated analyses show that the fraction of BB-only firms has fluctuated between 5% and 10% between
mid-2003 (when we start to have data that allow us to reliably identify finer categories of OTC firms) and mid2007. Starting in August 2007, the fraction declines and falls below 1% in 2010. By October 2010, there are
eight BB-only firms left in our sample.

24

Thus, all models include a flexible time trend to capture general and unrelated changes in the
Pink Sheets market.
The first two specifications show that market liquidity is generally higher for BB firms.
However, the coefficient estimate on the interaction term is negative, implying that the liquidity
advantage for BB stocks relative to NBB stocks declines over time. In fact, the combined effect
at the end of the sample period (when the regime index takes a value of 1) is close to zero
suggesting that, by October 2010, liquidity for NBB stocks is close to that for BB firms. The
third and fourth specifications illustrate that the results for crash risk are similar. Specifically,
BB stocks initially have lower crash risk, but stocks solely quoted in the NBB catch up over
time.
Overall, the results in this section show that the market quality advantage (i.e., higher
liquidity and lower crash risk) of dually-quoted BB stocks relative to stocks that are solely
quoted in the NBB has declined over time. This advantage seems to have disappeared steadily as
a result of successive regime changes in the Pink Sheets.

25

Table IA.10
Independent variables
BB

Dependent variable:
Liquidity (t)

Dependent variable:
Crash risk (t to t+2)

0.340***

0.305***

-0.114***

-0.160***

(25.32)

(27.51)

(-15.04)

(-16.98)

-0.390***

-0.229***

0.140***

0.038**

(-21.93)

(-13.39)

(11.99)

(2.55)

Manual and SEC indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Control variables (lagged)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Price-level indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

BB x Regime index

Firm fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Industry fixed effects

Yes

Year-month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

596,415

596,415

351,520

351,520

0.22

0.52

0.07

0.18

# Firm months
R-squared

Yes

This table presents regression analyses relating liquidity and crash risk to regulatory changes in the Pink Sheets
markets. For details on the proxies for liquidity (t) and crash risk (t to t+2), see Table 3 in the paper. All regressions
are estimated at the firm-month level and include year-month and either industry or firm fixed effects. The analyses
are based on the NASDAQ venue history (period: January 2001 to October 2010) and include only firm-month
observations from the OTC market (BB and NBB). BB is a trading venue indicator for firms traded on the OTC
Bulletin Board. Regime index is an ordinal variable that increases with major reforms in the Pink Sheets regulatory
regime. It takes the value of 0 (from the start of the sample period until May 2003), 0.25 (from June 2003 to July
2007), 0.5 (from August 2007 to May 2009), 0.75 (from June 2009 to March 2010) and 1 (from April 2010 to the
end of the sample period). We also include, but do not report the coefficients on, indicators for SEC filing and
manual inclusion status, lagged control variables and price-level controls (see Tables 4 and 5 in the paper for
details). The analyses are subject to the following filters: for the liquidity regressions, we exclude months in which
firms change their trading venue and/or the variable Regime index increases; for the crash risk regressions, the
month of and the six months before such changes are excluded. The table reports OLS coefficient estimates and (in
parentheses) t-statistics. The t-statistics are based on standard errors clustered by firm. ***, **, * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels (two-tailed), respectively.

26

IA.11 Extending the fixed effects structure
In this section, we provide additional analyses extending the fixed effects structure in our
main models. These analyses gauge the sensitivity of our findings to unobserved industry as
well as geographic shocks to mitigate concerns about omitted variables.

To control for

(observed and unobserved) economic shocks that are specific to certain industries, we interact
industry and year-month fixed effects (see Panel A of Table IA.11). Likewise, we control for
economic shocks that are geographic in nature by including State of Headquarters * year-month
fixed effects (see Panel B) and State of Incorporation * year-month fixed effects (see Panel C).
We also estimate models that include interactions between the trading venue indicators and firm
characteristics, such as return volatility and size, to allow for different coefficients on the key
control variables by venue (not tabulated). We find that these extensions do not materially alter
the coefficient estimates for our key variables Manual and SEC. Thus, the findings reported in
the paper are robust to these extensions. This analysis further mitigates concerns that omitted
variables or unobserved shocks drive our SEC reporting and manual inclusion results.
Table IA.11
Panel A: Industry x year-month
Independent variables
Manual

Dependent variable:
Liquidity (t)

Dependent variable:
Crash risk (t to t+2)

0.055***

0.057***

-0.028***

-0.002

(7.80)

(9.92)

(-10.69)

(-0.51)

0.034***

0.049***

-0.058***

-0.072***

(3.23)

(6.40)

(-7.54)

(-8.52)

Trading venue indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Control variables (lagged)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Price-level indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

SEC

Firm fixed effects
Industry fixed effects

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Year-month fixed effects

Interaction with Industry

Interaction with Industry

# Firm months

713,217

713,217

501,286

501,286

0.40

0.63

0.07

0.17

R-squared

27

Panel B: State of headquarters (SoHqt) x year-month
Independent variables
Manual

Dependent variable:
Liquidity (t)

Dependent variable:
Crash risk (t to t+2)

0.062***

0.058***

-0.026***

-0.003

(8.70)

(10.03)

(-9.89)

(-0.65)

0.033***

0.051***

-0.055***

-0.068***

(3.14)

(6.62)

(-7.19)

(-8.07)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Control variables (lagged)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Price-level indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

SEC
Trading venue indicators

Firm fixed effects
Industry fixed effects
Year-month fixed effects
# Firm months
R-squared

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Interaction with SoHqt

Interaction with SoHqt

713,217

713,455

501,286

501,470

0.41

0.63

0.08

0.17

Panel C: State of incorporation (SoInc) x year-month
Independent variables

Dependent variable:
Liquidity (t)

Manual

0.066***
(9.26)

(10.04)

(-8.38)

(-0.28)

SEC

0.033***

0.051***

-0.058***

-0.071***

(3.18)

(6.58)

(-7.80)

(-8.36)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Control variables (lagged)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Price-level indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Trading venue indicators

Firm fixed effects

0.058***

Dependent variable:
Crash risk (t to t+2)
-0.022***

-0.001

Yes

Yes

Industry fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Year-month fixed effects

Interaction with SoInc

Interaction with SoInc

# Firm months
R-squared

713,217

713,455

501,286

501,470

0.41

0.63

0.08

0.17

This table presents regression analyses relating liquidity and crash risk to the SEC filing and manual inclusion status
of the sample firms. For details on the proxies for liquidity (t) and crash risk (t to t+2), see Table 3 in the paper. The
basic research design is the same as in Table 5 in the paper, and uses firm-month observations from all venues. In
this table, we enhance the basic design by including extended fixed effects. In Panel A, we add interacted industry x
year-month fixed effects to capture shocks that are specific to certain industries. In Panel B (Panel C), we add
interacted state of headquarters x year-month (state of incorporation x year-month) fixed effects to control for
shocks that are geographic in nature. The table reports OLS coefficient estimates and (in parentheses) t-statistics.
The t-statistics are based on standard errors clustered by firm. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%,
5% and 10% levels (two-tailed), respectively.

28

IA.12 Short selling in the OTC market
In this section, we provide evidence on how difficult it is to short sell stock in the OTC
market. Table IA.12 presents statistics on the supply of stock lending for short selling at the
firm-quarter level. The analysis is based on a dataset that includes information on the supply of
lendable stocks and covers the period 2006Q3 to 2010Q3.5
Panel A shows that the dataset covers only a fraction of our sample. However, coverage
varies systematically as data are more likely to be available for firms in regulated trading venues
and – within trading venues – for firms that have higher market values. For example, data
coverage is 21.5% for firms in the Bulletin Board (BB) but only 4.3% for firms in the Grey
Market. The median market value is $18.8 million for covered BB firms compared to $9.0
million for the full BB sample. To the extent that stocks of large firms are more likely to be
subject to short selling (e.g., D’Avolio, 2002), the dataset therefore overestimates the prevalence
of short selling activity.
Panel B illustrates that the supply of lendable stocks is negligible in the OTC market, even
for the subsample of larger firms with available data. There is no supply at all for more than half
of the firm-quarters in the BB and the NBB (Pink Sheets and Grey Market). The mean supply of
lendable stocks across these firm-quarters is $670,000 or 1.46% relative to market value. This
evidence is very different from the statistics in Prado et al. (2016) who focus on U.S. stocks at
traditional exchanges over the same period. They document an average supply of 20.02%
relative to market value.

5

We are very grateful to Pedro Saffi for running our sample through his dataset of stock lending supply. See
Prado et al. (2016) for details on the data.

29

Taken together, the analysis in this section provides strong evidence that short selling is
extremely difficult in the OTC market. Consequently, even sophisticated investors will find it
hard, if not impossible, to correct overpricing in this market.
Table IA.12
Panel A: Data availability
Full sample
Venue

# Firm
quarters

NBB

Missing

NBB
NBB

Subsample with available data

Market value ($US)
Mean
Median

# Firm
quarters

Market value ($US)
Mean
Median

19,533

15,894,018

392,750

354

64,587,847

13,695,743

Grey Market

4,695

7,873,281

13,548

202

25,004,705

84,294

Pink Sheets

34,444

10,362,585

359,943

2,502

38,384,581

4,479,072

BB

43,145

26,791,018

8,975,999

9,264

41,089,201

18,802,094

101,817

18,270,527

2,029,790

12,322

40,951,439

15,207,406

SCM (Benchmark or to/from OTC)

4,670

55,346,473

32,399,215

3,821

60,790,609

36,284,960

Exchange (to/from OTC)

8,177

158,771,470

83,317,504

7,474

166,442,352

91,357,540

Total OTC

Panel B: Statistics on supply of lendable stocks
Subsample with available data
Venue

# Firm quarters with Supply >
1,000,000 $US 1,000 $US

NBB

Missing

54

160

NBB

Grey Market

11

50

NBB

Pink Sheets

369

1,414

BB

412

3,055

Total OTC

846

SCM (Benchmark or to/from OTC)
Exchange (to/from OTC)

Supply ($US)
Mean
Median
2,122,804

Supply / Market value
Mean
Median

300

1.62%

0.01%

753,221

0

7.97%

0.00%

2,028,179

3,500

4.24%

0.20%

245,527

0

0.56%

0.00%

4,679

669,753

0

1.46%

0.00%

1,190

3,141

2,776,512

263,000

2.58%

0.95%

4,961

7,122

24,574,340

3,942,850

8.94%

5.37%

This table presents descriptive statistics on the supply of lendable stocks in the OTC market by trading venue at the
firm-quarter level. The dataset covers the period 2006Q3 to 2010Q3. Panel A shows how many firm-quarters in our
sample are covered by this dataset and compares average market values in U.S. dollars across the full sample and the
covered subsample. Panel B provides statistics on the supply of lendable stocks in U.S. dollars and relative to the
firms’ market values. For details on the trading venue categories, see Table 3 in the paper.

30

References
Amihud, Y., 2002, Illiquidity and Stock Returns, Journal of Financial Markets 5, 31-56.
Ang, A., A. Shtauber and P. Tetlock, 2013, Asset pricing in the dark: The cross section of OTC
stocks, Review of Financial Studies 26, 2985-3028.
Bollen, N. and W. Christie, 2009, Market Microstructure of the Pink Sheets, Journal of Banking
and Finance 33, 1326−1339.
D’Avolio, G., 2002, The market for borrowing stock, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 271306.
Daske, H., L. Hail, C. Leuz and R. Verdi, 2008, Mandatory IFRS Reporting around the World:
Early Evidence on the Economic Consequences, Journal of Accounting Research 46, 10851142.
Eraker, B. and M. Ready, 2015, Do investors overpay for stocks with lottery-like payoffs? An
examination of the returns on OTC stocks, Journal of Financial Economics 115, 486-504.
Frieder, L. and J. Zittrain, 2008, Spam works: Evidence from stock touts and corresponding
market activity, Hastings Communications & Entertainment Law Journal 30, 479-520.
Hanke, M. and F. Hauser, 2008, On the effects of stock spam e-mails, Journal of Financial
Markets 11, 57-83.
Litvak, K., 2011, How Much Can We Learn by Regressing Corporate Characteristics against the
State of Incorporation? Available at SSRN.
Prado, M. P., P. A. C. Saffi and J. Sturgess, 2016, Ownership Structure, Limits to Arbitrage, and
Stock Returns: Evidence from Equity Lending Markets, Review of Financial Studies,
forthcoming.

31

