                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           SEMIPARAMETRIC ESTIMATES OF MONETARY POLICY EFFECTS:
                         STRING THEORY REVISITED

                                           Joshua D. Angrist
                                              Òscar Jordà
                                           Guido Kuersteiner

                                         Working Paper 19355
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19355


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2013




Thanks go to Jordi Galì, Ivan Werning, and seminar participants at the Bank of England, the European
Central Bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the NBER Summer Institute 2013, and
Yale University for helpful suggestions and comments. The views expressed here are solely the responsibility
of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco or the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Early Elias provided expert research assistance.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Joshua D. Angrist, Òscar Jordà, and Guido Kuersteiner. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Semiparametric Estimates of Monetary Policy Effects: String Theory Revisited
Joshua D. Angrist, Òscar Jordà, and Guido Kuersteiner
NBER Working Paper No. 19355
August 2013, Revised September 2013
JEL No. C32,C54,E52,E58,E65

                                              ABSTRACT

We develop a flexible semiparametric time series estimator that is then used to assess the causal effect
of monetary policy interventions on macroeconomic aggregates. Our estimator captures the average
causal response to discrete policy interventions in a macro-dynamic setting, without the need for assumptions
about the process generating macroeconomic outcomes. The proposed procedure, based on propensity
score weighting, easily accommodates asymmetric and nonlinear responses. Application of this estimator
to the effects of monetary restraint suggest contractionary policy slows real economic activity. By
contrast, the Federal Reserve's ability to stimulate real economic activity through monetary expansion
appears to be much more limited. Estimates for recent financial crisis years are similar to those for
the earlier, pre-crisis period.


Joshua D. Angrist                                     Guido Kuersteiner
Department of Economics, E17-226                      Department of Economics
MIT                                                   Tydings Hall
77 Massachusetts Avenue                               The University of Maryland
Cambridge, MA 02139                                   College Park, Maryland 20742
and NBER                                              gk232@Georgetown.edu
angrist@mit.edu

Òscar Jordà
Economic Research, MS 1130
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market St.
San Francisco, CA 94105
and University of California, Davis
oscar.jorda@sf.frb.org
    “Our credibility will ultimately be judged by how we do on both of these mandates, not just the price
mandate,”Mr. (Charles) Evans said Tuesday night. “I think we will be judged very badly”if o¢ cials do
not act forcefully to reduce unemployment and instead, he said, “worry obsessively” about in‡ation.
    “There’s little more that we can do,” Mr. (Je¤rey) Lacker said of monetary policy. “There’s little
more that we can contribute to growth.”
    - The New York Times, April 2, 2013


    Congressman Goldsborough: You mean you cannot push a string.
    Governor Eccles: That is a good way to put it, one cannot push on a string. We are in the depths
of a depression and ... beyond creating an easy money situation through reduction of discount rates
and through the creation of excess reserves, there is very little if anything that the reserve organization
[Federal Reserve Board] can do toward bringing about recovery. I believe that in a condition of great
business activity that is developing to a point of credit in‡ation, monetary action can very e¤ectively
curb undue expansion.
    - Testimony before the House Committee on Banking and Currency, March 18, 1935.


1    Introduction
The string metaphor is an enduring feature of the debate over monetary policy: increasing borrowing
costs may reliably slow an expansion, but cheap capital need not stimulate investment in a downturn.
What does the historical record say regarding the possibly di¤erent macroeconomic e¤ects of monetary
contraction and expansion? As many have recognized, this question is easy to ask but hard to answer.
The identi…cation challenge in this context arises from the fact that policy changes are rarely isolated
from other economically important developments, including, perhaps, anticipated changes in economic
conditions. If these changes are related to the outcome variables of interest, one subset of time series
observations likely provides a poor control for another.
    Many contemporary investigations of macro policy rely on structural models of economic behavior
to solve this fundamental identi…cation problem (see, for example, the survey by Christiano, Trabandt
and Walentin, 2011). This approach, typically cast in a dynamic structural general equilibrium (DSGE)
framework, begins with a model of the macroeconomy that is meant to mimic the time series behavior
of key macro variables. In addition to theoretical predictions, DSGE models generate a system of linear
(or linearized) di¤erence equations that provide the basis for empirical work.       These equations can
be interpreted as vector autoregressions (VARs) with an associated set of coe¢ cient or error-covariance
restrictions (as in Bagliano and Favero, 1998; Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans, 1999; and many others).
The heart of the DSGE approach uses a model of the entire economy to isolate shocks that identify causal
policy e¤ects. The validity of the resulting causal inferences therefore turns in part on how accurately
economic models describe the macroeconomy.

                                                    2
   An alternative strategy, inspired by the landmark Friedman and Schwartz (1963) volume, tries to
identify policy shocks through a close reading of the Federal Reserve’s Open Market Committee (FOMC)
meeting minutes. Romer and Romer (1989) is the …rst in a series of in‡uential contemporary studies in
this mold. A drawback of the narrative approach is the subjective manner in which shocks are identi…ed.
Moreover, some of the putatively random policy shifts identi…ed in Romer and Romer (1989) may be
correlated with economic variables (an argument ‡eshed out in Hoover and Pérez, 1994; see Romer and
Romer, 1994 for a rebuttal).
   This paper outlines a new route to causal inference for monetary policy e¤ects, sidestepping some
of the di¢ culties encountered in structural and narrative-based e¤orts.      The de…ning feature of our
approach is a laser-like focus on the policy-making process.     In contrast with the narrative approach,
which also focuses on Fed decision-making, our analysis of Fed behavior is more formal and data-driven.
Our solution to the policy evaluation problem starts with the presumption that, conditional on market-
derived statistics that embed optimal forecasts of future outcomes and anticipated policy moves, along
with a small set of institutional and economic variables, policy variation can be used to identify causal
e¤ects. This assumption allows us to quantify the causal e¤ect of policy changes in an environment of
stable expectations and goals. At the same time, our empirical strategy easily accommodates nonlinear
e¤ects, while distinguishing the e¤ects of monetary easing from those of tightening.
   The selection-on-observables framework outlined here is founded on strong identifying assumptions,
but also provides a natural starting point for time series causal inference. In the absence of purposefully
designed experiments or naturally occurring quasi-experimental shifts, it’s hard to see how one can do
better than to use the policy variation at hand. Our focused approach limits the task of model speci…cation
and robustness checking to the formulation and testing of a model of the policy determination process.
The selection-on-observables assumption also buys us strong testable restrictions that can be used to assess
the plausibility of causal claims. The principal econometric question that arises in our context is how to
exploit selection-on-observables identi…cation in a manner that imposes minimal auxiliary assumptions
and facilitates speci…cation testing.
   Our econometric policy model describes the probability of federal funds rate target changes conditional
on market statistics, past policy choices, lagged outcomes, and a few other controls. The resulting set
of conditional distributions de…nes a function we call the policy propensity score. Monetary policy rules
have long been studied in macroeconomics; see, for example, Clarida, Galí and Gertler (2000), Woodford
(2001) and Galí and Gertler (2007) for recent contributions. Propensity score methods, introduced by
Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983), have proven useful for cross-sectional causal inference (see, e.g., Dehejia
and Wahba (1999) and Heckman, Ichimura and Todd(1998)).             In a pair of papers closely related to
this one, Angrist and Kuersteiner (2004, 2011), adapt the propensity score framework to the problem of
time series causality testing of the sort discussed by Granger (1969) and Sims (1972). We extend this
framework here, deriving ‡exible, easy-to-compute propensity score estimators of the causal e¤ects of a
dynamic multinomial treatment. These semiparametric estimators are then used to assess the impact of


                                                     3
monetary policy before and since the Great Recession. The main payo¤ to our approach is the ability to
go directly from the policy process to causal e¤ects on outcomes. The resulting causal estimates are valid
for all processes generating outcomes, nonlinear and complex as they might be, while allowing distinct
assessments of the impact of tight and easy money.
    The …rst task on our empirical agenda is the construction of a credible model for the policy propensity
score. To that end, we follow Kuttner (2001), Faust, Swanson and Wright (2004), and Piazzesi and
Swanson (2008) in using market-based measures of anticipated policy. Speci…cally, we rely on Piazzesi’s
(2005) model linking Federal Reserve policy actions with asset prices. This link is used to justify a model
for target rate changes as a function of the price of federal funds rate futures contracts. Market-based
predictions of policy actions provide a low-dimension aggregator of publicly available information. This
in turn leads to parsimonious policy models well suited to a data-poor time series setting.
    Our investigation of monetary policy e¤ects replicates …ndings from earlier work while uncovering some
that are new. Echoing the …ndings of Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1996, 1999)), among others,
our results suggest contractionary monetary policy slows real economic activity, reducing employment
as well as in‡ation. At the same time, in contrast with a number of earlier studies (such as those
reviewed in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans, 1999), the semiparametric estimation strategy developed
here suggests Fed e¤orts to support the real economy have been disappointing. The ease with which this
asymmetric response is revealed is an attractive feature of our approach. Finally, motivated by interest in
the Fed’s attempts to stimulate the economy during the Great Recession, we compare responses calculated
using a sample that ends in mid-2005 with results from a sample running through 2008, when the federal
funds target rate hit zero.       We also compute estimates for the latter period only.                 Our conclusions
regarding the Fed’s limited ability to boost real economic activity stand under both variations.


2     Potential Outcomes and Macro Causal E¤ects

2.1    Conceptual Framework

The economy is described by the vector,          t   = (x0t ; yt0 ; Dt0 )0 ; where yt is a ky -vector of outcome variables,
Dt is a vector of policy variables that takes on values d0 ; :::; dJ , and xt is a vector of contemporaneous
covariates.
    Policy is determined by lagged economic conditions, lagged policy choices, and covariates; combined
in the vector zt = f [xt ;   t 1 ]:   The policy regime is indexed by a parameter,           , which takes values in a
parameter space     : In addition, policymakers are assumed to react to idiosyncratic information or taste
variables, represented by the scalar "t , that we don’t get to see. The realized policy Dt is determined
by both observed and unobserved variables according to Dt = D(zt ; ; "t ). For identi…cation purposes,
we assume that "t is independent of potential outcomes. This is reminiscent of the recursive ordering
proposed by Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1996, 1999), but our approach requires no description



                                                             4
of the structural process connecting yt with policy choices or expected future values of         t:
    Our framework for causal inference builds on the notion of potential outcomes. Potential outcomes
describe realizations of yt that arise in response to a hypothetical change in monetary policy.            The
potential outcomes concept originated in experimental studies where the investigator has control over the
assignment of treatments, but is now widely used in observational studies. Although potential outcomes
most commonly appear in studies looking at the causal e¤ects of a binary treatment or policy intervention,
the idea is easily extended to ordered discrete or continuous interventions (see, e.g., Angrist and Imbens,
1995).
    The de…nition of potential outcomes used here comes from Angrist and Kuersteiner (2011):

De…nition 1 For …xed t,l, and        , potential outcomes fyt;l (d) ; d 2 Dg are de…ned as the set of values
the observed outcome variable yt+l would take on if Dt = D(zt ; ; "t ) = d, for all possible policy choices
d, d 2 fd0 ; :::; dj ; :::; dJ g.

The vector of potential outcomes includes the observed outcome, yt+l = yt;l (Dt ), as well as counterfactual
outcomes describing the consequences of policy choices not taken. The causal e¤ect of a policy change is
de…ned as the di¤erence yt;l (dj ) yt;l (d0 ), where dj indicates an intervention and d0 indicates a benchmark
policy. This notation makes a conceptual distinction between changes to the policy regime (indicated by
changes in       ) and policy changes within the same regime, though only the latter are identi…ed in our
framework.        Although the notation introduced here is nonstandard in a macro setting, the notion of
macroeconomic causal e¤ects determined by counterfactual states has a long history. Cochrane (1994),
for example, quotes Kareken and Solow (1963):"... One cannot deduce conclusions about the e¤ects of
monetary policy or about their timing without making some hypothesis, explicit or implicit, about what
the course of events would have been had the monetary authorities acted di¤erently." (emphasis added)
    In a macroeconomic context, potential outcomes can be generated by a DSGE structure. Suppose,
as in Cochrane (1994), that output is determined by

                                            yt = ay" "t + ayD Dt + ay                   t;                  (1)

where the a are parameters and        t   is an i.i.d. shock (The mapping between a and         may be obtained
by linearizing a non-linear DSGE model.). Cochrane’s monetary policy rule is given by

                                                  Dt = aDy yt             1   + "t                          (2)

The resulting moving average representation for yt can be written

                                                 1
                                                 X                        1
                                                                          X
                                          yt =         cy";j "t   j   +         cy   ;j t j :
                                                 j=0                      j=0




                                                                  5
Here, cy";j is the impulse response function for output in response to policy shocks. Suppose, that instead
of the realized policy, Dt is set to dj . The potential outcome induced by this manipulation is:

                                                                          1
                                                                          X
                              yt;l (dj ) = cy";j (dj   aDy yt    1) +               cy";j "t+l   j   + cy (L)    t:                 (3)
                                                                         j=0;j6=l


This tell us what we can expect to see in response to such a change, in a world where the path of
shocks is otherwise unchanged. The associated causal e¤ect of this policy change is yt;l (dj )                              yt;l (d0 ) =
cy";j (dj       d0 ). Thus, causal e¤ects in our framework match those determined by a VAR in a linear,
constant-e¤ects world.
    Individual causal e¤ects can never be observed since the real world gives us on only one realization. We
                                                      0 ; :::; y 0                               0
therefore focus on average causal e¤ects. Let Yt;L = yt+1       t+L                                  and de…ne the vector of potential
outcomes up to horizon L by Yt;L (d) =                     yt;1 (d) ; :::; yt;L (d) : Potential outcomes determine observed
outcomes as follows:
                                                           X
                                                 Yt;L =          Yt;L (d) 1 fDt = dg :                                              (4)
                                                           d2D

     Average policy e¤ects are given by
                                                   h                              i
                                                  E Yt;L (dj )       Yt;L (d0 )          j;                                         (5)

                    0          0   0
where       j   =   1;j ; :::; L;j     describes the response of yt to policy dj at horizons 1 to L: The e¤ects of all
                                                                    0        0 0
possible policy changes are summarized by                    =      1 ; :::; J ,      a vector of dimension k = ky        L J, with
ky the number of outcome variables, L the horizon of interest, and J + 1 the number of policy options.
  describes an average generalized impulse response function for all possible policy choices. In contrast
with traditional impulse response analyses in empirical macro, however, the impulse response function
estimated here can be both asymmetric and nonlinear.
    Potential outcomes for counterfactual policy choices are unobserved, so the expectation in (5) cannot
be estimated directly. The variation that identi…es causal relationships in our framework is characterized
by a conditional independence assumption, also known as selection on observables:

Condition 1 Selection on observables:

                            yt;l (dj ) ?Dt jzt for all l      0 and for all dj , with                …xed;   2    :

In Cochrane’s example, the policy function, indexed by                                , a¤ects the impulse response parameters,
cy" , through the parameter aDy : Cochrane (1994) shows that cy" may change as fed behavior changes.
Our conditional independence assumption focuses on variation in policy interventions while holding the
policy regime …xed, after conditioning on observables, zt . Leeper and Zha’s (2003) notion of modest
policy interventions captures the same idea. In the simple model described by (1) and (2), selection on

                                                                     6
observables requires serially independent "t , independent of            t.
    Using Equation (4) and Condition 1, we can write the average policy e¤ect conditional on zt in terms
of observable distributions as:
                     h                           i
                    E Yt;L (dj )    Yt;L (d0 )jzt = E [Yt;L jDt = dj ; zt ]    E [Yt;L jDt = d0 ; zt ] :              (6)

Although cast in terms of in-principle observable conditional means, in applications with a high-dimensional
conditioning set involving continuous random variables, estimation of these conditional expectations is
empirically demanding. The estimation problem is simpli…ed by use of a parametric model for the policy
function. Angrist and Kuersteiner (2011) call this model the policy propensity score.
    The policy propensity score is P (Dt = dj jzt ) = pj (zt ; ) ; where pj (zt ; ) is a ‡exible parametric
model with parameters determined by the policy regime. Average causal e¤ects can then be estimated
using the fact that Condition 1 implies
                                                              h              i
                                E [Yt;L 1 fDt = dj g jzt ] = E Yt;L (dj ) jzt pj (zt ; ) :                            (7)

                 h              i
Solving (7) for E Yt;L (dj ) jzt and integrating over zt allows us to write

                           h                       i                 1 fDt = dj g    1 fDt = d0 g
                    j   = E Yt;L (dj )   Yt;L (d0 ) = E Yt;L                                               :          (8)
                                                                       pj (zt ; )      p0 (zt ; )

This weighting scheme was …rst used to estimate population means in non-random samples by Horvitz
and Thompson (1952) and adapted for the estimation of causal e¤ects of cross-sectional Bernoulli treat-
ments by Hirano, Imbens, and Ridder (2003). In cross-sectional studies of causal e¤ects of Bernoulli
interventions, (8) is known as an average treatment e¤ ect. Our setup allows for multinomial or ordered
treatments.1
    The estimand described by (8) is similar to that approximated using local linear projections in Jordà
(2005), though here no approximation is required.                 The estimand can also be related to the nonlinear
impulse response function introduced by Gallant, Rossi and Tauchen (1993). The latter is based on
estimation of E [yt+l jxt ] where xt = (yt ; :::; yt   p)   and yt is assumed to be a Markov process. An impulse
response function can then be de…ned as a marginalized version of E yt+l jx+
                                                                           t                        E [yt+l jxt ] where x+
                                                                                                                         t
perturbs yt by a constant. Although E [yt+l jxt ] is in principal nonparametrically identi…ed, extrapolation
to counterfactual E yt+l jx+
                           t in the Gallant, Rossi and Tauchen (1993) framework is likely to require a
model for the conditional expectation of outcomes.
    Our approach leans on parametric policy models but requires no functional form assumptions for the
   1
     With Bernoulli treatments, the formulation in (8) re‡ects Rosenbaum and Rubin’s (1983) propensity score theorem,
which says that if potential outcomes are independent of treatment conditional on covariates, they’re also independent of
treatment conditional on the propensity score. Imbens (2000) notes brie‡y that Horvitz-Thompson weighting applies to
multinomial treatments as well.



                                                              7
outcome process, yt . We use institutional knowledge and economic reasoning to guide the choice of zt ,
and speci…cation testing to assess our model for pj (zt ; ) : We need not de…ne or estimate structural
innovations for the policy process, nor develop, solve, or simulate a model for the joint process governing
outcomes yt ; policy variables Dt , and covariates zt : The estimator based on (8) is an easily constructed
weighted average, for which inference is straightforward.


2.2   Estimation

Inverse probability weighting estimators can be written as simple weighted averages of the vector of future
                 0 ; ::; y 0    0
outcomes Yt;L = yt+1      t+L , with weights formed from:


                                                 1 fDt = dj g          1 fDt = d0 g
                                    t;j   ( )=                                      :
                                                   pj (zt ; )            p0 (zt ; )

In a correctly speci…ed model, these weights have mean zero and are uncorrelated with zt . To ensure this is
true in …nite samples and under possible misspeci…cation, we weight with the residuals from a regression
of t;j ^ on zt and a constant. This produces the weighting function, h     ^ t = Yt;L t;j ^        ^t;j ,
where ^t;j is the relevant …tted value. The average causal response vector is then estimated as the sample
average
                                                             XT
                                                 ^=T     1             ^ t:
                                                                       h                                               (9)
                                                                 t=1

   The estimator ^ solves

                                             1 PT ^                               1 PT ^
                                                                 0
                        ^ = arg min T                                  1
                                                t=1 ht                        T      t=1 ht     ;                    (10)


a minimum distance objective function. Given this problem has an equal number of parameters and
moment conditions, the choice of          leaves the solution to (10) una¤ected.                Sometimes, however, it’s
interesting to restrict : For example, to facilitate comparisons with VAR’s, symmetric responses can be
estimated by assuming that the e¤ect of dj and               dj are of the same magnitude but opposite in sign.
More generally, we estimate under restrictions         = ( ), where                is a reduced set of free parameters, by
solving:
                                          1 PT ^                                  1 PT ^
                                                                 0
                                                                       1
                     ^ = arg min T           t=1 ht      ( )                  T      t=1 ht    ( ) :                 (11)

The optimal                                                                       ^ t at zero frequency, which
               for this over-identi…ed scenario is the spectral density matrix of h
can be estimated as detailed in Newey and West (1994). Asymptotic approximations to the sampling
distribution of ^ or ^ account for the fact that is estimated in a …rst stage. The relevant limiting
distributions for estimators and test statistics are derived in the appendix.




                                                             8
3        A Propensity Score for Monetary Policy Interventions
The federal funds market is an interbank loan market intended for the management of reserve require-
ments; the rate for overnight loans in this market, known as the federal funds rate, provides a benchmark
for securities across the risk and maturity spectrum. Monetary policy targeted the level of the federal
funds rate until mid-December, 2008, when the fed funds rate was set to trade between 0 and 0.25%.
With no room to lower rates further, the Fed turned to other tools, such as large scale asset purchases.
We focus here on the pre-2009 policy era, going back to July 1989. Because FOMC meetings are very
nearly a monthly occurrence, we work with monthly data.


3.1       The Federal Funds Rate Targeting Regime

Since February 1994, fed funds targets have been announced after each FOMC meeting, eight times a
year.2 Changes in the target usually come in 25 basis-point increments in a [-0.50%, 0.50%] interval,
though the target was twice changed by 75 basis points in our sample period.               Of the 78 target rate
changes in our sample, 23 were outside of an FOMC meeting. Most of these happened before February
1994. On three occasions there was more than one change in a given month, in which case we sum them.3
The space of possible policy choices is de…ned here to be {-0.50%, -0.25%, 0%, 0.25%, 0.50% }, where
the       0.50% events include the larger changes.
        Our sample is determined in part by the availability of policy predictors derived from …nancial deriv-
atives based on the federal funds rate.       One such derivative, federal funds rate futures (FFF) started
trading in earnest in 1989 (the market was established earlier, in 1988). We consider two sample end-
points. July 2005 marks the last in a series of increases in the fed funds target. From then on, the
target rate remained at 5.25% until September 2007 before the Great Recession began. We use July
2005 as a …rst sample end-point for estimation of the propensity score and evaluate policy responses up
to 24 months ahead on data running to July 2007. The target fell gradually thereafter, until December
2008 when it hovered between zero and 0.25%, marking the end of conventional monetary policy. The
second sample end-point for propensity score estimation therefore extends through the end of 2008 with
an additional 24 months ending in December 2010 used to estimate policy responses. Finally, we also
experiment separately with data from the Great Recession period only. This is a small sample and it
imposes some limits to the experiments we can conduct that we will discuss below.


3.2       Policy Predictors for the Propensity Score

E¢ cient markets price futures contracts using all available information. This motivates students of mon-
etary policy to de…ne policy shocks as deviations from the optimal predictions implicit in asset prices.
    2
    The FOMC comprises the Fed Chairman and six other Board Governors, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York and a rotating pool of four presidents from the remaining eleven regional Federal Reserve Banks.
  3
    The relevant months are December 1990, December 1991, and January 2001.



                                                        9
Cochrane and Piazzesi (2002), for example, use changes in the Eurodollar rate around meeting dates to
de…ne target rate surprises, while Thapar (2008) uses T-Bill futures in a similar manner. Kuttner (2001),
Faust, Swanson and Wright (2004), Gürkaynak, Sack and Swanson (2005, 2007), Bernanke and Kuttner
(2005) and Wingender (2011) construct monetary policy shocks from …nancial derivatives that price the
federal funds rate directly.4
          Federal funds rate derivatives include a futures contract on the e¤ective federal funds rate and an
options contract on these futures (though the latter started only in 2003). Futures contracts refer to
calendar-month averages of the e¤ective federal funds rate published by the New York Fed, with spot,
and one- through …ve-month contracts. We use these derivatives to predict target changes, implicitly
de…ning policy surprises as deviations from market-based forecasts of Federal Reserve behavior.
          The intuitive notion that futures prices provide an optimal policy forecast can be made rigorous using
Piazzesi’s (2005) term structure model. Denote the information available to policy makers at time t by
 t.       Piazzesi shows that bond yields and related derivatives likewise depend on        t.   Under the additional
assumption that pricing functions are invertible, we can replace        t;   which may be only partially observable,
with a vector of observed asset prices zt . This theoretical argument is ‡eshed out in the appendix.
          As a practical matter, our analysis distinguishes between months with scheduled FOMC meetings
("meeting months") and months without. In meeting months, we construct s1t , the di¤erence between
the price of the futures contract expiring during the same month as the meeting and the current target
rate, both observed at market close on the day before the meeting. In non-meeting months, we construct
s0t , the di¤erence between the price of a one-month-ahead contract in that month and the target rate in
e¤ect on the last day of the previous month.
          With a few exceptions, our predictor for meeting months is s1t , while in non-meeting months, s0t is
used. In constructing s1t for months in the pre-1994 era, before target rate changes were announced, our
coded announcement date is delayed by one day relative to the later period. Before 1994, the market
became aware of a target change only through a reading of the open market operations implemented by
the New York Fed’s Trading Desk. These operations take place at the beginning of the trading day and
hence are observed the day after a meeting, which generally concludes after the close of the market. This
nuance a¤ects the construction of s1t only.
          In a few instances, target rate changes in meeting months preceded meetings, with an additional
change or no change at the meeting, as in February, March, and August 1991. In such situations, the
predictor is taken to be s0t rather than s1t and enters as its own covariate. The active futures variable for
any given month is denoted F F Ft , equal to either s0t or s1t , as described above.
          Because target changes are naturally ordered in 0.25% increments over the range           0:50%, we model
the policy propensity score with an ordered probit speci…cation. Hamilton and Jordà (2002) and Scotti
(2011) likewise use ordered probit to model federal funds rate target changes. The dependent variable
      4
    Krueger and Kuttner (1996), Kuttner (2001), Piazzesi and Swanson (2008), Gürkaynak et al. (2005, 2007) and Hamilton
(2009) discuss the e¢ ciency of the market for federal funds futures.



                                                          10
is the change in the target rate during month m + 1; irrespective of whether an FOMC meeting was
announced or whether the target was changed. For the few occasions where more than one target change
occurred in the same month, recall that we use the accumulated monthly change.
    We allow the coe¢ cients of the propensity score to vary after August 2006 to capture a window that
includes the …nancial crisis with about a one year lead time.5 Since there were no instances of changes
prior to meetings after 2001, the predictor for that scenario only enters in the pre-crisis data.
    In addition to controlling for market expectations through fed funds futures prices, we include and the
unemployment rate, such as might appear in a conventional monetary policy rule. The unemployment
rate is available at a monthly frequency and is a natural substitute for output gap measures commonly
used with quarterly data. Moreover, our "Taylor Rule" speci…cation can be motivated by results of
Blanchard and Galí (2010) and Galí (2011) who show that the optimal monetary policy rule in a New
Keynesian model with real-wage rigidities depends both on in‡ation and unemployment. Finally, the
speci…cation of the propensity score includes a number of terms designed to capture a variety of calendar
e¤ects. These include a dummy variable FOMCt indicating months with a scheduled FOMC meeting,
the target change in the previous month, the target rate change in the previous month interacted with
FOMC, a scale factor that accounts for when within the month the FOMC meeting is scheduled, and a
set of monthly seasonal dummies. We also include the variable CRISISt , a dummy that takes the value
of 1 starting August 2006 to capture a window that includes the …nancial crisis with about a one year
lead time. Finally, the model includes dummies for the Y2K event and the September 11, 2001 attacks.6
    Table 1 reports average marginal e¤ects of the e¤ects of predictors on the likelihood of a 0.25%
increase in the target.     These estimates use the sample through July 2005 for the pre-crisis sample (July
1989 to July 2005) and through December 2008 for the full sample (July 1989 to December 2008). Since
responses are calculated by shifting the outcome variable up to two years forward, we note that the end
dates for the outcome samples are July 2007 and December 2010, respectively.
    Estimates of a benchmark Taylor-type speci…cation that predicts target rate changes with in‡ation
and unemployment alone are reported in columns (1) and (2). These are labeled OPT 1 and OPT 2 and use
the pre-crisis sample. Columns (5) and (6), report estimates for OPT 1 and OPT 2 using the full sample.
Broadly speaking, the estimates show that both variables a¤ect policy largely as expected, though the
negative unemployment e¤ect is stronger than the very small positive in‡ation e¤ect. The latter is not
statistically signi…cant. The Taylor model estimates shown in columns (1) and (5) (labeled OPT 1 ) use
same-month measures only, while the estimates reported in columns (2) and (6) (labeled OPT 2 ) are from
models that add in‡ation and unemployment lags, the size of the last target change, and seasonal and
scheduling dummies.7
   5
     The last target increase is dated June 2006. August 2007 marks the …rst in a sequence of target reductions that extend
to the end of the sample.
   6
     The scale factor is de…ned as = (     t) where is the number of days in a given month and t is the day of the month
when the FOMC meeting is scheduled.
   7
     Detailed variable de…nitions and sources appear in Appendix B.



                                                            11
   Columns (3) and (4) for the short sample and columns (7) and (8) for the long sample, labeled OPF 1
and OPF 2 report estimates from speci…cations that include F F Ft terms that di¤er in meeting and non-
meeting months, and in the pre-crisis and full samples. The results indicate that market-based factors
are better predictors of target rate changes than the combination of in‡ation and unemployment and
their lags in a Taylor speci…cation. The pseudo-R2 s in columns (3) and (7) (OPF 1 ), based on estimates
of the policy propensity score using these factors but excluding in‡ation and unemployment terms are
virtually identical to the pseudo-R2 s from the speci…cations augmented with these Taylor model terms
and reported in columns (4) and (8) (OPF 2 ). Neither in‡ation nor unemployment marginal e¤ects are
signi…cantly di¤erent from zero when estimated in the more elaborate models.
   Fitted values from the full policy score model (8) seem to track realized shifts well over the course of
the business cycle. This can be seen in Figure 1, which plots actual and predicted target changes (i.e.,
the expected target change conditional on regressors in the policy propensity score). Predictions were
computed using the OPF 2C estimates from column (8) of Table 1. The …gure also shows the time series
of Industrial Production (IP) growth to mark cyclical ‡uctuations.
   An important diagnostic for our purposes looks at whether lagged macro aggregates are independent
of policy changes conditional on the policy propensity score. In other words we would like to show
that the policy shocks implicitly de…ned by our score model look to be "as good as randomly assigned".
Angrist and Kuersteiner (2011) develop semiparametric tests that can be used for this purpose. Panel
A of Table 2 reports test results for the null hypothesis of orthogonality between the policy innovation,
fDt = dj g   pj (zt ; ), and conditioning variables in the model. Panel B looks at the correlation between
innovations and lagged outcomes. Both panels show p-values for joint (3 df ) tests of the null hypothesis
that the score model indicated in the column headings is an adequate speci…cation of the conditional
probability that the target rate is unchanged, rises by a quarter point, or falls by a quarter point (these
are the shocks analyzed below). The table also shows p-values for joint orthogonality of an aggregate
market based factor FFFt . We consider linear and quadratic terms of FFFt (2       3 = 6 df ).
   Test results for the simple Taylor model (reported in columns labelled OPT 1 ) show substantial cor-
relation with economic variables, including the lagged federal funds rate. The addition of controls for
in‡ation and unemployment lags, the size of the last target change, and seasonal and scheduling dummies
generates better results, although these p-values (reported in columns labelled OPT 2 ) still show some ev-
idence of correlation between FFFt and the average federal funds rate with policy innovations, especially
in the longer sample. Test results for the model with FFFt alone (reported in columns labelled OPF 1 ) all
pass, contrary to those for the expanded Taylor model, OPT 2 . Similarly, test results for the model that
includes both FFFt and in‡ation and unemployment terms (reported in columns labeled OPF 2 ) o¤er no
evidence against the hypothesis of random policy innovations.      In what follows, we proceed using the
p-score model based on OPF 2 :




                                                    12
4    Dynamic Policy E¤ects
The yield curve is the proximate channel through which target rate changes a¤ect in‡ation and the real
economy. We therefore begin with an analysis of policy e¤ects on the yield curve, speci…cally, the federal
funds, 3-month T-Bill, and 2- and 10-year T-Bond rates.         In addition to the yield curve, we look at
e¤ects on in‡ation measured by the change in 100 times the log of the Consumer Price Index (CPI), the
response in the change of 100 times the log of the Industrial Production (IP) index, and the response
in the change of the unemployment rate. Policy responses refer to the percentage point change in the
outcome variable measured from the month of the policy intervention out to the relevant horizon.
    Our analysis shows the impact of 25 basis point changes, up and down, out to a horizon of 24 months.
Figures 2, 3 and 4 plot these estimated responses, constructed using propensity score model OPF 2=C in
columns (4) and (8) of Table 1. The …gures also show 90% con…dence bands.
    The federal funds rate responds more sharply to increases in the target rate than to decreases, as
can be seen in Figure 2 A 25 basis point (bps) increase in the target appears to spark a sequence of
further changes that induces a peak increase in the federal funds rate close to 1 percentage point (pp)
after about a year, then falling to half a percentage point after two years. This pattern is similar to that
found in VAR-type estimates (e.g., Figure 3 in Christiano et al. 1999, when cumulated). By contrast, a
25 bps reduction lowers the federal funds rate by -0.50 pp one year out, a decline that’s sustained after
two years.
    Estimated causal e¤ects of a change in target yields are shown in Figure 3. As we might expect,
rate increases move through the yield curve with diminished intensity as maturities lengthen. A similar
pattern appears in estimates reported by Cochrane and Piazzesi (2002). The estimated yield curve
response to a rate decrease goes the other way and is somewhat more muted, as can be seen in the
right-hand column of the …gure. This relatively ‡at response is consistent with the ‡atter response of
the federal funds rate in the bottom of Figure 2. The relative insensitivity of the yield curve to target
rate decreases provides a possible explanation for weak transmission of accommodative monetary policy
changes to macro aggregates.
    Responses of macroeconomic aggregates to monetary policy changes appear in Figure 4. The top row
displays the responses of the change in 100 times the log of the price level; the second row reports e¤ects
on 100 times the change in the log of IP; the third row shows e¤ects on the change in the unemployment
rate. Target rate increases begin to reduce in‡ation after about 18 months. After two years, a quarter
point increase in the target is estimated to have reduced prices by about a quarter point, equivalent to a
reduction of just over a tenth of a point in the annual in‡ation rate. Interestingly, these results show no
evidence of a "price puzzle," that is, a short-run increase in in‡ation when rates rise. The price puzzle
is a common …nding in VAR-based estimates of the e¤ects of monetary shocks (see, e.g., Sims, 1992)
    Industrial Production is largely invariant to a rate increase in the …rst post-change year, but then falls
to a net decline of about 1.5 pps after two years. This is roughly a 0.75 pp decrease in annual growth


                                                     13
rates. The unemployment rate response essentially mirrors this, with a total increase of about a quarter
point after two years. Estimated responses of IP and the unemployment rate to target rate reductions
emerge only slowly and are modest when they do. This di¤erence, documented in the right-hand column
of Figure 3, seems likely to re‡ect the relatively muted response of the federal funds rate and the yield
curve to reductions in the target rate. Although the e¤ect of target rate changes is about equal, up or
down, when looking two years out, the fed funds rate and yield curve are markedly more sensitive to rate
increases than to rate decreases at intermediate horizons. Di¤erences in the responses to up and down
changes therefore seem likely to re‡ect a weaker "…rst stage" for the policy intervention, though we can’t
rule out di¤erences in policy sensitivity on the upside and downside as well. This strong asymmetry in
yield curve and macro aggregate responses to US monetary policy shifts echoes …ndings in Hamilton and
Jordà (2002) and Angrist and Kuersteiner (2011), but does not feature in most VAR-based estimates.


Other Comparisons and Context

In an in‡uential study of the e¤ects of monetary policy shocks on the yield curve and macro variables,
Cochrane and Piazzesi (2002) report estimates of policy e¤ects on the yield curve similar to ours. On
the other had, their results show little e¤ect of policy changes on prices, while suggesting employment
increases after a rate increase. The yield curve e¤ects reported here are stronger than the VAR-based
responses reported in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1996, 1999).
    Faust, Swanson and Wright (2004) use policy-induced changes in federal funds futures price to quantify
policy shocks. Their VAR-based estimates of the e¤ect of a positive 25 basis point surprise show price
decreases similar to those reported here. The corresponding estimated e¤ects on output line up less well,
however, with a mixture of positive and negative e¤ects.
    As a theoretical matter, monetary models with nominal rigidities, information asymmetries, menu
costs, or lending constraints typically imply asymmetric responses to monetary policy interventions. For
example, Cover (1992) and DeLong and Summers (1988) argue that contractionary monetary policy
a¤ects real variables more than expansionary policy does. Using international data, Karras (1996) …nds
strong evidence of asymmetry in the e¤ects of monetary policy on output using European data. These
papers are consistent with Keynes’ (1936) observations on the role of sticky wages in business cycles
(see Ravn and Sola, 2004 for a review of the relevant history of thought in this context). More recently
Tenreyro and Thwaites (2013), using Romer and Romer (2004) monetary policy shocks, report that
monetary policy e¤ectiveness declines in recessions.


5    Crisis Intervention
Did the Great Recession change the e¤ects of monetary policy? This section addresses this question by
…rst extending the sample to cover target rate changes through the end of 2008, with outcomes measured
through the end of 2010 and then by analyzing policy changes for the early crisis period only (October

                                                    14
2006 to December 2008), with outcomes measured through December 2009 (one year earlier than the
full-sample analysis as we limit the horizon to 12 months for the crisis sample).
    Figure 5 shows the estimated response of the federal funds rate in the longer sample (the …rst of our
two experiments). These estimates are similar to those shown in Figure 2, with the response to a target
increase peaking slightly above 1 pp after 18 months, falling to a little over half a point two years out.
The estimated response to a target decrease is slightly less persistent than in the shorter sample, ending
the two-year horizon with a decline of only a quarter point rather than a half.
    Estimated term rate responses are plotted in Figure 6.      These show a slightly sharper yield curve
response to rate increases, while the response to target rate reductions is, if anything, even more muted
than that for the pre-crisis sample. The estimated e¤ects in panels on the right hand side of Figure 6 are
remarkably ‡at, consistent with the ‡atter response of the fed funds rate to target rate declines plotted
in Figure 5.
    Macro aggregate responses in the longer sample, reported in Figure 7, show little e¤ect of a target
rate change on in‡ation. Estimated e¤ects of rate increases on IP suggest less of a decline in response
to rate increases than that estimated for the short sample, with a decline of just over 1 pp after two
years (versus 1.5 pps in the shorter sample). The unemployment rate response to a rate increase is also
somewhat smaller than that found in the shorter sample, while target rate declines are again estimated
to have little e¤ect on any macro aggregate.
    Our short "crisis sample" saw no target rate increases, so the analysis of this sample models policy
changes as any rate decrease of 25 bps or more.      The policy propensity score used for this is a probit
function of the combined futures variable, along with in‡ation and unemployment (the Taylor variables
used for the policy model estimated in the longer sample). The resulting marginal e¤ects, reported in
Table 3, are normalized to show the impact on the probability the target rate is left unchanged, so
the signs align with the ordered estimates reported earlier.    As with the ordered score model, column
(3) in Table 3 shows FFF to be a strong predictor of target rate changes.         Though the coe¢ cient on
in‡ation is marginally signi…cant (and wrong-signed) in column (3), overall, in‡ation and unemployment
add little to policy prediction conditional on FFF, a …nding that emerges by comparing the log likelihood
in columns (2) and (3). The F -statistic is 1.98 with a p-value of 0.14. Finally, a model with in‡ation
and unemployment alone does not predict target rate decreases as well as a model with only FFF, as
can be seen in a comparison of likelihoods across columns (1) and (2). In fact, in the short crisis sample,
traditional Taylor Rule variables are essentially unrelated to target rate declines. The F -statistic between
columns (1) and (3) is 14.52 with a p-value of nearly 0, suggesting that the term FFF is doing the heavy
lifting.
    Figure 8 shows the estimated response of the federal funds rate to target rate changes using only
the crisis period. The results show large but highly imprecisely estimated declines in the federal funds
rate. Part of the increase in magnitude here may be due to the fact that the policy dummy in this case
indicates a combination of quarter-point and half-point declines.


                                                     15
    Figure 9 plots term rate responses to policy interventions in the crisis sample. The estimates o¤er
some evidence that federal funds rate declines are passed down the yield curve in the form of a pattern
reasonably consistent with that found when estimated using more data. Finally, Figure 10 reports the
responses of the macro variables. Here too the estimates are imprecise. Although inconclusive, they o¤er
little support for the view that monetary stimulus was e¤ective in the crisis period.


6    Summary and Conclusions
We start with the assumption that policy changes are independent of potential outcomes, conditional on
observed market-based forecasts of these changes plus a small set of economic predictors. Selection-on-
observables is a strong assumption, but a natural starting point. We then consider how best to make use
of the selection-on-observables identi…cation condition in a potential outcomes framework. The resulting
propensity score weighting estimator captures possibly nonlinear and asymmetric causal responses to an
ordered dynamic treatment through a simple reweighting procedure. Our framework focuses modeling
e¤ort and speci…cation testing on the process that determines policy decision; the model for outcomes is
left unspeci…ed.
    Our propensity score weighting estimator for ordered time series treatments is applied to evaluate
the e¤ect of monetary policy interventions on macroeconomic outcomes before and during the Great
Recession. Results for the pre-recession period suggest an asymmetric response to changes in the fed
funds rate target, much as implied by the string metaphor. Our …ndings suggest that target rate increases
reduce in‡ation, employment and output. At the same time, target decreases appear to have little e¤ect
on output or in‡ation. Perhaps surprisingly, an extension of our analysis to cover the "zero lower bound
years" since 2008 leaves these …ndings essentially unchanged.
    What explains the asymmetric response of macro aggregates to monetary policy interventions? An
important …nding emerging from the analysis reported here is the weak e¤ect of target rate declines on
medium and long term bond rates. Because changes in these rates provide a plausible causal channel
for policy, the relative unresponsiveness of these bond rates to policy may account for much of the
weak impact of target rate reductions on macro aggregates.      At the same time, the limited precision
of many of our estimates means we can’t rule out di¤erential sensitivity of macro aggregates to bond
yield declines and hikes. In view of this constellation of …ndings, suggesting though not establishing a
"weak channels" hypothesis for asymmetric policy e¤ects, in future work, we plan to use the econometric
methods developed here to analyze the e¤ects of the Fed’s recent large scale asset purchases. These
interventions were designed to reduce the long end of the yield curve in the face of exceptionally low
short-term rates.




                                                   16
A        Asset Price Based Policy Predictions
Our formulation of the propensity score is based on Piazzesi’s (2005) term structure model. Piazzesi
(2005) provides an explicit parametric framework that links Fed-policy actions to the yield curve. Her
model consists of a monetary policy rule pj ( t ; ) ; the probability of choosing Dt = dj ; conditional on
information      t.   Monetary policy then a¤ects the state price density Mt and consequently, through no-
arbitrage arguments, the yield curve. The key insight of Piazzesi’s model that is relevant here is the fact
that asset prices, in particular bond yields and related derivatives, depend on the same state vector                       t   as
                             j
the policy function p ( t ; ). Under the additional assumption that the pricing functions are invertible,
we can recover        t   with a vector of asset prices. This is particularly appealing because some of the elements
in   t   may not be directly observable.
     We rely on a no-arbitrage pricing relationship between the price of zero coupon bonds as well as a
federal funds futures contract and the state vector                 t:   Let the state price density Mt be such that the price
at time t of a random payo¤ V at time T is E [MT V j t ] =Mt = ETQ [V ] where ETQ [V ] is the expectation
operator with respect to the risk neural measure. Harrison and Kreps (1979) show that the existence of
a state price density is essentially equivalent to the existence of an equilibrium price system, something
we impose as an assumption. Using the risk neutral measure, random payo¤s at various maturities are
priced as
                                                 PVT (t; T j t ) = ETQ [V j t ] :                                          (12)

We assume that the relationship between the state vector                       t   and (12) is invertible, an assumption that is
satis…ed for example in a¢ ne models. Let zt = PV1 (t; T1 j t ) ; :::; PVq (t; Tq j t ) be a vector of observed
price data with maturities T1 ; ::; Tq and assume that the pricing function has an inverse g such that


                                                     t   = g (zt ; t; T1 ; :::; Tq ) :                                     (13)

The technique of inverting the yield curve to elicit unobservable state variables is well established in the
…nancial econometrics literature –see Söderlind and Svensson (1997), Singleton (2001) or Piazzesi (2005)
for examples. Our empirical model for the propensity score is related to the policy function by

                                          pj (zt ; ) := pj (g (zt ; t; T1 ; :::; Tq ) ; ) :                                (14)

Federal funds futures maturing shortly after FOMC announcements are probably good candidates for zt .
The reason is that there is a direct link between their expected future cash ‡ow and changes in the federal
funds target rate. We focus on the case where no FOMC meeting is announced. Because macroeconomic
data is released at di¤erent days throughout the month and because we are interested in good predictors
of expected Fed policy for the entire month m + 1, we concentrate our attention on the futures price on
the last day of the prior month m; that is, tm : Let ft1                     denote the price of a one-month ahead contract
                                                                     m ;m




                                                                   17
traded at the last day of month m and let                m   be the total number of days in month m. On any given
day tj in month m + 1, let rtj be the e¤ective federal funds rate at the close of the market.8 The payo¤
                                                                                       1 and the average
for a buyer of a fed funds futures contract is the di¤erence between the futures rate ft;m
fed funds rate over month m + 1;
                                                                  1    X
                                                                       m+1

                                                     rtam+1 =                rtj                                             (15)
                                                                  m+1 j=1


with the payo¤ cash settled the day after expiration of the futures contract (see Piazzesi and Swanson,
2008, p. 679). Pricing equation (12) and (15) imply that the spread between a funds future ft1                               and
                                                                                                                      m ;m

the prevailing target rate rtm at the last day tm of month m is

                                                                E Q rm+1
                                                                     a      rtm j tm
                                           ft1m ;m    rtm =                                                                  (16)
                                                                 P1 tm ; tm+1 j tm

where tm+1 denotes the end of month m + 1 and P1 tm ; tm+1 j                       tm   is the tm price of a zero coupon bond
maturing at tm+1 . Note that      ft1 ;m   re‡ects both uncertainty about whether and when a target rate change
                                    m

will occur in month m+1 and more general uncertainty about the economy captured by the pricing kernel
Mt : Equation (16) shows that the futures-target rate spread is the best risk adjusted predictor of a target
rate change during the coming month.9 Whether (16) can be inverted to recover                          tm   as in (13) depends
on the dimension of     t   as well as the exact functional form of the conditional expectations. In the absence
of an explicit pricing model, which would require a more parametric framework than we are willing to
entertain, it is ultimately an empirical question whether controlling for ft1                          rtm in the propensity
                                                                                                m ;m

score is su¢ cient.


B       Implementation

B.1      Data

    a) Federal Funds Futures: CBOT prices of current month and next month Federal Funds Futures
        contract at market close, cry out market Monday - Friday. Source: Bloomberg.

  b) Treasury Bond yields: Daily data from the Federal Reserve Board of Governors. Federal Reserve
        Statistical Release H.15. Daily observations for Market yields on U.S. Treasury securities at 1-
        month constant maturity, quoted on investment basis at 3 month and 2, and 10 year maturities.
        Respective data-codes are ‘RIFLGFCM03’, ‘RIFLGFCY02’, ‘RIFLGFCY10’. Federal funds rate:
        Daily data based on weighted average of brokered trades. Data-code ‘RIFSPFF_N.B’
    8
      The rate rtj is published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. It is the volume weighted daily average of trades
arranged by major brokers (source: http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/omo/dmm/fedfundsdata.cfm). Using the model
implied rate at the end of the day thus is a slight simpli…cation.
    9
      In other words, it minimizes the squared prediction error amongst all predictors based on tm of rtam+1 and under the
risk neutral discounted measure.



                                                                 18
   c) Macro Data, all monthly frequency. Source: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Fred. (i) Consumer
      Price Index of all urban consumers: all items (PCU) seasonally adjusted, Source: Bureau of Labor
      Statistics; (ii) Industrial Production Index seasonally adjusted (IP), Source: Board of Governors
      of the Federal Reserve System; (iii) Federal Funds e¤ective Rate in percent per annum (FFED),
      monthly average, Source: Federal Reserve Statistical Release H.15; (iv) Civilian Unemployment
      Rate, seasonally adjusted (UNRATE), Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics.


B.2       Standard Errors

The estimator ^ de…ned in (11) is computed in two steps. First, the unconstrained estimate ^ =
   P ^
T 1 Tt=1 h t is obtained. Let be the asymptotic covariance matrix of ^: Assume that ^ is a consistent
estimator of         : Now, the estimator ^ is given as

                                                   1 PT ^                                           1 PT ^
                                                                                    0
                           ^ = arg min T                                                ^   1
                                                      t=1 ht                 ( )                T      t=1 ht              ( ) :


Replacing    with ^ has no e¤ect on the …rst order asymptotic distribution of ^ under our assumptions.
On the other hand, the limiting distributions of ^; (^ ) and ^ ; derived in Theorems 1 and 2 in Appendix
B.5, depend on a preliminary estimate of the the propensity score with parameters                                                  . Assume ^ is the
maximum likelihood estimator with representation

                                                                                   T
                                                                                   X
                                      1=2    ^               =       1
                                                                         T   1=2
                                                                                         l(Dt ; zt ;       0)   + op (1)                        (17)
                                                                                   t=1


where          = E [l(Dt ; zt ;                         0]
                                  0 )l(Dt ; zt ;   0)        and the function

                                                                 J
                                                                 X                d
                                                                   1 fDt = dj g @pt j (zt ; )
                                            l(Dt ; zt ; ) =
                                                                 j=0 pjt (zt ; )     @


is the score of the maximum likelihood estimator. The representation in (17) is used to expand h        ^t
around 0 leading to h  ^ t = vt ( ) + Op T 1 where vt ( ) = ht ( )           _
                                                                         0 + h( 0 )
                                                                                     1
                                                                                       l(Dt ; zt ; 0 ) and
                                  0                      0         0
_
h(                         0
    0 ) = E @ht ( 0 ) =@     : The covariance matrix is the typical spectrum at frequency zero matrix
of vt (   0)   found in the HAC-standard error literature (see Newey and West (1994)) and is given by

                                                                 1
                                                                 X                                     0
                                                         =               E vt (     0 ) vt i ( 0 )                                              (18)
                                                              i= 1


The formula for                                                     ^ t used to compute the sample averages are
                          takes into account that the ‘observations’h
based on estimated, rather than observed data. Con…dence intervals for                                               can be constructed from      :




                                                                             19
       We estimate       from the sample averages

                                           T
                                           X                                                          T
                                                                                                      X
                        b_
                        h(   0) = T
                                       1
                                                 @ht ^ =@ 0 ; ^ = T                               1
                                                                                                            l(Dt ; zt ; ^ )l(Dt ; zt ; ^ )0
                                           t=1                                                        t=1


                                              b_
and by letting vt ^ = ht ^                  ^+h( )^           1
                                                                  l(Dt ; zt ; ^ ): As in Newey and West (1994), we use the Bartlett
kernel with prewhitening and a data-dependent plug in estimator to obtain the necessary bandwidth
parameter.
  The Newey and West procedure is implemented as follows. Prewhitening is achieved by …tting a
VAR(1) model to vt ^ : For this purpose de…ne the autoregressive parameter estimate

                                       T                                              T
                                                                                                                                    !0
                                       X                                     0        X                                         0
                                A^ =            vt ^ vt           1
                                                                      ^                      vt       1
                                                                                                          ^ vt          1
                                                                                                                            ^
                                        t=2                                           t=2

                                                                                                                PT                                           0
and let r^t ^ = vt ^              ^ t
                                  Av        1
                                                 ^ : Then de…ne ^                       ;j    =T            1
                                                                                                                     t=j+1 r
                                                                                                                           ^t        ^ r^t      j
                                                                                                                                                     ^           for j = 0 and
^ ;j = ^ 0                                               0
           ; j for j < 0: Let
                           1 = [1; :::; 1] be an r-dimensional vector where r is the dimension of : De…ne
                                                                                            j             k
                        P                                (0) 2=3 where10 c = 1:1447 and n = 3 (T =100)2=9
^ j = 10 ^ ;j 1, s^(q) = n
                       j= n jjjq
                                 ^ j and  ^ = c   s
                                                  ^(1) =^
                                                        s
where b:c denotes the integer part of a real number. Set the bandwidth parameter to B    ^ = ^ T 1=3 :
       The estimator for       is now de…ned as

                    ^ = Ir
                                        1                    PB^                    j                                                                    1
                                 A^             ^   ;0   +     j=1       1                                ^     ;j   + ^ 0 ;j            Ir     A^           :
                                                                                  ^
                                                                                  B+1

B.3        Speci…cation Tests

The speci…cation tests are based on the following fact. If wt is a vector of elements of zt or                                                                        t 1;   then
correct speci…cation of the propensity score implies that

                                E 1 fDt = jg                  pj (zt ;    0 )jwt         = 0 for all j = 1; :::; J:

All J conditional moment restrictions, or a subset of them, can be summarized into a vector. Let Dj;t =
1 fDt = dj g ; Dt = (Dj1 ;t ; :::; Djk ;t ) and p (zt ; ) = pj1 (zt ; ) ; :::; pjk (zt ; ) : Set k                                                       J and 1             j1 <
::: < jk      J: In our case, we use this setup to focus on dj = f :25; 0; :25g : Then, E [Dt                                                            p(zt ;      0 )jwt ]   =0
must hold. To test this condition, consider the statistic m (Dt ; zt ; wt ; ) = (Dt                                                           p(zt ; ))           wt for which
the unconditional moment restriction E [m (Dt ; zt ; wt ; 0 )] = 0 holds. A test of this restriction is based on
                                  P
the limiting distribution of T 1=2 Tt=1 m (Dt ; zt ; wt ; 0 ) under the null-hypothesis of correct speci…cation
of p (zt ;   0) :
       The testing problem is complicated by the fact that                                    0       is unknown and needs to be estimated. This
  10
       See Newey and West (1994, Tables I and II).



                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                  PT
a¤ects the limiting distribution of the test statistic. De…ne b
                                                              p_ ( ) = T                                                      1
                                                                                                                                   t=1 @p(zt ;
                                                                                                                                                   ^ )=@    0
                                                                                                                                                                 wt and

                                                                    ^t = m
                                                                    #    ^t         b
                                                                                    p_ ( ) ^         1
                                                                                                         l(Dt ; zt ; ^ )

where the second term in # ^ t corrects m
                                        ^ t for the e¤ects of parameter estimation. A key insight is that
                           ^
under the null-hypothesis, #t is approximately a martingale di¤erence sequence. This feature signi…cantly
                                                                                                 P
simpli…es estimation of the asymptotic variance normalizing the test. Then, letting m = T 1 Tt=1 m     ^t
              P        0
and V^ = T 1 T #   ^t#
                     ^ leads to the test statistic
                              t=1       t


                                                                           T m0 V^      1
                                                                                            m !d            2
                                                                                                            (J)                                                           (19)

under the null hypothesis that E [1 fDt = jg jzt ] = pj (zt ;                                               0 ):   The limiting distribution in (19) is estab-
lished in Appendix B.5.


B.4           Regularity Conditions

Let       t   = [yt0 ; x0t ; Dt ]0 be the vector of observations. Assume that f t g1
                                                                                   t=1 is strictly stationary with values
in the measurable space (Rr ; B r ) where B r is the Borel -…eld on Rr and r is …xed with 2                                                                     r < 1. Let
Al1   =        (   1 ; :::;   l)   be the sigma …eld generated by                                1 ; :::;   l:     The sequence         t   is -mixing or absolutely
regular if                                                     "                                                     #
                                            m   = sup E             sup        Pr   AjAl1                P (A)           ! 0 as m ! 1:
                                                      l 1       A2A1
                                                                   l+m


Condition 2 Let                     t   be a stationary, absolutely regular sequence such that for some 2 < p < 1 the
                                                                                 1+p
  -mixing coe¢ cient of                     t   satis…es           m      cm    p 2=p       for some bounded constant c > 0:
                                                          P1           1 1=p
      Condition 2 implies that                              m=1        m       < 1 as required for Corollary 3.9 of McLeish (1975a). In
addition,    satis…es (2.6) of McLeish (1975b) required for a strong law of large numbers. Using Corollary
                    m
                                                    P
A.2 of Hall and Heyde (1980), it also follows that 1   i=m jmj
                                                               p
                                                                  E vt ( 0 ) vt m ( 0 )0 < 1 as required
by Assumption 2 of Newey and West (1994). Also note that p > 2 is su¢ cient to satisfy Assumption 3
of Newey and West (1994) when the Bartlett kernel is used as suggested here.
      The next condition states that the propensity score p(zt ; ) is the correct parametric model for the
conditional expectation of Dt and lists a number of additional regularity conditions.

Condition 3 Let                     0   2       where               Rk is a compact set and k < 1: Assume that E [1 fDt = dj g jzt ] =
pjt (zt ;     0)   and for all              6=        0   it follows E [1 fDt = dj g jzt ] 6= pj (zt j ): Assume that pj (zt j ) is di¤ eren-
tiable a.s. for               2f 2               jk            0k        g := N (           0)    for some               > 0: Let N (       0)   be a compact subset of
the union of all neighborhoods N (                                  0)   where @pj (zt j )=@ ; @ 2 pj (zt j )=@                        i@   j    exists and assume that
                                                                                                                                                                      0
N(     0)     is not empty. Assume that for all j 2 f0; :::; Jg and some                                                      0   > 0 and any              > 0    ;       with



                                                                                            21
          0
                  <             0       there exists a random variable Bt which is a measurable function of Dt ; zt and Yt;L
and a constant                 > 0 such that for all i

                                                                                                     0                                     0
                                                                         ht;j ( )         ht;j                    Bt                            ;

and

                                                                                                     0                                                0
                                                    @ht;j ( ) =@                         @ht;j           =@                         Bt                                                         (20)
                                                                                                              0                                       0
                                                                         zt       t;j   ( )        t;j                              Bt                                                         (21)

and ;         0
                  2 int N (             0 ). Let    ht;j;i ( ) be the i-th element of ht;j ( ) : E [jBt jp ] < 1; for all i E [jht;j;i (                                                       p
                                                                                                                                                                                           0 )j ]   <
                                            p
1; E [j@ht;j;i (          0 ) =@          j ] < 1:
                                                                                                                                                     PT
Condition 4 Assume that ^                                            0   = op (1) ; T 1=2 ^                       0       =            1
                                                                                                                                           T   1=2
                                                                                                                                                      t=1 l(Dt ; zt ;     0 ) + op (1) :   Let p
                                                                                                                              p
be given as in Condition 2 and assume that E [kl(Dt ; zt ;                                                            0 )k        ] < 1:

Condition 5 Assume that                                          is positive de…nite for all                                      in some neighborhood N                           such that
  0    2 int N and 0 < k                       k < 1 for all                       2 N: Assume that                               de…ned in (18)is positive de…nite.

       Conditions 2, 3 and 4 imply that Assumption 2 of Newey and West is satis…ed. The results of their
paper thus apply to the estimates of                                               proposed here.
       Regularity conditions for the speci…cation tests are given below.

Condition 6 Let N (                           0)   be the set de…ned in Condition 3. For some random variable Bt which is a
measurable function of Dt ; zt and wt and for which E [Btp ] < 1; it holds that for some " > 0 and                                                                                             ;    0

                      0                                          0
with                      <                  0h and         ;         2 int N (            0 ) that
                                                                                                  i
                  p+"                                                         0               p+"                                                    p+"
i) E k#t k                < 1; E                @p(zt ;           0 )=@                 wt          <    1; E kl(Dt ; zt ;                       0 )k       <1
                                                    0                                    0
ii) l(Dt ; zt ; )              l(Dt ; zt ;              )            Bt                       ;
                                    0                       0             0                                       0
iii)     @p(zt ; )=@                         @p(zt ;            )=@               wt          Bt                          :


B.5       Proofs

Theorem 1 Let ^ be de…ned in (9) and assume that Conditions 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 hold. Then,

                                                                                                          d
                                                                                  T 1=2 ^                ! N (0;                   )

where             is de…ned in (18).
                                                                                                                                                                               0
   Proof. Let Z = (z1 ; :::; zT )0 ; YL = (Y1;L ; :::; YT;L )0 and j ^ = 1;j ^ ; :::; T;j ^ : De…ne the
                                                 h                i
population projection y as y = arg minb E kYt;L bzt k2 and sample analog ^ y = YL0 Z (Z 0 Z) 1 : Recall
     ^ t = Yt;L
that h                                   ^         ^t;j         where ^t;j = zt0 (Z 0 Z)                  1Z 0                ^        and let ht (
                              t;j                                                                                     j                                    0)   = (Yt;L       y zt ) t;j   (    0) :


                                                                                                     22
   By the Mean Value Theorem we obtain
                                                      XT
      T 1=2 ^            0      = T        1=2                      ^t
                                                                    h              0                                                                                                                                              (22)
                                                t=1
                                               XT                                                                                                                                             XT
                                = T        1=2
                                                                    (Yt;L                  y zt ) t;j
                                                                                                                         ^                  0       +(            y      ^y ) T       1=2
                                                                                                                                                                                                               zt   t;j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ^
                                                t=1                                                                                                                                                    t=1
                                               XT                                                                           XT
                                = T        1=2
                                                                    ht (        0)                 0   +T               1
                                                                                                                                             @ht (                    0 ) =@
                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                    (T = )1=2 T 1=2 ^                         0
                                                     t=1                                                                            t=1
                                                    XT
                                     +T           1
                                                                      @ht                  =@           0
                                                                                                                  @ht (               0 ) =@
                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                  T 1=2 ^                 0
                                                            t=1
                                                                                XT
                                     +(       y           ^y ) T          1=2
                                                                                                       zt     t;j
                                                                                                                            ^
                                                                                           t=1


where                           ^                 and @ht ( ) =@                           0
                                                                                               = [@ht;1 (                                           0                                             0
                     0                    0                                                                                     0 ) =@                  ; :::; @ht;J (              0 ) =@            ] with

                                                                                   Dt;j    @pj (zt ; )      Dt;0     @p0 (zt ; )
                             @ht;j ( ) =@             = Yt;L                                           +                                                                                                   :                      (23)
                                                                               pj (zt ; )2     @         p0 (zt ; )2    @

By (20) it follows that for                   0   given in Condition 3 and any                                                             such that                       0    >      > 0;

                         XT
                     1                                            0                                                 0
        P       T                    @ht;j                =@                  @ht;j (              0 ) =@                       >                                                                                                     (24)
                               t=1
                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                         XT
                                     1                                                     0                                                    0
        P           sup         T                          @ht;j ( ) =@                                @ht;j (                0 ) =@                      > ;                         0       <            +P                     0
            k                                 t=1
                      0k

        E [jBt jp ]      p
  =             p
                               +P                      0

                                                                                                                                                              p
where both terms can be made arbitrarily small by choosing                                                                                              =           and > 0 for T large enough by
                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                  PT                  0 p _
using Conditions 4 and 3. By McLeish (1975b, Theorem 2.10) T                                                                                                       t=1 @ht;j ( 0 ) =@   ! h( 0 ) where
we de…ned E @ht;j ( 0 ) =@ 0 = h_ j ( 0 ): This implies that the third term in (22) is op (1) :
   For the last term in (22) note that (                                                           ^ y ) = Op T                              1=2              by McLeish (1975b, Theorem 2.10),
                                                                                       y

Corollary 3.9 of McLeish (1975a) and standard arguments for linear regressions. Now consider
                                                                                           XT
                                                  (   y        ^y ) T           1=2
                                                                                                             zt         t;j
                                                                                                                                   ^                                                                                              (25)
                                                                                                   t=1
                                                                                                   XT
                                         = T 1=2 (              y         ^y ) T               1
                                                                                                                        zt      t;j    (     0)
                                                                                                     t=1
                                                                                                     XT
                                                  +T 1=2 (                     ^y ) T              1
                                                                                                                              zt                         ^                      (
                                                                      y
                                                                                                                  t=1
                                                                                                                                           t;j                            t;j        0)       :

The …rst term in (25) is op (1) because from E [zt                                                          t;j   (         0 )]   = 0 it follows that

                                                                                   T
                                                                                   X
                                                                               1
                                                                          T                    zt      t;j    (         0)    = op (1) :                                                                                          (26)
                                                                                   t=1




                                                                                                            23
For the second term in (25) use Condition 3 to show that
                                                                XT
                                                   T        1
                                                                             zt              (                        ^
                                                                       t=1
                                                                                       t;j         0)        t;j                     = op (1)                                                      (27)

by arguments similar to those in (24). Then, (26) and (27) establish that (25) is op (1)
      It then follows from (25) and (27) that (22) is
                                                   XT
                                             1=2
                                         T                           ht;j (       0)          0
                                                            t=1
                                                   XT
                                         +T    1
                                                                     @ht;j (       0 ) =@
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                      T 1=2 ^                0       + op (1)
                                                  t=1
                                                 XT h                                                                                                  i
                                = T          1=2
                                                                       ht;j (                         _                      1
                                                            t=1                    0)             0 + hj (     0)                l(Dt ; zt ;        0 )  + op (1) :

Let
                                                  vt (          0)   = ht (       0)              + h_ j (    0)
                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                             l(Dt ; zt ;           0)

and vt;j (    0)    is the j-th element of vt (                          0) :     Note that vt;j (                  0)   is -mixing with E [vt;j (                              0 )]   = 0. Then it
follows that

                                                                 1       P             P                                         0
                                                           T         E        t=1            t=s vt ( 0 ) vs ( 0 )                                                                                 (28)
                                                                T
                                                                X1                     jjj                                                 0
                                              =                               1                   E v1 (           0 ) v1 j          (   0)    !                                                   (29)
                                                                                        T
                                                           j= T +1

                                                                                                                                                                                         PT        0
by stationarity of vt (             0)   and the Toeplitz lemma. Fix                                       2 Rk with k k = 1 and let ST = T                                        1=2
                                                                                                                                                                                           t=1         vt :
                            0
Then, E       ST2    !               > 0 by (28) and Condition 5. In addition
                                                       h P                                    pi           Pk                     p       p 1           hP                  i
                                         p                k                                                                                                 k
                        E       0
                                    vt            E                  l=1 j l j j~
                                                                                vt;l j                         l=1 j l j
                                                                                                                                 p 1               E             vt;l jp
                                                                                                                                                            l=1 j~


by Hölder’s inequality (Magnus and Neudecker, 1988, p.220) and where v~t;l is the l-th element of vt . Since
                                        P         p
p=p 1 2 and k k = 1 it follows that kl=1 j l j p 1 < 1: Denote by ht;j ( 0 ) and (j) the j-th element
of ht ( ) and respectively and by h_ j ( ) the j-th row of h(
          0
                                                           _   ). Then,      0                                               0

                                                   h                                                                                                                   pi
                        vt;j jp ]
                    E [j~                     E            jht;j (       0 )j +         (j)       + h_ j (     0)
                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                          kl(Dt ; zt ;          0 )k
                                                                                                                                     p             p
                                                                                      p
                                              3p       1
                                                               E [jht;j (         0 )j ]     + j j jp + h_ j (               0)
                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                        kl(Dt ; zt ;    0 )k
                                                                                                                                                                            p



                                                                                              p                                                                                                    p
                                                                                                                              p                                                               1
again by Hölder’s inequality. It follows that                                          (j)              E [jht;j (        0 )j ]         by Jensen’s inequality and                                     <
                                                                                                                                                                p
                                                                                     p
1 by Condition 5. Similarly, E [kl(Dt ; zt ;                                     0 )k ]    < 1 by Condition 4 and h_ j (                                   0)          E [j@ht;j (        0 ) =@       jp ] <
                                                                                            p
1 by Condition 3. By Condition 3 E [jht;j (                                             0 )j ]                          vt;j jp ] < 1: These arguments to-
                                                                                                      < 1 such that E [j~
gether with Condition 2 show that all the conditions of Corollary 3.9 of McLeish (1975a) are satis…ed.



                                                                                                   24
                                  0
Thus, ST !d N 0;                                      : The result now follows from the Cramer-Wold theorem.

Theorem 2 Let ^ be de…ned in (11) and assume that Conditions 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 hold. Let _ ( ) =
@ ( ) =@ 0 and assume that _ ( 0 ) A has full column rank. In addition, assume that 0 ( ) = 0 if
and only if           =     0   where                     0   2A         Rd and A is compact. Then,

                                                                                                d                                     1           1
                                                                       T 1=2 (^           0)   ! N 0; A0                                  A

where         is de…ned in (18): For any                                       2 Rd such that A0 6= 0 it follows that

                                                                                               d                                              1            1
                                                  T 1=2           0
                                                                      ( (^ )          ( )) ! N 0;                    0
                                                                                                                         A A0                     A             A0         :

   Proof. Let
                                                                         1 PT ^                                                       1 PT ^
                                                                                                             0
                                      QT ( ) = T                                                                 ^       1
                                                                            t=1 ht                 ( )                        T          t=1 ht                        ( ) :

                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                      PT              ^ !p : Thus, uniformly in
By the arguments in the proof of Theorem 1 it follows that T                                                                                  t=1 ht                                                      2 A;

                                                              QT ( ) !p Q ( ) = (                                ( ))0            1
                                                                                                                                          (                ( )) :

                  1
Because               is positive de…nite by Condition 5 and                                                                 ( ) = 0 if and only if                                 =     0    it follows that
Q( )         0 and Q ( ) = 0 if and only if                                       =       0:    By standard arguments it follows that ^ !p                                                         0:   We use
a mean value expansion of the …rst order condition
                                                                                  0
                                                                      @ (^ )          ^   1             1 PT ^
                                                                                               T           t=1 ht                         (^ ) = 0
                                                                       @ 0

such that
                                          0               p                                                                                       0                                 p
                       @ (^ )                 ^       1                  1 PT ^                                              @ (^ )                   ^     1        @ (~ )
             0=                                            T T              t=1 ht                  (   0)       +                                                                      T (^       0)     (30)
                        @ 0                                                                                                   @ 0                                     @ 0

where k~                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                      0k        k^                0k      !p 0: Then, by the continuous mapping theorem, it follows that @ (^ ) =@                                                                             !p
_ ( 0 ) and @          (~ ) =@        0       !p _ (              0) :   By the same arguments as in the proof of Theorem 1 it follows that
       P
T 1=2 Tt=1            ^t
                      h       (       0)          !d N (0;                     ) : The result then follows directly from rearranging (30) and ap-
plying the continuous mapping theorem.
   To prove the second part of the theorem use a mean value expansion around                                                                                                    0


                                                                                                                                                                      0_
                                 T 1=2            0
                                                      ( (^ )              ( )) =          0
                                                                                              @ (~ ) =@ 0 T 1=2 (^                                    0)   !d              (   0)


                                              1               1
where          N 0; A0                            A               : The result then follows from the continuous mapping theorem, noting
        0               1        1
that        A A0            A         A0 is non-singular.
   The following theorem establishes the limiting distribution of the test statistic in (19).

                                                                                                        25
Theorem 3 Assume that Conditions 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 hold. Let Vt = #t #0t                                                                                     V where #t is de…ned in
                                                                                                   p
(31). Assume that for any element Vt;ij of Vt ; E [jVt;ij j ] < 1: Then,

                                                                          T m0 V^        1
                                                                                             m !d            2
                                                                                                             (J)


   Proof. Let P (zt ; ) = diag (p(zt ; )) ; h(zt ; ) = diag (p(zt ; ))                                                                    p(zt ; )p (zt ; )0 . Simple algebra
then shows that

                   (Dt   p(zt ; ))0 h (zt ; )                 1
                                                                  @p (Dt jzt ; ) =@                 0
                                                                                                        = @` (Dt ; zt ; ) =@                       0
                                                                                                                                                       = l(Dt ; zt ;                0)
                                                                                                                                                                                         0


                                PJ               j
where ` (Dt ; zt ; ) =             j=0 Dj;t log p                 (zt ; ) is the log likelihood of the multinomial distribution and
Dj;t = 1 fDt = dj g :
   Recall m
          ^ t = Dt               p(zt ; ^ )              wt such that for mt;0 = m (Dt ; zt ; wt ;                                            0) ;



                                                  m
                                                  ^ t = mt;0                  @p(zt ; )=@               0
                                                                                                                  wt        ^
                                                                                                                                          0


                                                                                                                                                                           PT
with               0
                          ^
                                       0    : Using (17) as well as Condition 4 and setting b
                                                                                            p_ ( ) = T                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                               t=1 @p(zt ;           )=@   0

wt we obtain

             T
             X                             T
                                           X                                                       T
                                                                                                   X
  T    1=2
                   m
                   ^t = T          1=2
                                                  mt;0        b
                                                              p_ ^              1
                                                                                    T        1=2
                                                                                                            l(Dt ; zt ;         0)       + op (1) :
             t=1                           t=1                                                     t=1
                                           XT
                                   1=2                                          1                                0                                     1
                         = T                      mt;0        p_ (       0)         @p (Dt jzt ;              0 ) =@        h (zt ;           0)           (Dt             p(zt ;    0 ))    + op (1)
                                            t=1


where the last line follows from E @p(zt ;                                0 )=@
                                                                                     0
                                                                                              wt = p_ (                0)   and b
                                                                                                                                p_ ^                       p_ (       0)     = op (1) : Since

                          #t = mt;0               p_ (   0)
                                                                     1
                                                                         @p (Dt jzt ; )0 =@ h (zt ; )                           1
                                                                                                                                     (Dt           p(zt ;             0 ))                            (31)

is a martingale di¤erence sequence we consider

                                                                                                                                     0
                          E mt;0 m0t;0 = E                         P (zt ;      0)           p (zt ;        0 ) p (zt ;         0)            wt wt0 = ;
                                              h                                                                                                                  i
                                                                              0                                   1                                          0
                                           = E @p (Dt jzt ;                0 ) =@ h (zt ;               0)            @p (Dt jzt ;            0 ) =@

and
        h                                                                                                         i
                                               0                     1                                        0                                                   0
       E mt;0 (Dt             p(zt ;       0 )) h (zt ;       0)         @p (Dt jzt ;             0 ) =@              = E @p(zt ;                  0 )=@                   wt = p_ (          0) :




                                                                                             26
By Corollary 3.9 of McLeish (1975a) it follows that

                                               T
                                               X                                     T
                                                                                     X
                                         1=2                             1=2
                                    T                  m
                                                       ^t = T                              #t + op (1) !d N (0; V )                                                (32)
                                                 t=1                                 t=1

                             1            0
where V =       p_ (   0)        p_ (   0) :   A detailed veri…cation of the conditions is omitted but follows the same
line of argument as given in the proof of Theorem 1 above. To estimate V; de…ne

                                                     ^t = m
                                                     #    ^t                b
                                                                            p_ ^ ^             1
                                                                                                   l(Dt ; zt ; ^ )

with
                                                                       T
                                                                       X
                                                 ^ =T              1
                                                                                l(Dt ; zt ; ^ )l(Dt ; zt ; ^ )0 :
                                                                       t=1

Let
                                                                                     1 PT ^ ^ 0
                                                                  V^ = T                t=1 #t #t :

By arguments similar to the proof of Theorem 1 it follows that

                                                                            ^ !p                                                                                   (33)

and
                                                                   b
                                                                   p_ ^ !p p_ (                    0) :                                                            (34)

Next, expand

                                    ^ t = mt;0
                                    #                                  @p(zt ; )=@             0
                                                                                                        wt            ^
                                                                                                                               0

                                                         b
                                                         p_ ^ ^                  1
                                                                                        p_ (   0)
                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                     l(Dt ; zt ; ^ )

                                                       p_ (       0)
                                                                            1
                                                                                     l(Dt ; zt ; ^ )             l(Dt ; zt ;       0)
                                                                            1
                                                       p_ (       0)            l(Dt ; zt ;        0)


                                                 1
and recalling #t = mt;0          p_ (   0)           l(Dt ; zt ;        0 ):     Then,

                       1 PT ^ ^ 0                                  1 PT                ^t#
                                                                                         ^t                                        1 PT
                T         t=1 #t #t          V                T       t=1              #             #t #0t            + T                    0
                                                                                                                                      t=1 #t #t       V            (35)

where the second term on the RHS of (35) is op (1) by Theorem 2.10 of McLeish (1995b). Next, consider

           1 PT                                      1 PT
                                                                                                                 0                           0
       T            # ^0
                    ^t#      #t #0t = T                                ^t
                                                                       #          #t        ^t
                                                                                            #           #t                ^t
                                                                                                                     + #t #             #t       ^t
                                                                                                                                                 #        #t #0t   (36)
              t=1       t                               t=1




                                                                                      27
where

              ^t
              #       #t =             @p(zt ; )=@                       0
                                                                                 wt      ^
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                     b
                                                                                                                     p_ ^ ^                     1
                                                                                                                                                       p_ (      0)
                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                       l(Dt ; zt ; ^ )            (37)

                                   p_ (        0)
                                                            1
                                                                 l(Dt ; zt ; ^ )              l(Dt ; zt ;            0)       :

Thus,

                    1 PT                                                              1 PT
                                                        0                                                                                                                                   0
              T                   ^t                                                                                                        0                    ^
                       t=1 #t     #            #t               =            T           t=1 #t        @p(zt ; )=@                                     wt                          0                              (38)
                                                                                      1 PT
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                             T                          b
                                                                                                        p_ ^ ^                        1                              1
                                                                                                                                                                              l(Dt ; zt ; ^ )
                                                                                         t=1 #t                                                 p_ (    0)

                                                                                      1 PT
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                             T           t=1 #t       p_ (   0)
                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                          l(Dt ; zt ; ^ )                 l(Dt ; zt ;               0)

                                                                         R1 + R2 + R3 :

For R1 note that

                                                1 PT                                              0                       ^
                      kR1 k               T        t=1 #t @p(zt ;                        0 )=@          wt                                 0                                                                      (39)
                                                    1 PT                                                                  0                                           0        ^
                                      +T               t=1 k#t k kwt k                       @p(zt ;     0 )=@                        @p(zt ; )=@                                               0



where ^              0   = Op T           1=2       and

                                                            1 PT                                             0
                                                    T          t=1 #t                 @p(zt ;    0 )=@                    wt = Op (1)                                                                             (40)

because
              h                                                               i                                       h                                                                     i       1=2
                                                                (p+ )=2                                                                                                                p+
          E        #t @p(zt ;   0 )=@
                                           0
                                                    wt                                  E k#t kp+ E                           @p(zt ;               0 )=@
                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                          wt                              <1

by Condition 6 and by Theorem 2.10 of McLeish (1975b).11 The second term in (39) can be bounded
with probability approaching 1 as T ! 1, using Condition 6(iii), and noting that

                                      0                             0             0                                                            0                          0             0
                    @p(zt ; )=@                @p(zt ;                  )=@              wt =           @p(zt ; )=@                                    @p(zt ;                )=@               kwt k ;

by

                                          1 PT                                                                   0                                           0        ^
                                  T          t=1 k#t k kwt k                           @p(zt ;    0 )=@                   @p(zt ; )=@                                                  0                          (41)
                                                                             1 PT
                                                            1+
                                      ^                             T
                                                    0                           t=1 k#t k jBt j

 11
      We use McLeish (1975), Equation (2.12) and stationarity to establish Condition (2.11) of Theorem (2.10).




                                                                                                 28
       h                                    i                                                         1=2
where E k#t k(p+    )=2
                          jBt j(p+    )=2
                                                      E k#t kp+ E jBt jp+                                   < 1 by Condition 6. This again implies
that
                                                                    1 PT
                                                            T          t=1 k#t k jBt j             = Op (1)                                                            (42)

by McLeish (1975b). Now (40) and (41) imply that R1 = op (1) :
    For R2 note that using Condition 6(ii), w.p.a.1 as T ! 1;

                           b                                                         1 PT
           kR2 k           p_ ^ ^           1
                                                     p_ (   0)
                                                                           1
                                                                                T       t=1 k#t k kl (Dt ; zt ;                 0 )k

                                                                                            1 PT
                          + b
                            p_ ^ ^               1
                                                        p_ (        0)
                                                                                1
                                                                                    T          t=1 k#t k           l (Dt ; zt ;      0)        l Dt ; zt ; ^
                           b                                                         1 PT
                           p_ ^ ^           1
                                                     p_ (   0)
                                                                           1
                                                                                T       t=1 k#t k kl(Dt ; zt ;                 0k

                                                                                            1 PT
                          + b
                            p_ ^ ^               1
                                                        p_ (        0)
                                                                                1
                                                                                    T           t=1 k#t k jBt j
                                                                                                                           ^
                                                                                                                                     0

       h                                               i                                                           PT
                                      (p+        )=2                                                           1
where E (k#t k kl (Dt ; zt ;    0 )k)                       < 1 as before. Then, T                                      t=1 k#t k kl (Dt ; zt ;        0 )k    = Op (1) and
(33), (34) and (42) imply that R2 = op (1) :
    For R3 note that

                                            1 PT
                                                                                                                                                   0
                                     T         t=1 #t               p_ (       0)
                                                                                        1
                                                                                             l(Dt ; zt ; ^ )           l(Dt ; zt ;       0)

                                                                     1 PT
                                     p_ (   0)
                                                       1
                                                                T       t=1 k#t k              l(Dt ; zt ; ^ )           l(Dt ; zt ;          0)

                                                       1             1 PT                             ^
                                     p_ (   0)                  T       t=1 k#t k jBt j                            0


                                                                                            P
where ^        0 = op (1) by Condition 4. Then, R3 = op (1) follows from (42). The term T 1 Tt=1 # ^ t #t

  ^ t #t in (36) can be analyzed in the same way as T 1 PT #t #
           0                                                                  0
  #                                                                   ^ t #t but the details are omitted.
                                                              t=1
                   P          ^ 0 #t #0 = op (1) which in turn implies that
It follows that T 1 Tt=1 #  ^t#
                                t     t


                                                                         V^         V = op (1) :                                                                       (43)

                        PT
Then, for m = T     1
                           t=1 m
                               ^ t;      the statistic T m0 V^                       1m      is asymptotically                 2
                                                                                                                               J     because of (32), (43) and the
continuous mapping theorem.




                                                                                        29
References
Angrist, J. D., and G. W. Imbens (1995): “Two-Stage Least Squares Estimates of Average Causal Re-
  sponse in Models with Variable Treatment Intensity,”Journal of the American Statistical Association,
  90(430), 431–442.

Angrist, J. D., and G. M. Kuersteiner (2004): “Semiparametric Causality Tests Using the Policy
  Propensity Score,” NBER Working Paper 10975.

Angrist, J. D., and G. M. Kuersteiner (2011): “Causal e¤ects of monetary shocks: Semiparamet-
  ric conditional independence tests with a multinomial propensity score,” Review of Economics and
  Statistics.

Bagliano, F. C., and C. A. Favero (1998): “Measuring Monetary Policy with VAR Models: An
  Evaluation,” European Economic Review, 42(6), 1069–1112.

Bernanke, B. S., and K. N. Kuttner (2005): “What Explains the Stock Market’s Reaction to Federal
  Reserve Policy?,” Journal of Finance, 60(3), 1221–1257.

Blanchard, O., and J. Galí (2010): “Labor Markets and Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Model
  with Unemployment,” American Economic Journal: Macroeoconomics, 2, 1–30.

Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. Evans (1996): “The E¤ects of Monetary Policy Shocks:
  Evidence from the Flow of Funds,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 78, 16–34.

Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (1999): “Monetary Policy Shocks: What Have
  We Learned And To What End?,”in Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and
  M. Woodford, chap. 2, pp. 65–148. Elsevier Science B.V.

Christiano, L. J., M. Trabandt, and K. Walentin (2011): “DSGE Models for Monetary Policy
  Analysis,”in Handbook of Monetary Economics, Volume 3A, ed. by B. M. Friedman, and M. Woodford,
  pp. 285–367. North Holland, Netherlands.

Clarida, R., J. Galí, and M. Gertler (2000): “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability:
  Evidence and Some Theory,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 147–180.

Cochrane, J. H. (1994): “Comment on: What Ends Recessions? by Christina D. Romer and David H.
  Romer,”in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, ed. by S. Fischer, and J. J. Rotemberg, vol. 9. MIT Press:
  Cambridge.

Cochrane, J. H., and M. Piazzesi (2002): “The Fed and Interest Rates - A High Frequency Identi…-
  cation,” The American Economic Review, 92, 90–95.



                                                 30
Cover, J. P. (1992): “Asymmetric E¤ects of Positive and Negative Money-Supply Shocks,”The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 107(4), 1261–1282.

Dehejia, R. H., and S. Wahba (1999): “Causal E¤ects in Nonexperimental Studies: Reevaluating the
  Evaluation of Training Programs,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 94, 1053–1062.

Delong, J. B., and L. H. Summers (1988): “How Does Macroeconomic Policy A¤ect Output?,”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 433–94.

Faust, J., E. T. Swanson, and J. H. Wright (2004): “Identifying VARS based on high frequency
  data,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 51, 1107–1131.

Friedman, M., and A. J. Schwartz (1963): A Monetary Historory of the United States: 1867-1960.
  National Bureau of Economic Research. Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ.

Galí, J. (2011): “Monetary Policy and Unemployment,” in Handbook of Monetary Economics, Volume
  3A, chap. 10, pp. 487–546. Elsevier Science B.V.

Galí, J., and M. Gertler (2007): “Macroeconomic Modeling for Monetary Policy Evaluation,”Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 21, 25–45.

Gallant, A. R., P. E. Rossi, and G. Tauchen (1993): “Nonlinear Dynamic Structures,”Economet-
  rica, 61(4), 871–907.

Granger, C. W. J. (1969): “Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric Models and Cross Spectral
  Methods,” Econometrica, 37(3), 424–438.

Gurkaynak, R. S., B. P. Sack, and E. Swanson (2005): “The Sensitivity of Long-Term Interest
  Rates to Economic News: Evidence and Implications for Macroeconomic Models,”American Economic
  Review, 95(1), 425–436.

Gurkaynak, R. S., B. P. Sack, and E. T. Swanson (2007): “Market-Based Measures of Monetary
  Policy Expectations,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 25(2), 201–212.

Hall, P., and C. Heyde (1980): Martingale Limit Theory and its Application. Academic Press.

Hamilton, J. D. (2009): “Daily Changes in Fed Funds Futures Prices,” Journal of Money, Credit and
  Banking, 41(4), 567–582.

Hamilton, J. D., and Òscar Jordà (2002): “A Model of the Federal Funds Rate Target,”Journal of
  Political Economy, 110, 1135–1167.

Harrison, H. M., and D. M. Kreps (1979): “Martingales and Arbitrage in Multiperiod Securities
  Markets,” Journal of Economic Theory, 20, 381–408.

                                                   31
Heckman, J. J., H. Ichimura, and P. E. Todd (1998): “Matching as an Econometric Evaluation
  Estimator,” Review of Economic Studies, 65, 261–294.

Hirano, K., G. Imbens, and G. Ridder (2003): “E¢ cient Estimation of Average Treatment E¤ects
  using the Estimated Propensity Score,” Econometrica, 71, 1161–1189.

Hoover, K. D., and S. J. Perez (1994): “Post hoc ergo propter hoc once more: An evaluation of
  ’Does monetary policy matter?’ in the spirit of James Tobin,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 34,
  47–74.

Horvitz, D., and D. Thompson (1952): “A Generalization of Sampling Without Replacement from a
  …nite Population,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 47(260), 663–685.

Imbens, G. W. (2000): “The Role of the Propensity Score in Estimating Dose-Response Functions,”
  Biometrika, 87, 706–710.

Jordà, O. (2005): “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections,” American
  Economic Review, 95(1), 161–182.

Kareken, J., and R. M. Solow (1963): “Lags in Monetary Policy,”in Comission on money and credit,
  stabilization policies., pp. 14–96. Englewood Cli¤s, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Karras, G. (1996): “Are the Output E¤ects of Monetary Policy Asymmetric?,” Oxford Bulletin of
  Economics and Statistics, 58(2), 267–78.

Keynes, J. M. (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. McMillan.

Krueger, J. T., and K. N. Kuttner (1996): “The Fed Funds Futures Rate as a Predictor of Federal
  Reserve Policy,” The Journal of Futures Markets, 16(8), 865–879.

Kuttner, K. N. (2001): “Monetary Policy Surprises and Interest Rates: Evidence from the Fed Funds
  Futures Market,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 47(3), 523–544.

Leeper, E. M., and T. Zha (2003): “Modest Policy Intervention,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
  50, 1673–1700.

Magnus, J. R., and H. Neudecker (1988): Matrix Di¤ erential Calculus with Applications in Statistics
  and Econometrics. John Wiley and Sons.

McLeish, D. (1975a): “Invariance Principles for Dependent Variables,”Zeitschrift f. Wahrscheinlichkeit-
  srechnung und verw. Gebiete, 32, 165–178.

McLeish, D. L. (1975b): “A Maximal Inequality and Dependent Strong Laws,” The Annals of Proba-
  bility, 3(5), 829–839.

                                                   32
Newey, W. K., and K. D. West (1994): “Automatic Lag Selection in Covariance Matrix Estimation,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 61, 631–654.

Piazzesi, M. (2005): “Bond Yields and the Federal Reserve,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(2),
  311–344.

Piazzesi, M., and E. T. Swanson (2008): “Futures Prics as Risk-Adjusted Forecasts of Monetary
  Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(4), 677–691.

Ravn, M. O., and M. Sola (2004): “Aysmmetric E¤ects of Monetary Policy in the United States,”
  Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 86(5), 41–60.

Romer, C. D., and D. H. Romer (1989): “Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New Test in the Spirit
  of Friedman and Schwartz,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 4, 121–170.

        (1994): “Monetary Policy Matters,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 34(1), 75–88.

Rosenbaum, P. R., and D. B. Rubin (1983): “The Central Role of the Propensity Score in Observa-
  tional Studies for Causal E¤ects,” Biometrika, 70(1), 41–55.

Scotti, C. (2011): “A Bivariate Model of Federal Reserve and ECB Main Policy Rates,” International
  Journal of Central Banking, 7(3), 37–78.

Sims, C. A. (1972): “Money, Income and Causality,” American Economic Review, 62(4), 540–562.

         (1992): “Interpreting the macroeconomic time series facts: The e¤ects of monetary policy,”
  European Economic Review, 36(5), 975–1000.

Singleton, K. J. (2001): “Estimation of a¢ ne asset pricing models using the empirical characteristic
  function,” Journal of Econometrics, 102(1), 111–141.

S oderlind, P., and L. Svensson (1997): “New techniques to extract market expectations from …nan-
  cial instruments,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 40, 383–429.

Tenreyro, S., and G. Thwaites (2013): “Pushing on a string: US monetary policy is less powerful in
  recessions,” working paper.

Thapar, A. (2008): “Using Private Information to Estimate the E¤ects of Monetary Policy,” Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 55, 806–824.

Wingender, A. M. (2011): “Monetary Policy Shocks and Risk Premia in the Interbank Market,” The
  B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, 11(1), 1–19.

Woodford, M. (2001): “The Taylor Rule and Optimal Monetary Policy,”American Economic Review,
  91(2), 232–237.


                                                  33
                                   July 1989 to July 2005                               July 1989 to Dec 2008
                         OPT 1        OPT 2      OPF 1    OPF 2               OPT 1        OPT 2     OPF 1       OPF 2
                          (1)          (2)        (3)      (4)                 (5)          (6)       (7)         (8)

Meeting Months (s1t )
Pre-Crisis                                           1.08***    1.05***                             1.18***     1.16***
                                                      (0.25)     (0.23)                              (0.23)      (0.24)
Post-Crisis                                                                                         0.86***     0.90***
                                                                                                     (0.28)      (0.28)
Non-Meeting Months (s0t )
Pre-Crisis                                            0.39           0.38                             0.42        0.39
                                                     (0.28)         (0.29)                           (0.30)      (0.30)
Post-Crisis                                                                                           -0.00       -0.10
                                                                                                     (0.44)      (0.47)
Meeting months with pre-meeting changes (s0t )
Pre-Crisis                                    -0.11                  -0.10                            -0.12       -0.10
                                             (0.22)                 (0.23)                           (0.23)      (0.24)

In‡ation, Lag 1           0.00          0.02                      0.02         0.02         0.01                   0.01
                         (0.06)       (0.06)                     (0.04)       (0.04)       (0.04)                 (0.03)
In‡ation, Lag 2                        0.09                        0.04                   0.12**                   0.02
                                      (0.06)                     (0.05)                    (0.05)                 (0.03)
Unem. Rate, Lag 1       -0.31***     -0.19**                      -0.08      -0.30***     -0.17**                  -0.08
                         (0.10)       (0.09)                     (0.07)       (0.09)       (0.09)                 (0.06)
Unem. Rate, Lag 2                   -0.25***                      -0.05                  -0.29***                  -0.04
                                      (0.09)                     (0.06)                    (0.09)                 (0.06)
Target Rate                         -0.01***     -0.01***       -0.02***                 -0.02*** -0.01***      -0.02***
                                      (0.01)      (0.00)         (0.00)                    (0.01)      (0.00)     (0.00)
Last Target Change                      0.11      0.13**          0.11*                     0.11      0.15**     0.13**
                                      (0.08)      (0.06)         (0.06)                    (0.09)      (0.06)     (0.06)
LTC FOMC                             0.21**        0.06            0.08                  0.29***        0.09       0.11
                                      (0.10)      (0.07)         (0.07)                    (0.11)      (0.07)     (0.07)
FOMC                                   -0.02      -0.05*         -0.04*                     -0.03      -0.05*     -0.04*
                                      (0.03)      (0.03)         (0.03)                    (0.03)      (0.02)     (0.02)
CRISIS                                                                        -0.07*       -0.06*       0.03        0.03
                                                                              (0.04)       (0.03)      (0.03)     (0.03)
Log Likelihood           -187.65     -150.11         -102.92    -101.38      -232.55      -185.80     -119.25    -118.18
Pseudo R2                  0.01        0.15            0.37       0.38         0.00         0.15        0.43        0.43
Observations                                   192                                                233

Table 1. Ordered Probit Speci…cations for the expected change of the Target Rate. This table reports selected marginal
e¤ects on the probability of a 25 bps increase in the fed funds target rate. Standard errors are shown in parenthe-
ses. ***/**/* indicates signi…cance at the 99/95/90% con…dence level. LTC=Last Target Change. For other variable
de…nitions see text.




                                                               34
                                   July 1989 to July 2005                           July 1989 to Dec 2008
                           OPT 1         OPT 2     OPF 1 OPF 2              OPT 1        OPT 2     OPF 1      OPF 2
                            (1)           (2)       (3)   (4)                (5)          (6)       (7)        (8)

                                         A. Propensity Score Covariates

FFFt Combined             0.000***    0.004***     0.434      0.465       0.000***     0.000***    0.299      0.288
FFFt                      0.017**     0.061*       0.461      0.479       0.005***     0.108       0.195      0.188
FFFt squared              0.001***    0.001***     0.130      0.155       0.000***     0.000***    0.116      0.112
E¤ective Funds Rate       0.031**     0.114        0.256      0.262       0.019**      0.058*      0.127      0.130
Target Rate               0.014**     0.107        0.248      0.265       0.008***     0.058*      0.145      0.149
Last Target Change        0.000***    0.386        0.739      0.769       0.000***     0.087*      0.620      0.631
In‡ation, Lag 1           0.913       0.952        0.966      0.998       0.461        0.430       0.753      0.764
Unem. Rate Lag 1          0.220       0.673        0.790      0.697       0.661        0.974       0.957      0.808
In‡ation, Lag 2           0.896       0.490        0.714      0.732       0.881        0.694       0.712      0.771
Unem. Rate Lag 2          0.003***    0.720        0.252      0.394       0.007***     0.930       0.647      0.845

                                         B. Lagged Outcome Variables

Federal Funds Rate        0.000***    0.133        0.545      0.631       0.000***     0.031**     0.602      0.648
IP                        0.193       0.439        0.848      0.896       0.175        0.398       0.817      0.819
3 Month T-Bill            0.255       0.844        0.876      0.907       0.048**      0.456       0.646      0.705
2 Year T-Bond             0.168       0.871        0.977      0.940       0.142        0.776       0.982      0.958
10 Year T-Bond            0.423       0.985        0.890      0.864       0.674        0.908       0.815      0.773

Table 2. Speci…cation Tests. This table shows p-values for joint tests of the null hypothesis that the ordered probit
model correctly speci…es the conditional probability of Dt = f :25; 0; :25g. Moment conditions are formed for each
candidate predictor variable individually. Test statistics labeled FFF (Combined) are joint for F F F and F F F 2 .




                                                         35
                         PT       PF 1      PF 2
                         (1)      (2)       (3)
 F F Ft                           1.39      1.93
                                  (0.41)    (0.60)
 In‡ation                0.07               -0.37
                         (0.16)             (0.20)
 Unemployment Rate       0.25               -0.42
                         (0.58)             (0.54)
 Log Likelihood          -15.99   -10.71    -8.73
 Pseudo R2               0.06     0.45      0.58
 Sample Size             28       28        28

Table 3. Probit Models for Target Rate Reductions dur-
ing the 2006-2008 period. The table shows marginal ef-
fects. ***/**/* indicates signi…cance at the 99/95/90%
con…dence level




                         36
                                             Actual and Predicted Change of the Target Rate
                                                                                                                    0.8
                                                                                                        Predicted
                                                                                                        Actual
                 0.5                                                                                    IP
                                                                                                                    0.6

                 0.4

                                                                                                                    0.4
                 0.3




                                                                                                                           Monthly IP Growth Rate 2−Sided Average in %
                 0.2                                                                                                0.2


                 0.1
Target Change




                                                                                                                    0

                  0

                                                                                                                    −0.2
                −0.1


                −0.2                                                                                                −0.4


                −0.3
                                                                                                                    −0.6

                −0.4

                                                                                                                    −0.8
                −0.5


                                                                                                                    −1
                       90    92       94       96          98          00           02        04   06       08


                 Figure 1. Actual Changes (circles) and Predicted Changes (dots) in the Target Rate. Pre-
                 dictions are from the propensity score model labeled OPF 2 in Table 1. The …gure also shows
                 IP growth over the same period.




                                                                      37
                                                 0.25 Effect on Federal Funds Rate



           1.5


            1


           0.5
Percent




            0


          −0.5


           −1


          −1.5


                     3           6           9               12             15       18      21             24




                                              −0.25 Effect on Federal Funds Rate



           1.5


            1


           0.5
Percent




            0


          −0.5


           −1


          −1.5


                     3           6           9               12             15       18      21             24


             Figure 2. Estimated E¤ects of Target Rate Changes on the Federal Funds Rate. These estimates
             use data from August 1989 through July 2007, and the propensity score mode labeled OPF 2 in
             Table 1. Dashed lines indicate 90% con…dence bands.




                                                             38
                          0.25 Effect on 3 Month                                               −0.25 Effect on 3 Month

           1.5                                                                   1.5

            1                                                                     1

           0.5                                                                   0.5
Percent




                                                                      Percent
            0                                                                     0

          −0.5                                                                  −0.5

           −1                                                                    −1

          −1.5                                                                  −1.5

                 3    6     9     12     15       18   21   24                         3   6      9     12    15     18   21   24




                          0.25 Effect on 2 Year                                                −0.25 Effect on 2 Year

           1.5                                                                   1.5

            1                                                                     1

           0.5                                                                   0.5
Percent




                                                                      Percent




            0                                                                     0

          −0.5                                                                  −0.5

           −1                                                                    −1

          −1.5                                                                  −1.5

                 3    6     9     12     15       18   21   24                         3   6      9     12    15     18   21   24




                          0.25 Effect on 10 Year                                               −0.25 Effect on 10 Year

           1.5                                                                   1.5

            1                                                                     1

           0.5                                                                   0.5
Percent




                                                                      Percent




            0                                                                     0

          −0.5                                                                  −0.5

           −1                                                                    −1

          −1.5                                                                  −1.5

                 3    6     9     12     15       18   21   24                         3   6      9     12    15     18   21   24


             Figure 3. Estimated E¤ects of Target Rate Changes on Bond Yields. These estimates use data
             from August 1989 through July 2007, and the propensity score mode labeled OPF 2 in Table 1.
             Dashed lines indicate 90% con…dence bands.




                                                                 39
                          0.25 Effect on Inflation                                            −0.25 Effect on Inflation



            1                                                                    1


           0.5                                                                  0.5
Percent




                                                                     Percent
            0                                                                    0


          −0.5                                                                 −0.5


           −1                                                                   −1

                 3    6     9      12     15     18   21   24                         3   6      9     12      15     18   21   24




                             0.25 Effect on IP                                                   −0.25 Effect on IP

            1                                                                    1
           0.5                                                                  0.5
            0                                                                    0
          −0.5                                                                 −0.5
Percent




                                                                     Percent




           −1                                                                   −1
          −1.5                                                                 −1.5
           −2                                                                   −2
          −2.5                                                                 −2.5
           −3                                                                   −3
          −3.5                                                                 −3.5
                 3    6     9      12     15     18   21   24                         3   6      9     12      15     18   21   24




                      0.25 Effect on Unemployment                                         −0.25 Effect on Unemployment

           0.5                                                                  0.5

           0.4                                                                  0.4

           0.3                                                                  0.3

           0.2                                                                  0.2
Percent




                                                                     Percent




           0.1                                                                  0.1

            0                                                                    0

          −0.1                                                                 −0.1

          −0.2                                                                 −0.2

          −0.3                                                                 −0.3
                 3    6     9      12     15     18   21   24                         3   6      9     12      15     18   21   24


             Figure 4. Estimated E¤ects of Target Rate Changes on Macro Variables. These estimates use
             data from August 1989 through July 2007, and the propensity score mode labeled OPF 2 in Table
             1. Dashed lines indicate 90% con…dence bands.




                                                                40
                                                0.25 Effect on Federal Funds Rate
            2



           1.5



            1
Percent




           0.5



            0



          −0.5



           −1

                     3          6           9               12             15       18    21             24




                                             −0.25 Effect on Federal Funds Rate
            2



           1.5



            1
Percent




           0.5



            0



          −0.5



           −1

                     3          6           9               12             15       18    21             24


             Figure 5. Estimated E¤ects of Target Rate Changes on the Federal Funds Rate Through 2010.
             These estimates use data from August 1989 through December 2010, and the propensity score
             model (8) labeled OPF 2 in Table 1. Dashed lines indicate 90% con…dence bands.




                                                            41
                         0.25 Effect on 3 Month                                               −0.25 Effect on 3 Month

           1.5                                                                  1.5


            1                                                                    1
Percent




                                                                     Percent
           0.5                                                                  0.5


            0                                                                    0


          −0.5                                                                 −0.5


           −1                                                                   −1
                 3   6     9     12     15       18   21   24                         3   6      9     12    15     18   21   24




                         0.25 Effect on 2 Year                                                −0.25 Effect on 2 Year

           1.5                                                                  1.5


            1                                                                    1
Percent




                                                                     Percent




           0.5                                                                  0.5


            0                                                                    0


          −0.5                                                                 −0.5


           −1                                                                   −1
                 3   6     9     12     15       18   21   24                         3   6      9     12    15     18   21   24




                         0.25 Effect on 10 Year                                               −0.25 Effect on 10 Year

           1.5                                                                  1.5


            1                                                                    1
Percent




                                                                     Percent




           0.5                                                                  0.5


            0                                                                    0


          −0.5                                                                 −0.5


           −1                                                                   −1
                 3   6     9     12     15       18   21   24                         3   6      9     12    15     18   21   24


             Figure 6. Estimated E¤ects of Target Rate Changes on Bond Yields Through 2010. These
             estimates use data from August 1989 through December 2010, and the propensity score model
             (8) labeled OPF 2 in Table 1. Dashed lines indicate 90% con…dence bands.




                                                                42
                         0.25 Effect on Inflation                                            −0.25 Effect on Inflation
            1                                                                   1

           0.8                                                                 0.8

           0.6                                                                 0.6

           0.4                                                                 0.4
Percent




                                                                    Percent
           0.2                                                                 0.2

            0                                                                   0

          −0.2                                                                −0.2

          −0.4                                                                −0.4

          −0.6                                                                −0.6

                 3   6     9      12     15     18   21   24                         3   6      9     12      15     18   21   24




                            0.25 Effect on IP                                                   −0.25 Effect on IP
            2                                                                   2
           1.5                                                                 1.5
            1                                                                   1
           0.5                                                                 0.5
Percent




                                                                    Percent




            0                                                                   0
          −0.5                                                                −0.5
           −1                                                                  −1
          −1.5                                                                −1.5
           −2                                                                  −2
          −2.5                                                                −2.5
                 3   6     9      12     15     18   21   24                         3   6      9     12      15     18   21   24




                      0.25 Effect on Unemployment                                        −0.25 Effect on Unemployment
           0.4                                                                 0.4


           0.2                                                                 0.2


            0                                                                   0
Percent




                                                                    Percent




          −0.2                                                                −0.2


          −0.4                                                                −0.4


          −0.6                                                                −0.6

                 3   6     9      12     15     18   21   24                         3   6      9     12      15     18   21   24


             Figure 7. Estimated E¤ects of Target Rate Changes on Macro Variables Through 2010. These
             estimates use data from August 1989 through December 2010, and the propensity score model
             (8) labeled OPF 2 in Table 1. Dashed lines indicate 90% con…dence bands.




                                                               43
                                    Effect on Federal Funds Rate


                        1


                        0


                       −1
             Percent




                       −2


                       −3


                       −4



                            2   4             6           8        10   12



Figure 8. Estimated E¤ects of Target Rate Drops on the Federal Funds Rate. These estimates
use data from October 2006 through December 2009, and the propensity score model labeled
PF2 in Table 3. Dashed lines indicate 90% con…dence bands.




                                              44
                                    Effect on 3 Month
                      1.5
                       1
                      0.5
                       0

           Percent
                     −0.5
                      −1
                     −1.5
                      −2
                     −2.5
                      −3
                            2   4       6               8   10     12




                                     Effect on 2 Year
                      1.5
                       1
                      0.5
                       0
           Percent




                     −0.5
                      −1
                     −1.5
                      −2
                     −2.5
                      −3
                            2   4       6               8   10     12




                                    Effect on 10 Year
                      1.5
                       1
                      0.5
                       0
           Percent




                     −0.5
                      −1
                     −1.5
                      −2
                     −2.5
                      −3
                            2   4       6               8   10     12


Figure 9. Estimated E¤ects of Target Rate Drops on Bond Yields in the Crisis Period.
These estimates use data from October 2006 through December 2009, and the propensity
score model labeled PF2 in Table 3. Dashed lines indicate 90% con…dence bands.




                                         45
                                          Effect on Inflation

                           7

                           6

                           5

                           4

                Percent
                           3

                           2

                           1

                           0

                          −1

                               2   4           6                8   10   12




                                             Effect on IP
                          15

                          10

                           5

                           0
            Percent




                          −5

                      −10

                      −15

                      −20

                      −25

                               2   4           6                8   10   12




                                       Effect on Unemployment
                           6


                           4


                           2
                Percent




                           0


                          −2


                          −4

                               2   4           6                8   10   12


Figure 10. Estimated E¤ects of Target Rate Drops on Macro Variables in the Crisis Period.
These estimates use data from October 2006 through December 2009, and the propensity
score model labeled PF 2 in Table 3. Dashed lines indicate 90% con…dence bands.




                                                46
