                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE IMPACT OF PARENTAL DEATH ON CHILD WELL-BEING:
                   EVIDENCE FROM THE INDIAN OCEAN TSUNAMI

                                              Ava Cas
                                       Elizabeth Frankenberg
                                          Wayan Suriastini
                                          Duncan Thomas

                                        Working Paper 19357
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19357


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2013




The authors thank Arizal, Loren Brandt, Esther Duflo, Jed Friedman, Thomas Gillespie, Husnul Khalik,
Dilip Mookherjee, Mark Rosenzweig, Shelly Lundberg, Bondan Sikoki, John Strauss Cecep Sumantri
and Christopher Udry for helpful comments. This work was supported by grants from the World Bank,
the MacArthur Foundation (05- 85158-000), the National Institute for Child Health and Human Development
(HD052762, HD051970), the National Institute on Aging (AG031266), the National Science Foundation
(CMS-0527763), and the Fogarty International Center (TW007699). All opinions and errors are those
of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Ava Cas, Elizabeth Frankenberg, Wayan Suriastini, and Duncan Thomas. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Parental Death on Child Well-being: Evidence from the Indian Ocean Tsunami
Ava Cas, Elizabeth Frankenberg, Wayan Suriastini, and Duncan Thomas
NBER Working Paper No. 19357
August 2013
JEL No. J12,O15

                                                   ABSTRACT

Identifying the impact of parental death on the well-being of children is complicated because parental
death is likely to be correlated with other, unobserved, factors that affect child well-being. Population-representative
longitudinal data collected in Aceh, Indonesia, before and after the December 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami
are used to identify the impact of parental deaths on the well-being of children who were age 9 through
17 years old at the time of the tsunami. Exploiting the unanticipated nature of parental death due to
the tsunami in combination with measuring well-being of the same children before and after the tsunami,
models that include child fixed effects are estimated to isolate the causal effect of parental death. Comparisons
are drawn between those children who lost one parent, both parents and those whose parents survived.
Shorter-term impacts on school attendance and time allocation a year after the tsunami are examined
as well as longer-term impacts on education trajectories and marriage. Shorter- and longer-term impacts
are not the same. Five years after the tsunami, there are substantial deleterious impacts of the tsunami
on older boys and girls whereas the effects on younger children are more muted.


Ava Cas                                                    Wayan Suriastini
School of Business and Economics                           SurveyMETER, Yogyakarta, Indonesia
Catholic University of America                             nwsuriastini@gmail.com
cas@cua.edu
                                                           Duncan Thomas
Elizabeth Frankenberg                                      Department of Economics
Sanford School, Duke University                            Duke University
e.frankenberg@duke.edu                                     Box 90097
                                                           Durham, NC 27708
                                                           and NBER
                                                           d.thomas@duke.edu
1. Introduction
       On December 26, 2004, an earthquake measuring 9.3 on the Richter scale occurred off the

coast of Indonesia. The earthquake, which generated a 1,200 km rupture in the earth’s surface,

spawned a tsunami that affected coastlines around the Indian Ocean. Within 15 minutes of the

earthquake the tsunami reached the island of Sumatra and engulfed communities along 800

kilometers of the coastline of Aceh, the province closest to the earthquake’s epicenter. It is

estimated that the tsunami killed over 160,000 people, with women, young children and older

adults the most likely to die (Rofi et al., 2006; Doocy et al., 2007; Frankenberg et al, 2011).

       Many children lost one or both parents in the tsunami. We estimate that among children

age 9 to 18 at the time of the tsunami, around 10,000 lost one parent and about 4,400 lost both

parents. For these children, parental death was a major unanticipated shock. This research

measures the impact of that death on the well-being of children in the aftermath of the tsunami.

Establishing this impact is not straightforward, even after an unanticipated shock, if a family in

which a parent dies differs from other families in ways that would have affected a child’s

outcomes had the parent survived. We directly address this concern by drawing on longitudinal

data from the Study of the Tsunami Aftermath and Recovery (STAR), which we conducted in the

Indonesian provinces that were affected by the December 2004 Indian Ocean disaster. The

baseline survey was conducted ten months before the tsunami and is representative of the

population living in districts with coastlines vulnerable to inundation. Re-interviews took place

annually between 2005 and 2010. The first post-tsunami interview, about a year after the event,

provides evidence on the short-term impact of parental death. Evidence regarding the longer term

impact draws on data collected about 5 years after the tsunami.

       Although Indonesia regularly experiences earthquakes, tsunamis are rare and the event in

2004 was largely unanticipated. Moreover the intensity of the tsunami varied within small areas as
                                              1
a function of the topography, elevation, and orientation of the land relative to the direction and

force of the waves. Survival was to large extent attributable to idiosyncratic factors revolving

around the combination of where the waves hit and people’s precise locations at that moment. For

these reasons, it is possible that parental death is independent of prior behaviors, including

previous investments in children. We show, however, that parental survival is related to several

characteristics of children measured in the pre-tsunami baseline. Therefore, to identify the causal

impact of parental death we compare changes in outcomes (measured before and after the tsunami)

for children whose parents died in the tsunami with the changes in those outcomes for children

whose parents survived. The combination of the longitudinal data on children who were living

along the coast of Aceh and the unanticipated nature of the tsunami provide a unique window on

how children’s well-being is affected by parental death.

       The results of this investigation are important given that in recent years, high-mortality

natural disasters have caused surges in the number of orphaned children, bringing media attention

and humanitarian concern to their plight. Little scientific evidence exists regarding the impact of

parental death in these contexts on child well-being. This research contributes to filling that gap.

       Our evidence also speaks to a long-standing interest among demographers, sociologists,

economists and psychologists who have sought to understand how parental absence affects

children’s well-being. This interest has broadened as divorce, migration, and the HIV/AIDS

epidemic have increased the number of children experiencing the absence or loss of a parent.

Identification of causal effects in this literature has been a substantial challenge.

       We examine indicators of child well-being related to human capital and time allocation

that are measured in the surveys collected both before and after the tsunami. Parental death

potentially affects other indicators of well-being, such as psycho-social health and aspirations for


                                               2
the future, but because those measures are not available in the baseline data we do not examine

those outcomes.

       We find that the impact of parental death varies with the age and gender of the child and

that shorter-term impacts do not reliably portend what the longer-term impacts will be. Few papers

examine the impact of losing both parents. We find that the death of both parents has a large,

negative impact on the human capital accumulation of 15-17 year olds of both genders, and likely

of 9-14 year old females. In addition, loss of only a father has negative implications for older

males, who acquire less education after the tsunami than similar males whose parents survived the

tsunami. We find little evidence that parental death affects the human capital of 9-14 year old

males. Maternal death has little impact on schooling outcomes of children but does affect their

time allocation.



2. Background

       A parent’s death typically ends a child’s relationship with someone of central emotional

importance, with the attendant potential for straining relationships with the remaining parent or

caregivers. Parental death usually worsens the family’s economic status, creates pressures to take

on responsibilities of the dead parent, and may isolate the child from friends (Worden 1996;

Tremblay and Israel 1998, Stokes, Reid, and Cook 2009).

       Parental absence is often accompanied by symptoms of poor psycho-social well-being with

changes in behavior and school performance sometimes occurring. However, the results of studies

on how children fare after a parental death are not uniform, which has motivated efforts to identify

factors that mediate the impact of parental loss (Sandler, 2003).

       A key challenge in this literature is that parental loss is potentially correlated with other

unobserved factors that affect child well-being. Studies have contrasted impacts of parental
                                              3
absence brought on by a death with absence because of divorce, arguing that the death of a parent

is plausibly exogenous with respect to other factors that affect child welfare, whereas absence

because of divorce is not. Using data from a British cohort study, Fronstin (2001) shows that

parental absence when a child is 11-15 years old is associated with reduced educational attainment

for males and females which, for males, is larger if the absence results from death rather than

divorce. Norwegian registry data indicate that paternal death lowers transition rates from lower to

upper secondary school; similar effects emerge for divorce in models with mother-specific random

effects (Steele et al 2009). However, it is unclear that random effects absorb all unobserved

differences between children whose parents divorce, those whose parent dies and those who live

with both parents. More generally, although some parental deaths are likely to be random, it is

unlikely that all are random or that parental death can be treated as ‘exogenous’ in these models.

       In developing countries, much of the literature focuses on parental deaths from HIV-AIDS.

Early studies relied on cross-sectional Demographic and Health Surveys and reported that,

controlling age, school enrollment tended to be lower among children whose parent had died prior

to the survey, recognizing that the results may be driven by unobserved heterogeneity. (Bicego et

al. 2003; Case et al 2004).

       Longitudinal data from Africa have been used to address concerns with unobserved

heterogeneity and investigate the dynamic impact of AIDS-induced parental death on child

outcomes. Using data from rural Kwa-Zulu/Natal, South Africa, Case and Ardington (2006) report

that maternal death negatively affects subsequent enrollment, school attainment and education

spending. The results are interpreted as causal since future maternal death does not predict

baseline school outcomes. In contrast, paternal death has no effect on school outcomes; the authors

suggest that effects of paternal death, if they exist, may operate through socio-economic status.

Alternatively, also suggested by the authors, paternal death may matter less than maternal death
                                             4
for children in rural Kwa-Zulu/Natal because many of the fathers are absent: less than 30% of

children co-reside with the father while around two-thirds co-reside with the mother.

       Changes in primary school participation of children whose parents died between 1999 and

2002 in Kenya are compared with changes for similar children whose parents did not die by Evans

and Miguel (2007). A child is about 5% less likely to be in school after the mother dies. This

effect appears about two years prior to the mother’s death, which the authors attribute to the

influence of parental illness due to HIV/AIDS, and persists for several years after the death.

Effects of paternal death are smaller and not statistically significant.

       In a study of longer-term impacts of orphanhood, Tanzanian children interviewed between

ages 7 and 15 years when both parents were alive were re-interviewed ten years later. Children

who had lost a parent during the hiatus were compared with those whose parents survived. Female

orphans were more likely to be married (Beegle and Krustikova, 2008), orphans had completed

one year less of schooling and they were 2 cms shorter than non-orphans (Beegle, DeWeerdt and

Dercon, 2010). Because height is largely determined by the time a child is age 4 or 5 (Martorell

and Habicht, 1986), the differences in height at follow-up likely reflect pre-existing differences

between children who subsequently lost a parent and those who did not. This underscores a

methodological issue in the literature on the impact of death from HIV/AIDS: because the parent

is often ill for several years prior to death, behavioral responses by children and their families may

precede the baseline measurement. Comparisons of trajectories of child well-being before and

after the death of the parent potentially reflect the combination of these prior behaviors and the

causal impact of the death itself. Longitudinal data alone may not be sufficient to identify the

causal effect of parental death; it is important that parental death also be unanticipated.

       This issue has been discussed in the literature. When a parent dies after a prolonged illness,

the child may be better prepared for the eventual loss (Worden 1996). In a study of adolescents
                                               5
who lost a parent to HIV/AIDS, emotional distress and contact with the juvenile justice system

peaked in the year before the death, then steadily declined (Rotheram-Borus et al 2005). Results

were similar for children who lost a parent to cancer (Siegel et al 1992, Siegel, Karus, Raveis

1996).

         Investigators have argued that the causal effect of orphanhood can be identified when

parental death is accidental. Using Indonesian data in which some deaths may be unanticipated,

Gertler et al (2004) report that recent parental death is associated with reduced school enrollment

among children and that older daughters with younger siblings, are at higher risk of dropping out

when a parent dies. Drawing on administrative records from Taiwan, the relationship between

parental deaths from accidents and college enrollment is examined (Chen, Chen, and Liu 2009).

Comparing children at least 18 years of age when a parent died to younger siblings, the

unexpected death of a mother results in a 4% lower probability of enrolling in college. Death of a

father does not affect college enrollment. The authors interpret these patterns as evidence that

maternal provision of non-financial support is more important for college-going behavior than

paternal financial support, which can be replaced with resources provided to families after the

father’s death. Whereas some accidents can legitimately be treated as exogenous in these models,

the concern remains that parents who are more likely to have accidents differ from other parents in

unobserved ways that are related to investments in children.

         Our research makes four contributions to the literature. First, we identify the effect of

orphanhood based on the combination of, first, unexpected parental deaths that occurred because

of the tsunami and, second, longitudinal data collected before and after the tsunami. The estimated

effects are purged of contamination from unobserved heterogeneity that is fixed at the child and

family level. From a methodological point of view, the combination of both dimensions of the

research design are important to measure the impact of parental death on child well-being, at least
                                                6
in the context of the Indian Ocean tsunami, which underlies our second contribution: little is

known about the well-being of children orphaned in a large-scale natural disaster. Third, we

examine both shorter- and longer-term impacts of parental death on child outcomes and find that

shorter-term impacts are poor predictors of longer-term impacts. Fourth, we distinguish male from

female children, older from younger children, and the loss of a mother from the loss of a father

from the loss of both parents. We establish that all of these distinctions are important for

understanding the impact of parental death on the well-being of the next generation.



3. Aceh and the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami

       Aceh, at the northern tip of Sumatra, lies at the periphery of the Indonesian archipelago

which, along with historical factors, contributed to a desire for autonomy that has set the province

apart from provinces closer to Jakarta. The exploitation of Aceh’s abundant natural resources,

particularly oil and natural gas at the beginning of the 1970s, fuelled aggregate economic growth

in the province and sustained high rates of growth in Indonesia more broadly for three decades

until the 1998 financial crisis. The distribution of the benefits caused conflicts between the

Acehnese and the central government which, in combination with disagreements over the

application of Islamic law, underlay the formation of a separatist movement, GAM (Free Aceh

Movement). GAM was only disbanded in the year after the tsunami (Rist, 2010.)

       Despite its natural resources, the material well-being of the population of Aceh is close to

the average for all Indonesians. At the time of the tsunami, the poverty rate in Aceh was slightly

above the average for all of Indonesia and more Acehnese fell into poverty as a result of the

destruction caused by the tsunami. However, within a few years, the poverty rate had returned to

its pre-tsunami level, in part because of the massive reconstruction effort (Thorburn, 2009, World

Bank, 2009.)
                                              7
       The Sumatra-Andaman earthquake of 2004 resulted in a 2,000 km rupture along the floor

of the Indian Ocean. The displaced water generated a tsunami that slammed into the island of

Sumatra shortly after the earthquake (Lay et al. 2005; Marris 2005) causing over 160,000 deaths

and massive destruction.

       Two features of the tsunami are important for our empirical approach. First, the tsunami

was not expected. No early warning systems were in place. Moreover, geological evidence

documents that mainland Sumatra had not experienced a tsunami for more than 600 years (the last

tsunami in the region, in 1907, affected Simeulue Island off the coast of Sumatra) (Monecke et al

2008). Second, the severity of the impact varied in ways that could not be anticipated even within

small areas. Areas where the water hit full force experienced the greatest damage, but sites nearby

were protected from the water’s force by topographical features of the coastline (Frankenberg et

al, 2011). Because idiosyncratic features of the landscape played an important role in determining

risk, parental deaths from the tsunami are driven less by genetic risk factors, prior behavioral

choices, and socioeconomic status than is the case for parental absence caused by death from

illness, floods, hurricanes or other natural hazards.



4. Data

       The Study of the Tsunami Aftermath and Recovery (STAR) is a longitudinal survey of

individuals who were living, prior to the tsunami, along the coast of Aceh and the neighboring

province of North Sumatra. The baseline survey, STAR0, was conducted in February 2004, as part

of the annual population-representative cross-sectional socioeconomic survey, SUSENAS,

conducted by Statistics Indonesia.

       With the assistance of Statistics Indonesia, we fielded the first follow up wave, STAR1,

between May 2005 and July 2006. We targeted all SUSENAS respondents from the 2004 survey
                                               8
who were living in any of 11 kabupaten (districts) in Aceh and 8 kabupaten in North Sumatra. The

baseline sample survey includes 585 enumeration areas in 525 villages. The kabupaten were

selected because they each have a coastline and so were, in principle, vulnerable to inundation

from the tsunami waves. Tsunami effects varied within and across these kabupaten because the

force and reach of the water varied considerably as a function of land topography.

       In the baseline survey, informants reported the socioeconomic and demographic

characteristics of themselves and other household members. In STAR1 we collected individual

and household-level data, drawing on and augmenting the baseline questionnaire. In addition

village leaders and informants at local schools and health facilities provided information as part of

a large community-level survey.

       STAR1 was the first of five annual post-tsunami surveys. We also use data from the fifth

follow-up, STAR5, which took place between November, 2009 and November, 2010.

       We focus on children and young adults who were between 9 and 17 years old at the time of

the baseline survey and were living in 91 communities along the coast that sustained heavy

damage from the tsunami, as measured by a combination of satellite imagery, direct observations

of survey supervisors, and interviews with village leaders. In the larger STAR sample, the vast

majority of deaths due to the tsunami occurred in these areas. In STAR1, and subsequently, we put

considerable effort into identifying which baseline respondents had died and locating the

survivors. When respondents could not be found in the baseline location, interviewers obtained

proxy information about their whereabouts and tracked them to their new location. In about half

these cases, survivors had moved to temporary camps; the majority of the others had moved to the

homes of family or friends or rented housing elsewhere. One or more family members provided

information about the survival status of each member of the baseline household. If no family

member could be found, we drew on information collected from neighbors, village leaders and
                                              9
local death registers that were compiled after the tsunami. Of 1,173 age-eligible children in the

baseline, 345 (30%) are known to have died. Of the remaining 828 children, we interviewed 709

(86%) in the first follow-up. Persistent attempts to track all survivors in subsequent waves paid

off: we found more of them and 737 (89%) were assessed in the final interview. 1

         About one in six of the children interviewed in the first follow-up lost at least one parent,

as shown in panel A of Table 1. The literature suggests that the loss of a mother has a larger

impact on child human capital outcomes than the loss of a father. In our empirical models we will

distinguish the loss a mother from the loss of a father, as well as the loss of both parents to the

tsunami. In our study sample of children, 7.9% lost a mother, 4.5% lost a father and about the

same fraction, 4.4%, lost both parents to the tsunami.

         We examine five shorter-term child outcomes and five longer-term outcomes, all of which

are related to human capital and time allocation. The shorter-term outcomes are measured at the

first follow-up interview, about a year after the tsunami, when the children were age 10 through 18

years. At that time 83% were enrolled in school, 9% had worked in the previous week and 36%

had helped with housekeeping in the previous week (Panel B of Table 1). A scholarship program

was instituted by a number of different humanitarian aid organizations across Aceh in an effort to

encourage children to stay in school. As with much of the humanitarian response to the tsunami,

the structure of the scholarships varied across programs. The modal scholarship covered all fees,

costs of books and costs of exams for either one or two years. For example, among children of

elementary and high school age, the scholarship funded by Education International paid, on a

monthly basis, about Rp 10 million per year (approximately $100). Other donors included the

Sampoerna Foundation, the Freeman Foundation, and the Organization of Islamic Conference.


1
  1% of the children refused to participate in each wave, 2 children died between the first and final re-survey and the
remaining children were lost to follow-up.
                                                       10
Many programs describe their primary targets as those children who lost one or both parents and

children whose parents lost their livelihood due to the tsunami. About 19% of the children in our

sample had received a scholarship after the tsunami.

       By the time of the final interview, about five years later, fewer than two-thirds of the

children were enrolled in school and the average child had completed 10.2 years of schooling.

About 28% were working in the labor market (for a wage, in a family business or self-employed),

39% did housework in the week prior to the survey, and 11% had married.



5. Empirical strategy

       Our goal is to identify the extent to which variation in these child human-capital related

outcomes can be attributed to the death of a parent in the tsunami. A natural starting place is to

estimate the relationship between each of the shorter-term and longer-term outcomes, Yit, for child

i at time t (where t spans the period before and after the tsunami), and parental death, Dit,

controlling time varying and time invariant child and family characteristics, Xit, and Xi,

respectively:

                Yit = α + βDit + γXit + δXi + εit                             [1]

Parental death, D, is vector-valued distinguishing children who lost their mother, those who lost

their father and those who lost both parents in the tsunami. An important advantage of our

research is that parental death does not reflect prior health-related behaviors but is the

consequence of a large and unexpected natural disaster. Estimates from [1] can be interpreted as

causal if parental death in the tsunami is exogenous in the model; i.e., if unobserved heterogeneity

εit is not correlated with covariates in the model including parental death. This strong assumption

underlies much of the existing literature. In our context, it is reasonable to suppose that parents

who survived the tsunami are stronger or better swimmers than other parents, or that they lived in
                                                11
more robust houses. If those parents also invested more in the human capital of their children prior

to the tsunami, then the assumption that εit is unrelated to parental death will be violated.

       If such differences exist and reflect traits that do not change during the study period, they

can be taken into account in [1] by including a child-specific fixed effect. Specifically, separating

unobserved heterogeneity into two components, a fixed effect that is time invariant for each child,

i, and a component that varies over time, it, re-write [1] as

               Yit = α + βDit + γXit + i + it                       [2]

The fixed effect absorbs all characteristics of the parent and child that do not change over time and

affect the outcome, Yit, in a linear and additive way. These include observed characteristics, Xi, in

model [1] along with unobserved characteristics that are included in εit in that model. The latter

might include, for example, parents’ tastes for investments in their children, characteristics of the

child such as ability and ambition, and characteristics of the family and community in which they

were living at the time of the tsunami.

       Estimates of [2] require repeated observations of the same child before and after the

tsunami. We examine indicators of schooling and time allocation that were measured for the same

child before the tsunami and again after the tsunami.

       One indicator was only collected after the tsunami. In the first re-survey we asked about

participation in programs implemented after the tsunami to assist families, including whether the

child received a scholarship from such a program. Since this scholarship program did not exist at

baseline, we assume no child received one of these scholarships at that time.

       Before presenting our empirical results, we assess whether parental death can be treated as

exogenous in model [2]. Indicators measured in the pre-tsunami baseline for children whose

parents subsequently survived the tsunami are compared with indicators for children who lost one

or both parents in the tsunami.
                                                  12
       The first row of Table 2 shows that children whose parents survived the tsunami were, on

average, 12.9 years old at baseline (column 1). Children who lost a parent were, on average, age

13.5 (column 2) and the difference of 0.6 years is significant (column 3). The differences for

children who lost their mother, their father or both parents, relative to those whose parents

survived are displayed in columns 4, 5 and 6, respectively (none is significant).

       The second row of the table indicates that males constitute a significantly higher fraction of

survivors among children who lost parents relative to children whose parents survived. The

difference is largest for children who lost both parents – in this group 19.9% more young males

survived than young females (this difference is also significant).

       Children whose parents died in the tsunami were also significantly better educated and

significantly more likely to be enrolled in school prior to the tsunami. They were less likely to be

working or engaged in housekeeping in the week before the pre-tsunami survey relative to those

whose parents survived, although these differences are not significant. The rest of Table 2

compares characteristics of parents and households of those children whose parents survived the

tsunami relative to those whose parents did not survive. None of these differences is statistically

significant. We also estimated models that include a community fixed effect, which compares

children within each community. In these models we find no statistically significant differences in

any of the indicators in the table between children who lost one or more parents and those who did

not. Thus, part of the differences between orphans and non-orphans can be attributed to

differences across study sites, including the likelihood of death of parents. For some outcomes,

differences between children who were orphaned and those who were not are similar in magnitude

in models with and without community fixed effects, suggesting the possibility that even within

communities pre-existing differences may exist between children who were orphaned by the

tsunami and those children who were not orphaned.
                                              13
       Results in Table 2 establish that children who lost parents in the tsunami had higher levels

of human capital before the tsunami relative to those children whose parents survived the tsunami.

To the extent that these pre-tsunami differences are not absorbed by observed characteristics in the

model [1], unobserved heterogeneity in the model will be correlated with parental death and

estimates in [1] will be biased. If, however, these pre-tsunami differences reflect influences that

are fixed for a child over the study period, they will be absorbed in the child fixed effect and

estimates in [2] can be given a causal interpretation. The results in Table 2 underscore the critical

importance of having a pre-tsunami baseline in order to identify the causal effect of parental death

on child outcomes.

       We have established that males are more likely to have survived the tsunami than females.

The male survival advantage also holds for adults. It has been attributed to the fact that males are

stronger and, in Islamic Aceh, much more likely to know how to swim than females (Frankenberg

et al, 2011). We estimate separate models for males and females.

       We also explore whether other attributes are associated with children’s survival status

(Appendix Table 1). The only significant difference is that children who helped with housekeeping

were also more likely to survive. This difference, however, is small in magnitude and both smaller

in magnitude and not significant when comparisons are drawn within communities. The evidence

indicates that net of age and sex, children’s deaths are not significantly related to pre-tsunami own

human capital, parental human capital or household resources.

       The final three columns of Appendix Table 1 compare the same indicators for respondents

who were interviewed in the first follow-up with those who were not. None of the differences is

significant and, taken together, the indicators explain only 1.2% of the variation in the probability

an individual is not interviewed in the follow-up survey (F statistic for the significance of all the


                                               14
covariates in the appendix table is 1.2, p value is 0.31.) In short, we find no evidence that attrition

is selected on observed characteristics measured at baseline.



6. Results

        The empirical model, [2], is estimated by ordinary least squares including child fixed

effects. All estimates of variance-covariance matrices take into account clustering at the

community level and are robust to arbitrary forms of heteroskedasticity. Results for older children

(age 15 to 17 years at baseline) are reported in Table 3. Results for younger children (age 9 to 14

years at baseline) are reported in Table 4. All models are stratified by the child’s gender and we

distinguish short-term outcomes (measured a year after the tsunami) from longer-term outcomes

(measured around five years after the tsunami). Each panel of the table reports the impact on the

outcome listed in the first column of the table of death of the mother, death of the father and death

of both parents relative to the excluded group (both parents survived the tsunami).

        We begin with older children, who are likely to make the transition from school to work

and possibly family formation during the study period. The shorter-term impacts of parental death

are reported in the first column of Table 3 for older males. A year after the tsunami, they are less

likely to be enrolled in school if a parent died – an impact that is large and statistically significant

if the father died. There is no evidence that the scholarship programs introduced after the tsunami

were effectively targeted at older children orphaned by the tsunami. In fact, the least likely to

receive a scholarship were older males who lost both their mother and father in the tsunami.

        Five years after the tsunami (column 2 of Table 3), relative to those who did not lose a

parent, the older male children who lost both parents have completed 1.7 years less schooling

since the tsunami and they are 40 percentage points less likely to be enrolled in school and 34

percentage points more likely to be working. These effects are both substantively large and
                                                15
statistically significant. Relative to those whose parents both survived, if only the father died, the

older males have completed 1.3 fewer years of schooling since the tsunami and they are less likely

to be enrolled in school. (These gaps are not statistically significant.) Both double orphans and

those who lost a father are 7 percentage points less likely to be married five years after the

tsunami. None of the differences between the double orphans and those who lost their father is

statistically significant. The results indicate that losing a father or both parents, has taken a toll on

the trajectory of human capital accumulation of older male children as they have shifted out of

school and into work earlier than similar males who did not lose a parent.2 An examination of

household rosters in the post-tsunami surveys establishes that in many cases, males who lost their

father or both parents have taken on the role of the head of the new household including taking

care of their younger siblings. We conclude that these older male orphans are likely to carry the

costs of the tsunami into adulthood and possibly through the rest of their lives.

         Results for older female children are reported in the third and fourth columns of Table 3. In

the shorter-term, death of a father results in higher rates of school enrollment and lower rates of

doing housework. However, death of the mother or both parents results in lower school enrollment

(albeit not significantly) and substantially higher rates of doing housework (34% and 53%

respectively). It appears that when the father dies, the mother seeks to protect older female

children whereas the death of the mother results in the child stepping into the mother’s role, at

least in terms of housekeeping. Again, the scholarship program does not appear to have been

targeted well. Among all older female children, those who lost both parents are the least likely to

receive a scholarship.

2
  Prior to the tsunami, older boys who lost a parent in the tsunami were better educated than those who did not lose a
parent, but after the tsunami, those who lost a parent had completed less education than those whose parents survived.
For example, five years after the tsunami, boys who lost both parents had completed 10.8 years of schooling while
those who did not lose a parent had completed 11.8 years.

                                                      16
       Five years after the tsunami, the impacts of parental death are greatest on those older

female children who lost both parents. Relative to similar females neither of whose parents died,

older female children who lost both parents are 55 percentage points less likely to be enrolled in

school, they are less likely to be in the work force, more likely to be keeping house and they are 62

percentage points more likely to be married.

       Older female children who lost one parent are also more likely to be keeping house –

presumably daughters substitute for the mother who died or assist the mother who was widowed

and works in the labor market to replace income lost with the death of her husband. Whereas

widowed mothers apparently tried to protect their daughters in the short run, this does not appear

to have been sustained over the longer term. Nonetheless, in contrast with the substantially lower

human capital of older male children who lost their fathers or both parents, there is no evidence

that older female children who lost one of both parents have completed less education since the

tsunami than similar females whose parents survived.

       The fact that older female children who lost both parents are transitioning into the adult

role of marriage earlier than other similar female children likely reflects at least two influences.

First, the death of both parents left many of these older female children with fewer psycho-social

and economic resources, and possibly a desire to form a new family earlier than would otherwise

be the case. Second, the higher rates of mortality among prime age women, relative to prime age

men, substantially changed the local area marriage markets. Five years after the tsunami,

essentially all the prime age men who were widowered by the tsunami had re-married (Burrows et

al, 2013). Whatever the reasons for the relatively early marriage of these girls, it is not clear

whether the death of both parents will have an enduring impact on their well-being. Future waves

of STAR will provide evidence on this important question.


                                               17
         We turn next to results for the younger children, who were between the ages of 9 and 14 at

the pre-tsunami baseline. Results are reported for males in the first two columns of Table 4.

Although younger males are no more or less likely to be enrolled in school if one or both parents

died in the tsunami than are similar children whose parents survived, they are 32 percentage points

more likely to have received a scholarship if the father died or both parents died. If both parents

died, they are less likely to be working or doing housework, and if the father died, they are also

less likely to be doing housework. It is possible that these effects on time allocation are driven by

the scholarship program. There is little evidence suggesting significant longer-term impacts of

orphanhood on these younger male children apart from a slightly higher probability of helping

with housework if either the mother or father died.3

         Results for younger female children are reported in the second two columns of Table 4.

Those who lost their mother or both parents are significantly more likely to be enrolled in school.

Effective targeting of scholarships to young girls who lost both parents may explain one piece of

these results. It does not, however, explain the higher enrolment rates among girls whose mother

died since they are no more likely to receive a scholarship than those female children whose

mother and father both survived. Moreover, young female children who lost their father are more

likely to receive a scholarship but their enrollment rates are the lowest of all groups. No significant

differences emerge in the probability of working and doing housework among younger female

children who lost one or both parents relative to those who did not.

         Five years later, younger female children who lost both parents are 51 percentage points

less likely to be enrolled in school. Loss of a father has effects in the same direction (but is half the

magnitude and not statistically significant). Although there are no differences in the amount of

3
 Male children whose father died, or both parents died, are more likely to be working; while the estimated effect is
substantively large, it is not statistically significant.

                                                      18
schooling completed since the tsunami for these young women, relative to those whose parents

survived, the lower enrollment rates suggest that gaps in completed schooling may emerge in the

coming years. Whereas loss of a mother or a father results in significantly lower rates of working

in the market, loss of both parents results in a 24% increase in that probability – these double-

orphaned girls have left school and entered the labor force earlier than similar girls whose parents

did not die in the tsunami. Death of a father also results in higher rates of housekeeping suggesting

that these young girls, like older female children, are substituting for their mothers.



7. Discussion and Conclusions

       The potential repercussions for children of the death of a parent are likely to be multi-

faceted and to evolve over time. The role in the family played by the parent who dies goes unfilled

for at least some period of time. The surviving parent or care-giver may assume some of the

deceased parent’s responsibilities and, depending on the child’s age and gender, the child may also

take on some of those responsibilities. The child’s relationship with the surviving parent (and/or

other relatives and care-givers) likely changes and the child may strike out on his or her own

earlier than if the parent had not died. Parental death is also likely to be accompanied by changes

in the socioeconomic status of surviving family members. All these processes – and their impacts

on the lives of the children -- evolve over time. We have investigated both the short and longer-

term impacts of parental death on human capital related indicators of well-being of children.

       Using data collected before and after the Indian Ocean tsunami, we examine the impact of

death of one or both parents on child outcomes soon after the tsunami and over the longer-term.

Because the tsunami was unexpected and survival depended largely on where people were located

when the water came ashore, it is reasonable to assume that parents who died in the tsunami did

not invest more (or less) in their children in anticipation of their children becoming orphans. This
                                               19
assumption is less likely to be satisfied in studies of death of parents after an illness such as HIV.

Nonetheless, it is a leap of faith to assume that those children who were orphaned by the tsunami

can be treated as randomly drawn from the population of all children. The evidence indicates that,

before the tsunami, children orphaned by the tsunami were different from those who were not

orphaned. We therefore present estimates of the impact of parental death on child well-being in

models of human capital accumulation and time allocation that take into account these pre-existing

differences by including child fixed effects. These estimates depend on longitudinal data that

measure child outcomes before and after the tsunami.

       Estimates with child fixed effects can be given a causal interpretation under the assumption

that pre-existing differences between children orphaned by the tsunami and children whose parents

survived reflect characteristics that do not change for the child during the study period. Such

characteristics might include, for example, parental desire to invest in the human capital of the

child, the child’s ability, and the ambitions of the parents and the child.

       It is possible that children, families, and communities changed because of the tsunami.

Parental death occurred in the context of considerable upheaval. On one hand, this period is likely

to be a time when children particularly need their parents to navigate the new landscape. On the

other hand, the extended family and community may respond to protect orphaned children. We

conducted qualitative interviews with young adults who had lost parents seven years after the

tsunami. Our interviews revealed cases where sets of siblings who were separated by the death of

their parents at the time of the tsunami returned to their original communities to set up households

with the help of more distant relatives who were also living in the area. It is important to interpret

our estimates as inclusive of such responses by extended family members.

       The communities included in this study were selected because they were heavily damaged

by the tsunami, as measured by a comparison of satellite imagery before and after the tsunami. It
                                               20
is possible that children who were orphaned by the tsunami are clustered in communities that

suffered more damage than other areas and our results are driven by this heterogeneity. We find

that this is not the case.

        First, parents died and left orphaned children in over half the heavily damaged

communities. In these communities, the proportion of children who were orphaned ranged from

5% to 85%. On average, slightly over one-quarter of children who survived the tsunami were

orphaned. The models reported in Tables 3 and 4 have been re-estimated excluding the

communities in which no child was orphaned by the tsunami. The estimates for this subset of

communities are slightly less precise but none of our conclusions is affected. For example, in

specifications using this smaller set of communities, over the longer term, older males who lost

both parents have completed 1.9 fewer years of schooling (s.e.=0.5) since the tsunami and those

who lost their fathers have completed 1.5 fewer years of schooling (s.e.=0.7) after the tsunami.

The comparable estimates in Table 3 are 1.7 and 1.3 fewer years of education, respectively. Older

females who lost both parents are 58 percentage points more likely to be married (s.e.=8) in the

model with the reduced set of communities which compares with a 62 percentage point difference

in Table 3.

        Possibly the poorer education outcomes of older orphans are driven by their living in areas

where the tsunami reduced access to schools. We find no evidence to support this hypothesis. The

STAR community survey measures the damage to buildings, infrastructure and services, including

schools, as well as changes in prices, access to markets and employment opportunities after the

tsunami. The fraction of orphaned children in a community does not predict whether junior or

senior secondary schools were damaged in the community or whether access to such schools

worsened after the tsunami.


                                             21
       More generally, in an effort to take into account changes in communities in the aftermath

of the tsunami, we have re-estimated the models in Tables 3 and 4 including measures of the

extent of damage to the communities that resulted from the tsunami. These controls include

indices of the degree of water inundation and visible destruction in the tsunami’s aftermath, and a

measure of reduced access to senior secondary schools. Adding these controls has no discernible

impact on the magnitude or significance of the estimated effects reported above and affects none

of our conclusions.

       Changes in the children themselves and their extended families resulting from the

experience of the tsunami cannot be separately identified from the impact of parental death. This

affects the generalizability of our results. We find that the impact of parental death varies with the

age and gender of the child and that shorter term impacts are not reliable indicators of the effects

that emerge in the longer-term. An older male child who lost his father or both parents in the

tsunami has substantially lower levels of education and is more likely to be working than a son

whose parents survived the tsunami. It is likely that older females who lost both parents will also

have less human capital than those that did not; these females are less likely to be in school or

working and much more likely to be married five years after the tsunami. An older female is more

likely to be doing housework if her mother, father, or both parents died, suggesting that she

substitutes for the parent who died in a complex way. These children will likely carry the costs of

parental death through their entire lives.

       The impact of parental death on younger children is more muted. Younger males are

largely protected from the deleterious impact of the death of either parent. Whereas this may be

true for a younger female who lost either her mother or father, those who lost both parents appear

to be on trajectories of lower human capital investments that have not fully played out. It is

possible that scholarship programs targeting younger children who lost their fathers or both
                                              22
parents offset negative impacts on enrolment among these children immediately after the tsunami.

More generally, the impact of parental death may have been offset by the influx of assistance after

the tsunami, which included opening temporary schools and subsequent reconstruction of

infrastructure. Children whose parents survived were also able to take advantage of these services

and those children serve as the controls in our models.

       The literature on HIV/AIDS mortality in Africa indicates that death of a mother typically

has significant negative consequences for child education whereas death of a father has negligible

and insignificant effects. It has been suggested that this may, in part, reflect the fact that many

children do not co-reside with their fathers in Africa. As shown in Table 1, the vast majority of

children co-reside with both their mother and their father in Aceh. In contrast with the African

literature, we find that death of a father in the tsunami has significant negative consequences for

the educational attainment of older sons whereas the impact of maternal death is more muted. The

evidence suggests that both the children and the surviving parent substitute for the parent that

died. However, the death of both parents has the largest and substantively most important impacts

on older males, older females and possibly younger females. These double-orphans are the most

vulnerable, at least in the context of the tsunami. This is an important result since no population-

based study has examined the impact of the loss of both parents in a longitudinal design that

compares children before and after the death of the parents.




                                               23
References

Beegle, K. and S. Krutikova. 2008. “Adult Mortality and Children’s Transition into Marriage.”
        Demographic Research, 18.42:1551-74.

Beegle, K. J. De Weerdt, adn S. Dercon. 2010. “Orphanhood and human capital destruction: Is there
        persistence into adulthood?” Demography. 47(1): 163-180.

Bicego, G., S. Rutstein, and K. Johnson. 2003. “Dimensions of the Emerging Orphan Crisis in Sub-
        Saharan Africa.” Social Science and Medicine, 56:1235–47.

Burrows, M., E. Frankenberg, P.Katz, B. Sikoki, and D. Thomas. 2012. “Family Formation in Indonesia
       after the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami.” Presented at the 2012 Annual Meetings of the Population
       Association of America.

Case, A., C. Paxson, and J. Ableidinger, 2004. “Orphans in Africa: Parental Death, Poverty, and School
       Enrollment.” Demography, 41(3): 483-508.

Case, A. and C. Ardington, 2006. “The Impact of Parental Death on School Outcomes: Longitudinal
       Evidence From South Africa.” Demography, 43(3): 401–420.

Chen, S., Y. Chen, and J. Liu. 2009. “The Impact of Unexpected Maternal Death on Education: First
       Evidence from Three National Administrative Data Links.” American Economic Review: Papers &
       Proceedings. 99:2, 149-153.

Doocy, S., Y. Gorokhovich, G. Burnham, D. Balk, and C. Robinson. 2007. "Tsunami Mortality Estimates
       and Vulnerability Mapping in Aceh, Indonesia." American Journal of Public Health 97(S1):S146-
       S151.

Evans, D. and E. Miguel. 2007. “Orphans and Schooling in Africa: A Longitudinal Analysis.”
       Demography, 44(1):35-57.

Frankenberg, E., T. Gillespie, S. Preston, B. Sikoki, and D. Thomas. 2011. “Mortality, the Family, and the
       Indian Ocean Tsunami.” Economic Journal.

Fronstin, P., D. Greenberg, and P. Robins. 2001. “Parental disruption and the labour market performance of
        children when they reach adulthood.” Journal of Population Economics 14:137-172.

Gertler, P., D. Levine, and M. Ames, 2004. “Schooling and Parental Death.” The Review of Economics and
         Statistics, 86(1): 211–225.

Lay, T., H. Kanamori, C. Ammon, M. Nettles, S. Ward, R. Aster, S. Beck, S. Bilek, M. Brudzinski, R.
        Butler, H. DeShon, G. Ekstrom, K. Satake, and S. Sipkin. 2005. "The Great Sumatra-Andaman
        Earthquake of 26 December 2004." Science 308(30 May 2005):1127-1133.

Marris, Emma. 2005. "Inadequate warning system left Asia at the mercy of tsunami." Nature 433(6 January
        2005):3-5.

Martorell, R. and Habicht, J. (1986). “Growth in Early Childhood in Developing Countries.” In
       Human Growth: A Comprehensive Treatise. F. Falkner and J. Tanner, Editors. Plenum
                                                24
        Press. New York.

Monecke, K, W Finger, D Klarer, W Kongko, B McAdoo, A Moore & S Sudrajat. 2008. A 1,000-year
      sediment record of tsunami recurrence in northern Sumatra Nature 455, 1232-1234 (30 October
      2008).

Rist, M. 2010. “The economic development of Aceh since 1945” in A. Graf, S, Schroter, E. Wieringa (eds)
        Aceh: History, Politics and Culture. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.

Rofi, A., S. Doocy, and C. Robinson. 2006. "Tsunami mortality and displacement in Aceh province,
        Indonesia." Disasters 30(3):340–350.

Rotheram-Borus MJ, Weiss R, Alber S, Lester P. 2005. “Adolescent adjustment before and after HIV-
       related parental death.” Journal of Consulting Clinical Psychology. Apr;73(2):221-8.

Sandler, I., S. Wolchik, C. Davis, R. Haine, and T. Ayers. 2003.“Correlational and experimental study of
        resilience in children of divorce and parentally bereaved children.” Chapter 9 in Suniya S. Luthar
        (ed) Resilience and Vulnerability: Adaptation in the Context of Childhood Adversities. Cambridge
        University Press.

Siegal, K., D. Karus, and V.H. Raveis. 1996. “Adjustment of children facing the death of a parent due to
        cancer.” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 35, 442-450.

Siegal, K., F.P. Mesagno, D. Karus, G. Christ, K. Banks, and R. Moynihan. 1992. “Psychosocial
        adjustment of children with a terminally ill parent.” Journal of the American Academy of Child and
        Adolescent Pscyiatry. 31, 327-333.

Steele, F., W. Sigle-Rushton, and O. Kravdal. 2009. “Consequences of Family Disruption on Children’s
         Educational Outcomes in Norway.” Demography. 46(3): 553-574.

Stokes, Julie; Reid, Catriona; Cook, Vanessa. 2009. “Life as an adolescent when a parent has died.”
        Adolescent encounters with death, bereavement, and coping. Balk, David E. (Ed.); Corr, Charles A.
        (Ed.); New York, NY, US: Springer Publishing Co, 2009. pp. 177-197.

Tremblay, G. and A. Israel. 1998. “Children’s adjustment to parental death.” Clinical Psychology: Science
       and Practice. 54: 424-438.

Worden, J.W. and P.R. Silverman. 1996. “Parental death and the adjustment of school-age children.”
      Omega Journal of Death and Dying. 33,91-102.

The World Bank. 2009. “Aceh Growth Diagnostic. Identifying the Binding Constraints to Growth in a
      Post-conflict Post-disaster Environment.” Report. http://reliefweb.int/report/indonesia/indonesia-
      aceh-growth-diagnostic-identifying-binding-constraints-growth-post. Accessed 9 May 2013.

Thorburn, C. 2009. “Livelihood recovery in the wake of the tsunami in Aceh.” Bulletin of Indonesia
       Economic Studies. 451:85-105.




                                                25
Table 1: Parental death, shorter term and longer-term child outcomes

A. Parental death as a result of the tsunami
 % of children who lost one or both parents                            16.8
 % of children whose
    mother died                                                         7.9
    father died                                                         4.5
    mother and father both died                                         4.4

B. Child outcomes
 B.1 Shorter-term outcomes (at first follow-up interview)
 % of children
   enrolled in school at time of follow-up interview                   83.2
   received scholarshipa                                               19.2
   working in market sector in week before interview                    9.2
   housekeeping in week before interview                               35.7

 Sample size                                                            709

 B.2 Longer-term outcomes (at final follow-up interview)
 Completed years of education                                          10.2
  % of children
   enrolled in school at time of interview                             62.1
   working in market sector in week before interview                   28.2
   housekeeping in week before interview                               38.5
  ever married by time of interview                                    11.1

 Sample size                                                            737

Notes: Sample consists of tsunami survivors who were, at baseline interview age 9 through 17 years
and living in a community that was subsequently heavily damaged by the tsunami.
Shorter-term outcomes measured during first post-tsunami interview, about a year after tsunami.
Longer-term outcomes measured in final interview, about 5 years after the tsunami.
a
  Between time of tsunami and first follow-up interview.
Table 2: Child and family characteristics at pre-tsunami baseline
         Stratified by survival status of parents
                                  Both parents     One or both                            Difference (relative to both parents survived)
                                    survived       parents died                         Any parent     Mother         Father    Both parents
                                    tsunami       during tsunami                          died           died          died          died
                                             [1]                   [2]                       [3]              [4]            [5]             [6]
Age (years)                                 12.9                  13.5                      0.6              0.6            0.2             0.8
                                            [0.1]                 [0.2]                     [0.3]           [0.4]           [0.5]          [0.4]
Male (%)                                    54.2                  65.5                      11.3             8.2            8.2            19.9
                                            [2.1]                 [4.7]                     [5.1]           [8.3]           [9.1]          [8.8]
Education (years)                           5.3                    6.4                      1.14             1.1            0.9             1.5
                                            [0.2]                 [0.2]                    [0.28]           [0.4]           [0.6]          [0.5]

Enrolled in school (%)                      91.4                  96.6                      5.25             5.0            5.5             5.4
                                            [1.5]                 [1.5]                    [2.17]           [2.8]           [3.5]          [3.6]
Working for a wage (%)                      4.6                    2.8                     -1.82             -2.7           3.1             -4.6
                                            [1.6]                 [1.5]                    [2.19]           [2.5]           [5.5]          [1.6]
Engaged in housekeeping (%)                 8.2                    3.8                     -4.40             -4.3           -8.2            -1.3
                                            [1.8]                 [2.9]                    [3.39]           [4.2]           [1.8]          [5.1]

Mother's education (years)                  8.5                    8.6                      0.10             0.5            -0.8            0.3
                                            [0.4]                 [0.4]                    [0.52]           [0.8]           [0.8]          [0.6]
Father's education (years)                  9.4                    9.0                     -0.39             -0.5           -0.9            0.3
                                            [0.4]                 [0.4]                    [0.52]           [0.7]           [0.8]          [0.7]

Mother alive at baseline (%)                98.1                  99.2                      1.02             1.9            -1.3            1.9
                                            [0.7]                 [0.9]                    [1.08]           [0.7]           [3.2]          [0.7]
Father alive at baseline (%)                95.4                  90.8                     -4.68             -0.8           -4.8           -11.6
                                            [1.0]                 [4.0]                    [4.03]           [5.3]           [9.0]          [7.3]

Per capita expenditure                      40.0                  41.8                      1.84             7.9           -10.1            3.1
 (Rp10,000 per month)a                      [2.7]                 [5.7]                    [5.94]           [11.0]          [3.7]          [5.6]

Household size                              5.9                    5.8                     -0.13             0.0            -0.1            -0.5
                                            [0.2]                 [0.2]                    [0.22]           [0.3]           [0.4]          [0.3]
Notes: In the first post-tsunami survey, 590 children were interviewed, both of whose parents survived (column 1) and 119 children wee interviewed who lost
one or both parents (column 2). Column 3 is the difference between columns 2 and 1. Standard errors (in parentheses) are adjusted for clustering at the
community level and take into account heteroskedasticity.. aRp10,000 is approximately equal to US$1.
Table 3: Effects of death of a parent on outcomes for children age 15-17 at baseline
Regression estimates compare post- tsunami outcomes with pre-tsunami outcomes for children
who lost one or both parent with those children whose parents survived the tsunami
All models include child fixed effects.

                                                              Older males                Older females
                                                        Short-term Long-term        Short-term Long-term
Child outcome             Status of parent                  [1]          [2]             [3]          [4]
% of enrolled in school   Mother died/father alive         -11.6         7.0            -22.2          -0.1
                                                          [18.0]       [15.2]          [17.4]        [21.1]
                          Father died/mother alive         -37.7        -24.7           14.5          11.8
                                                          [18.6]       [16.5]           [4.9]        [29.4]
                          Both mother and father died       -9.2        -40.2           -15.9         -55.3
                                                          [14.7]       [10.6]          [28.7]         [4.5]
% received scholarship    Mother died/father alive         -13.3                        10.2
                                                           [7.3]                        [9.2]
                          Father died/mother alive          0.6                         19.3
                                                          [15.4]                       [26.8]
                          Both mother and father died      -21.8                        -16.9
                                                           [4.3]                        [4.3]
Years of education        Mother died/father alive                       -0.9                         0.9
(completed)                                                             [0.6]                        [1.1]
                          Father died/mother alive                       -1.3                         -0.1
                                                                        [0.9]                        [0.5]
                          Both mother and father died                   -1.7                          0.0
                                                                        [0.4]                        [0.7]
% working                 Mother died/father alive         12.8        -10.1             8.1           7.5
(previous week)                                           [13.5]       [13.6]          [11.3]        [21.0]
                          Father died/mother alive          2.0          3.7            -37.5         -26.3
                                                          [11.7]       [17.8]          [28.0]        [48.1]
                          Both mother and father died      27.1         34.2             -5.0         -26.0
                                                          [16.2]       [14.3]           [3.0]         [4.9]
% doing housework         Mother died/father alive         15.0          0.8            34.0         15.3
(previous week)                                           [21.9]        [7.6]          [12.8]        [3.8]
                          Father died/mother alive         18.9          7.8            -39.0        15.5
                                                          [13.6]        [2.8]           [8.5]        [4.0]
                          Both mother and father died      -5.5          7.7            53.2         16.0
                                                          [10.8]        [2.8]           [6.5]        [3.8]
% ever married            Mother died/father alive                       -0.1                          6.7
                                                                        [7.7]                        [20.5]
                          Father died/mother alive                       -7.3                          -5.1
                                                                        [2.9]                        [27.3]
                          Both mother and father died                    -7.2                         62.0
                                                                        [2.8]                         [5.6]
Number of children                                          181          185            151            159
Notes: Excluded category in each regression is both parents survived the tsunami. Short-term models
compare pre-tsunami outcomes with outcomes one year after the tsunami. Long-term models compare
pre-tsunami outcomes with outcomes five years after the tsunami. There are two observations for each
child. All models control age of child. Standard errors in parentheses take into account clustering at the
community level and heteroskedasticity of arbitrary form.
Table 4: Effects of death of a parent on outcomes for children age 9-14 at baseline
Regression estimates comparing post- tsunami outcomes with pre-tsunami outcomes
All models include child fixed effects.

                                                            Younger males              Younger females
                                                        Short-term Long-term        Short-term Long-term
Child outcome             Status of parent                  [1]          [2]             [3]          [4]
% of enrolled in school   Mother died/father alive          2.5        -13.0             7.5           9.0
                                                           [2.2]       [13.5]           [3.4]         [8.3]
                          Father died/mother alive          2.8          -2.1            -4.1         -26.9
                                                           [2.5]       [22.9]          [11.1]        [21.8]
                          Both mother and father died       2.8         -13.6             6.3         -50.8
                                                           [2.5]       [12.4]           [2.8]        [16.7]
% received scholarship    Mother died/father alive          3.2                          6.7
                                                           [8.3]                       [14.7]
                          Father died/mother alive         32.0                         22.2
                                                          [19.7]                       [13.2]
                          Both mother and father died      32.0                         40.0
                                                          [11.9]                       [24.9]
Years of education        Mother died/father alive                       -0.2                         0.4
(completed)                                                             [0.3]                        [0.5]
                          Father died/mother alive                       -1.4                         1.1
                                                                        [1.1]                        [0.9]
                          Both mother and father died                   -0.1                          0.1
                                                                        [0.7]                        [0.4]
% working                 Mother died/father alive           0.0         2.6             -2.4         -9.9
(previous week)                                            [5.4]       [12.3]           [1.6]         [4.8]
                          Father died/mother alive           7.1        26.7              8.9         -9.8
                                                          [12.2]       [25.9]           [9.6]         [4.8]
                          Both mother and father died       -5.4        22.3            -2.0          23.6
                                                           [2.2]       [16.1]           [1.4]        [21.6]
% doing housework         Mother died/father alive         12.6          2.6             -1.1          0.5
(previous week)                                           [10.5]        [1.2]          [17.0]         [7.5]
                          Father died/mother alive         -12.7          2.3           15.0            7.8
                                                           [3.6]        [1.3]          [21.2]         [2.6]
                          Both mother and father died      -21.0         -6.3           -26.5          -8.8
                                                           [9.0]        [9.0]          [30.3]        [16.2]
Number of children                                          217          223             160           170
Notes: Excluded category in each regression is both parents survived the tsunami. Short-term models
compare pre-tsunami outcomes with outcomes one year after the tsunami. Long-term models compare
pre-tsunami outcomes with outcomes five years after the tsunami. There are two observations for each
child. All models control age of child. Standard errors in parentheses take into account clustering at the
community level and heteroskedasticity of arbitrary form.
Appendix Table 1: Attrition - Comparison of characteristics at baseline
Means, differences and [standard errors] of survivors (relative to those who died) and
among survivors, those who were interviewed (relative to those not interviewed)


                                   All age                                                       Interviewed Not ivwed Difference
                                   eligible             Died in      Survived      Difference       in first   in first (Ivw-Not
Baseline characteristics           children             tsunami      tsunami      (Surv-Died)      resuvey    resurvey     ivw)
                                      [1]                  [2]           [3]              [4]       [5]         [6]        [7]
Age (years)                          13.0                 13.0          13.0             0.03       13.0       12.9       0.12
                                                                                     [0.14]                               [0.24]
Male                                 52.34               46.09         54.95             8.86      56.14      47.90       -8.24
                                                                                         [4.3]                            [5.2]
Education (years)                     5.6                  5.7           5.5             -0.18      5.5        5.7        -0.20
                                                                                     [0.25]                               [0.41]


Enrolled in school (%)               92.0                 93.0          91.7             -1.36      92.5       86.3       6.20
                                                                                     [1.82]                               [4.76]
Working for a wage (%)                4.1                  3.1           4.5             1.37       4.3        5.7        -1.39
                                                                                     [1.72]                               [3.44]
Engaged in housekeeping (%)           6.5                  3.7           7.7             3.97       7.4        9.5        -2.12
                                                                                     [1.84]                               [3.31]



Per capita expenditure               39.7                 38.3          40.2             1.93       40.3       39.6       0.78
 (Rp10,000 per month)a                                                               [3.84]                               [5.15]

Household size                        5.9                  5.7           5.9             0.21       5.9        6.1        -0.16
                                                                                     [0.22]                               [0.71]


Sample size                          1,173                345           828                         709        119
a
  Rp10,000 is approximately equal to US$1
