                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    INFORMATIONAL RIGIDITIES AND THE STICKINESS OF TEMPORARY SALES

                                            Eric Anderson
                                          Benjamin A. Malin
                                            Emi Nakamura
                                           Duncan Simester
                                            Jón Steinsson

                                         Working Paper 19350
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19350


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2013




This research has been supported by National Science Foundation grants SES 0922011 and SES 1056107.
The paper was previously circulated under the title: “Temporary Sales: On Autopilot and ‘Funded’
by Frequent Flyer Accounts”. We thank Ariel Burstein, Judith Chevalier, Gee Hee Hong, Nicholas
Li, and seminar participants at various institutions and conferences for helpful comments and discussions.
We thank Jean Jaques Forneron and Zoe Xie for excellent research assistance. This research was conducted
with restricted access to US Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) data. The view expressed here are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the BLS, the Federal Reserve System, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Eric Anderson, Benjamin A. Malin, Emi Nakamura, Duncan Simester, and Jón Steinsson.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Informational Rigidities and the Stickiness of Temporary Sales
Eric Anderson, Benjamin A. Malin, Emi Nakamura, Duncan Simester, and Jón Steinsson
NBER Working Paper No. 19350
August 2013, Revised June 2015
JEL No. E30,L11,M30

                                             ABSTRACT

We use unique price data to study how retailers react to underlying cost changes. Temporary sales
account for 95% of price changes in our data. Simple models would, therefore, suggest that temporary
sales play a central role in price responses to cost shocks. We find, however, that, in response to a
wholesale cost increase, the entire increase in retail prices comes through regular price increases. Sales
actually respond temporarily in the opposite direction from regular prices, as though to conceal the
price hike. Additional evidence from responses to commodity cost and local unemployment shocks,
as well as broader evidence from BLS data reinforces these findings. We present institutional evidence
that sales are complex contingent contracts, determined substantially in advance. We show theoretically
that these institutional practices leave little money “on the table”: in a price-discrimination model of
sales, dynamically adjusting the size of sales yields only a tiny increase in profits.


Eric Anderson                                       Duncan Simester
Kellogg School of Management                        Sloan School of Management
Northwestern University                             MIT
2001 Sheridan Road                                  1 Amherst Street, Room E40-177
Evanston, IL 60208-2001                             Cambridge, MA 02142-0679
eric-anderson@kellogg.northwestern.edu              simester@mit.edu

Benjamin A. Malin                                   Jón Steinsson
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis                 Department of Economics
90 Hennepin Ave                                     Columbia University
Minneapolis, MN 55401                               1026 International Affairs Building
benjamin.malin@mpls.frb.org                         420 West 118th Street
                                                    New York, NY 10027
Emi Nakamura                                        and NBER
Columbia Business School                            jsteinsson@columbia.edu
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 820
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
enakamura@columbia.edu
1. Introduction

          The speed of price adjustment to aggregate shocks is a central determinant of the effects
of demand shocks on output and in particular the effects of monetary and fiscal policy. In an
influential study, Bils and Klenow (2004) show that consumer prices adjust quite frequently.
Subsequent empirical work has shown, however, that much of this price flexibility is due to
temporary sales, which have vastly different empirical characteristics than “regular” price
changes (Nakamura and Steinsson, 2008). An important question is to what extent price changes
associated with temporary sales contribute to the adjustment of aggregate inflation to aggregate
shocks.

          A growing literature on sticky information points out that even if prices do change, they
may fail to respond to recent economic shocks if the information set on which the price changes
are contingent is old (e.g., Mankiw and Reis, 2002; Burstein, 2006). In these cases, the prices
may be flexible but follow “sticky plans” whereby pricing decisions are made only periodically.
As we discuss later in the paper, the institutions of price-setting in the consumer packaged goods
industry are such that the timing and magnitude of sales are determined by trade promotion
budgets and schedules that are largely set at low frequencies.

          Motivated by this institutional evidence, we investigate to what extent temporary sales
reflect sticky plans as opposed to playing an important role in how retailers respond to cost
shocks. We use a detailed dataset on retail and wholesale prices from a large US retailer over the
period 2006-2009. Our main empirical exercise is to study how the retailer responds to wholesale
cost increases. If both regular prices and sales are equally flexible margins, then in response to a
wholesale cost increase, the retailer might: (1) raise the regular price, (2) decrease the frequency
or size of sales, or both.1 Because temporary sales account for 95% of all price changes in our
data, one might think sale prices account for a large share of retail price adjustment to cost
shocks.

          Our findings contrast strongly with this prediction. In a substantial fraction of cases,
when the base wholesale price increases the regular retail price responds quickly and completely.
In the remaining cases, the regular retail price responds more incompletely and with some delay.


          1
              We show that both outcomes are predicted by Hendel and Nevo’s (2013) model.
                                                             2
However, in neither of these cases do we find any evidence of a decrease in the frequency or size
of temporary sales. To the contrary, we find that discounts temporarily increase when regular
retail prices increase in response to a wholesale price increase — suggesting that the retailer is
trying to mask the associated regular price increase.

        We present three additional pieces of evidence for our central finding that sales do not
play an important role in how prices respond to macroeconomic shocks. First, we provide
evidence that temporary sales fail to react to commodity cost shocks. While the frequency of
regular price increases roughly quadrupled in response to the sharp commodity price increases in
the middle part of our sample, we find no response of sales. Second, we provide evidence that
temporary sales fail to react to changes in local unemployment rates. Third, we use BLS micro
data to show that time-variation in sale prices does not contribute to the variance or cyclicality of
inflation, or to the response of inflation to an identified monetary policy shock in a VAR.2 This
generalizes our finding that retailers do not use sales to respond to shocks beyond just a single
retailer.

        We conclude the paper by asking two questions. First, we ask why retailers respond to cost
and demand shocks by adjusting regular prices instead of sales prices. We use Hendel and Nevo’s
(2013) model of sales to study the profit losses firms face in not adjusting their discounts in
response to cost shocks. In this model, the optimal response to higher costs is for the retailer to
raise regular prices and reduce discount depth. However, the profit advantage to the retailer from
optimally adjusting the magnitude of discounts in response to changes in marginal costs is
miniscule: two orders of magnitude smaller than the benefits of price discrimination per se.
While the use of sale prices to price discriminate is crucially important, varying the extent of
price discrimination in response to a cost shock is not.

        Second, given that 95% of the price variation in our data is explained by sales, are sale
prices truly flexible? We present institutional features of retail and wholesale pricing for
consumer packaged goods that indicate that sale prices are governed by sticky plans. Most sales
are “funded” out of trade promotions budgets and planned substantially in advance according to


        2
           There is some evidence of a lower-frequency relationship between the level of discounts and
unemployment, as emphasized by Kryvtsov and Vincent (2014), but even there, the magnitude of the cyclical
fluctuations in the discount is very small. See our discussion at the end of section 6.
                                                           3
a “trade promotions calendar.” Both the trade promotions budget and the calendar are revised
only infrequently. Hence, although the trade promotion system yields price variation, the system
itself is not easily varied.

        These institutional features also help to reconcile our findings with previous results
reported by Eichenbaum et al. (2011) (henceforth, EJR). In particular, the finding that retailers
respond to cost increases using the regular price instead of sale prices may at first appear to be at
odds with EJR, who find that the vast majority of sales are associated with a change in wholesale
prices. Does this imply that sales are, in fact, a key part of the response to wholesale price
movements? Not necessarily. EJR’s measure of wholesale prices includes manufacturer trade
deals. Our discussion of the institutions of pricing in consumer packaged goods highlights two
institutional features of trade deals that suggest we need to be cautious when interpreting
variation in sale prices in response to trade deals as a measure of whether retailers use sale prices
to respond to cost shocks. First, since reductions in wholesale prices during trade deals are often
“funded” from trade deal budgets, which the retailer is “spending down” when he holds a sale,
observed movements in wholesale prices associated with such trade deals may not reflect true
reductions in marginal cost (much like plane tickets purchased with frequent flyer points are not
free). But if marginal costs do not change at the time of trade deals, why do retailers change the
retail price at these times? This is because doing so is a contractual obligation associated with
receiving the trade deal funds—the second institutional feature of trade deals we wish to
emphasize in this context. Trade deals are jointly planned well in advance, and the manufacturers
require evidence that the retailer actually put the product on sale before they will release the
allocated funding from the trade deal budget.

        Although trade deal budgets are generally stable, we recognize that they are not completely
inflexible. Manufacturers may occasionally adjust their trade deal budgets, and these events could
be interpreted as cost shocks to the retailer. Moreover, we cannot rule out the possibility that such
adjustments are sometimes influenced by macroeconomic conditions. However, we see no
evidence of this in our investigation of: (a) the response to commodity cost shocks, (b) the
response to changes in local unemployment rates, or (c) the BLS micro data. All three pieces of
evidence are inconsistent with the view that manufacturers use trade promotions to respond to
macroeconomic shocks, and that this variation is passed on by retailers through their sale prices.

                                                      4
         It is also important to acknowledge that even if retailers do not respond to
macroeconomic shocks by adjusting the size or frequency of sales, consumers’ use of sales may
still respond. Indeed, a number of recent papers emphasize this effect.3 This type of consumer
response is, nevertheless, fundamentally different from a firm-level response, since it is entirely
consistent with the presence of important price adjustment frictions.
         Our paper is related to several recent papers that study the behavior of regular prices and
sales from a macroeconomic perspective. Recent theoretical papers investigate why it may be
important to distinguish between regular prices and sales in measuring the flexibility of prices.
EJR (2011) show that weekly grocery prices change frequently but fluctuate around “reference
prices” that remain constant for some time. To rationalize these findings, they develop a model
of “price plans”: firms choose a small set of prices that they can freely move between, but a
menu cost applies whenever the plan is changed. In this model, the effects of monetary policy are
more tightly tied to the behavior of reference prices than to all prices. Similarly, Kehoe and
Midrigan (2015) point out that even if temporary sales completely respond to movements in
underlying costs, the temporary nature of sales implies that they contribute much less to the
adjustment of the aggregate price level than do regular price changes. Finally, Guimaraes and
Sheedy (2011) develop a model in which temporary sales are used for price discrimination.4 In
their setup, sales are strategic substitutes, implying that they tend to average out in the
cross-section and have little impact on aggregate prices.

         A more empirically-focused literature has also blossomed, with a key question being
whether temporary sales respond to aggregate information. Using US CPI micro data, Klenow
and Willis (2007) argue that the size of sale-related price changes is more responsive to inflation
than is the size of regular price changes. Kryvtsov and Vincent (2014) find that the frequency of




         3
             Nevo and Wong (2014) find that a greater share of household grocery expenditures were purchased on
sale in the Great Recession, while Stroebel and Vavra (2014) document that, when house prices fall, the expenditure
share on sale items increases for homeowners, while it decreases for renters. Coibion et al. (2015), however, show
that, at the UPC level, the share of goods bought on sale is acyclical. These results can be reconciled by noting that,
in recessions, consumers may be shifting expenditures towards UPCs that have, on average, more sales.
         4
           Chevalier and Kashyap (2014) also develop a price-discrimination model. They use it to explore the
implications of temporary sales for constructing price indices.
                                                               5
sales is correlated with unemployment in the UK.5 On the other hand, Coibion et al. (2015) find
that US retailers’ use of sales does not vary with unemployment, while Berardi et al. (2015) find,
using French CPI data, that aggregate inflation and unemployment have less effect on price
changes associated with sales than they do on regular price changes.

         The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section 3 illustrates the
importance of sales in explaining retail price fluctuations in our data. Section 4 presents our main
analysis of how regular prices versus sales respond to changes in the base wholesale price.
Section 5 presents our evidence on price responses to the commodity cost run-up and relative
unemployment rates. Section 6 presents our broader analysis of the BLS data. Section 7 presents
our analysis of the Hendel and Nevo (2013) model of price discrimination. Section 8 discusses
the institutions of manufacturer and retail pricing, and their implications for the role of different
price setting mechanisms in the responsiveness of prices. Section 9 concludes.

2. Data

         The scanner price data that we use in the paper comes from a large retailer that sells
products in the grocery, health and beauty, and general merchandise categories. Data from this
retailer have been used in other published studies, including Anderson et al. (2015) and McShane
et al. (2015) who report findings using a different dataset. The data used in this paper contains
195 weeks (15 quarters) of store transactions at a sample of 102 stores. The 195 weeks extend
from the first quarter of 2006 through the end of the third quarter of 2009.6 For this sample, we
have data on the number of units sold each week for each product at the Stock Keeping Unit
(SKU) level at each store.7 The dataset reports three price measures: (1) the Regular Retail Price,
(2) the Retail Price that was actually paid (including any temporary sales), and (3) the Base
Wholesale Price of the item. The Retail Price reflects the average price actually charged by the


         5
           Kryvtsov and Vincent (2014) also present some evidence for the US for a subset of the time period we
study. See section 6 for a discussion of this evidence.
         6
            The stores were selected as a control group for a pricing test conducted by the retailer and are considered
representative of the retailer’s stores. The stores are located in 14 Mid-West and East Coast states. Because they are
in different “price zones,” the Regular Retail Price and the Retail Price (including temporary sales) for an SKU in a
given week differs across stores.
          7
            We exclude private label items and “Direct Store Delivery” (DSD) categories (primarily alcohol,
beverages and dairy). DSD categories and private label items have very different institutional features. We discuss
the implications of excluding the direct store delivery (DSD) categories in Appendix A.
                                                               6
retailer, and excludes potential confounds such as employee discounts and manufacturer
coupons.

        The dataset has two unique features that are crucial to our analysis. First, the Regular
Retail Price variable is reported directly in our dataset. This allows us to avoid using a “sale filter”
to identify sales, as in other scanner datasets.8 Second, our measure of wholesale prices is the
“Base Wholesale Price” excluding trade deals. This is an important departure from earlier work
(e.g., Eichenbaum et al. 2011) that focused on wholesale prices including trade deals. The reason
we believe it is preferable to exclude trade deals is that, as we explain in detail in section 8,
variation in wholesale costs associated with trade deals may not reflect variation in marginal cost
faced by the retailer. The retail response to such trade promotions is typically part of a complex
contingent contract.9 Another advantage of our data is that the wholesale price measure is a true
“marginal cost” as opposed to an “average acquisition cost.”

        We use several additional sources of data: commodity cost data, unemployment data and
the BLS price data that underlies the Consumer Price Index. We discuss these additional data
sources, as well as several additional details regarding our scanner price dataset in Appendix A.

3. The Importance of Sales in Scanner Data

        Figure 1 illustrates three price measures using a representative item in our dataset: the
Retail Price, Regular Retail Price, and Base Wholesale Price. The figure reveals that Wholesale
and Regular Retail Prices exhibit similar dynamics, adjusting both infrequently and persistently,
while Retail Prices adjust much more frequently due to the presence of temporary sales.

        Table 1 reports the average weekly frequency and average size of price changes for all
three price measures, weighted by total revenue for each SKU–store combination (calculated




        8
            For example, syndicated data providers such as Symphony IRI and Nielsen have created algorithms to
impute the regular price from the observed average prices. Analogous sale filters have been adopted by academics
(e.g., Nakamura and Steinsson, 2008; Chahrour, 2011, Kehoe and Midrigan, 2015). These imputation algorithms
will, however, naturally introduce some noise into the regular price variable.
         9
            For example, the retailer that we study uses the Base Wholesale Price (without trade promotions) as its
measure of marginal product cost. It tracks promotion “funding” separately through a stand-alone system that is used
solely for trade promotion planning and evaluation.
                                                             7
using all 195 weeks).10 Over 95% of the price changes in our dataset are due to temporary sales.
The weekly frequencies of price change for Base Wholesale and Regular Retail Prices are 0.74%
and 1.11% respectively; while the frequency of retail price change including sales is 21.16% per
week.

         Although these findings are well-established, they provide important motivation for the
analysis that follows. Does the prevalence of temporary sales mean they are responsible for the
lion’s share of the retail price response to a wholesale cost increase? In the next section, we
investigate this question empirically.

4. Do Sales Respond to Wholesale Costs?

         If sales represent an additional dimension of flexibility for retailers to respond to
underlying movements in costs over and above changes in Regular Retail Prices, then when
wholesale costs increase we should expect to see both increases in Regular Retail Prices and
reductions in the size and frequency of sales. One might expect that sales would be responsible
for a large fraction of the responsiveness of prices to costs, given that they account for 95% of all
price changes.

         To investigate this hypothesis, in this section we consider the evolution of retail prices
surrounding changes in the Base Wholesale Price. We initially focus on the effects of wholesale
price increases, but will later also extend the analyses to wholesale price decreases. We identify
37,981 Wholesale Price increase events, representing a cost increase on an item in a week in a
store. We construct a sample that for each event includes: the week of the event, the prior 50
weeks and the subsequent 50 weeks. For some cost increase events several observations are
missing, either because there no unit was sold of the item in one of these weeks or because the
cost increase event occurred too close to the start or end of the sample period. Pooling across the
37,981 events yields a total panel sample of 2,147,676 observations.

         We estimate the following equation,

    Yist = ∑µi + ∑µt + ∑βPeriodest + εist,                                                                  (1)



         10
            The average absolute size of the price changes is measured as a percentage of the average regular price
(calculated for that SKU in that store across the entire 195 week period).
                                                              8
where Yist refers to the relevant price measure (for item i in store s in week t). The µi terms are
item fixed effects and the µt terms are time fixed effects. The βPeriodest term refers to a set of
dummy variables identifying blocks of weeks before and after the cost increase event (e).11 To
prevent over-identification we omit the dummy variable measuring week 0, the week before the
wholesale price change. We estimate the model using weighted OLS, where the observations are
weighted by the revenue of the SKU in the store. The standard errors are clustered at the item
level, to account for any correlation in the errors across events, stores and/or SKUs that share the
same item number.

         We analyze the response of four different price measures:




                                                               .

Note that our measure of discounts is defined such that
                           . Each price index is normalized using the average Regular Price
(calculated using the entire 195 week data period).

Results

         Figure 2 presents the results. Recall that we omitted the dummy variable identifying week
0 (the week immediately before the cost change), and so all of the coefficients measure the
change in the indexed price series relative to this week. This also ensures that the plots of the
coefficients pass through zero at week 0. The sharp increase in the Wholesale Price index after
week 0 is therefore by construction—we have selected these instances precisely as periods when
the wholesale price increases. Panel A of Figure 2 shows, however, that there is also a sharp and



         11
            For example, Week -50 corresponds to weeks -50 to -46, Week -45 corresponds to weeks -45 to -41, and
so on, for Weeks -50 to 50, in 5 week intervals. The exception is Week 0, which identifies the 1 week before the cost
change.
                                                              9
immediate response of Regular Retail Prices.12 The immediate “pass-through” of Wholesale
Prices into Regular Retail Prices is roughly “cent-for-cent.” Recall that the series are all indexed
against the same base (the average Regular Price), and so movements in each series represent the
same dollar-for-dollar change.

        If sales and regular prices play a similar role in the price adjustment process, one might
expect to see a decline in the frequency and size of sales around the time of the wholesale price
increase. For example, Kehoe and Midrigan (2015) and Hendel and Nevo (2013) present models
in which regular prices and sales both respond to underlying changes in marginal costs.

        Panel B of Figure 2 presents the response of discounts following the wholesale price
increase. Sales do not respond strongly. In fact, if anything, there is a temporary increase in sales
following the wholesale cost increase. In other words, sales actually hinder the increase in retail
prices following the cost increase, as opposed to accelerating the speed of the price adjustment.
One potential interpretation of this pattern is that the retailer increases discounts following the
regular price increase so as to make it more difficult for the consumer to notice the price
increase.

        Recall that the model includes time fixed effects. Therefore, the lines in the figures
should be interpreted as prices of products contingent on a wholesale cost increase in week 0
relative to what we would have expected without this contingency. The trend in the sample is
positive, since prices generally increase over time. Hence, in the weeks before and after week “0”
when the cost change occurs, the product’s price is getting eroded relative to other products in
the sample. This explains the negative trends that arise before and after week “0” in Figure 2.
These trends are absent in Appendix Figure A1, which shows the results for the model with no
time fixed effects.

        Table 2 presents the results in tabular forms, with the average short-term price response
(weeks -20 to -1 versus weeks 1 to 20), the average medium term response (weeks -40 to -21
versus week 21 to 40) and the average long-term price response (weeks -50 to -41 versus weeks




        12
           This result is consistent with the results of Nakamura and Zerom (2010) and Goldberg and Hellerstein
(2013), who find that retail prices respond quickly to wholesale price changes.
                                                            10
41 to 50).13 The table shows that in the short-term the Wholesale Price increased by 3.2%, which
led to a 3.2% increase in the Retail Price. Regular Retail Prices rose by 4.6% but this was offset
by a 1.4% increase in discounts. In the long-term there was no change in the Discount
Component. Instead, the increase in Retail Prices is almost completely attributable to an increase
in the Regular Retail Price.

         The evidence that the Discount Component returns to its pre-event level in the long-run is
perhaps unsurprising. If every Wholesale price increase led to permanent increases in the
Discount Component, this would lead to accumulated increases in the Discount Component over
time. Eventually the Discount Component would reach its natural limit: discounts all of the time.
The fact that we do not see this requires that increases in the Discount Component are not
permanent.

         Notice that the long-run increase in wholesale prices is considerably less than the
long-run increase in retail prices (1.5% vs. 3.1%), whereas the pass-through is one-to-one in the
short-run. Recall that these percentage statistics are taken relative to the same base (the average
regular retail price). An equal change for wholesale and retail prices thus corresponds to
“cent-for-cent” pass-through (not an equal percentage change). Over time, this would lead to
gradual erosion in retail markups in percentage terms. Hence, the greater relative adjustment of
retail prices in the long-run depicted in Table 2 reflects the retailers’ efforts to maintain their
percentage margins. The larger pass-through in the long run than in the short run arises from a
combination of both anticipatory and delayed price responses to the wholesale price increase
(changes in the Base Wholesale Price are usually announced in advance).14

With and Without a Nearby Regular Price Change

         One might ask whether the reason that sales fail to play any role in the adjustment to a
wholesale cost increase is precisely because regular retail prices adjust so completely. Perhaps if
regular retail prices did not increase, then sales would adjust in their stead. Table 3 addresses this



         13
             These results were estimated by re-estimating Equation 1 using separate dummy variables identifying
these sets of weeks.
         14
             To see the intuition for this result, it is helpful to look at the results with no time fixed effects (in Figure
A1). Here, it is clear that, for retail prices, the long-run response is much larger than the short-run response; but for
wholesale prices, the short- and long-run responses are similar.
                                                                  11
question by considering the effect of wholesale price increases in two cases: those with a nearby
regular price change and those without a nearby regular price change (where “nearby” is defined
as within 10 weeks of the event).

        Based on this definition, 83% of our wholesale cost increase events do exhibit a nearby
regular price change, while the remaining 17% do not. When there is a nearby change, the
Regular Retail Price responds quickly and completely. In the remaining cases, the Regular Retail
Price responds incompletely and with some delay.

        In neither of these cases do we find any evidence that a decrease in the frequency or size
of temporary sales helps accelerate the adjustment to the wholesale price increase. In the former
case, where the Regular Retail Price increases, we observe a transitory increase in sales, as we
discuss above. However, this does not occur in the case without a nearby regular price
change—substantiating the view that the increase in sales is intended to mask the increase in
regular retail prices.

        In the long-run, the wholesale cost increase has no impact on sales in either the case with
or without the nearby regular price increase. The long-run increase in the Retail Price is also very
similar in the two cases. In the latter case with no nearby price change, the increase in the
Regular Retail Price occurs outside the short-term window. Notably, even in these situations the
retailer does not use temporary sales as a way of adjusting prices in the short-term.

Wholesale Price Decreases

        For completeness we also analyze how the retailer responds to wholesale price decreases.
Wholesale price decreases are relatively rare events, and so this analysis should be treated
cautiously, as it is a study of outliers. In Table A1 of the appendix we report the equivalent of
Table 2 for cost decreases, comparing the short, medium, and long-term change in the different
price indices. These results are calculated using 6,052 events, representing a reduction in the
Base Wholesale Price in a store in a week. In comparison, the analysis of the response to
wholesale price increases uses 37,981 events. We see that none of the price indices change
significantly in any of the three time periods. Even the Wholesale Price Index is not significantly
lower in the 20 weeks after the wholesale price reduction, compared to before the price reduction.
Further investigation reveals that many of the wholesale price decreases are short-term events,

                                                     12
and the wholesale price quickly recovers to its pre-event levels. As a result, it is perhaps
unsurprising that we do not see significant changes in either the Regular Price Index or the
Discount Index (similar findings are also reported by Anderson et al. 2015 and McShane et al.
2015).

Summary

         We have shown that the retailer we study responds to most wholesale price increases by
increasing its regular retail price quickly and completely. In other cases it still increases its
regular price, though the response may be delayed. We find no evidence that wholesale price
increases yield a systematic reduction in discounts. To the contrary, if anything the retailer
increases its discounts in an apparent attempt to mask the regular price increases.

         In the remainder of the paper we reinforce the findings in this section through a series of
additional analyses. These additional results help to generalize the findings beyond a single
retailer and a single type of cost shock. They also offer an explanation for why retailers respond
through their regular prices instead of their sale prices. We begin by examining how this retailer
responded to changes in commodity prices and regional employment.

5. The Response of Prices to Commodity Costs and Unemployment Rates

The Effect of the Commodity Cost Boom of 2007-2008

         Our sample period coincides with a rapid rise and fall in the price of oil and other
commodities in 2007-2008. To the extent that temporary sales are used to respond to underlying
movements in production costs, we should expect to see the frequency and depth of discounts
change in response to the commodity cost fluctuations.

         Figure 3 (Panel A) plots the average weekly frequency of Regular Retail and Base
Wholesale Price increases (left axis), along with changes in diesel prices (right axis) on a
biannual basis. Panel B presents analogous statistics for temporary sales. The frequencies of
price change are weighted by total revenue, and are adjusted for the seasonal pattern observed in
2006.15 The diesel price variable is the 12-month change in diesel prices, lagged by one



         15
            The frequency of price change is considerably higher in the first quarter of the year than in other quarters,
consistent with the seasonal pattern found in Nakamura and Steinsson (2008). To adjust for this pattern, we subtract
                                                               13
quarter.16

         Figure 3 (Panel A) shows that the increase in diesel prices in 2008 was matched by a
sharp rise in the frequency of Wholesale Price increases (the correlation between the two series
is 0.91). In conversations with managers at the retailer, they attributed the spike in the frequency
of Wholesale Price increases in 2008 to the commodity price changes. The frequency of Regular
Retail Price increases also spikes sharply at this time. In stark contrast, Panel B shows that the
frequency and depth of temporary sales were unaffected by the huge run up and subsequent fall
in diesel and other commodity prices.

The Effect of Unemployment Rates

         Next we study the responsiveness of the different forms of price change to variation in
unemployment across different Core Based Statistical Areas (CBSAs).17 Table 4 presents results
from the following weighted OLS regression,

Yist = ∑µi + ∑µt + β1Change in Unemploymentst + εist,                                                        (2)

where the µi terms are item fixed effects and the µt terms are time fixed effects. We use three
different outcome measures, Yist, including the Retail Price Index, the Regular Price Index, and
the Discount Index. We do not report the results for the Wholesale Price Index as this variable is
determined almost exclusively at the national level, implying that there is little variation across
regions.

         The Change in Unemploymentst variable is defined in a similar way to the change in
diesel prices in the previous section. In particular, it is calculated as the 12-month change in the
monthly unemployment rate in that CBSA, lagged by one quarter. We use the same sample of
approximately 5 million observations weighted by the total revenue of the SKU in the store. The




from each frequency statistic the average frequency of price change for that time period in 2006, relative to the
overall frequency for that year.
          16
             Lagging the change by a quarter recognizes that there is a lead-time between the timing of the diesel
price change, the timing of wholesale and retail pricing decisions, and the implementation of those decisions.
          17
             Core Based Statistical Areas are geographic areas consisting of a county or set of counties that include a
core urban area with a population of at least 10,000 people and the surrounding areas that are linked to the core by a
high degree of social and economic integration as measured by commuting patterns. Core Based Statistical Areas are
defined by the Office of Management and Budget.
                                                              14
inclusion of the time fixed effects means that we identify the impact of changes in
unemployment on retail prices solely using variation in regional unemployment (where the
regions are represented by the store locations) relative to the average unemployment rate.

         Table 4 shows that a one percentage point increase in the relative regional unemployment
rate led to significantly lower retail prices. However, this reduction arose entirely from regular
prices, as opposed to sales. The change in the unemployment rate had no effect on the discount
index.18

         The empirical findings in the previous three sections are constructed using pricing data
from a single retailer. Even though the retailer sells consumer packaged goods in a very broad
range of categories, the restriction to a single retailer is an obvious limitation. We address this
limitation in the next section using BLS data.

6. Broader Analysis using BLS Data

         How representative are our findings of other U.S. retailers? To investigate this question,
we use BLS micro data on prices underlying the Consumer Price Index. These data have the
advantage of being highly representative of the economy as a whole. In these data temporary
sales are identified using a “sale flag” that indicates whether a product was on promotion. We
aggregate these data to a quarterly frequency for a sample covering 1988q4 to the present.
Appendix A describes other important features of the data construction.
         Since the BLS data do not include direct information on costs, we are not able to directly
study the response of regular prices versus sales to cost shocks. We are, however, able to study
how regular prices versus sales vary over the business cycle. If sales were highly responsive to
shocks, we would expect that including temporary sales in measures of inflation would have a
substantial effect on the cyclicality of measured inflation.19 This allows us to investigate the
generalizability of the key finding in the previous sections. If retailers respond to shocks by
adjusting their temporary sales, then including or excluding temporary sales in measures of


         18
            This result is consistent with Coibion et al. (2015), who also find no impact of the unemployment rate on
the frequency of sales for the US. In contrast, Kryvtsov and Vincent (2014) do find an increase in sales during the
Great Recession in the UK and US.
         19
            Klenow and Malin (2011) also construct and contrast measures of inflation with and without sales, but
they did not focus on the cyclical behavior of these series or their responsiveness to aggregate shocks.
                                                             15
inflation should yield important differences.
         Figure 4 plots “posted” and “regular” price inflation alongside the unemployment rate.
Posted price inflation is the conventional inflation rate based on observed prices, while regular
price inflation is the inflation rate for regular prices excluding sales.20 We HP-filter all series to
remove low-frequency trends21 and plot the 12-month (centered) moving average of the inflation
series to remove very high frequency fluctuations. Foreshadowing some of our results, the
inclusion or exclusion of sales yields inflation rates that exhibit almost identical cyclicality.
         Table 5 presents some key moments of posted, regular, and “sale-related” inflation; the
latter being the difference between regular and posted inflation. Our focus is primarily on the
elasticity of the respective inflation series to various measures of the business cycle. The
elasticity is calculated by running a regression of the (log) inflation rate on unemployment or
(log) GDP; all variables HP-filtered. A positive (semi-)elasticity of sale-related inflation with
respect to unemployment -- or a negative elasticity with respect to GDP -- would indicate that the
magnitude of sale-related discounts tends to rise during recessions. Note that this cyclical
elasticity is a covariance measure, so depends on both the correlation of sales with the cycle and
the magnitude of the discount due to sales.
         Let us start by discussing the features of food price inflation, since these products have
the greatest overlap with those sold by the retailer we focus on in our earlier analysis. Table 5A
shows that sale-related inflation is essentially acyclical for the food category. The cyclical
elasticity of posted price inflation (including sales) with respect to the unemployment rate is
-0.99 versus -0.91 for regular prices, while the cyclical elasticity of sale-related inflation is
statistically insignificant and economically small (+0.08, s.e. 0.06). The results are qualitatively
similar if we use GDP as our measure of the business cycle: 90% of the cyclical movement in
posted price inflation is due to movement in regular price inflation. Table 5B presents the results
for all sectors of the economy. Again, the cyclical elasticity with respect to unemployment and
GDP is similar for posted price and regular price inflation, and statistically insignificant and


         20
           We use the BLS sale flag to identify sales and ``fill forward’’ the previously observed regular price
through these sale episodes to construct the regular price series. See Appendix A for more details.
         21
            Regular price inflation is higher, on average, than posted price inflation over our sample. This is due to a
trend increase in the frequency (and size) of sales over our sample period as we will show later (see also Nakamura
and Steinsson (2008) and Kryvtsov and Vincent (2014)).
                                                               16
economically small for sale-related inflation. These findings provide further evidence that
incorporating temporary sales into measures of inflation does not appear to influence the
cyclicality of these measures.
         While we are not able to directly study the effect of cost shocks in the BLS data, we can
study the response of inflation to aggregate shocks. Figure 5 presents the impulse response to a
+25 basis point monetary policy shock using a standard four-variable VAR, including the
unemployment rate, posted (or regular) price inflation, commodity price inflation and the Federal
Funds Rate.22 The shock is identified using a standard Cholesky factorization, where the
variables are ordered as above. Figure 5 shows that the estimated response of posted price
inflation is very similar to the estimated response of regular price inflation. A tiny gap appears in
the first quarter after the shock, but that response in sale-related inflation is economically small
and statistically insignificant.23
         The findings in Figures 4 and 5 and Table 5 provide consistent evidence that
incorporating temporary sales in measures of inflation has little impact on the cyclicality of the
measures, or on their response to macro-economic shocks. If retailers used sale prices to respond
to macro-economic shocks, then we would expect there to be substantial differences in the
inflation measures constructed using regular prices (without sales) versus posted prices (with
sales). We interpret the absence of any differences as evidence supporting the generalizability of
our earlier findings that retailers respond primarily through regular prices, rather than by
adjusting their sale prices. Time-variation in the frequencies and sizes of sales do not appear to
play an important role in how prices respond to shocks.
         In a recent paper, Kryvtsov and Vincent (2014) argue that there is a statistically
significant relationship between the frequency of sales in BLS data and the unemployment rate.
This may seem to conflict with our results above. However, the frequency of sales is more
closely related to the level of prices than the rate of inflation. We show in the Appendix (Table
A2) that it is possible to obtain a statistically significant relationship between sales and


         22
           For commodity prices, we use the PPI: Crude Materials for Further Processing, and for the Federal
Funds Rate, we use the Wu and Xia (2014) Shadow Rate. We also considered using GDP growth rather than
unemployment and the results changed little.
         23
            The quarter-one response of sale-related inflation is 0.007 (s.e. 0.008), compared to -0.028 (s.e. 0.018)
for posted price inflation.
                                                               17
unemployment/GDP if one focuses on the HP-filtered level of prices as opposed to the inflation
rate. However, the magnitude of the cyclicality is small. These results are also somewhat
difficult to interpret since the cyclicality of the posted price itself is small and sometimes (e.g.,
for food items) goes in the “wrong” direction. This makes it difficult to say whether the discount
response is “facilitating” an adjustment that would otherwise have been hampered by the
presence of sticky prices. The analysis of inflation rates above suggests, moreover, a mismatch in
the precise timing of the acceleration of sales and the timing of recessions.
         Figure 6 plots the (unfiltered) frequency of sales for all items against the unemployment
rate. The figure is directly comparable to the figure of sales reported in Kryvtsov and Vincent
(2014), but covers a longer time period and makes somewhat different assumptions about several
details of data construction.24 Several things stand out. First, there is a substantial upward trend
in the frequency of sales, and this rise appears to accelerate during the last three recessions.25
However, the magnitude of the increase in the frequency of sales is small and does not correlate
well with the size of the recession (it is much smaller during the Great Recession than the 2001
recession) and the timing lines up imperfectly—in particular, the frequency of sales has remained
at an elevated level in the last few years despite the fall in unemployment after the recession.
This helps explain why we found that sale-related inflation has been acyclical.
         The next two sections focus on explaining the findings in the previous sections. We begin
by presenting evidence that holding sale prices fixed, rather than adjusting them in response to
shocks, results in only a small opportunity cost for retailers. We then describe several
institutional features of trade deal funding for temporary sales, and argue that these features help
to explain why sales are “sticky plans.”

7. The (Un)profitability of Dynamically Adjusting Sales

         To what extent is our retailer “leaving money on the table” by failing to adjust its sales
policy in response to cost shocks? If the profitability of adjusting sales optimally to changes in


         24
            Our picture looks somewhat different from the one reported in Kryvtsov and Vincent (2014) due to a
number of differences in weighting, the definition of sales, and sample selection. We discuss these differences in
more detail in Appendix A. However, the qualitative findings are the same.
         25
             Note that the discount variable reported in Table A2 is the product of the frequency and average size of
sales, but the discount variable moves very closely with the frequency because the average size of sales turns out to
be acyclical – though growing over time.
                                                              18
marginal costs was large, we might find it a priori implausible that a retailer would behave in the
way we describe above.
        In this section, we investigate the optimal response of temporary sales to changes in costs
in a recent two-period price discrimination model of temporary sales developed by Hendel and
Nevo (2013). In this model, there are two types of consumers: storers and non-storers. These
consumers have perfect foresight about the path of product prices. However, there demand is
random. There is a mass          of storers in the population (and a mass       1            of
non-storers).
            For non-storers, the model generates inverse demand functions of the form:
                           exp              .
where         denotes the price of the product in period , and       denotes the quantity demanded
by non-storers. The demand function for storers is slightly more complicated. Denote one-period
demand for storers as:
                         exp            .
If               and they have nothing in storage, then storers purchase for two periods: 2       ;
while if they have goods in storage, they purchase only for the next period:          . If
              and storers have goods in storage, then demand is zero; otherwise, they demand
        .
        Suppose the firm holds a sale in the first period but not the second. Given the perfect
foresight assumption, only non-storers purchase in the second period. The firm solves the
following optimization problem:
                     2
where        is the firm’s marginal cost. We adopt Hendel and Nevo’s parameter assumptions in
their Coca-Cola example, for which the storers have a higher price elasticity than the
non-storers:       =0.137172,       = -1.413173,     = -4.371763, and c = 57 cents.
        In the context of this model, we ask two questions. First, what is the optimal response of
discounts to an increase in costs? Second, suppose the firm decides to hold fixed its discounts
following a cost shock. By how much will its profits be reduced?
        Figure 7 addresses the first question. We denote the price when only non-storers buy as
the “Regular Price” and the price when storers also buy as the “Sale” price. The green and blue

                                                      19
lines show the regular and sale prices respectively in the firm’s optimal pricing policy. For
comparison, the red line shows the price the firm would set if it was unable to price discriminate
between the first and second period (i.e., the “Non-Discriminatory” price). The figure shows that
the firm does optimally reduce the magnitude of discounts as costs increase in the Hendel-Nevo
model (i.e., the top and bottom lines get closer together as costs rise). As costs increase, the
fraction of storers buying on sale falls, lowering the overall price elasticity for sale prices (the
storers have a higher price elasticity than the non-storers). Given this, one might expect that sales
would play a part in price adjustment, even if their main role is to facilitate price discrimination.
          Table 6 addresses the question of how much profits would be reduced if the firm decided
to hold fixed its discounts instead of varying them optimally as costs change. Here, we consider a
20,000 period simulation of the Hendel-Nevo model. In the simulation, marginal costs have a
mean of c = 57 cents, as in the Hendel-Nevo calibration, and a standard deviation of 2.4 cents
(5% of the average cost). We assume that the cost shocks are known by all agents to persist for
two periods (the duration of the storage technology). Hence, the simulation is equivalent to
10,000 repetitions of the two-period Hendel-Nevo model described above, in which the firm
alternates between regular prices and sales, but where the marginal cost changes every other
period.
          We consider five alternative pricing regimes. In three of the regimes, the firm (optimally)
sets a low “sale” price in the first period of each two-period block and sets a higher “regular”
price in the second period of each two-period block. Storers only buy at the first-period sale price
(storing for the second period), while the non-storers purchase in both periods. In the first regime,
the firm can vary both prices in response to the cost shock (“Flexible Sales Policy”). In the
second regime, the regular price can respond to the cost shock, but the sale price is a fixed
percentage discount of the regular price for all 10,000 periods (“Fixed Discount”).26 This fixed
discount percentage is set at the optimal level for the average marginal cost. In the third regime,
the firm chooses both a fixed regular price and a fixed sale price (“Fixed Prices”), where neither
price can respond to the (two-period) cost shock. These fixed prices are both chosen to optimize



          26
            Recall that in our analyses of the firm’s response to wholesale price changes, we indexed the price series
using the average regular price. For this reason, the Discount Index used in that analysis can be interpreted as a
percentage discount off the regular price.
                                                              20
profits at the average marginal cost.
       In the final two regimes, the price is held fixed within each two-period block, and so both
storers and non-storers buy each period for just that period’s consumption (without storing). In
one regime this fixed price is allowed to vary in response to the cost shock, and in the other
regime it is held fixed across the 20,000 periods. Because these regimes rule out inter-temporal
price-discrimination, Hendel and Nevo (2013) refer to them as “Non-Discriminatory” policies.
       The first row of Table 6 compares the profits earned under each regime. To ease
comparison, the profits are indexed against the Flexible Sales Policy, where complete price
flexibility yields the highest profits. Table 6 therefore reports the loss resulting from each pricing
restriction as a percentage of flexible price profits. In this model firms want to vary their prices
for two reasons: to price discriminate across consumers within each two-period block and to
respond to cost shocks. The biggest loss (4.32%) arises if the firm cannot price discriminate or
respond to cost shocks. If it cannot price discriminate but can respond to cost shocks, then the
opportunity cost is 4.06%. On the other hand, if it can price discriminate but cannot respond to
cost shocks, the opportunity cost is only 0.29%. Conspicuously, if the constraint only applies to
the sale price, so that the firm can adjust the regular price in response to cost shocks, but the
percentage discount is fixed, then the opportunity cost is miniscule: just 0.02%.
       The results confirm that having a sale price is important as it allows for price
discrimination. Moreover, allowing the regular price to vary is important because it allows for
prices in both periods to adjust to the cost shocks. In contrast, allowing the sales price is a
miniscule effect because its role is limited to allowing the extent of price discrimination to vary
over time in response to the cost shock.
       We can investigate how robust these findings are to varying the parameters in the model.
In particular, in Table 6 we report several variations to the Hendel-Nevo parameters:


   Baseline case (Hendel-Nevo parameters): ω = 0.137172, βNS = -1.413173, βNS = -4.371763
   Lower non-storer price sensitivity: βNS = -0.413173
   Higher non-storer price sensitivity: βNS = -2.413173
   Lower storer price sensitivity: βS = -3.371763
   Higher storer price sensitivity: βS = -5.371763
   Twice as many non-storers: ω = 0.274344
                                                      21
    Half as many non-storers: ω = 0.068586


         The findings confirm the robustness of the initial analysis. The firm incurs almost no
opportunity cost from failing to adjust its discounts in response to cost shocks. In contrast, failing
to either price discriminate between periods or adjust its regular prices in response to a cost
shock have impacts that are at least an order of magnitude larger. We conclude that the firm
leaves very little money on the table when it forgoes the opportunity to vary its sale prices in
response to cost shocks. While it is important to offer sale prices, it is not important to let the
size of the discount vary with underlying marginal costs.27

8. Institutions of Manufacturer Trade Deals and Retailer Temporary Sales

         We have presented evidence from multiple sources that retailers respond to
macro-economic shocks through their regular prices rather than their sale prices. This evidence
contrasts with the initial observation that 95% of the price variation in our data is explained by
sales. In this section we reconcile the findings with these observations by discussing the
institutional features of trade promotions and sales. These features indicate that sale prices are
governed by sticky plans, so that while the system of trade promotions contributes to price
variation, the system itself is not easily changed.

         The information in this section is based on interviews with both the firm that provided
data for this study and a convenience sample of manufacturers and retailers. We should note that
the details of the promotion funding mechanisms discussed in this section differ across
manufacturers and retailers.28 However, we know from surveys of manufacturers that a large
fraction of these mechanisms share the key features that we emphasize in markets for consumer


         27
             Notice that for several of the alternative parameter configurations we consider, the benefits of price
discrimination are smaller than in our baseline specification. There are two alternative scenarios in which the
benefits of price discrimination become extremely low: 1) Because the storers and non-storers become sufficiently
similar or 2) Because it becomes more optimal to sell only to the non-storers.
         28
              Precisely documenting how the promotion funding mechanisms work for every manufacturer and every
retailer is extremely difficult. For example, in 2002 two of us (Anderson and Simester) sent an MBA student to
intern for 10 weeks at a retailer and document promotion funding. We learned that there was no uniform promotion
funding practice among manufacturers selling to the retailer and the retail category managers could not easily
document the flow of promotion funds. The most senior retail managers admitted that the promotion funding process
had become extremely complicated and difficult to trace. At that time, determining the true marginal cost of a
promoted item proved almost impossible.
                                                             22
packaged goods (see, e.g., Acosta, 2012). We have organized our findings into four stylized
facts.

A. Temporary Sales Follow “Sticky Plans”

         From a logistics perspective, temporary sales are complicated events that require a
substantial amount of planning and coordination between retailers and manufacturers. For
example, when a promotion is run at a retail chain it may be accompanied by coupons,
radio-television advertising, digital marketing, in-store displays, feature advertising, or product
sampling. Retailers and manufacturers both understand that these demand-generating activities
are highly complementary with temporary sales and thus need to be coordinated carefully. In
addition, there is often coordination with the retailer to ensure that sufficient inventory is
available.29

         To coordinate these activities, manufacturers and retailers collaborate to determine the
timing and depth of temporary sales. For many promotions, manufacturers allow for a “trade deal
window” of several weeks where retailers can execute a promotion (see Blattberg and Neslin
1990, p. 319). This flexibility allows retailers to adjust their promotion plan to local market
conditions. For example, if a competing retailer is expected to offer a deep discount on Coke,
then a retailer may decide to promote a different carbonated soft drink, such as Pepsi. In a
subsequent week, the retailer may take advantage of the trade deal window to promote Coke.

         Within the parameters of the trade deal funding offered by the manufacturer, retailers and
manufacturers jointly agree up to a year in advance on a “trade promotion calendar”—a schedule
for temporary sales and associated promotional activity. This is often decided via an annual
planning process. We interpret this promotional calendar as a “sticky plan”.30

B. Temporary Sales are Funded by “Trade Deal Budgets”

         Most temporary sales are “funded” by trade deal budgets. To understand how this process
works, consider the following example. Suppose a manufacturer’s product normally has a regular



         29
              See for example Anderson and Simester (2001) and Anderson, Fitzsimmons and Simester (2006).
         30
            In a separate study, two of the authors were involved in manipulating the depth of temporary discounts
on a sample of items. Even though they were merely varying the prices (and not which items were to be discounted),
the lead time on making these decisions was almost four months.
                                                            23
retail price of $2.49, but the manufacturer wants to encourage the retailer to lower the price to
$1.99 for one week eight times during the year. To “fund” the $0.50 discount the retailer may be
“paid” $0.35 per unit sold at $1.99 during the eight promotion weeks.31 This amount will be
allocated from a manufacturer trade deal budget that is specific to each retail account. In addition
to “funding” temporary sales, the trade deal budget can be used to fund advertisements, in store
displays and other demand-generating activity associated with the temporary sale. The allocation
of this funding should not be considered a marginal cost shock, as it is neither an unexpected
shock nor, arguably, a change in the true marginal cost of the item. An analogy can be drawn to
the allocation of funds from travelers’ frequent flying accounts. When travelers redeem miles for
free flights, it would be wrong to interpret the transaction as customers taking advantage of a
sudden price shock.

         Importantly, the amount of funds in a trade deal budget limits the total amount the retailer
can “spend” on temporary sales. If the retailer wants to increase the number of discounts early in
the year, it must recognize that there will be fewer funds in the trade deal budget to support
discounts later in the planning period. Reductions in the wholesale price associated with trade
deals therefore may not reflect reductions in the retailer’s marginal cost – since the retailer is
spending down a finite resource (the trade deal budget). An implication of this is that the
wholesale price variables in scanner price datasets used in the macroeconomics and industrial
organization literatures must be interpreted with great caution, since these variables often include
price reductions “paid for” by trade deal funds, and therefore may not reflect true variation in the
retailer’s marginal cost.

C. Manufacturer Trade Deals are Contingent Contracts

         In the late 1960s and early 1970s, manufacturers would simply offer retailers a temporary
discount to the wholesale price. The intent of the manufacturer was to induce the retailer to hold
a temporary sale. However, the funding strategy by manufacturers for sales was not incentive
compatible. Some retailers would “forward buy,” i.e., purchase large quantities of the product at



         31
            In many cases, the amount that is paid out of the accrual account (e.g., $0.35 per unit) is designed to
keep the retailer satisfied with the total dollar margin during the promoted weeks. So, if the retailer earns a 33%
gross margin per unit at the regular price then the retailer may be happy to run a promotion that yields 25% gross
margin but substantially greater unit volume.
                                                              24
the discounted price. They would also not reduce the retail price (i.e., not hold a temporary sale)
or execute in-store displays to advertise the product. This “bad behavior” on the part of retailers
presumably arose because they understood that the temporary decline in wholesale price did not
reflect a commensurate decline in the value of inventory.

       Most modern sales are, therefore, designed as contingent contracts. Manufacturers
require retailers to verify “performance” in order to receive trade deals funds, by providing
evidence that they have discounted, promoted and/or featured the product in in-store displays. As
part of this verification they may be required to submit examples of advertisements together with
scanner price data.

       As we discuss in the introduction, we believe that facts B and C help to explain why EJR
(2011) find that retail sales almost always coincide with wholesale cost changes, whereas we
find little role for sales in responding to wholesale cost increases. Recall that we focus on
changes in the Base Wholesale Price as our measure of wholesale cost changes—and do not
include wholesale cost changes due to trade deals. Fact C implies that retailers are often
contractually required to reduce retail prices when they take trade deal funding, even though
reductions in wholesale price due to trade deals, arguably, do not constitute true changes in the
retailer’s marginal cost (Fact B).

       In fact, if trade deals did not constitute contingent contracts, it would be surprising to
observe sharp drops in observed wholesale prices associated with sharp contemporaneous drops
in retail prices (as EJR document). If such sharp drops in wholesale prices truly reflected
reduction in marginal cost, an optimizing retailer would simply respond by stocking up on
inventory at the lower wholesale price.

D. Managers Pay Attention to Regular Prices

       A key concern that macroeconomists have had about analyzing data on regular prices is:
How do we know that regular prices are relevant in determining the ultimate price faced by the
consumer? What if actual prices are set entirely independently from regular prices—making
regular prices a vacuous concept?

       One way of addressing this concern is to calculate how many transactions occur at the
regular price. At this retailer, transactions at the regular price contribute 75% of revenue. The

                                                     25
vast majority of revenue on the vast majority of the SKUs occurs at the regular retail price.32
Furthermore, when the regular price is not a retail price (i.e., there is a sale), we find the regular
price is almost always related to nearby retail prices. Specifically, an item’s time-t regular price
is said to be “vacuous” if it is higher than the maximum price paid for the item from week t-n to t.
We find that vacuous prices are rare -- for n=26, only 0.75% of regular prices are vacuous -- and
in 82% of these cases, the regular price equals a retail price paid in the next 26 weeks.

         We can also ask: which price measures do the firm’s senior managers believe are most
important? At this firm Regular Retail Prices and Base Wholesale Prices are clearly viewed as
the primary measures of the firm’s pricing policy and costs. These two metrics are summarized
in monthly pricing reports that are shared among senior leaders in the company.33 The monthly
pricing report lists every change in the Base Wholesale Price and the Regular Retail Price (in the
“main” pricing zone) that occurred in the calendar month. It then summarizes the impact on
profit margins by category and at the aggregate firm level. In this report, the Base Wholesale
Prices and the Regular Retail Prices are interpreted as the true variable cost of a unit and the true
price of a unit. Notably there is no reference to temporary sale prices or the funding of temporary
sales by manufacturers. In several years of conducting research with this firm, we (Anderson and
Simester) have never observed a regular management report describing temporary sale prices or
the amount of manufacturer trade deal funding.34

9. Conclusion

         Sale prices can result in an extremely high frequency of price changes in retail price data.
In our data, temporary sales account for 95% of all price changes. A key question is whether
these frequent price changes facilitate rapid responses to changing economic conditions, or


         32
              61% (77%) of SKUs generate over 90% (80%) of their revenue at the regular retail price (McShane et al.
2015).
         33
            Doubtless, the use of regular prices varies across firms. We believe, however, that the importance of the
regular price is likely to hold true for other retailers of consumer packaged goods.
         34
            These findings may help to explain the results of interview studies on pricing such as the seminal work
by Blinder et al. (1998) and the many follow-up studies using similar methodologies. These studies interview
managers about their pricing practices and find that prices change about once a year—much less than retail price
data suggests. The managers in our firm probably would have interpreted such interview questions as referring to the
firm’s regular price, explaining why the reported frequency of price change is much closer to the frequency of
regular price change than the frequency including sales.
                                                              26
whether they are merely part of a “sticky plan” that is determined substantially in advance and
therefore not responsive to changing conditions. We use an exceptionally detailed dataset on
retail and wholesale prices to investigate this question.

       We show empirically that, while regular retail prices respond strongly and immediately to
wholesale cost increases, temporary sales play no role in facilitating the upward adjustment of
retail prices. This is true even in cases where regular retail prices fail to respond immediately —
even in these cases there is no immediate response of sales. To the extent that sales do respond, it
is the “wrong” direction—i.e., sales appear to rise temporarily following regular retail price
increases, perhaps to conceal the price increase.

       We present three additional pieces of evidence for our central finding that retailers do not
use sale prices to respond to shocks. First, we provide evidence that temporary sales fail to react
to commodity cost shocks. Second, we provide evidence that temporary sales fail to react to
changes in local unemployment rates. Third, we use BLS micro data to show that time-variation
in sale prices does not contribute to the variance or cyclicality of inflation. This generalizes our
finding that retailers do not use sales to respond to shocks beyond just a single retailer.

       We then present theoretical and institutional arguments for why retailers behave in this
way. We use Hendel and Nevo’s (2013) model of price discrimination to show that the benefit to
a retailer of dynamically adjusting the size of sales is minimal; two orders of magnitude smaller
than the benefits of price discrimination per se. Finally, we highlight four features of the
institutions of retail and wholesale pricing for consumer packaged goods, which help explain our
empirical findings. Temporary sales are typically (1) orchestrated substantially in advance
according to a trade promotion calendar (i.e., they are “sticky plans”), (2) “funded” out of trade
promotion budgets, (3) implemented as part of “contingent contracts” requiring the retailer to
lower their price, and (4) the dynamic adjustment of sales is not the main focus of managerial
attention. These features imply that wholesale price variables that appear in scanner price data
sets often do not provide an accurate representation of the retailer’s marginal cost.




                                                     27
                                         Appendix A: Data Sources

Scanner Price Data
         As in other scanner price datasets, each of the price measures in our dataset represents a
weighted average over all of that week’s retail transactions for the item in that store. This implies
that if the Regular Retail Price changes in the middle of the week then the price we observe is an
average of the price before and after the change, weighted by the number of items purchased at
the different price levels. Similarly, if an item is temporarily discounted but customers only
receive the discount if they present the retailer’s frequent shopping card then the Retail Price will
represent a weighted average of the price paid by customers who receive the discount and those
who do not. To avoid double-counting price changes that occur mid-week when calculating the
frequency of price changes, we exclude price changes less than 1-cent in magnitude and price
changes that are in the same direction as a price change in the immediately preceding week.35

         Many items have multiple color or flavor variants (e.g. orange versus mint flavored 1oz
tic tac candy). The individual flavors of 1oz tic tac candy are identified at the SKU-level, while
all of the flavors of 1oz tic tac candy share a common item-number. All SKUs under a single
item-number have the same Regular Retail Price at a store in any week. They also share any
temporary discounts and generally have the same Wholesale Price (although in some cases there
is small variation in the Wholesale Price across different SKU numbers that share the same
item-number). In our analysis we will cluster standard errors at the item level to account for the
interdependence in price movements across stores and/or across SKUs that share the same item
number.

Direct Store Delivery

         Direct Store Delivery (DSD) refers to the practice of manufacturers bypassing the
retailer’s distribution system and delivering certain goods directly to individual retail stores. In




         35
            If a price reduction occurs in the middle of week t and continues in week t+1 then the average price paid
will be both lower in week t than week t-1, and lower in week t+1 than week t. This introduces a risk of
double-counting price changes. Excluding price changes in the same direction as a price change in the immediately
preceding week addresses this.
                                                             28
the analysis we omit DSD categories, primarily alcohol, beverages, and dairy.36 There are
important institutional differences in how pricing decisions are made in DSD categories, which
imply that both the Wholesale Price and the Regular Retail Price measures – key features of our
dataset – cannot be interpreted in the same way in these categories as in other categories.

         Most important for our purposes, accrual accounts are not used to “fund” temporary
discounts in DSD categories. In the case of alcohol, this is the result of legal restrictions. In the
other categories, it may be because the incentive problems accrual accounts are designed to solve
are not as severe in the case of DSD items since retailers hold no inventory apart from what is on
the shelf at each time (so “forward buying” in response to discounts is not possible) and since the
manufacturer can better monitor performance.

         Manufacturers play a more direct role in setting retail prices in DSD categories.37
Temporary sales on DSD items are often funded by temporary reductions in the Wholesale Price.
Moreover, temporary price fluctuations are often coded as movements in the Regular Retail Price
in the DSD category and discounts are more persistent. Approximately 20% of the Retail Price
changes on DSD items arise because of long sales of 13 weeks or more, compared to just 1% to
2% for non-DSD items.

         For non-DSD categories, we have argued that institutional features of how prices are set
– arising because of incentive problems associated with the implementation of temporary sales –
imply that Regular Prices respond to cost and demand shocks, while temporary sales do not and
are instead purely associated with intertemporal price discrimination. It may be that managers
use a similar two-part approach to setting prices in DSD categories. Unfortunately, for the
institutional reasons discussed above, this decomposition does not coincide with the Regular
Retail Price vs. Retail Price distinction as it does in non-DSD categories, so our data are not able
to speak to this issue.



         36
              Firms cannot legally store alcohol unless they are a bonded wholesaler, which in practice requires that
wholesalers deliver directly to stores. As a consequence, alcohol items are always DSD items.
          37
             Perhaps for this reason, in DSD categories, both Wholesale and Retail prices vary much more across
stores in response to regional competition. Regular Retail Prices and Retail Prices may vary at the region level in
DSD categories, rather than at the “pricing zone” level for other products. In addition, whereas for almost all other
products Wholesale Prices are constant across the national chain, Wholesale Prices for DSD items may also vary at
the regional level.
                                                             29
Commodity Price Data

         In our analysis of the reaction of retail and wholesale prices to underlying costs and
regional unemployment, we use additional data on the spot price of a gallon of diesel and
CBSA-level unemployment rates. The diesel price data was downloaded from the US Energy
Information Administration website and is for the Los Angeles price of a gallon of
ultra-low-sulfur number 2 diesel fuel.

Unemployment Data

          The CBSA-level unemployment rates were obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
Local Area Unemployment Statistics program. In cases where the stores in our main dataset are
located in rural areas that are not part of a CBSA for which an unemployment rate is available,
we manually match the store with the closest CBSA, and use the unemployment rate for that
CBSA.

BLS Data

         We use the micro data underlying the non-shelter portion of the CPI, which is about 70
percent of the CPI based on BLS expenditure weights.38 The BLS surveys about 85,000 items a
month in its Commodities and Services Survey; prices are collected at approximately 23,000
retail outlets across 87 large urban areas. Prices are collected monthly in the three largest urban
areas and for food and fuel items in all areas, but every two months otherwise. We use all the
data, but our results are little changed if we restrict our sample to only monthly data. Our sample
period is October 1988 through November 2014.39

         We construct all of our statistics using (expenditure) weighted averages of individual
prices (and price changes). The BLS defines approximately 300 categories of consumption as
Entry Level Items (ELIs), and they provided us unpublished annual ELI weights based on
Consumer Expenditure Surveys. We normalize the ELI weights so that they sum to one across
the ELIs each year, and we then construct an average weight over our sample period for each


         38
            Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) provide thorough descriptions of this
data set. Here, we focus on the features most relevant for our analysis.
         39
           The data actually starts in January 1988, but because our construction of regular prices involves “filling
forward” past prices when a sale occurs, it takes a few months before the count of admissible observations stabilizes.
                                                              30
ELI -- these weights also sum to one across ELIs. Finally, the CPI-RDB also contains relative
weights for each price within an ELI in each month, which we use.40

         We use constant rather than time-varying ELI weights because we’re more interested in
whether retailers change their use of sales over time than we are in the share of household
expenditures purchased on sale. That is, we want to know if retailers put more items on sale in a
recession, not whether households shift their consumption in recessions from, say, goods to
services, which have fewer sales. That said, we did construct our measure with both types of
weights, and our results do not change qualitatively.

         The BLS labels each price as either a “sale” price or “regular” price. For sale prices, we
construct a regular price by “filling forward” the previously reported regular price for the item.
This would be fairly straight-forward for a balanced panel of data but requires some explanation
because of the BLS’s rotating sample – specifically, each item is priced for up to five years, after
which it is rotated out of the sample – as well as missing observations. Our approach is as
follows. First, we drop observations for which there is no previous regular price; for example,
when an item is newly introduced to the sample.41 Second, “forced item substitutions” occur
when an item has been discontinued from its outlet and a similar replacement item (e.g., new
model) has been identified to price going forward. In this case, we use BLS quality adjustment
factors to adjust previous regular prices that are filled forward. Third, about 12 percent of prices
the BLS attempts to collect are unavailable in a given month, either because they are
out-of-season (5 percent) or temporarily unavailable (7 percent). Out-of-season observations are
treated as missing, and when the item comes back into season, its previous regular price is set
equal to the last regular price before it was out-of-season. On the other hand, we treat
temporarily unavailable items as available at the previously collected (posted and regular) price.

         Once we have posted and regular prices for each item, we compute the item-specific (i)
log difference between the regular and posted price and (ii) log difference between the t and t-1


         40
             Differential weights within an ELI reflect relative probabilities that an item is purchased versus sampled
at an outlet. Our results do not change if we instead simply assign equal weight to all items within an ELI-month.
         41
             It’s clear why this is necessary if the first observation(s) of an item is a sale price. We drop the first
observation of every item, even those whose first observation is a regular price, to avoid selection bias. Because the
number of new items varies over time, including those that enter at a regular price but not those on sale would lead
to fluctuations in the fraction of goods on sale due solely to our selection.
                                                               31
posted price and regular prices, respectively.42 Although the BLS requires its price collectors to
explain large price changes in order to minimize measurement error, some price changes in the
dataset appear implausibly large. We exclude (posted or regular) price changes that exceed a
factor of five in either direction (up or down). These account for less than one-tenth of one
percent of all price changes. We similarly exclude sales for which the posted price is less than
one-fifth of our constructed regular price. Finally, if the posted price is greater than the
constructed regular price, we set their log difference to zero; in other words, “sales” must be
price discounts.

          We then take the weighted average of these measures across items in each month to
construct time series of (i) the discount due to sales, (ii) posted price inflation, and (iii) regular
price inflation, respectively. We similarly construct a times series of the (weighted average)
frequency of sales by calculating the expenditure share on items whose posted price is less than
their constructed regular price. We then seasonally adjust these time series by taking out monthly
dummies, and finally take averages of the 3 months within each quarter to produce quarterly time
series.

Comparison of Figure 6 to Kryvtsov and Vincent (2014)

Kryvtsov and Vincent (2014) present statistics on the frequency of sales for a subset of the years
presented in Figure 6. For the years of overlap, the figure differs somewhat for the following
three reasons. First, we use stable item weights over the whole sample period, as opposed to
time-varying weights, as in the rest of our analysis—this is appropriate given that we wish to
measure the producer response of sales to unemployment. Time-varying weights largely
eliminate the upward trend in the frequency of sales that otherwise arises in the BLS data. BLS
product weights put less weight on products with a high frequency of sales in more recent time
periods. Second, our definition of sales requires both that the BLS sale flag be active and that the
posted price is less than the regular price, whereas Kryvtsov and Vincent (2014) define sales
using the BLS sale flag alone. Our definition is necessary because we are ultimately interested in
the total discount from sales, not just their frequency. Third, and for a similar reason, we drop
observations that are out-of-season, don’t have a lagged regular price, or have a sale that is larger


          42
               For bi-monthly observations, we calculate monthly inflation by dividing the log difference by 2.
                                                                32
than an 80% discount.




                        33
   References

Acosta (2012): “The Trend behind the Spend,” AMG Strategic Advisors,
  http://www.amgstrategicadvisors.com/thoughtLeadership.aspx?id=120, accessed on July 11,
  2012.
Anderson, E., G. Fitzsimmons, and D. Simester (2006): “Measuring and Mitigating the Cost of
  Stockouts,” Management Science, 52(11), 1751-1763.
Anderson, E., N. Jaimovich and D. Simester (2015): “Price Stickiness: Empirical Evidence of the
  Menu Cost Channel,” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Anderson, E. and D. Simester (2001): “Are Sale Signs Less Effective When More Products Have
  Them?” Marketing Science, 20(2), 121-142.
Berardi, N., E. Gautier, and H. Le Bihan (2015): “More Facts about Prices: France Before and
  During the Great Recession,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, forthcoming.
Bils, M. J. and P. Klenow (2004): “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,” Journal of
   Political Economy, 112(5), 947-985.
Blattberg, R.C. and S.A. Neslin (1990): Sales Promotion: Concepts, Methods, and Strategies,
       Prentice Hall, New York, NY.
Blinder, A. S., E. R. D. Canetti, D. E. Lebow, and J. B. Rudd (1998): Asking about Prices, Russell
       Sage Foundation, New York, NY.
Burstein, A.T. (2006): “Inflation and Output Dynamics with State-Dependent Pricing Decisions,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(7), 1235-1257.
Chahrour, R. (2011): “Sales and price spikes in retail scanner data,” Economics Letters, 110(2),
  143-146.
Chevalier, J. A. and A. K. Kashyap (2014): “Best Prices: Price Discrimination and Consumer
  Substitution,” NBER Working Paper No. 20768.
Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko and G.H. Hong (2015): “The Cyclicality of Sales, Regular, and
  Effective Prices: Business Cycle and Policy Implications,” American Economic Review, 105(3),
  993-1029.
Eichenbaum, M, N. Jaimovich and S. Rebelo (2011): “Reference Prices and Nominal Rigidities,”
   American Economic Review, 101(1), 234-262.
Goldberg, P. and R. Hellerstein (2013): “A Structural Approach to Identifying the Sources of
  Local-Currency Price Stability,” Review of Economic Studies, 80(1), 175-210.
Guimaraes, B. and K. Sheedy (2011): “Sales and Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review,
  101(2), 844-876.
Hendel, I. and A Nevo (2013): “Intertemporal Price Discrimination in Storable Goods Markets,”
  American Economic Review, 103(7), 2722-51.
Kehoe, P., and V. Midrigan (forthcoming): “Prices Are Sticky After All,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics.
Klenow, P. J., and O. Kryvtsov (2008): “State-Dependent or Time-Dependent Pricing: Does It
                                                      34
  Matter for Recent U.S. Inflation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(3), 863-904.
Klenow, P.J., and B.A. Malin (2011): “Microeconomic Evidence on Price Setting,” in Handbook of
  Monetary Economics Volume 3A, edited by B. Friedman and M. Woodford, 231-84.
  Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, North-Holland.
Klenow, P.J. and J.L. Willis (2007): “Sticky Information and Sticky Prices,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 54, 79-99.
Kryvtsov, O. and Vincent, N. (2014): “On the Importance of Sales for Aggregate Price Flexibility,”
  Working paper, Bank of Canada.
Mankiw, N.G. and R. Reis (2002): “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal to Replace
  the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4), 1295-1328.
McShane, B., C. Chen, E. Anderson, D. Simester (2015), “Decision Stages and Asymmetries in
  Regular Price Pass-through,” Marketing Science, forthcoming.
Nakamura, E., and J. Steinsson (2008): “Five Facts about Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu Cost
  Models,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4), 1415-1464.
Nakamura, E. and D. Zerom (2010): “Accounting for Incomplete Pass-Through,” Review of
  Economic Studies, 77(3), 1192-1230.
Nevo, A. and A. Wong (2014): “The Elasticity of Substitution Between Time and Market Goods:
  Evidence from the Great Recession,” Working Paper, Northwestern University.
Stroebel, J. and J. Vavra (2014): “House Prices, Local Demand, and Retail Prices,” NBER WP
   20710.
Wu, J.C. and F.D. Xia (2014): “Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Monetary Policy at the
  Zero Lower Bound,” Working Paper, Chicago Booth.




                                                     35
                                         Table 1
                  Frequency and Size of Wholesale and Retail Price Changes

                                                   Average                            Average
                                               Weekly Frequency                     Absolute Size

   Base Wholesale Price
   Changes
   Any Change                                           0.74%
   Increases                                            0.63%                           4.67%
   Decreases                                            0.11%                           7.14%
   Regular Retail Price Changes
   Any Change                                           1.11%
   Increases                                            0.91%                           8.41%
   Decreases                                            0.20%                          10.10%
   Retail Prices
   (including temporary sales)
   Any Change                                          21.16%
   Increases                                           10.70%                          22.64%
   Decreases                                           10.46%                          22.31%
The table reports the average weekly frequency of price changes and the average absolute percentage size of the
price changes. The average absolute size of the price changes is measured as a percentage of the average regular
price (calculated for that SKU in that store across the entire 195 week period). The unit of observation is a SKU
at a store in a week, and the sample size is 5,394,146 for the frequency measures. Not all items have price
changes in every week and so the sample sizes for the absolute size measures range from a low of 6,052
(Wholesale Price decreases) to a high of 602,678 (Retail Price decreases). The observations are weighted by
Total Revenue for the SKU-Store combination (calculated across all 195 weeks).




                                                           36
                                                      Table 2
               Change in Price Indices around the Wholesale Price Increase Events

                                     Short-Term                 Medium-Term                     Long-Term
                                     Comparison                  Comparison                     Comparison

Wholesale Price Index                    3.18%**                      2.18%**                       1.54%**
                                        (0.25%)                      (0.31%)                       (0.29%)

Retail Price Index                       3.22%**                      3.13%**                       3.05%**
                                        (0.36%)                      (0.40%)                       (0.50%)

Regular Price Index                      4.57%**                      3.77%**                       3.11%**
                                        (0.30%)                      (0.39%)                       (0.45%)

Discount Index                           1.35%**                      0.64%*                        0.06%
                                        (0.36%)                      (0.28%)                       (0.36%)

This table reports the change in the four price indices in the periods after the Wholesale Price increase events
compared to the corresponding periods before the events. Week 0 identifies the week before the Wholesale Price
increase. The “Short-Term Comparison” compares weeks -20 to -1 with weeks 1 to 20, the “Medium-Term
Comparison” compares weeks -21 to -40 with weeks 21 to 40, the “Long-Term Comparison” compares weeks -50 to
-41 with weeks 41 to 50. Positive values indicate that the price index was higher after the event. The sample sizes
are all 2,147,676. Observations are weighted by Total Revenue for the SKU in that Store (calculated across all 195
weeks). Standard errors are clustered at the item level and reported in parentheses. *Significantly different from zero,
p < 0.05, ** Significantly different from zero, p < 0.01.




                                                              37
                                           Table 3
              Change in Price Indices around the Wholesale Price Increase Events
              Conditional on Whether There Was a Nearby Regular Price Change

                                                       Short-Term           Medium-Term             Long-Term
                                                       Comparison            Comparison             Comparison

Nearby Regular         Wholesale Price Index              3.08%**                 1.87%**              1.21%**
Price Change                                             (0.24%)                 (0.26%)              (0.26%)

                       Retail Price Index                 3.89%**                 3.23%**              2.98%**
                                                         (0.45%)                 (0.47%)              (0.54%)

                       Regular Price Index                5.42%**                 3.88%**              2.91%**
                                                         (0.34%)                 (0.48%)              (0.54%)

                       Discount Index                     1.57%**                 0.65%*              -0.07%
                                                         (0.41%)                 (0.32%)              (0.43%)



No Nearby              Wholesale Price Index              3.55%**                 3.68%**              2.95%**
Regular Price                                            (0.59%)                 (0.99%)              (0.90%)
Change
                       Retail Price Index                -0.46%                   2.41%*               3.43%*
                                                         (0.54%)                 (0.97%)              (1.67%)

                       Regular Price Index               -0.23%                   2.73%*               3.40%*
                                                         (0.39%)                 (1.15%)              (1.45%)

                       Discount Index                     0.23%                   0.32%               -0.03%
                                                         (0.48%)                 (0.49%)              (0.82%)

This table reports the change in the four price indices in the periods after the Wholesale Price increase events
compared to the corresponding periods before the events. Week 0 identifies the week before the Wholesale Price
increase. The “Short-Term Comparison” compares weeks -20 to -1 with weeks 1 to 20, the “Medium-Term
Comparison” compares weeks -21 to -40 with weeks 21 to 40, the “Long-Term Comparison” compares weeks -50 to
-41 with weeks 41 to 50. Positive values indicate that the price index was higher after the event. The sample sizes
are all 1,834,682 (Nearby Regular Price Change) and 312,994 (No Nearby Regular Price Change). Observations are
weighted by Total Revenue for the SKU in that Store (calculated across all 195 weeks. Standard errors are clustered
at the item level and reported in parentheses. *Significantly different from zero, p < 0.05, ** Significantly different
from zero, p < 0.01.




                                                              38
                                         Table 4
           Regional Variation in Unemployment and the Frequency of Price Changes

                                             Retail Price            Regular Price                 Discount
                                               Index                    Index                       Index

    Change in Unemployment                    -0.170%**                 -0.156%**                  0.014%
    (3 month lag)                             (0.039%)                  (0.037%)                  (0.022%)

    R2                                           0.278                     0.251                     0.280

The table reports coefficients from estimating Equation 2 on each dependent variable. The coefficients reflect the
percentage point increase in the dependent variable. Item and week fixed effects (and a constant) are included but
omitted from the table. The unit of observation is an item x week and the sample sizes are 5,394,146. Observations
are weighted by Total Revenue for the SKU in that Store (calculated across all 195 weeks). Standard errors are
clustered at the item level and reported in parentheses. *Significantly different from zero, p < 0.05, ** significantly
different from zero, p < 0.01.




                                                               39
                                                   Table 5A
                                          Inflation Cyclicality: Food

                                            Posted Price             Regular Price             Sale-Related
                                             Inflation                 Inflation                 Inflation
    Relative Variance                             1.00                     0.78                      0.06
    Correlation with Posted                       1.00                     0.98                     -0.57
                                                                          (0.02)                    (0.08)
    Cyclical Elasticity wrt U                    -0.99                    -0.91                      0.08
                                                 (0.34)                   (0.30)                    (0.06)
    Correlation with U                           -0.38                    -0.40                      0.13
                                                 (0.09)                   (0.09)                    (0.10)
    Cyclical Elasticity wrt GDP                   0.59                     0.53                     -0.06
                                                 (0.25)                   (0.21)                    (0.05)
    Correlation with GDP                          0.35                     0.36                     -0.15
                                                 (0.09)                   (0.09)                    (0.10)



                                                 Table 5B
                                     Inflation Cyclicality: All Products

                                            Posted Price             Regular Price             Sale-Related
                                             Inflation                 Inflation                 Inflation
    Relative Variance                             1.00                     0.91                      0.03
    Correlation with Posted                       1.00                     0.99                     -0.36
                                                                          (0.02)                    (0.09)
    Cyclical Elasticity wrt U                    -0.32                    -0.37                     -0.04
                                                 (0.25)                   (0.24)                    (0.05)
    Correlation with U                           -0.10                    -0.12                     -0.08
                                                 (0.10)                   (0.10)                    (0.10)
    Cyclical Elasticity wrt GDP                   0.42                     0.45                      0.03
                                                 (0.20)                   (0.18)                    (0.05)
    Correlation with GDP                          0.19                     0.22                      0.07
                                                 (0.10)                   (0.10)                    (0.10)
Inflation series constructed from the CPI-RDB, using data on food items (Panel A) and all non-shelter items (Panel
B) in all areas from 1988q4 through 2014q3. Posted Prices include sale prices, whereas Regular Prices replace sale
prices with previous regular price. Inflation is the weighted average of individual log price differences, and weights
are constant as described in Appendix A. Sale-Related Inflation is obtained by subtracting Posted Price Inflation
from Regular Price Inflation. Inflation series are seasonally adjusted and HP-filtered (parameter = 1600). The
cyclical elasticity is obtained by regressing (log) inflation on (log) GDP (or unemployment); all variables
HP-filtered and Newey-West standard errors are reported.


                                                              40
                                                  Table 6
                                   Profit Loss from Constraining Prices

                                                                                   Non-           Non-
                                               Fixed             Fixed
                                                                              Discriminatory Discriminatory
                                              Discount           Price
                                                                                 Flexible         Fixed

Parameters in Hendel-Nevo                       0.02%            0.29%              4.06%               4.32%

Lower Non-Storer Price Sensitivity              0.00%            0.01%              0.00%               0.01%

Higher Non-Storer Price Sensitivity             0.00%            0.53%              1.68%               2.20%

Lower Storer Price Sensitivity                  0.01%            0.27%              3.65%               3.91%

Higher Storer Price Sensitivity                 0.04%            0.22%              1.22%               1.37%

More Non-Storers                                0.01%            0.16%              0.99%               1.12%

Fewer Non-Storers                               0.01%            0.42%              6.37%               6.79%

The table reports the loss from fixing each price component, as a percentage of the profit earned under the “flexible
sales policy” (which allows both regular prices and sales prices to be optimized). The “fixed discount” policy allows
the firm to adjust the regular price in response to the cost shocks, but uses a fixed percentage discount. The “fixed
price” policy uses a fixed regular price and fixed sale price (no adjustment for cost shocks). The “non-discriminatory”
policies set the same price in both periods. The non-discriminatory price is fixed in one regime and flexible in the
other. The findings are obtained from 10,000 simulations of Hendel and Nevo’s 2-period model.
                                           Figure 1
                                    Price Series: Example

  $1.00

  $0.90

  $0.80

  $0.70

  $0.60

  $0.50

  $0.40

  $0.30
                                                                     Regular Retail Price
  $0.20                                                              Retail Price
  $0.10                                                              Wholesale Price

  $0.00
      200601      200627     200701     200727     200801      200827     200901     200927

The figure reports the price trends for the three price variables for an arbitrarily chosen SKU at a
single store that had sales of the SKU in all 195 weeks of the sample period.




                                                      42
                                              Figure 2
                             Response to a Base Wholesale Price Increase




                          Panel A: Wholesale Price and Regular Price Index




                             Panel B: Wholesale Price and Discount index
This figures report the coefficients identifying the weeks before and after a Wholesale Price increase. Week 0
identifies the week before the Wholesale Price increase. The coefficients are obtained from estimating Equation 1 on
each dependent variable. Fixed effects identifying each item and each time period were included in the model but
are not reported. The sample sizes are all 2,147,676. Observations are weighted by Total Revenue for the SKU in
that Store (calculated across all 195 weeks).

                                                             43
                            Figure 3
                Price Adjustment and Diesel Prices
5.0%

4.5%                                                                           180%
4.0%
                                                                               130%
3.5%

3.0%                                                                           80%
2.5%
                                                                               30%
2.0%

1.5%                                                                           ‐20%
1.0%
                                                                               ‐70%
0.5%

0.0%                                                                           ‐120%
       2007H1       2007H2        2008H1         2008H2          2009H1
                Frequency of Wholesale Price Increases (left axis)
                Frequency of Regular Retail Price Increases (left axis)
                12m Change in Diesel Price (Lagged 1Q, right axis))


       Panel A: Regular Prices and Base Wholesale Prices

40%

35%

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

 5%

 0%
       2007H1        2007H2          2008H1          2008H2           2009H1
                                Discount Frequency (left axis)

                                Discount Depth (left axis)

                      Panel B: Temporary Sales

                                           44
                                                                 Figure 4
                                                     Posted vs Regular Price Inflation
              3.0


              2.0


              1.0
  Percent




              0.0


            ‐1.0


            ‐2.0


            ‐3.0
               1988q4                      1993q4            1998q4             2003q4            2008q4         2013q4
                                                    Posted Price Inflation; hp‐filt, 12‐mo (centered) mov avg
                                                    Regular Price Inflation; hp‐filt, 12‐mo (centered) mov avg
                                                    Unemployment, hp‐filtered


                                                              Figure 5
                                             Inflation Response to Fed Funds Rate Shock
                                0.10



                                0.05
            Percentage Points




                                0.00



                         ‐0.05



                         ‐0.10
                                       0       4                  8                12              16             20
                                                                      Quarter
                                                Posted Price Inflation              Regular Price Inflation

Impulse response functions constructed from 4-lag, 4-variable VAR, including unemployment rate, posted (or
regular) inflation, commodity price inflation, and fed funds (shadow) rate. The shock is a +25 basis point innovation
to the Fed Funds rate. Dashed lines are 2 * std error bounds on the posted inflation response.


                                                                              45
                                               Figure 6
                              Frequency of Sales and Unemployment Rate
       7.5%
                                                                                                             9.5%
       7.0%
                                                                                                             8.5%
       6.5%
                                                                                                             7.5%
       6.0%

                                                                                                             6.5%
       5.5%

       5.0%                                                                                                  5.5%


       4.5%                                                                                                  4.5%

       4.0%                                                                                              3.5%
          Mar‐89             Mar‐94           Mar‐99            Mar‐04              Mar‐09          Mar‐14


                            Sales Frequency (left axis)         Unemployment Rate (right axis)




                                               Figure 7
                             Discounts and Costs in the Hendel-Nevo Model
              1.80

              1.60

              1.40

              1.20

              1.00

              0.80

              0.60
                                                                            Non‐Discriminatory Price
              0.40
                                                                            Regular Price
              0.20                                                          Temporary Sale Price

              0.00
                     0.00   0.10   0.20     0.30    0.40    0.50    0.60     0.70     0.80   0.90     1.00

This figure illustrates how the optimal regular and sales prices vary according to the marginal cost in the Hendel and
Nevo (2013) model. The sales price is calculated as the regular price less discount. The non-discriminatory price is
the price that the firm would charge if it was unable to price discriminate between the two periods (charging the
same regular price without discounts in both periods).

                                                              46
                                                   Appendix
                                           Table A1.
              Change in Price Indices around the Wholesale Price Decrease Events

                                     Short-Term                 Medium-Term                    Long-Term
                                     Comparison                  Comparison                    Comparison

Wholesale Price Index                   -2.68%                       -0.34%                       -0.07%
                                        (1.59%)                      (0.86%)                      (0.98%)

Retail Price Index                      -0.99%                        0.19%                        1.43%
                                        (1.76%)                      (0.93%)                      (1.97%)

Regular Price Index                     -0.52%                        2.22%                        2.49%
                                        (1.96%)                      (1.78%)                      (2.30%)

Discount Index                           0.47%                        2.04%                        1.07%
                                        (0.58%)                      (1.07%)                      (0.85%)

This table reports the change in the four price indices in the periods after the Wholesale Price decrease events
compared to the corresponding periods before the events. The “Short-Term Comparison” compares weeks -20 to -1
with weeks 1 to 20, the “Medium-Term Comparison” compares weeks -21 to -40 with weeks 21 to 40, the
“Long-Term Comparison” compares weeks -50 to -41 with weeks 41 to 50. Positive values indicate that the price
index was higher after the event. The sample sizes are all 274,031. Observations are weighted by Total Revenue for
the SKU in that Store (calculated across all 195 weeks). Standard errors are clustered at the item level and reported
in parentheses.




                                                              47
                                                Table A2a
                                    HP-Filtered Price Cyclicality: Food
                                                        Posted Price                Discount

                Relative Variance                              1.00                    0.03

                Correlation with Posted                        1.00                    -0.36
                                                                                      (0.09)

                Cyclical Elasticity wrt U                      0.09                    0.10
                                                              (0.17)                  (0.02)

                Correlation with U                             0.08                    0.55
                                                              (0.10)                  (0.08)

                Cyclical Elasticity wrt GDP                    -0.21                  -0.05
                                                              (0.10)                  (0.01)

                Correlation with GDP                           -0.26                  -0.44
                                                              (0.10)                  (0.09)



                                               Table A2b
                               HP Filtered Price Cyclicality: All Products
                                                        Posted Price                Discount

                Relative Variance                              1.00                    0.02

                Correlation with Posted                        1.00                    -0.43
                                                                                      (0.09)

                Cyclical Elasticity wrt U                     -0.27                    0.07
                                                              (0.14)                  (0.01)

                Correlation with U                             -0.27                   0.60
                                                              (0.10)                  (0.08)

                Cyclical Elasticity wrt GDP                    0.10                   -0.04
                                                              (0.10)                  (0.01)

                Correlation with GDP                           0.15                   -0.53
                                                              (0.10)                  (0.09)

Series constructed from the CPI-RDB, using data on food items (Panel a) and non-shelter items (Panel b) in all areas
from 1988q4 through 2014q3. Posted Price constructed by cumulating posted-price inflation, which is the weighted
average of individual log price differences. Discount is the weighted average log difference of individual regular and
posted prices. We use constant weights as described in Appendix A. Series are seasonally adjusted and HP-filtered
(parameter = 1600). The cyclical elasticity is obtained by regressing (log) price index on (log) GDP (or
unemployment); all regression variables HP-filtered and Newey-West standard errors are reported in parentheses.

                                                              48
                                         Figure A1
              Response to a Base Wholesale Price Increase: No Time Fixed Effects




                         Panel A: Wholesale Price and Regular Price Index




                             Panel B: Wholesale Price and Discount Index
This figure reports the coefficients identifying the weeks before and after a Wholesale Price increase. Week 0
identifies the week before the Wholesale Price increase. The coefficients are obtained from estimating a modified
version of Equation 1 on each dependent variable. Equation 1 was modified to remove the time fixed effects. Fixed
effects identifying each item were included in the model but are not reported. The sample sizes are all 2,147,676.
Observations are weighted by Total Revenue for the SKU in that Store (calculated across all 195 weeks).
                                                            49
