                 FiBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               ARE EFFICIENCY WAGES EFFICIENT?




                      William T. Dickens

                         Lawrence Katz

                           Kevin Lang




                     Working Paper No. 1935




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     ioso Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                             June 1986




We would like to thank Lawrence Summers for an inspiring
conversation, George Akerlof and ,Janet Yellen for useful
discussions, and the National Science Foundation (under Grant
SES—B4O9380) and the Institute of Industrial Relations at Berkeley
for generous research support. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #1935
                                                    June 1986




                          Are Efficiency Wages Efficient?




                                      ABSTRACT



           Efficiency wage models have been criticized because worker malfeasance

can be prevented in a pareto efficient manner by requiring workers to post a bond

which they lose if they are caught cheating.       However, since it is costly to

monitor workers and costless to demand a larger bond, firms should pay nothing

for monitoring and demand very large bonds. Since we observe that firms devote

considerable resources to monitoring workers, bonds must be limited. Therefore

firms must use second best alternatives --   intensive   monitoring and/or efficiency

wages. The payment of efficiency wages cannot be ruled out on a priori theore-

tical grounds.




 William 1. Dickens            Lawrence Katz                  Kevin Lang
 Sloan School of Management    School of Business             School of Social
 M.I .T.                        Administration                 Science
 Cambridge, MA 02138           University of California       University of California
                               Berkeley, CA 94720             Irvine, CA 92717
                       ARE EFFICIENCY WAGES EFFICIENT?



                                       1/31/86


    Efficiency wage   models, in which workers are paid a wage above the reservation

wage in order to give them an incentive not to quit, steal or shirk, provide an

attractive explanation for a wide variety of phenomena including involuntary un-

employment, the large differences between industries in the wages paid for what

appear to be similar workers, and the existence of the dual labor market.           The

primary criticism of efficiency wage models is that similar incentives can be

provided in a pareto efficient manner by having workers post bonds against

malfeasance. Equivalently, firms can pay efficiency wages but charge workers an

employment fee which makes them indifferent between taking a particular job or

seeking alternative employment. The bond or employment fee can either be paid

at the beginning of employment, or over time if workers receive lower wages in

the initial months or years of employment. Bonds can be paid back as a lump-sum

upon retirement, as an annuity or pension after retirement and/or as higher wages

paid most commonly towards the end of one's career. Lazear (1979,1981) has pro-

posed this as an explanation for tenure-earnings profiles and a number of other

phenomena.

     In this note we argue that the first best efficient bonding solution is ev-

idently unattainable in practice. With efficient bonding firms should be spending

nothing or only an infinitesimal amount on monitoring workers to detect

malfeasance. Since firms are observed to devote substantial resources to moni-

toring workers, bonding must be incomplete. We argue that firms must be choosing

one or both of two inefficient solutions - -     monitoring workers   intensively and/or

paying efficiency wages.' Evidently there are limits on the size of the bond a

firm may demand. These could be due to either the possibility of the firm de-


Are Efficiency Wages Efficient?                                                        3
 faulting on the employment contract or wealth and credit market constraints on

 workers.

        The next section contains a more detailed discussion of this basic point.

 Section II presents a formal model of bonding and efficiency wages with variable

 monitoring costs. The formal model allows us to identify the conditions under

 which firms will choose intensive monitoring rather than efficiency wages.




 I.   EFFICIENCY WAGES VS. BONDING




       Since in a perfectly competitive labor market there is no unemployment and

all equivalent workers receive the same wage, separations are costless to workers.

As a consequence firms cannot punish worker malfeasance by firing them, and

therefore workers can be expected to shirk or steal unless firms can develop other

means of punishing malfeasance.      Several authors (Calvo, 1979; Stoft, 1982;

Shapiro and Stiglitz, 1984; Bowles, 1985; Jones, 1985; Bulow and Summers, 1985)

have developed models in which firms pay workers more than their reservation wages

so that it is costly to workers to be fired (or equivalently, in models in which

workers quit too frequently, it is costly to them to quit).

      A common objection to these models is that employers can solve these problems

in a pareto-efficient manner by requiring employees to post a bond against

shirking or quitting.     Instances of direct bonding are very rare although not

unknown. However, overt bonding is formally equivalent to the sort of employment

relation described by Lazear (1979, 1981).     In his model, workers post a bond

against cheating by accepting wages below their marginal product initially and


Are Efficiency Wages Efficient?                                                  4
have it returned in the form of wages above the value of their marginal product

later in life and/or in the form of a pension upon retirement. Many find this

argument - -   that   efficiency wages are inefficient and therefore unlikely to be

used --                   Discussion at several conferences and seminars we have at-
          compelling.2
tended indicates to us that acceptance of the efficiency wage model has been in-
                              3
hibited by this argument.

     A common response to this objection is to argue that there are limits on the

size of the bonds firms can demand. An alternative to paying efficiency wages

when bonding is limited is increased monitoring of workers. Some monitoring is

required with either bonding or efficiency wages since it is useless to make it

costly to workers to be caught cheating if they are never caught. Monitoring by

itself is insufficient to deter malfeasance since there must be some cost to

workers of being caught.          Considering only the size of the bond and monitoring

expenditures, the firm faces an optimal law enforcement problem in which it must

choose the amount of resources to devote to catching malfeasants and the punish-

ment to inflict on those it catches. The solution to this problem is well known

(Carr-Hill and Stern, 1979; Stern, 1978) and has been aptly characterized as "hang

litterers with probability zero." That is, next to nothing should be spent on

catching law breakers since it is cheaper to deter crime by making punishments

more severe.          This solution applies equally to the bonding model since it is

costly to the firm to monitor workers but costless to increase the bond. As long

as any resources are being devoted to monitoring, the same degree of deterrence

can always be attained at lower cost by increasing the bond and reducing the level

of monitoring. Thus the efficient bonding solution involves no expenditure on

monitoring. If the probability of detection is near zero when the firm does not

monitor workers, the bond required to prevent malfeasance will be very large.4




                                                                                       5
Are Efficiency Wages Efficient?
       There are two strong logical reasons for believing that the feasible bond may

 not be as large as necessary if firms spend little or nothing on monitoring. The

 first is that, particularly at the beginning of their work lives, workers face

 capital market constraints and thus may not be able to afford large bonds. The

 second is that if the bond were very large, the firm would have a strong incentive

 to claim malfeasance on the part of the worker and keep the bond. There is also

 empirical evidence that suggests one or the other of these two constraints is

 commonly binding.      Since the optimal expenditure on monitoring is zero, if we

 observe any expenditure on monitoring by firms, the efficient bonding solution

 must not be obtainable, and it must be the case that the optimal bond exceeds the

 maximum imposed by either capital markets or incentives for firm malfeasance.

Cursory inspection of almost any workplace indicates that firms do expend sub-

stantial resources monitoring workers.       Firms hire supervisors, auditors, in-

spectors and testers. The pace of many jobs is monitored by machines. Evidently

firms must choose second-best methods of avoiding worker malfeasance -- intensive

monitoring and/or efficiency wages. Which technique firms choose will depend on

the monitoring technology.




II.   A FORMAL MODEL




      We   use a one period model. At the beginning of the period workers may post

a bond, b. During the period workers may or may not supply effort, e, which takes

on the value 1 if effort is supplied and 0 otherwise. The probability, p(m), that

any shirking which occurs is detected by the firm depends on the firm's expendi-


Are Efficiency Wages Efficient?                                                  6
ture on monitoring, m. We assume p'>O and P(O)Pmin>O* If the workers are caught

shirking, they forfeit the bond and do not receive the wage, w. However, they

are immediately employed elsewhere at the reservation wage, r.      If they are not

caught shirking, they receive the wage and the bond is returned.

          It should be obvious that the only possible equilibria are those in which

e equals 1.        If workers provided zero effort, no output would be produced. The

firm would find it profitable to hire workers only if the expected wage net of

foregone bonds were nonpositive. However, with a nonpositive wage, workers will

be unwilling to supply labor.

         Therefore, the firm's objective is to maximize profits, it, which are given

by



(1)          ¶   = R(L)   -
                              (w+m)L



where L is the number of workers employed by the firm and R is revenue net of

nonlabor costs (R'>O, R''<O). Profits are maximized subject to two constraints.

The first is that the wage exceeds the reservation wage:



(2)          wr.

The second is that workers must not have an incentive to shirk.

      In specifying the conditions under which a worker will shirk, we assume that

workers are risk neutral. The model could easily be adjusted to allow for risk

aversion. We also assume, as noted above that workers who are fired for shirking

can   earn   the reservation wage for the remainder of the period. This is the

equivalent of the standard competitive assumption that workers who are fired im-

mediately obtain employment at the competitive wage rate. Workers will not shirk



Are Efficiency Wages Efficient?                                                   7
if the wage plus bond they receive if they do not shirk exceeds the expected wage

plus bond if they do shirk by at least the value of shirking. Thus we have



(3)      w + b   v + (l-p(m))(w+b) + p(m)r



where v is the benefit from shirking. There is no benefit to combinations of w

and b which exceed their minimum level so we treat (3) as an equality. Rearranging

terms gives



(4)      w+bv/p(m)+r.

         The firm chooses L, w, m and b to maximize (1) subject to inequality

constraint (2) and the equality constraint (4). In such problems, the constraint

that the choice variables be nonnegative can usually be ignored and an interior

solution assumed.    In this case, however, the requirement that m be nonnegative

may be a binding constraint. We therefore include this constraint explicitly.

The first order conditions are given by



 (5)     a(.)/aL =           -m   -   w   =   U


 (6)

 (7)     a(.)/am = - L + Avp'/p2 + 4, = U
 (8)     8(.)/Ob =   X   =   U




where 4' is the Kuhn-Tucker multiplier associated with the constraint that in be

nonnegative, X is the Lagrange multiplier associated with (4) and p is the

Kuhn-Tucker multiplier associated with (2).

        The solution to (5) -             (8)     is




Are Efficiency Wages Efficient?                                                 B
(9)        m0
(10)       R' =   w   =   r


(11)       b =   v/p(0).


Thus the efficient solution involves bonding with no monitoring. Efficiency is

achieved in competitive markets because the number of workers hired is chosen so

as to set the marginal revenue product equal to the wage.

       As noted in the last section, firms do spend resources on monitoring workers;

so there must be limits on the extent to which bonding can be used. A formal model

of the processes which limit the size of bonds is beyond the scope of this note.5

For the purposes at hand it suffices to assume that b cannot exceed some maximum

value, b*. In this case, the firm maximizes profits subject to inequality (2),

equality (4), and b =         b*.   Setting b =   b*   and reexamining (5) -   (7),   it is evident

that there are three possible solutions corresponding to the cases where (6) holds

with equality, (7) holds with equality and both (6) and (7) hold with equality.

Thus the firm may choose to use only increased monitoring, only an efficiency wage

or both. In the case where both are used, the level of monitoring is chosen to

set vpt/pZ equal to one. In sum the relevance of efficiency wages is an empirical

not a theoretical question.




Are Efficiency Wages Efficient?                                                                   9
 III. CONCLUSIONS




    The critical weakness in the argument that efficiency wages are an inefficient

solution to the problem of preventing worker malfeasance and are therefore tin-

 likely to be used in practice is that the size of bonds that workers can post is

limited.      The fact that firms expend significant resources monitoring workers

indicates that bonds are limited in practice.

      One obvious factor restricting the size of the bonds workers can post is

wealth and credit market constraints.     Another potential problem is incentive

compatibility problems on the firm's side. Lazear (1979, 1981) recognizes that

if a worker's wage exceeds his VMP, the firm will have an incentive to fire the

worker. Lazear relies on reputation costs to prevent the firm from responding

to this incentive. However, reputation costs may not be very large. The most a

firm can sacrifice if it loses its reputation is the present value of future

profits and any transaction costs involved in selling off its capital stock. In

a competitive market, the present value of expected future profits will be near

zero, and thus in a competitive market reputation costs should not exceed the

transactions costs for transferring an enterprise to new owners or hiring new

management.

     Moreover, if economic actors have rational expectations, past actions are

only signals of future behavior if firms differ in some relevant way which is

unobservable so that defaulting conveys some new information.    In models which

assume that all firms are ex ante identical or that workers have perfect infor-

mation about firm characteristics, if reputation costs are possible at all, they

rest on the etherial assumption that reputations matter because they matter.6




Are Efficiency Wages Efficient?                                                 10
     Thus it is not surprising that firms do not rely entirely on bonding to

prevent malfeasance but instead devote resources to monitoring workers. Since

resources are devoted to monitoring workers, depending on the monitoring tech-

nology, it may pay firms to reduce monitoring costs by paying efficiency wages.

Efficiency wages are not necessarily inefficient.




Are Efficiency Wages Efficient?                                               11
 FOOTNOTES




1. Eaton and White (1983) analyze the trade-off between efficiency wage payments
and increased monitoring effort when no bonding arrangements are possible.

2. We refer here to private efficiency relative to the use of alternative mech-
anisms for controlling worker malfeasance rather than to the Pareto optimality
of the market outcome.  The market equilibrium is generally not efficient since
firms fail to adequately take into account the impacts of their wage and moni-
toring levels on the policies other firms must utilize to prevent shirking by
employees (Shapiro and Stiglitz; 1984, 1985).

3. It should be noted that the bonding critique does not apply to norm based ef-
ficiency wage models (Solow, 1979; Akerlof, 1984), to adverse selection based
models in which firms never learn a worker's true ability (Weiss, 1980), or nu-
trition models (Stiglitz, 1974).

4. The possibility of mistakes (Type II errors) may be another factor limiting
the size of the bond a firm can demand. If firms sometimes fire workers who were
not cheating, a very high bond may no longer be optimal since the firm would have
to compensate workers for the possibility that they would lose their bond due to
an error. The larger the bond the larger the necessary compensation. This is
only a problem if the monitoring technology doesn't allow the firm to know with
complete certainty that a worker was cheating in at least some cases. If the firm
can know some cases with certainty, the best thing to do, if workers are at all
risk averse, is to fire only those it knows with certainty have shirked and to
set the bond as high as needed to avoid shirking given the probability of de-
tection with certainty. If workers are risk neutral, then the best solution will
be perfect bonding with workers being compensated for the possibility of a mistake
with a wage premium exactly equal to their expected loss. If workers are risk
averse and some mistakes are inevitable, the firm may find it optimal to expend
resources on monitoring to reduce the required bond and compensating wage dif-
ferential. When mistakes are unavoidable, some of the attractive features of the
efficiency wage model may still obtain even if there are no queues for jobs.
Industry wage differentials can be explained as compensation for the accidental
loss of a bond. In any case, our basic argument, that if we observe expenditures
on monitoring, then perfect bonding is not attainable holds. One further caveat
is that firms may monitor workers for other reasons than perventing worker
malfeasance. Monitoring may be utilzed to avoid honest worker errors or to help
in sorting heterogeneous workers. Still, we do believe that one does observe
monitoring activities that plainly serve to help deter shirking, carelesness and
stealing by workers.

5. Eaton and White (1982) show how capital market imperfections can limit the use
of bonding and give rise to efficiency wage payments. They assume exogenous
shirking detection possibilities.




Footnotes                                                                      12
6. The likelihood of firm default can be reduced if the firm does not expect to
gain anything from a default. For example, if a firm claims that a worker has
shirked and fires the worker it is possible to pay the bond to a third party in-
stead of the firm. Then the worker is disciplined but the firm gains nothing if
it cheats. While this is a theoretical possibility we do not observe the use of
this device.   One arrangement which seems at first to resemble this is having
payments made to a pension fund (at least up to the point where the pension is
vested). However, if the firm defaults it does benefit. Either it can reduce
its future payments to the fund or the fund will pay higher benefits so that the
firm can pay a lower wage and still attract workers.




Footnotes                                                                   13
BIBLIOGRAPHY


Akerlof, George. "Gift Exchange and Efficiency Wages: Four Views," American
nomic Review Proceedings, 74 (May 1984), 79-83.

Bowles, Samuel, "The Production Process in a Competitive Economy:  Walrasian,
Neo-Hobbesian and Marxian Models," American Economic Review, March 1985, 75,
16-36.

Bulow, J. I. and Summers, L. Ii. "A Theory of Dual Labor Markets with Application
to Industrial Policy, Discrimination and Keynesian Unemployment," NBER working
paper #1666 (July,1985).

Calvo, G. "Quasi-Walrasian Theories of Unemployment," American Economic Review,
May 1979, p102—7.

Carmichael, Lorne. "Can Unemployment Be Involuntaty?: Comment," American Economic
Review, 75 (December 1985), 1213-14.

Carr-Hhll, Roy A. and Nicholas H. Stern. Crime, The Police, and Criminal
tics, London: Academic Press, 1979.

Eaton, C. and W.D. White. "Agent Compensation and the Limits of Bonding," Economic
Inquiry, (July 1982), 330-343.

                        ,    "The Economy of High Wages: An Agency Problem,"
Economica, (April 1983), 175-81.

Jones, Stephen R.G. "Minimum Wage Legislation in a Dual Market," mimeo, University
of British Columbia, May 1985.

Lazear, E. "Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity, and Hours Restrictions,"
American Economic Review, (September 1981), 606-620.

               ,"Why is there Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political
Economy, 87(6), (December, 1979), 261-84.

Shapiro, C. and J.E. Stiglitz, "Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline
Device," American Economic Review, 74, (June 1984), 433-44.

                               "Can Unemployment be Involuntary?: Reply,"
                               ,


can Economic Review, 75, (December 1985), 1215-1217.

Solow, R. "Another Possible Source of Wage Stickiness," Journal of Macro
Economics, 1, 1979, 79-82.

Stern, Nicholas H. "On the Economic Theory of Policy Towards Crime," in J. N.
Heineke (ed.) Economic Models of Criminal Behavior, Amsterdam: North-Holland,
1978.

Stiglitz, J., "Wage Determination and Unemployment in L.D.C.'s: The Labor Turnover
Model," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1974, 88, 194-227.


                                                                               14
Bibliography
 Stoft, S.,   "Cheat Threat Theory: An Explanation of Involuntary Unemployment,"
 mimeo, Boston University, May 1982.

 Weiss, Andrew, "Job Queues and Layoffs in Labor Markets with Flexible Wages,"
 Journal of ?olitical Economy, 88, (June 1980), 526-38.

 Yellen, Janet L. "Efficiency Wage Models of Unemployment," American Economic
 view Proceedings, 74, (May,l984) 200-5.




Bibliography                                                                    15
