                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            INTERNATIONAL COMPETITIVENESS AND MONETARY POLICY:
STRATEGIC POLICY AND COORDINATION WITH A PRODUCTION RELOCATION EXTERNALITY

                                             Paul R. Bergin
                                            Giancarlo Corsetti

                                           Working Paper 19356
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w19356


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        August 2013




    We thank Yuan Liu and Riccardo Trezzi for excellent research assistance. We thank our discussant
    Matteo Cacciatore and seminar participants at the 2013 NBER Summer Institute, the 2013 International
    Finance and Macro Finance Workshop at Sciences Po Paris and the Bank of England, for comments
    The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
    National Bureau of Economic Research.

    NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
    reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
    NBER publications.

    © 2013 by Paul R. Bergin and Giancarlo Corsetti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
    exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
    © notice, is given to the source.
International Competitiveness and Monetary Policy: Strategic Policy and Coordination with
a Production Relocation Externality
Paul R. Bergin and Giancarlo Corsetti
NBER Working Paper No. 19356
August 2013
JEL No. F41

                                             ABSTRACT

Can a country gain international competitiveness by the design of optimal monetary stabilization rules?
This paper reconsiders this question by specifying an open-economy monetary model encompassing
a ‘production relocation externality,’ developed in trade theory to analyze the benefits from promoting
entry of domestic firms in the manufacturing sector. In a macroeconomic context, this externality provides
an incentive for monetary authorities to trade-off output gap with pro-competitive profit stabilization.
While helping manufacturing firms to set competitively low prices, optimal pro-competitive stabilization
nonetheless results in stronger terms of trade, due to the change in the country’s specialization and
composition of exports. The welfare gains from international policy coordination are large relative
to the case of self-oriented, strategic conduct of stabilization policy. Empirical evidence confirms that
the effects of monetary policy design on the composition of trade predicted by the theory are present
in data and are quantitatively important.


Paul R. Bergin
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Ave.
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
prbergin@ucdavis.edu

Giancarlo Corsetti
Faculty of Economics
Cambridge University
Sidgwick Avenue
CB3 9DD Cambridge, Cambs
United Kingdom
giancarlo.corsetti@gmail.com
1. Introduction
         This paper reconsiders how monetary and exchange rate policy can raise welfare by
promoting a country’s international competitiveness, contributing a novel approach to the
analysis of macro stabilization in open economies. Drawing on trade theory, we allow for
incomplete specialization across two tradable sectors, one of which produces differentiated
goods with a production externality. Manufacturing industries supplying differentiated goods
with monopoly power are typically associated with price stickiness and sunk (entry) investment,
arguably making them more sensitive to macroeconomic uncertainty than other industries. We
show that optimal monetary stabilization policy can create favorable conditions for such
industries, leading to potentially large welfare gains. We provide empirical evidence that the
effects of monetary policy design on the composition of trade predicted by the theory are
present in data and are quantitatively meaningful.
         The conventional approach to competitiveness in the Keynesian tradition focuses on
ex-post currency devaluation, as a way to lower the relative cost of production over the span of
time that prices and wages are sticky. In line with the New Open Economy Macroeconomics
(NOEM) or the new-Keynesian literature, we instead focus on the implications of monetary
rules and exchange rate regimes on firms’ entry and price setting. In the existing NOEM and
new-Keynesian literature, however, the key policy trade-off is between stabilizing the output
gap and strengthening the terms of trade, i.e., raising the international price of home goods ---
seemingly the opposite of improving competitiveness.1 In contrast, this paper shows that
monetary policy can improve welfare by taking advantage of price stickiness to have a long-
lasting effect on the competitiveness of manufacturing firms, and thereby shape the
composition of a country’s exports and comparative advantage. In this perspective, we
emphasize the benefits from ‘competitive stabilization’ over those of ‘competitive devaluations’

1
  In virtually all contributions to the new-open economy macroeconomics and New-Keynesian literature,
the trade-off between output gap and exchange rate stabilization is mainly modeled emphasizing a terms-
of-trade externality (see Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000) and Corsetti and Pesenti (2001,2005), Canzoneri et al.
(2005), as well as Benigno and Benigno (2003), and Corsetti et al. (2010) among others). Provided the
demand for exports and imports is relatively elastic, an appreciation of the terms of trade of manufacturing
allows consumers to substitute manufacturing imports for domestic manufacturing goods, without
appreciable effects in the marginal utility of consumption, while reducing the disutility of labor. The
opposite is true if the trade elasticity is low.

                                                     1
studied in the early literature. We believe that our approach to the assessment and design of
monetary policy in open economies is more closely in line with actual policy debates, often
reflecting concerns regarding international competitiveness.
         Essential to our approach is a well-defined structure of comparative advantage, that we
model allowing for more than one sector producing tradable goods (as is common in trade but
not so in macroeconomics), and heterogeneous sectoral responses to monetary stabilization.
We borrow a two-sector market structure from the international trade literature, embedding it in
a stochastic general equilibrium macro model. In the first sector, which we identify with
manufacturing, monopolistically competitive firms produce differentiated goods subject to
trade costs.2 In this sector, productivity is subject to country-specific stochastic shocks, and
firms are required to pay their fixed entry cost and set their prices (here in producer currency
units) before the realization of these shocks.3 In the second sector, goods may not be
differentiated, and the degree of nominal rigidities and trade costs are lower. For the sake of
deriving insightful analytical results, but without loss of generality, we posit that firms in this
sector produce a homogeneous good under perfect competition, implying price flexibility, and
assume away both trade and entry costs altogether.4
         While each of these model features on its own is standard in its respective trade or
macro literature, in combination they have key novel implications for both empirical and
theoretical open-economy analysis. Because the monopolistically competitive (manufacturing)
sector must invest in differentiated products and set prices ahead of production, entry and
pricing decisions are quite sensitive to uncertainty about demand and marginal costs. As shown

2
  The assumption that trade costs are associated with the monopolistic sector is a long-standing feature in
trade literature, and is the foundation of the home market effect of Krugman (1980), where
monopolistically competitive firms locate production in the larger market in order to minimize exposure to
trade costs. Empirical literature is inconclusive whether differentiated industries are associated with greater
trade costs (Davis, 1998). Later work shows this assumption is not strictly essential; what is necessary is a
sector where labor can move to if it moves out of the differentiated manufacturing sector (Krugman and
Venables, 1999).
3
  In a macro perspective, it is a logical as well as standard assumption to associate both sunk entry costs and
sticky prices with the monopolistically competitive sector: monopoly profits are required to pay for sunk
costs of entry, while monopoly power is a natural assumption in models where firms chooses prices.
4
  The assumption that firms in the second sector produce a homogenous good facilitates the derivation of
anaytical results, but it is not crucial for our results. As shown in the text, these hinge on differential trade
costs affecting goods produced in the two sectors. They would not be affected by modeling
monopolistically competitive firms in the second sector.

                                                       2
in previous work carried out in a closed economy context (such as Bergin and Corsetti (2008)
and Bilbiie, Ghironi and Melitz (2008)), uncertainty can imply a ‘risk premium’ in a firm’s
prices.5 A monetary policy that is effective in eliminating this risk induces firms to set a lower
price on average, fostering the comparative advantage of the home country in producing and
exporting differentiated manufacturing goods. Such a policy encourages entry of home
manufacturing firms at the expense of the foreign country, which in turn produces relatively
more non-differentiated good, amplifying the shift in trade patterns. In the presence of a
production relocation externality (as developed in Ossa 2011 in a trade context), acquiring a
larger share of the world production of differentiated goods produces welfare gains due to
savings on trade costs.
           Empirical work confirms a key testable implication of our analysis, that countries in a
fixed exchange rate regime, all else equal, will tend to specialize away from differentiated
goods supplied under imperfect competition and subject to entry costs and nominal rigidities,
relative to the countries with an independent monetary policy. This is due to the fact that fixed
exchange rate regimes prevent optimal stabilization of macro shocks. We conduct panel
regressions of exports on a measure of product differentiation interacted with the exchange rate
regime. We find that this interaction term has a highly robust and quantitatively significant
effect consistent with our theory. These results are entirely distinct from the macroeconomic
literature testing the effect of exchange rate volatility on the volume of exports, which are often
inconclusive; we instead provide evidence that the exchange rate regime has appreciable effects
on the composition of exports.
           A specific contribution of our analysis concerns the design of optimal monetary
stabilization policy and gains from cross border cooperation. Namely, the impact of monetary
policy on trade and production patterns create welfare incentives to deviate from monetary
rules that are efficient from a global perspective, defining a policy game over comparative
advantages. Strategic behavior in turn gives rise to significant beggar thy neighbor effects. In
contrast with the literature, gains from international policy coordination are a large share of the
overall welfare benefits from monetary stabilization.

5
    See also Corsetti and Pesenti (2005) and Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000).

                                                      3
           While these results are new in the NOEM literature, our analysis nonetheless suggests
an insightful reinterpretation of the main findings in this literature regarding the relevance of
the policy trade-off between output gap stabilization and terms of trade improvement. In our
model, the optimal policy is aimed at lowering the terms of trade specific to the manufacturing
sector, to gain competitive advantage in the production of differentiated goods. However, since
markups are higher in this sector, the shift in composition of home production and exports
toward manufacturing results in an improvement in the overall terms of trade, defined as the
trade-weighted average of differentiated and non-differentiated imports and exports.
           Our results are closely related to the production relocation externality studied in a trade
context by Ossa (2011). Our paper shows that this externality has a clear macroeconomic
dimension, and casts new light on its role in monetary policy analysis. Our main conclusions
could however follow from other types of externalities, shaping the welfare implications of
acquiring comparative advantage in manufacturing.
           Our model is distinct from the NOEM literature studying strategic policy and
coordination (see e.g. Benigno and Benigno (2003), Corsetti and Pesenti (2005), Corsetti et al.
(2010), Obstfeld and Rogoff (2002) and Sutherland (2004)). Not only the mechanism
producing gains from cooperation is different; these gains are larger, in terms of the overall
social benefits from monetary stabilization. Our argument is also conceptually distinct from the
conclusions of the literature assuming a traded and a non-traded goods sector (see e.g.
Canzoneri et. al 2005). Gains from coordination in this case may result from trade-offs in
stabilizing marginal costs across two sectors in each country, potentially creating stronger
cross-border spillovers than in the standard model where all goods are traded. Our work is
related to Corsetti, et. al (2007), which considers the role of the home market effect in a real
trade model, as well as Ghironi and Melitz (2005). We differ in modeling economies with two
tradable sectors, as well as considering the implications of price stickiness and monetary
policy.6


6
 There are a number of contributions studying the effects of monetary policy regimes on entry, see, e.g.,
Cavallari (2010), or the effect of exchange rate policy on trade, see, e.g., Staiger and Sykes (2010).
However, to our knowledge, no study has focused on competitiveness encompassing production relocation.

                                                    4
        The next section describes the model, and section 3 discusses the effects of monetary
policy in the model, and characterizes globally optimal stabilization rules. Section 4 traces the
implications of unilateral pegs for comparative advantage and welfare. Section 5 uses
simulations to find optimal policy rules, and discusses gains from international coordination
over a Nash equilibrium. Section 6 presents empirical evidence.


2. Model
        Consider a model of two countries, home and foreign, each with households, firms and
a government. Households derive income from supplying labor to domestic firms, and they
consume a basket of differentiated goods as well as a homogeneous good. The differentiated
good is produced by monopolistically competitive firms subject to a fixed entry cost and
iceberg trade costs. The homogeneous good is perfectly competitive and is not subject to the
costs. All goods are traded. We abstract from international trade in assets, so international trade
is balanced. However, as will be discussed below, the model specification implies that
productivity risk nonetheless will be perfectly diversified through the homogeneous sector,
making asset trade irrelevant in equilibrium. In what follows, we will focus our exposition of
the model on the home country, with the understanding that analogous expression will hold for
the foreign one. Foreign variables will be denoted with a star.


2.1 Goods market structure
     Household consumption (C) in the home country is an aggregate of n varieties of home
manufacturing goods and n* foreign varieties, as well as a homogeneous non-manufacturing
good (CD):

                                              Ct  CM ,t CD1,t ,

where
                                                                          
                                    nt                                  1
                                                       *
                                                1  nt         1
                         CM ,t      ct  h  dh   ct  f   df
                                                                      
                                   0                                  
                                                    0                 

is the index over the home and foreign varieties of manufacturing good, c(h) and c(f). The

                                                     5
corresponding price index is

                                                          PM ,t PD1,t
                                                 Pt                            ,                       (1)
                                                          1   
                                                                       1




where


                                                                                      
                                                                                         1

                                      PMt  nt pt  h         n p  f 
                                                         1       *                1 1
                                                                   t t                                  (2)

is the index over the prices of all varieties of home and foreign manufacturing goods.
        These definitions imply relative demand functions for domestic residents:

                                          ct (h)   pt  h / PMt  CMt
                                                                           
                                                                                                        (3)

                                          ct ( f )   pt  f  / PMt  CMt
                                                                           
                                                                                                        (4)

                                                   PMt C Mt   Pt C t                                  (5)

                                                PDt CDt  1    PC
                                                                    t t.                                (6)



2.2 Home household problem
        The representative home household derives utility from consumption (C), holding real
money balances (M/P), and disutility from labor (l). The household derives income by selling

labor at the nominal wage rate (W), receiving real profits from home firms   h   net of fixed

costs Wq, and interest (i) on holding domestic bonds (B), which are in zero net supply. They
pay lump-sum taxes (T).
        Household optimization for the home country may be written:
                                                    
                                                                   M 
                                           max E0   tU  Ct , lt , t 
                                                  t 0             Pt 

subject to the budget constraint:
                                 nt

                  t t  Wt lt    t  h  dh  Wt q  M t  M t 1  Bt  1  it 1  Bt 1  Tt ,
                 PC
                                 0


where utility is defined




                                                            6
                                                                    Mt
                                          Ut  ln Ct   ln              lt .
                                                                    Pt

        Defining t  PC
                       t t , optimization implies an intertemporal Euler equation:


                                            1                    1 
                                                 1  it  Et                                       (7)
                                            t                   t  1
a labor supply condition:
                                                       Wt  t                                         (8)

and a money demand condition:

                                                            1  it      
                                                 M t  t              .                             (9)
                                                            it          
        An analogous problem and first order conditions apply to the foreign household.


2.3 Home firm problem and export entry condition
        In the manufacturing sector, production is linear in labor employed by that firm:

                                                 yt  h   t lt  h  ,                             (10)

where l(h) is the labor employed by firm h, and where  represents stochastic technology
common to all production firms in the country (no productivity heterogeneity among firms).
The home firm h sets a price p(h) in domestic currency units for domestic sales. Under the
assumption of producer currency pricing, this implies a foreign currency price p*(h) for export
equal to p(h)/e, where the nominal exchange rate, e, is defined as home currency units per
foreign currency unit. Production involves a fixed cost in labor units q, paid each period.
Exports involve an iceberg trade cost,  , so that

                                       y  h   ct  h   1   t  ct*  h  .                    (11)

        Firm profits are computed as:

                        t  h   pt  h  ct  h   et pt*  h  ct*  h   Wt yt  h  /  t .   (12)

Nominal rigidities are introduced as in the New Open-Economy Macroeconomics literature, by
assuming that firms preset the price of their products before shocks are realized, and stand



                                                           7
ready to meet demand at the ongoing price for one period. Firms choose their price by
maximizing the expected discounted value of their profits

                                                                  
                                       max  E t   t  t 1  h   .
                                       pt 1  h 
                                                     t 1         

This implies the price setting function for domestic sales:

                                                      
                                         Et  t 1  t 1  
                                                    t 1  
                      pt 1  h  
                                     1      Et   t 1                                                    (13)
                                                                                        1
                                                                            t 1 
                                                        1   
                                                 1                1                                1
                     where  t 1  PM ,t 1                               *                P * M ,t 1 .
                                                                            t 1 

We assume producer currency pricing for exports, so the home firm export price is set:

                                      p*t 1  h   1    pt 1  h  / et 1                             (14)

where home export prices are set in foreign currency units.
        Given that entry into the market requires payment of a fixed cost in labor units, q, in the
period prior to production, free entry will ensure that the following entry condition holds:
                                                               
                                        Wt qt  E t  t  t1 h  .
                                                      t1      
                                                                                                            (15)


        In the second sector, where firms are assumed to produce a homogenous good, the
production function is also linear in labor:

                                                 yD ,t  D lD ,t ,                                           (16)

but productivity D is non-stochastic, and assumed to be identical across countries. It follows

that the price of the homogeneous goods is equal to marginal costs:
                                                 pD ,t  Wt / D .                                            (17)



2.4 Government
        The model abstracts from public consumption expenditure. The government uses
seigniorage revenues and taxes to finance transfers. The home government faces the budget
constraint:


                                                           8
                                          Mt M            t 1    Tt  0 .                             (18)

Monetary policy will be defined as a rule setting  as a function of productivity levels:

                                                t    t ,  * t  .                                  (19)



2.5 Market clearing
        The market clearing condition for the goods market was already given in equation (11)
above. Labor market clearing requires:
                                                 nt

                                      lM ,t   lt  h dh  nt lt  h  ,                               (20)
                                                 0


and

                                         lM ,t  lD ,t  nt 1q  lt .                                   (21)

Bond market clearing requires:

                                                       Bt  0 .                                          (22)

        Market clearing in the homogenous good sector requires:

                                        C Dt  C Dt
                                                 *
                                                     y Dt  y Dt
                                                               *
                                                                  .                                      (23)

With no trade costs in this sector, arbitrage ensures that:

                                                     PDt  et PDt* .                                     (24)

        We assume no international trade in assets, thus requiring balanced trade:
                     nt                  n*t

                      p  h  c  h dh   p  f  c  f df  p  C                    yDt   0 .
                           *   *
                          t     t                t          t                  Dt   Dt                   (25)
                     0                    0




2.6 Equilibrium definition and dynamic stability:
        Equilibrium is a sequence of the following 47 variables: C, P, c(h), c*(h), p(h), p*(h),

CM, CD, PM, PD, W, l, l(h), lD, lM, y(h), yD,   h , n, M, i ,T, B and foreign counterparts for each

of these, along with e. Of the 47 equilibrium conditions needed, 44 are given by equations (1)-
(22) and foreign counterpart, the remaining 3 by equations (23)-(25).



                                                           9
2.7 Risk sharing and exchange rate determination
         Analytical results for the exchange rate are greatly facilitated by assuming that both
economies produce the same homogeneous good with identical technology under perfect
competition. Note that, by equations (8) and (17), the exchange rate may be expressed as:

                                             p Dt         Wt           PtC t           t
                                      et                                                .           (26)
                                             p   *
                                                 Dt
                                                          Wt   *        *
                                                                       Pt C   *
                                                                              t
                                                                                        t*

The exchange rate is determined through arbitrage in the perfectly competitive sector of the
goods market. Given symmetric technology in labor input only, the law of one price implies
that nominal wages are equalized (once expressed in a common currency) across the border. By
the equilibrium condition in the labor market with linear disutility of labor, then, the exchange
rate is a function of the ratio of nominal consumption demands (and hence is the ratio of the
monetary policy stance variables).
         A key implication is that trade in the perfectly competitive good guarantees complete
risk sharing in the goods market regardless of market structure or specification of the rest of the
goods market. Rewrite the above equation as:

                                                 et Pt *                    Ct
                                                            rert                 .
                                                  Pt                        C t*

This is the risk sharing condition implied by complete asset markets for the case of log utility:
home consumption rises relative to foreign consumption only in those states of the world in
which its relative price (i.e. the real exchange rate) is weak. In our economy, risk sharing is
complete per effect of nominal wage equalization (due to trade in a single homogenous good),
even in the absence of trade in financial assets.
         Along with the real exchange rate, we report two alternative measures of international
prices. Following the trade literature, we compute the terms of trade as the ratio of ex-factory
prices set by a home firm relative to a foreign firm in the manufacturing sector:

T O T M t  pt ( h ) /  et pt* ( f )  . This measure ignores the homogeneous good, which in
                                         7




7
 This is the same definition used in Ossa (2011), though in our case it does not imply the terms of trade are
constant at unity, because monetary policy does affect factory prices. See also Helpman and Krugman
(1989), as well as Campolmi et al. (2012).

                                                           10
equilibrium may be either imported or exported. In our second measure, instead, we compute
the terms of trade taking the homogenous good into consideration. As common practice in the
production of statistics on international relative prices, this version is computed by weighting
goods with their respective expenditure shares. For example, in the case where the
homogeneous good is imported by the home country,

                             TOTSt  p(h)t /[t et p* ( f )t  1  t  pD,t ] ,

where the weight is an expenditure share:

                    t  et pt ( f )nt*1ct  f  /[et pt ( f )nt*1ct  f   pD,t  cDt  yDt ] .

        Finally, we rewrite the home entry condition (15) as a function of price setting and the
exchange rate:

                             q                                            
                                 Et  pt 1  h   t 1  pt 1  h   t 1 
                                                                        
                                                                                                                  (27)
                                                 t 1                    

where upon appropriate substitutions (detailed in the appendix)  t 1 can be written as:

                                                                                                        
                                                                                                             1
                                                                                       1   
                                                                                 1              1
                       t 1  nt 1 pt 1 (h)1  nt*1 p * t 1 ( f )1 et 1

                                                                        1
                       nt 1 pt 1 (h)1  nt*1 p * t 1 ( f )1 et 1     1          
                                                                                           1  1
                                                                                                     .

The foreign entry condition is analogously defined.
        Provided that the price setting rules can be expressed as functions of the exogenous
shocks and policy settings (a condition satisfied in several useful cases), the home and foreign
equilibrium entry conditions along with the exchange rate solution above comprise a three
equation system in the three variables: e, n and n*. This system admits analytical solutions for
several configurations of the policy rules.


2.8 Parameter values for numerical experiments
        For the numerical experiments to follow, macro parameters are taken from standard
real business cycle values:  =6 among differentiated goods (implying a price markup of 20%),

and  =0.96 to represent an annual frequency. The share of nonmanufacturing goods is set at




                                                          11
  0.5 . The parameters for money demand and labor supply are set at   1 and   1 .

Trade cost are set at  =0.1, and the fixed cost is q=0.1.
           For the purpose of deriving analytical results, we assume that productivity in each
country follows an i.i.d. log normal distribution, independent of productivity in the other
country. For simulations, the mean of productivity is set to unity in each country, and the
standard deviation of productivity is set to 0.017, which implies the standard deviation of
output used in Backus et al (1992). We set the productivity in the homogeneous sector at

D  1 .

           Parameters are set the same across countries to imply a non-stochastic steady state
symmetric between the two countries. In what follows, we will rely on analytical results when
possible, assuming a log utility function and certain policy rules. Numerical results are
nonetheless presented for a wider range of cases and variables, and computed from a second
order approximation of the stochastic model. The most original results involve policies that are
asymmetric across countries, but as a benchmark for comparison, we first present results for
symmetric policies.


3. Flexible price allocation and efficient monetary rules
           In this and the following sections, we will address the question of assessing the
consequences of alternative stabilization policy regimes on the output composition and welfare
in the two economies. We begin with a characterization of the flex-price allocation, and
establish that the consequences of nominal rigidities and the design of globally efficient
policies in our model are the same as in the baseline NOEM model.


3.1 Flexible prices
       If firms set prices after observing (productivity) shocks, with constant demand elasticity,
managers will charge a constant markup over marginal costs, which in our case coincide with
unit labor costs:

                                          t                               *t
                         1  h  
                       ptflex                             1  f 
                                                       pt*flex                 .
                                       1 t                           1  *t

                                                 12
Substituting into the entry condition (27) above, the equilibrium number of firms is:
                                                        1
                                                                                                              
                            
                                  
                                               t 1 
                                          2 * 
                                              t 
                                                               
                                                               1     1   
                                                                      1          1
                                                                                         
                                                                                         1 
                                                                                                1
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                               .
          1  nt 1
        ntflex           
                * flex
                               Et
                            q    t 1 1                                                        2(1 )
                                                                                                               
                                  1   * 
                                     t 
                                                                              
                                                 1     1    1      * 
                                                            1            1         1    t 1 
                                                                                              t 1 
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                               

Note that the number of firms is not time-varying and does not respond to productivity shocks.
This is because the number of firms is predetermined and shocks are i.i.d.8 The latter
assumption clearly facilitates many of our analytical results below. With no monetary policy

response to shocks (  t   t*  1 , as none is needed under flexible prices), the exchange rate will

be constant at et   t /  t*  1 .

         Under constant money supply, Figure 1 illustrates the dynamics of key macro variables
in response to a one standard deviation productivity shock in manufacturing good. A fall in the
price of home goods in both countries raises the demand for home goods at the global level.
The home country shifts resources away from production of the non-manufacturing good, and
concentrates production in the manufacturing good sector. In the foreign country, the opposite
occurs. Overall consumption rises in both countries.


3.2. Consequences of nominal rigidities
         Consider now the specification of the model with nominal rigidities impinging on
prices of manufacturing goods. A first important consequence is that, unless monetary policy is
contingent on shocks, preset prices would prevent the economy from achieving the allocation

characterized above. Without loss of generality, we set, as before,  t   t*  1 , implying a

constant exchange rate. ( et   t /  t*  1 ). With i.i.d. shocks, there are no dynamics in

predetermined variables such as prices and numbers of firms. We can thus solve for these




8
 Even in a case where monetary policy endogenously responds to shocks, changing the value of  t , the
number of firms is not time-varying in response to shocks. While a change in  t will affect wage level
and hence entry costs on the left side of equation (15), the wage is directly proportional to  t , which
exactly cancels the appearance of  t on the right hand side as part of the discount factor.

                                                           13
analytically. Prices are optimally preset charging the constant, equilibrium markup over
expected marginal costs:

                                                 1                                                                1 
                p tno1stab  h             Et                               p t*no1 stab  f             Et        .
                                       1         t 1                                                 1         t 1 
                                                                                                                        *



The number of firms can be computed by substituting these prices into the entry condition (27),
so to obtain:
                                                                                    
                                                      ntno1stab  nt*no1 stab         .
                                                                                     q

        With preset prices and no change in the exchange rate, there is no change in the price
index or any relative price. For a given monetary stance, there is no change in consumption
demands, and so no change in the level of production in any good. The only response to an i.i.d.
shock raising home productivity in the manufacturing sector is a fall in the level of
employment in the same sector (not compensated by a change in employment in the other
sectors of the economy).
        Table 1 reports unconditional means of variables computed from a stochastic
simulation of a second order approximation to the model. (See column 1.)


3.3. Globally efficient stabilization policy
        Since the model posits that the homogenous good sector operates under perfect
competition and flexible prices, there is no trade-off in stabilizing output across different
sectors. Hence, it is possible to replicate the flex-price allocation under a simple monetary
policy rule. That is, the monetary stance in each country moves in proportion to productivity in

the differentiated good sector:  t   t ,  t*   t* . The exchange rate in this case is not constant,

but contingent on productivity differentials. Namely. the home currency depreciates in
response to an asymmetric rise in home productivity:
                                                                         t
                                                                 et          .
                                                                          t*

This result is familiar from the classical NOEM literature assuming that prices are sticky in the
currency of the producers (Corsetti and Pesenti (2001, 2005) and Devereux and Engel (2003),

                                                                    14
among others). Endogenous exchange rate movements contribute to replicating the flexible
price equilibrium, by making home (manufacturing) goods cheaper to foreigners when the
home country is able to produce them more efficiently.
         Under the policy rules specified above, the optimal price preset by home
manufacturing firms is lower than the price firms preset in an economy with no stabilization:

                                                        
                                          1  h  
                                       ptstab                   ptno1stab  h  ,
                                                        1

                                               1           1
given that, by Jensen’s inequality, Et                              1 . Moreover, as shown in the
                                                t 1  Et  t 1 

appendix, the number of manufacturing firms is the same as the flexible price case.

                                                      1  nt 1 .
                                                             flex 9
                                                   ntstab

         In response to a productivity shock, the dynamics of the economy with an efficient
stabilization in place, shown in figure 2, are the same as for the flexible price case. With
nominal rigidities, of course, the reason why the foreign-currency price of the home
manufacturing good falls is the expansionary response of home monetary authorities, which
results in a home currency depreciation fully passed through in the import market. As in the
flex-price economy, the home country shifts resources away from production of the non-
manufacturing good and concentrates production in the manufacturing good sector. The foreign
country does the opposite. Consumption of both countries rises.
         The numerical exercise reported in Table 1 (column 2) illustrates the analytical results
above. Relative to the case of no stabilization, the effects of efficient policy are quite small in
magnitude, as is commonly found in analogous quantitative studies. Stabilization policy that is
symmetric across countries leads to a rise in the number of manufacturing firms and a rise in
overall manufacturing production, with no change in nonmanufacturing production. With
greater access to varieties, there is a small drop in the consumer price index and corresponding


9
  As discussed in the appendix, it is not possible to determine analytically whether symmetric stabilization
policies raise the number of firms compared to the no stabilization case. Simulations in table 1 show that
there is no positive effect for log utility, and a small positive effect for CES utility with a higher elasticity
of substitution. Nonetheless, we are able to provide below an analytical demonstration of asymmetric
stabilization, which is our main objective.

                                                            15
rise in the consumption index. The effects regarding the manufacturing sector coincide with
those found in Bergin and Corsetti (2008).


4. Stabilization policies and ‘competitiveness’: the case of currency pegs and deterministic
money growth rules
        The equilibrium allocation is significantly different if countries do not adopt symmetric
policy rules. To gain insight into the way our model works, we will now consider the policy
configuration of a currency peg. We posit that the home government fully stabilizes its output
gap, while the foreign country maintains its exchange rate fixed against the home currency:

 t   t , et  1 so  t*   t   t . As a related exercise, we will extend the analysis to the case

in which the foreign country keeps its money growth constant (  t*  1 ) while home carries out

its stabilization policy as above.
        Under a currency peg the optimally preset prices are:

                                                                                         t 1 
                          pt 1  h             ,          pt*1  f             Et        .
                                           1                                 1        t 1 
                                                                                            *



The equilibrium number of firms n and n* solve the following two equation-system:

                                             1              1          q
                                                                   
                                      nt 1  Ant*1 nt 1  Bnt*1    

                                            A               B          q
                                                                   
                                     nt 1  An t 1 nt 1  Bn t 1  
                                               *               *



where
                                          1                                            1
                                                                 
                                                1                                          1    .
                                                       1                                              1
                 A   Et  *t 1                        , B   Et  *t 1  
                         t 1                                     t 1  

While it is not possible to solve for the number of firms in closed form, the system does allow
one to prove that n>nflex > n* (see the appendix). Other things equal, the limit to
macroeconomic stabilization implied by a currency peg tends to reduce the size of the
manufacturing sector in the foreign country, in favor of the home country. In other words, the
country pegging its currency will tend to specialize in the homogeneous good sector.


                                                               16
          Column (4) in Table 1 reports unconditional means of variables for the currency peg
case. Our numerical exercise corroborates the claim that inefficient stabilization policy in the
country that pegs the currency leads to a higher price of foreign manufactures relative to full
stabilization in the home economy, hence raising the world demand for home manufactures.
Lower prices set by home firms translate into weaker ex-factory terms of trade reported in the

table ( T O T M  p  h  /  e p *  f   . As production of manufactures in the home country rises,

while it falls in the foreign country, the latter specializes in production of the homogeneous
good. Firm entry increases in the home county in response to the rise in demand, and it falls
correspondingly in the foreign country.
          In quantitative terms, the number of home manufacturing firms rises 1.25 percent
relative to the no stabilization case, while the number of manufacturing firms in the foreign
country falls by an equal amount. The home country now has 2.5% more domestic
manufacturing firms compared to the foreign country. Relative to the symmetric policy case
shown in column (2), the impact of a currency peg on the allocation is two orders of magnitude
larger.
          The ability to carry out optimal stabilization policy gives the home country a
comparative advantage in producing the good that is sensitive to shocks and uncertainty. In this
respect, our results are close in line with the production relocation argument of Ossa (2011),
whereas ‘tariff policy’ is replaced by ‘stabilization policy.’ Home stabilization policy benefits
the home manufacturing sector more when there is a foreign country passively pegging its
currency, from which it can draw manufacturing demand. The home country is better able to
specialize in the manufacturing industry when there is a foreign country to which it can export
manufacturing goods and import the nonmanufacturing goods that it no longer produces at
home.
          The welfare implications of specialization in manufacturing goods also parallel the
trade literature. Because manufacturing goods are subject to trade costs, home consumers
benefit from saving on these costs and thus from a lower consumption price index, when these
goods are mostly produced domestically. The relatively lower cost of consumption in the home


                                                  17
country is reflected in the depreciation of the real exchange rate ( rer  eP * / P ) reported in
Table 1. With a lower home price index, consumption and welfare rise accordingly. In
consumption units, relative to the case of symmetric monetary policies, the welfare gain is
approximately 50% larger when the home country pursues unilateral stabilization, as reported
in the table.
        However, our model also yields a key result typically not discussed by the trade
literature. While the terms of trade of manufacturing worsen for the country that stabilizes its
output gap completely, its terms of trade including the homogenous good, TOTS, actually
improve. This is due to a composition effect: the home country exports more manufacturing,
and imports the homogenous goods. The improvement in the overall terms of trade corresponds
to a much higher consumption (utils) to labor ratio, relative to the pegging country.
        It is also worth noting that, in our model, a depreciation of the nominal exchange rate in
the short run is systematically correlated with a worsening of the terms of trade, a piece of
evidence emphasized by Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000). Given the number of firms in the market,
and the fact that their price is preset in domestic currency, the foreign-currency price of
domestic products cannot but fluctuate one-to-one with the exchange rate within each period.
The improvement in the country’s terms of trade at the core of our results, indeed, stems from
the effects of monetary stabilization rules on average manufacturing prices, firm entry, and
thus the composition of a country’s exports and imports over time.
        The results just described are not significantly different, if we replace the currency peg
with the assumption that the foreign country pursues a non-contingent monetary rule, e.g. keeps

money constant (  t   t ,  t*  1 ). Comparing columns 3 and 4 in the table makes it clear that all

variables move in the same direction. Under a peg, however, the fact that the foreign country
shadows the home monetary stance means that its producers face some noise in demand and
marginal costs (unrelated to domestic productivity), which is not there if the central bank just
follows a money growth rule. Foreign residents are better off under the latter arrangement
(column 3) than under a peg (column 4).




                                                 18
5. Strategic policy interactions and the benefits from international coordination
         The analysis so far emphasizes that a production relocation externality imbues policy
with beggar-thy-neighbor implications. We now consider gains from international policy
coordination, relative to a Nash equilibrium. To this end, without loss of generality, we write a
general form for the policy rule, nesting the cases considered above:

                                                                   t   t  t*
                                                                             1       2

                                                                                                       (28)
                                                                   *t   t*  t .
                                                                             *    *
                                                                             1    2




The full stabilization case above corresponds to the case  1   1* =1,  2   2* =0. The no-

stabilization case corresponds to  1   1* =  2   2* =0.

         We first establish that the symmetric full stabilization case is globally efficient, namely,

we verify that  1   1* =1,  2   2* =0 is a solution to the problem:

                                    Max                  E0  ln Ct  Lt    ln Ct*  L*t   .   (29)
                                 1 , 1* , 2 , 2*


Figures 3a and 3b report the sum of the unconditional means of home and foreign welfare for
various values of the two policy parameters. The figures show that a perturbation up or down in
either policy parameter from the values for the full stabilization case produces lower world
welfare. In line with the literature, in the presence of appropriate production subsidies

compensating for the markup driving a wedge between prices and marginal costs, the full
stabilization case would coincide with the social planner optimum.
        Next we establish that the case of efficient stabilization policy is not a Nash equilibrium.
To this goal, we verify whether  1 =1,  2 =0 is a solution to the home policy maker problem:

                                                       Max            E0  ln Ct  Lt                 (30)
                                                        1 , 2


under the assumption that foreign policy parameters are  1* =1,  2* =0. This is equivalent to

testing whether there is an incentive for one of the countries to defect from the efficient
solution. As expected, Figures 4 and 5 show that the home country can unilaterally raise its
own welfare relative to the efficient equilibrium allocation if it mutes the response to domestic
productivity disturbances, i.e. if it lowers the value of  1 holding  2 constant at 0. This means


                                                                       19
that when the home country experiences a rise (fall) in productivity, it responds with a smaller
(larger) monetary expansion than in the symmetric, efficient stabilization case. This translates
into reduced exchange rate volatility. A similar conclusion applies to the parameter  2 when

studied in isolation, holding  1 constant at 1. The home country can raise home welfare as well

as the number of domestic manufacturing firms if it raises money supply at the same time as
the foreign country expands in response to a positive own productivity shock. The effect is
clearly that of preventing the exchange rate from moving in favor of the foreign manufacturing
sector.
          The figures also show two important results. First, the highest home welfare coincides
with the maximum expansion of the home manufacturing sectors, in terms of the number of
manufacturing firms which are active in the country. Second, while curbing exchange rate
volatility is beneficial over some range, moving towards a currency peg becomes increasing

detrimental to comparative advantage and welfare. Both drop substantially as  1 approaches 0

or  2 approaches 1, consistent with the analysis in the previous section.

          Numerical results describing the effect of an optimal unilateral deviation from the
globally efficient rules are shown in Column 7 of Table 1. Relative to column 2, the home
country has more manufacturing firms and output. Its real exchange rate and its terms of trade
for manufacturing are on average weaker. Yet, its overall terms of trade are stronger, enabling
residents to consume more at each level of employment.
          To support the claim that the production relocation externality is the principal driver of
the incentive to defect from the efficient equilibrium, we run two versions of the model without
entry and/or iceberg costs. Results are shown in column 8 and 9 of Table 1. In either case, a
terms-of-trade externality creates an incentive for policymakers to deviate from the globally
efficient rules, but the deviation is extremely small: the allocation is approximately identical to
the one in column 2. On the other hand, running the model without entry, but imposing an
asymmetric production structure with n and n* set at the same level as in column 3, produces
large welfare differences relative to the symmetric case in column 2. This exercise confirms
that saving on trade costs is the main source of welfare gains in the model.


                                                 20
        To find the Nash equilibrium, we iterate over the grid search, where at each iteration
the foreign policy parameters are updated to the optimal home policy parameters from the

previous round. We find a Nash equilibrium for  1   1* =0.66,  2   2* =0.34. Figure 6

illustrates the macroeconomic dynamics following a home positive productivity shock under

the Nash policies. Note that, compared to the efficient stabilization case (  1   1* = 1,  2   2*

= 0), each country expands by less. The equilibrium is characterized by understabilization at
the global level.
        The mechanics by which, in a Nash, policymakers deviate from globally optimal rules
is well understood (see e.g. Corsetti and Pesenti 2005). It is best illustrated by noting that,
under the full stabilization case, marginal costs are completely stabilized, and then tracing the
consequences of uncertainty for price setting and entry. While we refer to the appendix for a
detailed derivation, we can provide an intuitive account as follows. We have seen that, in our
model, monetary policy can bring the economy to operate at its flex-price level, essentially
affecting nominal demand and wages to ensure that firms’ markups are at their equilibrium
level: policymakers expand the monetary stance in states of the world in which productivity is
high, and contract it when productivity is low. Suppose we start in this world, and consider
the effect of under-stabilization. A moderate degree of under-stabilization means that, in high
productivity states, demand is relatively low, but costs are even lower: markups thus increase
relative to the flex-price level. Conversely, in low productivity states, demand and costs
remain relatively high, reducing markups below equilibrium. In other words, under-
stabilization tends to expand markups in high productivity states, and squeeze them in low
productivity states. This is bad for expected discounted profits at the firm level. By presetting
lower prices, however, the firms can optimally compensate, at least in part, for monetary
under-stabilization. At the margin, lower average prices allow the firm to rebalance markups
across states of nature, raising revenues and profits in good times. This is essentially the
mechanism underlying the (risk) premium in the optimal pricing formula.
        Because the social planner optimum is not a Nash equilibrium, there is an opportunity
to benefit from international policy coordination, as a way to enforce the social planner policies.


                                                  21
Column 6 of table 1 reports the unconditional means of variables under the Nash policy rule. If
we compute the welfare gains from policy in terms of a percentage increase in steady state
consumption units (x):

                                                              
                            E0U 1 x C no stab , Lno stab  E 0U C stab , Lstab   
and compare the gains from the social planner optimum and the Nash equilibrium, we find that
the gain from the social planner exceeds that of the Nash by 40%. In other words, the
additional gain from coordination over Nash is 2/3 of the gain from optimal stabilization done
unilaterally.
        This result on the benefits from coordination contrasts sharply with a vast body of
literature, which finds the gain from coordination to be exceedingly small, when not nil. By
way of example, in the models of Corsetti and Pesenti (2005) and Devereux and Engel (2003),
with which our model shares many features, there is no benefit from coordination. In our model,
under the same assumption, the introduction of firm entry and a production relocation
externality changes this conclusion.
        Our results also contrast with Obstfeld and Rogoff (2002), which stresses that policy
coordination has no benefit under the assumption of log utility, whether prices are preset in the
producers’ currency or in the local currency.10 Our paper offers a counterexample, where there
are gains from coordination even under log utility. The difference is that the production
relocation externality provides a first-order benefit to a country from defecting from the social
planner equilibrium, where there was no such first-order effect in the model of Obstfeld and
Rogoff (2002).
        Clearly the key reason that our model alters the result of preceding literature is the
existence of a production relocation externality in a two (tradable) sector economy. The
production relocation externality was introduced in the trade literature in Ossa (2011), to
provide a rationale for tariff reciprocity, in contrast to the classical optimal tariff argument.
Ossa argued that a focus on tariffs as a way to manipulate a country’s terms of trade misses the
primary motivation for strategic protection policies, that is, to encourage (or prevent) relocation

10
   Moreover, even if coordination produces gains under more general CRRA preferences, these gains are
tiny in comparison with the gains from moving from constant money supply to policy responding to shocks.

                                                   22
of production activity. We make the same argument here in a constructive critique of micro-
founded macro models. As shown above, the beggar-thy-neighbor effects of production
relocation alter the incentive for strategic monetary policy behavior, and hence the benefits for
monetary policy coordination.
         Our model hence differs from theories of cooperation based on a terms of trade
externality, as in Benigno and Benigno (2003) and Sutherland (2004), which essentially builds
on the optimal tariff argument (see Corsetti and Pesenti 2001). The standard argument is that
policymakers can raise welfare under elastic demand for exports, if they improve the terms of
trade; this lowers the disutility of labor while allowing consumers to substitute toward foreign
goods. Our result differs in two key respects. Firstly, we model a different mechanism: the
production relocation externality is based on the benefits of firm entry in terms of lower trade
costs. Secondly, this mechanism reverses the sign of optimal policy. In our model, under elastic
demand for exports, it is optimal to mute monetary policy responses to own productivity
shocks, in order to lower the mean level of the terms of trade in manufacturing. A weaker real
exchange rate and lower prices make home manufacturing goods more competitive and
encourages entry. In the model specification featuring a standard terms of trade externality (see
Sutherland 2004), the policy prescription is just the opposite. Under elastic foreign demand,
policymakers overstabilize domestic productivity shocks, seeking to drive the manufacturing
terms of trade up.11


6. Empirical evidence
         To carry out an empirical exploration of our main argument, we focus on a key testable
implication of the model derived in Section 4: countries with monetary policy focused on
domestic macro stabilization will have greater specialization of production and export in
differentiated products, relative to countries with monetary policy driven instead by the
objective of maintaining a fixed exchange rate. In summary, taking the U.S. as the base


11
  In a model similar to ours without the competitive sector, Sutherland (2004) shows that the optimal
deviations from globally optimal rules prescribes  1  1 . Simulation of a version of our model that
excludes the competitive sector replicates this result.

                                                      23
country, we run panel regressions to test whether countries with independent monetary policy
tend to have a greater share of their exports to the U.S. in industries classified as differentiated.
Regressions will be of two types: pooled country-sector analysis first, followed by country-
level analysis.


6.1 Data construction and description
           A key step in our analysis is to identify exports in differentiated industries. Rauch
(1999) provides a useful classification of 4-digit SITC industries in terms of the degree of
differentiation among products. Some products are traded on organized exchanges, and some
others have reference prices published in trade journals. Those products for which neither is
true are classified as differentiated. Roughly 58% of the industries fall into the differentiated
category, and they represent somewhat above one half of the value of U.S. imports. Let D I Fi

represent the Rauch classification of industry i, taking a value of 1 for a differentiated industry,
and 0 otherwise.
           Trade data come from the World Trade Flows Database (see Feenstra, et al., 2005).
Exports to the U.S. are available disaggregated by country and by four-digit industry, on an
annual basis 1972-2004. We use notation xijt to represent the dollar value of exports in industry

i from country j to the U.S. in year t, and we take logs.12
           The final key ingredient is a classification of monetary policy regime. The International
Monetary Fund produces a de facto classification of exchange rate regimes based upon the
observed degree of exchange rate flexibility and the existence of formal or informal
commitments to exchange rate paths. The definition of peg includes countries with no separate
legal tender, currency board arrangements, exchange rate bands, or crawling pegs; this excludes
countries classified as managed floating and independent floating. Let the index PEGjt, take a
value of 1 for a country j with some form of fixed exchange rate in period t, and let it take a 0
for counties with a flexible exchange rate. For the sake of robustness, we will also consider the




12
     Before taking logs, industries with zero trade value are replaced by a value of 1.

                                                        24
classification system of Shambaugh (2004), which identifies pegging countries as those where
interest rates systematically follow the interest rate of a base country.
           The set of countries covered both by the trade data and exchange rate classification
number 164. The set of sectors covered both by the trade data and the Rauch index number 773.
The sample years are determined by the availability of U.S. disaggregated import data,
covering the period 1972-2004.


6.2 Pooled country-sector analysis
           We consider two types of panel regression analysis. The first focuses on exports
disaggregated at the four-digit industry level. The baseline specification is
                          log xijt   0  1 PEG jt  DIFit   2 PEG jt   i   j   t   ijt   (31)

where PEG takes the value of 1 for a fixed exchange rate and 0 otherwise, and DIF takes the
value of 1 for a differentiated industry and 0 otherwise. Hence, the interaction term takes a
value of 1 only for exports in a differentiated sector by a country that had a fixed exchange rate
in that year. We also allow for various configurations of fixed effects to control for unmeasured
factors specific to a country, time period, and sector. Given that DIF varies only by sector, it is
subsumed in the sector fixed effect and does not need to appear in the regression.
           The theoretical model predicts that  1  0 . Results in Table 2 support this prediction

with a high degree of statistical significance.13 Comparing magnitudes of coefficients in the full
sample (column 1), it appears that when a given country adopts a fixed exchange rate, this
raises exports in non-differentiated industries by about 10 percent; however for differentiated
industries this effect is more than cancelled out by the negative effect of the interaction term, so
that exports of differentiated goods instead fall on net by about 10 percent. We conclude that a
peg shifts the composition of a country’s exports toward non-differentiated goods.
           It is standard in cross-sectional regressions of trade composition to include controls for
other determinants of comparative advantage, such as explicit measures of factor abundance of
a country and factor intensity of an industry. Our macroeconomic dataset and regression


13
     Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and are clustered.

                                                           25
specification are unusual in that they include variation in the time dimension. This permits us to
use a fixed effect that interacts country and sector as a comprehensive way to control for other
determinants of comparative advantage that do not vary over time. Table 3 shows that our
result is robust to this specification. We also include a fixed effect interacting country with year,
which is useful for controlling for the effects of macroeconomic variables such as exchange
rate level and current account. For example, a country abandoning a peg, say after a currency
crisis, might suddenly devalue and raise its level of exports, which might affect the export mix.
The interaction fixed effect is a comprehensive means of controlling for these and other
conceivable effects of time-varying macroeconomic variables that affect all sectors of a
country’s exports.
        The remaining columns of tables 2 and 3 show the result is robust to alternative
samples. One concern may be that countries adopt a fixed exchange rate because they are
endowed with oil or other commodities, which are invoiced in foreign currency. One way to
check this is to exclude Opec members and other large oil exporters from the data set (column
2) and to exclude fuel from the set of export industries (SITC categories beginning with 3, see
column 7).14 Both sets of estimations continue to strongly support our claim.
        The result is also robust to limiting the sample to more developed countries, with
cutoffs in per-capital income of $2000, $5000 and $10,000. It is also robust to a sample of just
manufacturing industries (SITC categories beginning with of 5 and higher). Although we
phrase the discussion of our model in the preceding sections focusing on the choice between
‘manufacturing’ and ‘non-manufacturing’ goods, the empirical content of our theory clearly
requires a finer classification. By the logic of the model, we should distinguish manufacturing
goods with a different degree of product differentiation, entry and trade costs. Finally, the
result also is robust to using the Shambaugh classification of exchange rate regime.




14
  The following countries are excluded as a result: Algeria, Angola, Ecuador, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya,
Nigeria, Norway, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela.

                                                    26
6.3 Country-level analysis
        The second analysis we carry out is at the aggregate country level. The dependent
variable in this case is the share of differentiated goods in total exports of a country. We adopt
the following differentiation index. For country j in year t, we define:

                                       SDIF jt 
                                                    DIF  x
                                                        i       i     ijt
                                                                            .
                                                     x     i   ijt


The index takes values on the continuous interval between 0 and 1. Note that while in our first
regressions, DIFi did not vary by country or time, SDIFjt varies both over countries and years
due to variation in the trade weights. The regression specification is now
                               SDIF jt   0  1 PEG jt   j   t   jt .                 (32)

We also include controls for country and year fixed effects.
        The model predicts  1  0 : the share of a country’s exports in differentiated goods falls

when it adopts a fixed exchange rate policy. Results in table 4 support this prediction. Baseline
estimates in column 1 indicate that, when a country adopts a peg, the share of its exports in
differentiated goods falls 6 percentage points. Given that for the typical country, differentiated
goods account for about half of its exports, the estimated coefficient suggests that the effect of
pegging the currency on the pattern of specialization and trade is economically meaningful.
        Our result is robust to the various checks considered previously for the pooled
regression. In addition, because we cannot include fixed effects that interact country and year,
we include explicit controls for the macroeconomic variables discussed above that might affect
trade composition: real exchange rate level, current account, and indicators for a country in a
currency or banking crisis. The result is robust to these additional controls.


7. Conclusion
        According to a widespread view in policy and academic circles, monetary policy can
contribute to national welfare by boosting the competitiveness of the domestic manufacturing
sector, with potential beggar-thy-neighbor effects. This paper revisits the received wisdom on
this issue, exploring a new direction for open-economy monetary models.


                                                   27
        The literature has so far focused on terms of trade externalities as key considerations
shaping strategic policy interactions across countries. In the standard new-Keynesian model,
optimal monetary policy essentially acts as if it pursued an ‘optimal tariff’ objective, moving
the terms of trade in favor of the domestic residents. In contrast, the main idea underlying our
approach consists of allowing for incomplete specialization in the production of two (or more)
tradable goods, with fundamental asymmetries regarding their contribution to national welfare.
In our specification, acquiring comparative advantage in the monopolistic sector producing
differentiated goods is desirable, insofar as it brings about saving in trade costs --- the main
implication of a production relocation externality. Alternative specifications could build upon
differences in market power across sectors, (knowledge) externalities and other sources of
increasing returns.
        We have shown that the standard model augmented with two tradable sectors and a
production relocation externality brings the main lessons from the literature closer to
addressing core concerns shaping the policy debate, regarding the implications of monetary and
exchange rate policies for competitiveness. Industries with monopoly power are typically
associated with sunk (entry) investment and price stickiness, arguably making them more
sensitive to macroeconomic uncertainty than other industries. By stabilizing macro shocks
affecting their marginal costs and revenues, monetary policy can attract such industries, leading
to potentially large welfare gains.
        From a domestic (non-cooperative) perspective, welfare-maximizing monetary
stabilization rules thus optimize over a trade-off between output gap stabilization, the
international competitiveness of domestic industries, and the strength of the country’s terms of
trade. Monetary rules contribute to shape domestic comparative advantage in manufacturing,
by creating conditions for domestic firms to charge low average prices on their exports and so
acquire a larger share of world demand for manufacturing. In spite of low domestic
manufacturing prices, however, per effect of a changing composition of output and exports
towards high markup goods, the country actually improves its overall terms of trade. Because
of strong beggar-thy-neighbor effects associated with strategic deviations from the globally



                                                28
efficient rule, we find sizable gains from international policy coordination relative to the case
of opportunistic conduct of monetary policy.
        Our analysis also provides a novel perspective on the benefits of alternative exchange
rate regimes. In our stylized model, from a country’s vantage point, it is beneficial to pursue a
stabilization policy that contains (fundamental) exchange rate volatility relative to the
benchmark case of complete output gap stabilization. Yet, fixing the exchange rate is not
optimal. Critical views of currency pegs typically emphasize the costs of giving up the ability
to respond to shocks with ex-post monetary expansion and currency depreciation, boosting
domestic and external demand. Our analysis unveils a different dimension of the same problem,
which consists of the policymakers’ ability to influence firms’ pricing policies, contributing to
the country’s competitiveness. In our analysis, adopting a currency peg has a negative effect on
a country’s comparative advantage in the production of differentiated goods, a proposition that
finds support in our explorative empirical analysis.
        Monetary policy of course cannot be expected to play the same pivotal role as real
factors, such as research and development, investment in human and physical capital, market
structure, taxation and the like, in determining a country’s competitiveness. Nonetheless, the
theoretical and empirical results from our analysis suggest that its potential role is far from
negligible, and may be larger than the standard welfare gains from stabilization in the monetary
policy literature.




                                               29
References
Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe and Finn E. Kydland, 1992. “International Real Business
Cycles,“ Journal of Political Economy 100, 745-775.

Benigno, Gianluca and Pierpaolo Benigno, 2003. “Price Stability in Open Economies,”
Review of Economic Studies 70, 743-764.

Bergin, Paul and Giancarlo Corsetti, 2008. “The Extensive Margin and Monetary Policy,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 55, 1222-1237.

Bilbiie, Florin O., Fabio Ghironi, and Marc J. Melitz, 2008. “Monetary Policy and Business
Cycles with Endogenous Entry and Product Variety,” in Acemoglu, D., K. S. Rogoff, and M.
Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2007, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, 299-353.

Campolmi, Alessia, Harald Fadinger, and Chiara Forlati, 2012. “Trade Policy: Home Market
Effect Versus Terms-of-trade Externality, forthcoming in the Journal of International
Economics.

Canzoneri, Matthew B. Robert E. Cumby and Behzad Diba, 2005. “The Need for
International Policy Coordination; What’s old, what’s new, what’s yet to come?” Journal of
International Economics 66, 363-384.

Cavallari, Lilia, 2010. "Exports and Foreign Direct Investments in an Endogenous-Entry
Model with Real and Nominal Uncertainty," Journal of Macroeconomics 32, 300-313.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc, 2010. “Optimal Monetary Policy in
Open Economies,” Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol III, ed by B. Friedman and M.
Woodford, 861-933.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Philippe Martin and Paolo Pesenti, 2007. "Productivity, Terms of Trade
and the `Home Market Effect'," Journal of International Economics 73(1), pages 99-127.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Paolo Pesenti, 2001. “Welfare and Macroeconomic
Interdependence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 421-446.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Paolo Pesenti, 2005. “International Dimensions of Optimal Monetary
Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(2), 281-305

Davis, Donald R, 1998. “The Home Market, Trade and Industrial Structure,” American
Economic Review 88, 1264-1276.

Devereux, Mick and Charles Engel, 2003. “Monetary Policy in the Open Economy Revisited:
Price Setting and Exchange Rate Flexibility,” Review of Economic Studies 70, 765-783.

Feenstra, Robert C., Robert E. Lipisey, Haizan Deng, Alyson, C. Ma and Hengyong Mo,
2005. “World Trade Flows, “ NBER Working Paper 11040.


                                             30
Ghironi, Fabio and Marc J. Melitz, 2005. "International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics
with Heterogeneous Firms," The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3), 865-915.

Helpman, Elhanan and Paul Krugman, 1989. Trade Policy and Market Structure, MIT Press.

Krugman , Paul, 1980. “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,”
American economic Review 70, 950-59.

Krugman, Paul and Anthony J. Venables, 1999. “How Robust is the Home Market Effect?”
Manuscript MIT.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, 2000. “New directions for stochastic open economy
models”, Journal of International Economics 50, 117-154.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, 2002. “Global Implications of Self-Oriented
National Monetary Rules,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 503-535.

Ossa, Ralph. 2011, “A “New Trade” Theory of GATT/WTO Negotiations,” Journal of
Political Economy 119, 122-152.

Rauch, James E., 1999. “Networks versus Markets in International Trade,” Journal of
International Economics 48, 7–35.

Staiger, Robert W. and Alan O. Sykes, 2010. “’Currency Manipulation’ and World Trade,”
World Trade Review 9(04), 583-627.

Shambaugh, Jay C., 2004. “The Effect of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 301-352.

Sutherland, Alan, 2004. “International Monetary Policy Coordination and Financial Market
Integration,” manuscript.




                                            31
                                                           Appendix:

1. Entry condition:

Substituting (12) into (15) and simplifying:
                              W                                                W                
Wt q  Et   t   pt 1  h   t 1  ct 1  h    et 1 pt*1  h   1    t 1  ct*  h   
                                                                                                      
            t 1              t 1                                            t 1            
Under producer currency pricing of exports:
                              W                                                     W                  
Wt q  Et   t   pt 1  h   t 1  ct 1  h    1    pt 1  h   1    t 1  ct*1  h   
             t 1             t 1                                                  t 1             
                              W                                              
Wt q  Et   t   pt 1  h   t 1   ct 1  h   1    ct*1  h    
            t 1              t 1                                          
Using demand equations for CM and c(h), as well as definition of PM:
                                                                                                                                                  
              t                                                                                                             P * t 1  *   
                                                             
                                  Wt 1    pt 1  h  
                                                                                                                            
                                                                  Pt 1                      1  p t 1  h  / et 1 
          
Wt q  E t             p h                                          C t 1  1                               *               
            t 1   t 1       t 1    PM ,t 1        PMt 1                               P * M ,t 1          P Mt 1 
                                                                                                                                           C t 
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                             
                                                               n p (h)1  n * p ( f )1   1 P C                               
           t                        Wt 1                     t 1 t 1        t 1 t 1           t 1 t 1
                                                                                                                                       
                         pt 1  h           pt 1  h   
                                                            
Wt q  Et                                                                                                                              
               t 1                  t 1                  1    et 1  nt 1 p t 1 (h)  nt 1 p t 1 ( f )  P t 1C t   
                                                                             1          *        1 *     *          1 1 *  *
                                                                                                                                    
Under log utility, where Wt  t and PC                  t t  t , this becomes equation (27).




2. Entry under full stabilization
Substitute prices, pt 1  h   p * t 1  f     1   , and policy rules (    ,    ) into
                                                                                             *   *



(27) and simplify:
                                      1                  1                             1                     1
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                   1
  q                                              1                 1   t 1                      
        Et  nt 1  nt 1  *  1      1     *   nt 1  *  1     nt 1  
                        *        t 1                                                                       t 1            1 *

                          t 1                     
                                                                                t 1              t 1                    
                                                                                                                                   
            
Impose symmetry across countries:
            t 1                                                                                                    
                                    1                 1                             1                                   1
                                                 1                  1   t 1          t 1  1
                                        1      1     *    *  1     1 
                                                                                                                       1
nt 1        Et  1 
         q    * t 1                                              t 1     t 1                           
                 
                                             1
                                                                                              
         
                  
                                  
                             2   *t 1 
                                   t 1 
                                                  1     1   
                                                               1
                                                                              
                                                                             1
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
nt 1        Et
         q    t 1 1                                                          2(1 )
                                                                                               
                 1   * 
                    t 1 
                                       1     1      * 
                                                  1
                                                                    
                                                                   1       t 1 
                                                                             t 1 
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
Which is the same as for the flexible price case.

To compare to the no stabilization case, write this as



                                                                 32
   1  nt 1
ntstab           Et  t 1
         no stab

                                            1
                        
                 2   *t 1 
                          
                        t 1 
                                              1
                                                  
                                     1     1   
                                                          1
                                                                               
where =                1                                        2(1 )
              
         1   *t 1 
               t 1 
                               
                             1     
                                    1
                                         1   
                                                  1
                                                      
                                                          t 1 
                                                        * 
                                                         t 1 
                                                                    
             1  nt 1
Note that ntstab           if Et  t 1  1 . However  t 1 switches from a concave function of
                   no stab



 t 1  *t 1 to a convex function near the symmetric steady state value of  t 1  * t 1  1 . Hence
we cannot apply Jensen’s inequality to determine whether E t  t 1  1 . This finding reflects the
fact that the effects of symmetric stabilization are small. Our analysis, nonetheless, will show
that the effects of asymmetric stabilization can be large.


3. Consider case of fixed exchange rate rule:

Substitute prices and policy rules (    * ,      (so e  1) ) into (27):
                                                            *


                                                                1                                          1
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                          
                                             n                                                                                               
                                                                                            Et  *   1    
                                                                                                                               
                                                                         nt 1 
                                                                            *                         t 1                   1
                                            t 1    1                                                                                       
q                                                                            1            t 1                     
         
     Et                                                                                                                                         
           1              1                                                                                                            1  
                                                                                    1                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                    
                                              1   1  n     1   1  n *    E   t 1      
                                                                                                                             * t 1  
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                              
                                                                         1                                      1
                                                                  t  1                                       t  1              t
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                           
Pass through expectations and simplify
                                       1                1                                        1
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                          1
 q             *         t 1                                     *           t 1  
       nt 1  nt 1  Et  *   1       nt 1  nt 1  Et  *   1     
                                                     1                                                             1

                    t 1                       
                                                         
                                                                
                                                                                  t 1                              
                                                                                                                          
       
Do the same for the foreign entry condition:
                       1 
                                                                                                                      
                                                    1                  1                                           1
 q    t 1     *    t 1                                      *     1
                              n t 1  Et  *    nt 1 1       n t 1  Et  *t 1   nt 1 1     
                                                                   1                                           
      Et
                                                                                                                   1

     *t 1                 t 1                     
                                                                       
                                                                            
                                                                                   t 1                         
                                                                                                                      
                           
Rewrite the home and foreign conditions as fractions:
         q           1              1
                             
Home:         nt 1  Ant 1 nt 1  Bnt*1
                          *


             q       A            B
                                
Foreign:  nt 1  An t 1 nt 1  Bn t 1
                           *             *


Where we define:
                   1                           1
        t 1                     t 1  
 A   Et  *   1    , B   Et  *   1   
                             1                            1

        t 1                     t 1  
Equating across countries:


                                                                    33
      2nt 1   A  B  nt*1                        A  B  nt 1  2 ABn*t 1
                                            
n t 1    Ant*1  nt 1  Bnt*1           n t 1    An*t 1  nt 1  Bn* t 1 
 nt 1 2 AB  A  B
        
 n*t 1      2 A B
       n         2 AB  A  B
so *t 1  1 if                1
      n t 1       2 A B
Note that the denominator will be negative provided the standard deviation of shocks is small
relative to the iceberg costs, which will be true for all our cases:

                                           1 
                                                     
                                                                   0.5
     
   ln 2/ 1           1   
                       1             1
                                           /     
                                             2 
For shocks independently log normally distributed with standard deviation  so that
              1
                       2

Et  *t 1   e 2
     t 1         . For example, with  =0.1 and  =6,  must be less than 0.209. Our
calibration of  is 0.017.
      n
So *t 1  1 if 2 AB  A  B  2  A  B or AB  1
     n t 1
                              1                                       1                                     21 
                           1                            
AB   Et  *t 1   1     Et  *t 1   1      Et  *t 1  
                                                             1

         t 1                     t 1                    t 1  
For independent log normal distributions of productivity:
                   21 
   t 1  
                 e    1 since  >1
                     1  2
 Et  *  
    t 1  
We can conclude that n>n*.


4. Explaining how monetary policy affects optimal pricing

Normalizing the monetary policy parameters such that  1   2  1 and  1*   2*  1 , we can
rewrite the price-setting equation (13) as:
                                  t 1                                         
                                                 1 1                       1 1
                                                                   t 1  
               pt 1  h         Et  *    cov t  t 1 ,  *   Et  t 1   .
                               1    t 1  
                                                               t 1          
                                                                                       
A primary determinant of the price setting equation is the covariance between labor
production costs ( W /  ) and demand (a negative function of the  from above). Using the
fact that under this policy et   t  t* 
                                                                  1   1* 1
                                                                                 ,  can be written as
                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                     (  1   1 1)1                 
                                                                                                 *

                                                                           1   
                              t 1   nt 1 pt 1 (h)1  nt*1 1     t*                           pt*1 ( f )1 
                                      
                                                                               t                                       
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                          1
                                                        (  1   1 1)1                                      
                                                                          *

                                           1 *   t 
                                 1    nt 1  * 
                                                                              pt*1 (h)1  nt 1 pt 1 ( f )1 
                                 
                                                 t                                                             
                                                                                                                   

                                                                                 34
establishing that that the only time-varying term in the covariance above is  t  t* . We will
now discuss how the sign and magnitude of the covariance term crucially depends on the
configuration of policy parameters.

Consider first the case in which home policymakers focus on domestic stabilization. In
general, the home monetary stance will respond to a domestic shock more than the foreign
one:  1   2*  1  1* --- consistent with the fact the it is always optimal for home
policymakers to devalue the home currency so to stimulate demand for domestically
produced goods, both at home and abroad. Such condition is indeed verified in our
characterization of optimal policies. In this case, it is apparent that a positive shock to the
home productivity (a rise in  t  t* ) will increase the ‘demand’ term  t 1 in the covariance

                                             
                                                   1
above. Conversely, the cost term:  t  t*               may either rise or fall, depending on whether 
is smaller or greater than one, that is, whether the home policy ‘over’ or ‘under-stabilize the
output gap. If the home policy over-responds to the shock (  1 >1), it will drive nominal
wage growth above productivity growth, increasing marginal costs: --- see the term
                                  1
 Wt 1      t 1       t 1 
                   *  . The cost term in the covariance will rise.
  t 1     t 1       t 1 

Under the above policy configuration  1  1   2*  1  1* , the covariance between demand
and costs is positive, causing firms to preset higher prices. To gain insight on the mechanism,
note that when monetary policy overstabilizes the output gap with  1 >1, it tends to squeeze
markups in high productivity states of the world, and expand them in low productivity states.
In high productivity states, as a domestic monetary expansion causes a demand boom for
home goods, it raises marginal costs even faster. Conversely when productivity and thus
demand are particularly low, marginal costs fall even more, raising markups. The fact that
markups are squeezed when demand is high, and boosted when demand is low, is bad for
expected discounted profits. By presetting higher prices, however, the firms can optimally
react to monetary over-stabilization. At the margin, higher average prices allow the firm to
rebalance markups across states of nature, raising revenues and profits in good times. This is
essentially the mechanism underlying the (risk) premium in the optimal pricing formula.

                                                                                  
                                                                                        1
In the case of under-stabilization, 1  1   2*  1  1*  1 <1, the  t  t
                                                                              *
                                                                                              term falls with a
rise in relative home productivity: the covariance term in the optimal pricing expression
above turns negative. The logic of the argument is the same. If policy under-responds to
shocks, markups are too high in good times, and excessively low in bad times. It is then
optimal for firms to adjust their preset prices downward, again to transfer demand and
revenues across states of the world, and ultimately raise expected discounted profits.

Monetary policy is optimally designed taking into account the trade-offs implied these effects,
as to move the equilibrium allocation away from the natural rate when accounting for the
production relocation externality. As shown in the text, the minimum level of prices (and thus
of the premium in the above formula) corresponds to a  1 for which the rise in wage is small
but there is still sufficient rise in demand. Note that the effect of policy is linear on wages,
but nonlinear (for our demand elasticity greater than 1) on demand.

                                                         35
                                             Table 1: Unconditional Means from Stochastic Simulations
                   (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)          (5)         (6)             (7)                (8)               (9)              (10)
                              symmet-         asym-          fixed        flex                      Unilateral         (7) with          (8) with         (9) with n
                  none                                                                 Nash
    policy                      ric           metric       exch rate      price                     defection         exog entry        no iceberg         from (7)
                 1, * 1    , * *    , * 1     , *             1  1*  .66   1  .66,1* 1   1  .66,1* 1   1  .66,1* 1   1  .66,1* 1
  n               0.8000       0.8000        0.8050    0.8100        0.8000     0.8000       0.8095              0.8000          0.8000       0.8095
  n*              0.8000       0.8000        0.7950    0.7900        0.8000     0.8000       0.7906              0.8000          0.8000       0.7906
  p               1.0674       1.0672        1.0672    1.0671        1.0672     1.0673       1.0669              1.0672          1.0450       1.0450
  p*              1.0674       1.0672        1.0675    1.0678        1.0672     1.0673       1.0676              1.0673          1.0451       1.0451
  c               0.9368       0.9371        0.9371    0.9372        0.9371     0.9370       0.9373              0.9371          0.9570       0.9570
  c*              0.9368       0.9371        0.9368    0.9366        0.9371     0.9370       0.9368              0.9370          0.9570       0.9570
  l               0.9967       0.9967        0.9966    0.9966        0.9967     0.9967       0.9966              0.9966          0.9966       0.9966
  l*              0.9967       0.9967        0.9967    0.9967        0.9967     0.9967       0.9967              0.9967          0.9967       0.9968
  ym              0.4166       0.4170        0.4196    0.4219        0.4170     0.4168       0.4218              0.4171          0.4172       0.4221
  yd              0.5000       0.5000        0.4969    0.4938        0.5000     0.5000       0.4941              0.4997          0.4996       0.4937
  ym*             0.4166       0.4170        0.4140    0.4114        0.4170     0.4168       0.4120              0.4166          0.4166       0.4117
  yd*             0.5000       0.5000        0.5031    0.5062        0.5000     0.5000       0.5059              0.5003          0.5004       0.5063
  p(h)            1.2002       1.2000        1.2000    1.2000        1.2000     1.1999       1.1997              1.1997          1.1997       1.1997
  p*(f)           1.2002       1.2000        1.2002    1.2004        1.2000     1.1999       1.2000              1.2000          1.2000       1.2000
  e               1.0000       1.0003        1.0001    1.0000        1.0003     1.0000       1.0001              1.0001          1.0001       1.0001
  rer             1.0000       1.0000        1.0003    1.0006        1.0000     1.0000       1.0006              1.0000          1.0000       1.0000
  TOTM            1.0000       1.0003        1.0000    0.9997        1.0003     1.0000       0.9999              0.9999          0.9998       0.9998
  TOTS            1.0000       1.0003        1.0018    1.0051        1.0003     1.0000       1.0052              1.0003          1.0003       1.0042
  c/l             0.9400       0.9402        0.9403    0.9403        0.9402     0.9401       0.9405              0.9403          0.9602       0.9603
  c*/l*           0.9400       0.9402        0.9399    0.9397        0.9402     0.9401       0.9399              0.9401          0.9601       0.9601
  (c/l)/(c*/l*)   1.0000       1.0000        1.0004    1.0007        1.0000     1.0000       1.0007              1.0001          1.0001       1.0002
  log(utility)   -1.0619      -1.0617       -1.0616   -1.0616       -1.0617    -1.0618      -1.0614             -1.0616         -1.0406      -1.0406
  log(utility)* -1.0619       -1.0617       -1.0620   -1.0623       -1.0617    -1.0618      -1.0620             -1.0618         -1.0407      -1.0408
  utility gain                 0.0242        0.0296    0.0349        0.0242     0.0146       0.0545              0.0283             --           --
  util gain*                   0.0242       -0.0055   -0.0352        0.0242     0.0146      -0.0118              0.0144             --           --
Unconditional means generated from a stochastic simulation of a second order approximation of the model. Utility gain is for the home country, computed in
steady state consumption units, in percentage terms.

                                                                                  36
                                                              Table 2: Pooled Regression


                             (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)
                          Benchmark         Non-oil         >$2000         >$5000     >$10,000     Manufac     No energy    Shambaugh
                                           countries       countries      countries   countries     goods       goods          peg

PEG x DIF                  -0.198***      -0.0861***     -0.0557***      -0.0472***   -0.0310**   -0.0744***   -0.0466***   -0.194***
                            (0.0520)       (0.0111)       (0.0107)        (0.0114)     (0.0117)    (0.0223)      (0.0105)    (0.0531)

PEG                         0.0986*        0.111***         0.0334         0.0422*     -0.0104      0.0490      0.0497*     0.217***
                            (0.0411)       (0.0253)        (0.0223)        (0.0215)   (0.0207)     (0.0514)     (0.0224)    (0.0432)

Obs.                         719603         556025          607247         551963      503393      633979       634009       800054
R-sq                          0.390          0.372           0.380          0.392       0.398       0.478        0.390        0.384
adj. R-sq                     0.389          0.371           0.379          0.391       0.397       0.477        0.389        0.383
Country Fixed Effect           yes            yes             yes            yes         yes         yes          yes          yes
Year Fixed Effect              yes            yes             yes            yes         yes         yes          yes          yes
Sector Fixed Effect            yes            yes             yes            yes         yes         yes          yes          yes
Notes: DIF not included as regressor because subsumed in sector fixed effect.
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses:
* significance at 5%; ** significance at 1%; ***significance at 0.1%




                                                                                37
                                               Table 3: Pooled Regressions with Interaction Effects


                             (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)         (5)        (6)          (7)         (8)
                          Benchmark         Non-oil         >$2000         >$5000     >$10,000    Manufac     No energy   Shambaugh
                                           countries       countries      countries   countries    goods       goods         peg

PEG x DIF                  -0.318***       -0.184**        -0.164**       -0.172**    -0.142**    -0.208***   -0.196***   -0.194***
                            (0.0961)        -0.0547        (0.0519)       (0.0553)     -0.0518     -0.0191     (0.0107)    -0.0531

PEG                          -0.0991        0.0915          -0.0724       -0.0321     -0.0727      -0.0245    -0.0471**   0.217***
                            (0.0707)        -0.166          (0.163)       (0.172)      -0.18        -0.055     (0.0179)    -0.0432

Obs.                         719603         556025          607247        551963      503393       633979      634009      800054
R-sq                          0.367          0.342           0.343         0.346       0.339        0.434       0.364       0.384
adj. R-sq                     0.363          0.338           0.341         0.343       0.337        0.432       0.360       0.383
Country-Sector FE              yes            yes             yes           yes         yes          yes         yes         yes
Country-Year FE                yes            yes             yes           yes         yes          yes         yes         yes
Notes: DIF not included as regressor because subsumed in fixed effects.
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses:
* significance at 5%; ** significance at 1%; ***significance at 0.1%




                                                                            38
                                                           Table 4: Country Level Analysis

                          (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)
                       Benchmark        Non-oil         >$2000         >$5000     >$10,000    Manufac    No energy   Shambaugh   Additional
                                       countries       countries      countries   countries    goods      goods         peg       controls

PEG                    -0.0585***     -0.0625***      -0.0735***      -0.0624**   -0.0628**    -0.0334   -0.0486**    -0.0367*   -0.0546**
                        (0.0163)       (0.0166)        (0.0170)        (0.0186)    (0.0218)   (0.0205)    (0.0164)    (0.0162)    (0.0182)

CA/GDP                                                                                                                            0.000519
                                                                                                                                 (0.000615)

Real Exch. Rate                                                                                                                   0.00795
                                                                                                                                  (0.0122)

                                                                                                                                  0.00448
Currency Crisis                                                                                                                   (0.0108)

                                                                                                                                  0.00621
Banking Crisis                                                                                                                    (0.0155)

Obs.                      3646           3190            2839             2345      1877       3632        3645        4757        2624
R-sq                      0.741          0.721           0.798            0.805     0.815      0.602       0.711       0.718       0.775
adj. R-sq                 0.728          0.706           0.786            0.793     0.803      0.581       0.696       0.706       0.759
Country FE                 yes            yes             yes              yes       yes        yes         yes         yes         yes
Year FE                    yes            yes             yes              yes       yes        yes         yes         yes         yes
Notes: DIF not included as regressor because subsumed in fixed effects.
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses:
* significance at 5%; ** significance at 1%; ***significance at 0.1%




                                                                             39
           Fig 1: Responses to a 1 std dev rise in home manufacturing productivity
                      Under flexible prices and no stabilization policy

              home manufacturing        foreign manufacturing
                    output                      output            home non-man output




              for. non-man output              home empl.                foreign empl.




                     home cons.                foreign cons.




Vertical axis is percent deviation (0.01=1%) from steady state levels. Horizonatal axis is time
(in years).




                                              40
           Fig 2: Responses to a 1 std dev rise in home manufacturing productivity
                         Under full symmetric stabilization policies

              home manufacturing       foreign manufacturing
                    output                     output             home non-man output




              for. non-man output              home empl.                foreign empl.




                     home cons.              foreign cons.          exchange rate




Vertical axis is percent deviation (0.01=1%) from steady state levels. Horizonatal axis is time
(in years).




                                              41
             Fig. 3a World utility as function of policy parameter 1
(value of 1 is full stabilization case that replicates the flexible price allocation)

‐2.123345
         0.85          0.9       0.95           1      1.05        1.1       1.15
‐2.123346

‐2.123347

‐2.123348

‐2.123349

 ‐2.12335

‐2.123351

‐2.123352


             Fig. 3b World utility as function of policy parameter 2
(value of 0 is full stabilization case that replicates the flexible price allocation)



                                ‐2.123345
  ‐0.15         ‐0.1         ‐0.05        0         0.05          0.1        0.15
                               ‐2.123346

                               ‐2.123347

                               ‐2.123348

                               ‐2.123349

                                ‐2.12335

                               ‐2.123351

                               ‐2.123352




                                           42
             Fig. 4a Home utility as function of policy parameter 1
(value of 1 is full stabilization case that replicates the flexible price allocation)

 ‐1.06145
              0       0.2        0.4          0.6       0.8         1          1.2
  ‐1.0615
 ‐1.06155
  ‐1.0616
 ‐1.06165
  ‐1.0617
 ‐1.06175
  ‐1.0618
 ‐1.06185
  ‐1.0619
 ‐1.06195
    ‐1.062


       Fig. 4b Home number of firms as function of policy parameter 1
(value of 1 is full stabilization case that replicates the flexible price allocation)

 0.806


 0.804


 0.802


    0.8


 0.798


 0.796


 0.794
          0        0.2         0.4         0.6         0.8          1          1.2




                                         43
             Fig. 5a Home utility as function of policy parameter 2
(value of 0 is full stabilization case that replicates the flexible price allocation)

    ‐1.06145
  ‐0.2       0          0.2        0.4        0.6        0.8         1         1.2
     ‐1.0615
    ‐1.06155
     ‐1.0616
    ‐1.06165
     ‐1.0617
    ‐1.06175
     ‐1.0618
    ‐1.06185
     ‐1.0619
    ‐1.06195
         ‐1.062



       Fig. 5b Home number of firms as function of policy parameter 2
(value of 0 is full stabilization case that replicates the flexible price allocation)

         0.806


         0.804

         0.802


            0.8


         0.798


         0.796

         0.794
  ‐0.2            0     0.2        0.4        0.6        0.8         1         1.2




                                         44
           Fig 6: Responses to a 1 std dev rise in home manufacturing productivity
                         Under policy Nash policy rule (log utility)

                                         foreign manufac
             home manuf output                output              home non-man output




              for. non-man output              home empl.                foreign empl.




                     home cons.                foreign cons.              exch rate




Vertical axis is percent deviation (0.01=1%) from steady state levels. Horizontal axis is time (in
years).




                                              45
