NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MACROECONOMIC ANALYSIS WITHOUT THE RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS
HYPOTHESIS
Michael Woodford
Working Paper 19368
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19368
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

Published in the Annual Review of Economics, volume 5, DOI: 10.1146/annurev-economics-080511110857. I would like to thank Klaus Adam, Ben Hebert, Mordecai Kurz, David Laibson, and Bruce
Preston for helpful discussions, Savitar Sundaresan for research assistance, and the Institute for New
Economic Thinking and the Taussig Visiting Professorship, Harvard University, for supporting this
research. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 Annual Review of Economics. Circulated with permission. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Macroeconomic Analysis without the Rational Expectations Hypothesis
Michael Woodford
NBER Working Paper No. 19368
August 2013
JEL No. E52,E63
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews a variety of alternative approaches to the specification of the expectations of economic
decisionmakers in dynamic models, and reconsiders familiar results in the theory of monetary and
fiscal policy when one allows for departures from the hypothesis of rational expectations. The various
approaches are all illustrated in the context of a common model, a log-linearized New Keynesian model
in which both households and firms solve infinite-horizon decision problems; under the hypothesis
of rational expectations, the model reduces to the standard “3-equation model” used in studies such
as Clarida et al. (1999). The alternative approaches considered include rationalizable equilibrium dynamics
(Guesnerie, 2008); restricted perceptions equilibria (Branch, 2004); decreasing-gain and constant-gain
variants of least-squares learning dynamics (Evans and Honkapohja, 2001); rational belief equilibria
(Kurz, 2012); and near-rational expectations equilibria (Woodford, 2010). Issues treated include Ricardian
equivalence; the determinacy of equilibrium under alternative interest-rate rules; non-fundamental
sources of aggregate instability; the trade-off between inflation stabilization and output-gap stabilization;
and the possibility of a “deflation trap.”
Michael Woodford
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 W. 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mw2230@columbia.edu

A crucial methodological question in macroeconomic analysis is the way in which
the expectations of decisionmakers about future conditions should be modeled. To the
extent that behavior is modeled as goal-directed, it will depend (except in the most
trivial cases) on expectations; and analyses of the eﬀects of alternative governmental
policies need to consider how expectations are endogenously inﬂuenced by one policy
or another. Finding tractable ways to address this issue has been a key challenge
for the extension of optimization-based economic analysis to the kinds of dynamic
settings required for most questions of interest in macroeconomics.
The dominant approach for the past several decades, of course, has made use of
the hypothesis of model-consistent or “rational expectations” (RE): the assumption
that people have probability beliefs that coincide with the probabilities predicted
by one’s model. The RE benchmark is a natural one to consider, and its use has
allowed a tremendous increase in the sophistication of the analysis of dynamics in the
theoretical literature in macroeconomics. Nonetheless, the assumption is a strong one,
and one may wonder if it should be relaxed, especially when considering relatively
short-run responses to disturbances, or the consequences of newly adopted policies
that have not been followed in the past — both of which are precisely the types of
situations which macroeconomic analysis frequently seeks to address.
While the assumption that an economy’s dynamics must necessarily correspond to
an RE equilibrium may seem unjustiﬁably strong — and under some circumstances, is
a heroic assumption indeed — it does not follow that we should then be equally willing
to entertain all possible assumptions about the expectations of economic agents. It
makes sense to assume that expectations should not be completely arbitrary, and
have no relation to the kind of world in which the agents live; indeed, it is appealing
to assume that people’s beliefs should be rational, in the ordinary-language sense,
though there is a large step from this to the RE hypothesis.1 We should like, therefore,
to replace the RE hypothesis by some weaker restriction, that nonetheless implies a
substantial degree of conformity between people’s beliefs and reality — that implies,
at the least, that people do not make obvious mistakes.
The literature has explored two broad approaches to the formulation of a criterion
for reasonableness of beliefs that is weaker than the RE hypothesis. One is to assume
that people should correctly understand the economic model, and be able to form
correct inferences from it about possible future outcomes. The other is to assume that
that the probabilities that people assign to possible future outcomes should not be too
1

This is stressed, for example, by Kurz (2012, p. 1).

1

diﬀerent from the probabilities with which diﬀerent outcomes actually occur, given
that experience should allow some acquaintance with these probabilities, whether
or not people understand how these outcomes are generated. The former approach
supposes that beliefs should be reﬁned through a process of reﬂection, independent
of experience and not necessarily occurring in real time, that Guesnerie (1992) calls
eduction, while the latter supposes that beliefs should be reﬁned over time through a
process of induction from observed outcomes. Section 2 discusses the ﬁrst approach,
while examples of the second approach are taken up in sections 3 and 4.
Within the category of inductive approaches, one may distinguish two important
sub-categories. A ﬁrst class of approaches speciﬁes the beliefs that should be regarded
as reasonable by specifying the patterns that people should be able to recognize in the
data on the basis of the rationality of the procedure used to look for such patterns. A
diﬀerent class of approaches speciﬁes a degree of correspondence between subjective
and model-implied probabilities that should be expected, without explicitly modeling
the process of inference through which such beliefs are formed. The ﬁrst class of
approaches (models of econometric learning) is treated in section 3, while the second
class (theories of partially or approximately correct beliefs) is taken up in section 4.
The diﬀerent possible approaches to the speciﬁcation of expectations are compared
by illustrating the application of each in the context of the same general framework
for macroeconomic analysis, introduced in section 1. In each case, it is shown that
one can demand that the speciﬁcation of beliefs satisfy quite stringent rationality
requirements without, in general, being able to conclude that the predictions of the
RE equilibrium analysis must obtain. I shall consider in particular the consequences
of alternative speciﬁcations of expectations for several familiar issues: the conditions
under which an interest-rate rule for monetary policy should be able to maintain a
stable inﬂation rate; the nature of the trade-oﬀ between inﬂation stabilization and
output stabilization; and the eﬀects of the government budget on aggregate demand.

1

Temporary Equilibrium in a New Keynesian Model

I begin by introducing a framework for analysis of the determinants of aggregate
output and inﬂation, in which subjective expectations can be speciﬁed arbitrarily, in
order to clarify the role of alternative speciﬁcations of expectations. It allows the
eﬀects of both monetary and ﬁscal policies to be considered, along with a variety of
2

types of exogenous disturbances to economic “fundamentals” and possible shifts in
expectations. The model is one in which households and ﬁrms solve inﬁnite-horizon
optimization problems, as in the DSGE models commonly used for quantitative policy
analysis; in fact, under the assumption of rational expectations, the model presented
here corresponds to a textbook New Keynesian model of the kind analyzed in Clarida
et al. (1999), Woodford (2003, chap. 4), Gali (2008, chap. 3), or Walsh (2010, chap.
8). Essentially, the goal of this section is to show how “temporary equilibrium” analysis of the kind introduced by Hicks (1939) and Lindahl (1939) and further developed
by Grandmont (1977, 1988) — in which a general competitive equilibrium is deﬁned
at each point in time, on the basis of the (independently speciﬁed) expectations that
decisionmakers happen to entertain at that time — can be extended to a setting
with monopolistic competition, sticky prices, and inﬁnite-horizon planning, for closer
comparison with the conclusions of conventional macroeconomic analysis. Some of
the best-known conclusions from RE analysis of the model are also recalled, as a basis
for comparison with the conclusions from alternative speciﬁcations of expectations in
the later sections.

1.1

Expectations and Aggregate Demand

The economy is made up of a large number of identical households, and a large
number of ﬁrms, each of which is the monopoly producer of a particular diﬀerentiated
good, with each household owning an equal share of each ﬁrm.2 At any point in
time, a household has an inﬁnite-horizon consumption (and wealth-accumulation)
plan from that date forward, which maximizes expected discounted utility under
certain subjective expectations regarding the future evolution of income and the rate
of return on saving; and the household’s expenditure at that date is assumed to be the
one called for by the plan believed to be optimal at that time. (The household may
or may not continue to execute the same plan as time passes, depending on what is
assumed about how expectations change.) While I wish for now to leave the subjective
expectations unspeciﬁed, the expectations held at any date represent a well-behaved
probability measure over possible future evolutions of the state variables. Because I
2

These and other aspects of the model structure are explained in more detail in Woodford (2003).
Here I focus only on the points at which an alternative model of expectations requires a generalization
of the standard exposition.

3

shall not assume that subjective expectations are necessarily model-consistent, they
are not necessarily the same across households; nor shall I necessarily assume that a
household’s later expectations are those that it previously expected to hold.
To simplify, I shall assume that the only traded asset is riskless nominal oneperiod government debt.3 I shall further assume that households have no choice but
to supply the hours of work that are demanded by ﬁrms, at a wage that is ﬁxed by
a union that bargains on behalf of the households. A household then has a single
decision each period, which is the amount to spend on consumption. Because its
nonﬁnancial income (the sum of its wage income and its share of the proﬁts of the
ﬁrms) is outside its control, in order to analyze optimal expenditure, we need only
specify households’ expectations regarding the time path of their total nonﬁnancial
income. If an equal amount of work is demanded from each household at the wage
ﬁxed by the union, and households similarly each receive an equal share of the proﬁts
of all of the ﬁrms,4 then each household’s nonﬁnancial income will be the same each
period, and equal to its share of the total value of output in that period; hence we
can equivalently specify nonﬁnancial income expectations as expectations regarding
the path of output.
A household’s perceived intertemporal budget constraint then depends only on its
expectations about the path of aggregate output, the path of aggregate tax collections
(also assumed to be levied equally on each household), and the real return on the
one-period debt. The consumption planning problem for an individual household at
a given point in time is then the familiar one faced by a household with rational
expectations and an exogenously given income process (discussed, for example, in
Deaton, 1992), and the solution is correspondingly the same, except with subjective
probabilities substituted for objective ones.5
3

In many RE analyses, with a representative household and ﬁscal policy assumed to be Ricardian
(in the sense deﬁned in Woodford, 2001), the model dynamics are unaﬀected by allowing additional
ﬁnancial markets or even issuance of other types of government debt. The restriction to oneperiod debt is no longer innocuous, however, once one allows for more general hypotheses regarding
expectations, as shown for example in Eusepi and Preston (2012b). Nonetheless, I here consider
only the most simple case.
4
Equity ownership shares are assumed for simplicity to be non-tradeable.
5
Note that the log-linear theory of aggregate demand derived here is the same as in a model
where households are assumed simply to have an exogenous endowment of the consumption good,
like that of Guesnerie (2008).

4

I shall log-linearize this and other structural relations of the model around a deterministic steady state, in which (i) all exogenous state variables are forever constant,
(ii) monetary and ﬁscal policy are speciﬁed to maintain a constant zero rate of inﬂation and some constant positive level of public debt, and (iii) all subjective expectations are correct (i.e., households and ﬁrms have perfect foresight). The log-linearized
relations accordingly represent an approximation to the exact model, applying in the
case that exogenous disturbances are suﬃciently small, monetary and ﬁscal policies
are suﬃciently close to being consistent with this steady state, and expectational
errors are suﬃciently small.
A log-linear approximation to the consumption function takes the form
cit = (1 − β)bit +

∞
∑

β T −t Êti {(1 − β)(YT − τ T ) − βσ(iT − π T +1 )

T =t

+(1 − β)sb (βiT − π T ) − β(c̄T +1 − c̄T )} .

(1.1)

Here cit is total real expenditure by household i (on all of the diﬀerentiated goods)
in period t, measured as a deviation from the steady-state level of consumption, and
expressed as a fraction of steady-state output; bit is the value of maturing bonds carried
into period t by household i, deﬂated by the period t − 1 price level (rather than the
period t price level) so that this wealth measure is predetermined at date t − 1;6 Yt
is the deviation of aggregate output from its steady-state value, as a fraction of that
steady-state value; τ t is net tax collections, also measured as a deviation from the
steady-state level of tax revenues and expressed as a fraction of steady-state output;
it is the riskless one-period nominal interest rate on debt issued in period t; π t is
the inﬂation rate between periods t − 1 and t; and c̄t is an exogenous shock to the
utility from consumption in period t. In addition, 0 < β < 1 is the utility discount
factor, σ > 0 measures the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, and sb > 0 is the
steady-state level of government debt, expressed as a fraction of steady-state output.
The notation Êti {·} indicates the expected value of the terms in the brackets,
under the subjective expectations of household i in period t. The bit and YT −τ T terms
then represent (a subjective version of) the usual permanent-income hypothesis;7 the
The reduction in the real value of this wealth due to inﬂation between periods t − 1 and t is
then reﬂected in the −sb π t term inside the curly brackets.
7
See, e.g., Deaton (1992) for an exposition of the standard theory, under the assumptions of
rational expectations, no preference shocks, and a constant real interest rate.
6

5

σ(iT − π T +1 ) terms indicate how expectations of a real interest rate diﬀerent from
the rate of time preference shift the desired time path of spending; the sb (βiT − π T )
terms indicate the income eﬀects of variations in nominal interest rates and inﬂation;
and the c̄T terms indicate the eﬀects of preference shocks on the desired time path of
spending.
Equation (1.1) involves subjective expectations of a number of variables at many
future horizons, but under our linear approximation we can write desired expenditure
as a function of the household’s forecast of a single variable,
i
, (1.2)
cit = (1−β)bit +(1−β)(Yt −τ t )−β[σ −(1−β)sb ]it −(1−β)sb π t +βc̄t +β Êti vt+1

where the composite variable vti is deﬁned as
vti

≡

∞
∑

β T −t Êti {(1 − β)(YT − τ T ) − [σ − (1 − β)sb ](βiT − π T ) − (1 − β)c̄T } . (1.3)

T =t

The advantage of this notation is that we need only to specify how people forecast a
single variable each period; note however that the variable that people must forecast
is a subjective state variable, that will depend on their own future forecasts.
∫
Aggregate demand is then given by Yt = cit di + Gt , where Gt is the departure of
government purchases of the composite good from their steady-state level, also measured as a fraction of steady-state output. Substituting (1.2) for cit in this expression,
we obtain
Yt = gt + (1 − β)bt + vt − σπ t ,
(1.4)
where gt ≡ Gt + c̄t is a composite exogenous disturbance to “autonomous expen∫
∫
diture”,8 bt ≡ bit di is the aggregate supply of public debt, and vt ≡ vti di is the
average value of the expectational variable deﬁned in (1.3). We thus obtain an equation for aggregate demand that separates out the eﬀects of the exogenous disturbances
gt , the wealth eﬀect of public debt, and the average state of expectation captured by
vt .
The government’s ﬂow budget constraint implies a law of motion
bt+1 = β −1 [bt − sb π t − st ] + sb it
8

(1.5)

To simplify, I treat government purchases as an exogenous disturbance, rather than as a possibly
endogenous policy choice.

6

for the public debt, where st ≡ τ t − Gt is the real primary budget surplus in period
t, measured as a deviation from its steady-state level and expressed as a fraction of
steady-state output. The aggregate demand block of our model then consists of equations (1.4) and (1.5), together with monetary and ﬁscal policy equations that specify
the evolution of it and st respectively (generally as a function of other endogenous
i
variables), and a speciﬁcation of the evolution of the forecasts {Êti vt+1
} (which determine the expectational variable vt ). We then have a system of four equations per
period (plus the speciﬁcation of expectations) to determine the paths {Yt , bt , it , st }
given a path for the price level, or the paths {π t , bt , it , st } given a supply-determined
path for output, along with the composite disturbance gt and shocks to policy and
expectations.
Deﬁnition (1.3) has a recursive form, so that the only subjective expectations
involved in vti are i’s forecast of the corresponding variable one period in the future.
Speciﬁcally, (1.3) implies that
i
vti = (1 − β)vt + β(1 − β)(bt+1 − bt ) − βσ(it − π t ) + β Êti vt+1
,

(1.6)

i
where in addition to substituting the forecast of vt+1
for the expectational terms,
I have used (1.4) to substitute out Yt and (1.5) to substitute out τ t . Hence to
specify the aspects of subjective expectations that are relevant for aggregate demand
determination it suﬃces that we specify an evolution for the {vti }, and subjective oneperiod-ahead forecasts of those variables, that are consistent with (1.6). This result is
used below to characterize the possible temporary equilibrium (TE) dynamics, under
various more speciﬁc assumptions about expectations.

1.2

Ricardian Expectations

Equation (1.5) implies that non-explosive dynamics for the real public debt require
that
∞
∑
bt =
β T −t [sT − sb (βiT − π T )].
T =t

I shall say that households have Ricardian expectations if they expect that the path
of primary surpluses will necessarily satisfy this condition, so that
Êti

∞
∑

β T −t [sT − sb (βiT − π T )] = bt

T =t

7

(1.7)

at all times. It is not obvious that expectations must have this property, even under
the RE hypothesis;9 it is even less obvious that reasonable expectations must have
this property once one dispenses with the strict RE assumption. Nonetheless, this
property is frequently assumed (at least tacitly) in non-RE analyses, and I shall
mainly assume it in the discussion below, to simplify the analysis.10
Under this assumption, there is no longer a wealth eﬀect of variation in the public
debt; the bt term in (1.4) is exactly canceled by the eﬀects of the change in the
expected path of primary surpluses on the vt term. In fact, one can write (1.4) more
simply as
Yt = gt + v̄t − σπ t ,
(1.8)
where v̄t ≡ vt + (1 − β)bt is the average value of a subjective variable v̄ti which (under
the hypothesis of Ricardian expectations) can be deﬁned simply as
v̄ti

≡

∞
∑

β T −t Êti {(1 − β)(YT − gT ) − σ(βiT − π T )} .

(1.9)

T =t

In this case, aggregate demand determination is completely independent of the paths
of both public debt and tax collections — so that “Ricardian equivalence” obtains
— as long as these ﬁscal variables have no direct eﬀect on people’s expectations
regarding the evolution of the variables {Yt , π t , it , gt }; or more simply, as long they
have no direct eﬀect on forecasts of the path of the variables {vti }.11
Under the assumption of Ricardian expectations, it is convenient to specify expectations by describing the evolution of the variables {v̄ti }; these must be consistent
9

It is possible for people to believe in a ﬁscal rule without this property, and yet for a RE
equilibrium to exist, as shown for example in Woodford (2001). (In equilibrium, debt does not
explode, and expectations are correct; but people believe that debt would explode in the case of
certain paths for endogenous variables that do not occur in equilibrium.) Some have disputed
whether such a speciﬁcation of out-of-equilibrium beliefs should be considered to be consistent with
the RE hypothesis; see Bassetto (2002) for a careful discussion.
10
In many NK models with adaptive learning, TE relations are derived by simply inserting subjective expectations into equations that hold (in terms of model-consistent conditional expectations) in
the RE version of the model; the fact that government liabilities are not perceived to be net wealth
in the RE analysis then leads to an assumption that they are not in the learning analysis, without
any discussion of the assumption. Evans and Honkapohja (2010) instead make the assumption of
Ricardian expectations explicit. Eusepi and Preston (2012a, 2012b) and Benhabib et al. (2012)
provide examples of analyses in which Ricardian expectations are not assumed.
11
See Evans et al. (2012) for a more detailed discussion of the conditions under which Ricardian
equivalence obtains even without the RE hypothesis.

8

with a relation of the form
i
v̄ti = (1 − β)v̄t − βσ(it − π t ) + β Êti v̄t+1
,

(1.10)

analogous to (1.6). The complete aggregate demand block of the model then consists
of equation (1.8), a monetary policy equation, and a speciﬁcation of the evolution
of the expectational variable {v̄ti } consistent with (1.10). This system provides two
equations per period to determine the paths of {Yt , it } given the evolution of the price
level, the exogenous disturbances {gt }, and shocks to policy and expectations.

1.3

Expectations and Aggregate Supply

Each of the monopolistically competitive ﬁrms sets the price for the particular good
that it alone produces. Prices are assumed to remain ﬁxed for a random interval
of time: each period, fraction 0 < α < 1 of all goods prices remain the same (in
monetary terms) as in the previous period, while the other prices are reconsidered;
and the probability that any given price is reconsidered in any period is assumed to
be independent of both the current price and the length of time that the price has
remained ﬁxed. It then follows that (again in a log-linear approximation) the rate of
inﬂation π t between periods t − 1 and t will be given by
π t = (1 − α)p∗t ,

(1.11)

where for each ﬁrm j, p∗j
t is the amount by which the ﬁrm would choose to set the log
price of its good higher than pt−1 , the log of the general price index in period t − 1,
∫
were it to be one of the ﬁrms that reconsiders its price in period t; and p∗t ≡ p∗j
t dj
is the average value of this quantity across all ﬁrms.
Each ﬁrm that reconsiders its price in a given period chooses the new price that
it believes will maximize the present value of its proﬁts from that period onward.
In a Dixit-Stiglitz model of monopolistic competition, with a single economy-wide
labor market, proﬁts in any period are the same function of a ﬁrm’s own price and
of aggregate market conditions for each ﬁrm. The single-period proﬁt-maximizing
log price popt
is then the same for each ﬁrm, and a log-linear approximation to the
t
ﬁrst-order condition for optimal price-setting takes the form
p∗j
t

= (1 − αβ)

∞
∑

− pt−1 ,
(αβ)T −t Êtj popt
T

T =t

9

(1.12)

where β is again the utility discount factor (also the rate at which real proﬁts are
discounted in steady state), and Êtj [·] indicates a conditional expectation with respect
to the subjective beliefs of ﬁrm j at date t. The recursive form of (1.12) implies that
internally consistent expectations on the part of any ﬁrm must satisfy
opt
j ∗j
p∗j
t = (1 − αβ)(pt − pt−1 ) + αβ(Êt pt+1 + π t ).

(1.13)

Averaging this expression over ﬁrms j and using the resulting equation to substitute
for p∗t in (1.11), we see that inﬂation determination depends only on the average of
ﬁrms’ subjective forecasts of a single variable, namely each ﬁrm’s own value for the
expectational variable p∗j
T one period in the future.
Suppose furthermore that the union sets a wage each period with the property
that at that wage, a marginal increase in labor demand would neither increase nor decrease average perceived utility across households, if for each household the marginal
utility of the additional wage income is weighed against the marginal disutility of the
additional work. This implies that (in a log-linear approximation)
wt = ν t − λt ,
where wt is the log real wage, ν t is the log of the (common) marginal disutility of labor,
and λt is the average across households of λit , a household’s subjective assessment of
its marginal utility of additional real income. Since optimizing consumption demand
implies that
λit = −σ −1 (cit − c̄t ),
we obtain
wt = ν t + σ −1 (ct − c̄t ) = ν t + σ −1 (Yt − gt ),
just as in a representative-household model with RE and a competitive economy-wide
labor market. In a model in which labor is the only variable factor of production,
both ν t and the marginal product of labor can be expressed as functions of hours
worked and hence as functions of output Yt and the exogenous level of productivity
in period t. We then obtain a relation of the form
popt
= pt + ξ(Yt − Ytn ) + µt ,
t

(1.14)

where yt indicates the “output gap” (deﬁned as Yt − Ytn , where the “natural rate” of
output Ytn is a composite exogenous disturbance, involving variations in gt , produc10

tivity, and shocks to the disutility of labor), and µt measures exogenous variations in
the desired markup of prices over marginal cost.12
Substituting (1.11) for π t and (1.14) for popt
in (1.13), we obtain
t
j ∗j
∗
p∗j
t = (1 − α)pt + (1 − αβ) [ξyt + µt ] + αβ Êt pt+1 .

(1.15)

In order for beliefs to be internally consistent, the evolution of the expectational
variables {p∗j
t } and subjective one-period-ahead forecasts of those variables must
satisfy (1.15) at all times. Given such beliefs, the inﬂation rate will be determined by
(1.11). Thus equations (1.11) and (1.15) constitute the aggregate-supply block of the
model, which determines the evolution of the general price level, given the evolution
of output, exogenous disturbances, and expectations.

1.4

The Complete Model

In the complete TE system, then, the expectations that must be speciﬁed are paths
for {v̄ti } for all households and {p∗j
t } for all ﬁrms, consistent with relations (1.10) and
(1.15) respectively. Given these expectations, paths for the exogenous disturbances
{gt , Ytn , µt }, and a monetary policy rule for the evolution of {it }, the evolution of
aggregate output and inﬂation are then given by equations (1.8) and (1.11).
Substituting for the variables vti and p∗j
t in terms of current observables and forecasts of future conditions, (1.8) can be written as
∫
i
Yt = gt − σit + Êti v̄t+1
di,
(1.16)
and (1.11) can correspondingly be written as
∫
π t = κyt + ut + (1 − α)β

Êtj p∗j
t+1 dj,

(1.17)

where

(1 − α)(1 − αβ)
(1 − α)(1 − αβ)
ξ > 0, ut ≡
µt .
α
α
We thus obtain an “IS equation” and “AS equation” to describe short-run output
and inﬂation determination, given monetary policy, exogenous disturbances, and expectations.
κ≡

12

The separation of the eﬀects of exogenous disturbances into Ytn and µt components in (1.14) is
useful only in the case that stabilization of the output gap is a goal of policy.

11

If expectations are assumed not to change in response to policy changes or other
shocks, the model makes predictions like those of a standard undergraduate textbook
exposition. For example, an increase in the central bank’s interest-rate target it should
reduce output and inﬂation. An increase in government purchases (that increases gt ,
and also increases Ytn by a smaller amount) should increase both output and inﬂation.
And a “cost-push shock” ut > 0 should increase inﬂation, but have no eﬀect on output
if the central bank’s interest-rate target is unchanged; if it is instead raised in response
to the increase in inﬂation, output should fall and the inﬂation increase will be more
modest.
But the model also indicates the eﬀects on output and inﬂation of changes in
average expectations. For example, an increase in the average forecast by ﬁrms of
the log price that they would wish to choose if reviewing their price one period in
the future, relative to the current average price, should raise current inﬂation for any
current level of output, just as in the case of an exogenous cost-push shock. And there
is no general reason to suppose that expectations should be unaﬀected by shocks of
the kind considered in the previous paragraph; hence a complete analysis even of
short-run equilibrium requires a speciﬁcation of how expectations are determined.
If expectations are Ricardian and monetary policy is unaﬀected by ﬁscal variables, the model implies that neither the size of the public debt nor the government
budget matter for output and inﬂation determination. If instead expectations are
not assumed to be Ricardian, it is more convenient to write the model in terms of
i
i
expectations of vt+1
rather than v̄t+1
. The “IS equation” can then alternatively be
written in the form
∫
i
Yt = gt − σit + (1 − β)bt+1 + Êti vt+1
di,
(1.18)
where one should recall from (1.5) that bt+1 is known at date t (though the debt
matures at t + 1). In this case, since the endogenous public debt matters for output
and inﬂation determination, we must adjoin (1.5) to the system that describes TE
dynamics under a given speciﬁcation of inﬂation.
The complete TE dynamics for the endogenous variables {π t , Yt , bt+1 } are then
given in the non-Ricardian case by the system consisting of (1.5), (1.17) and (1.18),
given expectations {vti , p∗j
t } consistent with (1.6) and (1.15). One observes that a
larger budget deﬁcit (or smaller surplus) should increase output and inﬂation, to the
extent that it does not cause a reduction in the ﬁnal expectational term in (1.18), of
12

a magnitude as large as the increase in (1 − β)bt+1 .

1.5

RE Equilibrium

Thus far, I have been completely agnostic about the nature of subjective forecasts.
Under the RE hypothesis, all agents’ probability beliefs are identical, and coincide
with the probabilities predicted by one’s model, given the choices that people make
on the basis of those beliefs. Under the hypothesis that all beliefs are identical, we
can replace the operators {Ê i [·]} and {Ê j [·]} by the single expectation operator Ê[·].
∗
And since in this case vti = vt for all i and p∗j
t = pt for all j, equations (1.10) and
(1.15) reduce to
v̄t = −σ(it − π t ) + Êt v̄t+1 ,
(1.19)
p∗t = (1 − α)−1 [κyt + ut ] + β Êt p∗t+1

(1.20)

respectively. If we assume a monetary policy rule (or central-bank reaction function)
of the form13
it = ϕπ π t + ϕy yt + ϵit ,
(1.21)
where ϵit is an exogenous disturbance to monetary policy, and use equations (1.8),
(1.11), and (1.21) to substitute for it , π t and yt in equations (1.19)–(1.20), we obtain
a system that can be written in the form
zt = B Êt zt+1 + bξ t ,

(1.22)

where zt is the vector of endogenous variables (v̄t , p∗t ), ξ t is the vector of (composite)
exogenous disturbances (gt − Ytn , ut , ϵit ), and B and b are matrices of coeﬃcients.
If subjective probabilities must coincide with objective probabilities, we can replace (1.22) by
zt = B Et zt+1 + bξ t ,
(1.23)
where Et [·] denotes an expectational conditional on the state of the world at date t,
under the probability distribution over future paths that represents the equilibrium
outcome. An RE equilibrium (REE) is then a stochastic process {zt } consistent with
13

This version of the “Taylor rule” (Taylor, 1993) reﬂects an implicit inﬂation target of zero. In
particular, if all exogenous disturbances are zero forever, this policy is consistent with the steady
state around which the model equations have been log-linearized.

13

(1.23). (Note that any solution for the process {zt } completely determines the stochastic evolution of the variables {π t , Yt , it }, using equations (1.8), (1.11), and (1.21).) We
shall here restrict attention only to the possibility of bounded solutions {zt }, on the
assumption that the disturbances {ξ t } are bounded, since our log-linearized equations
are derived under this assumption.
The RE hypothesis does not necessarily determine a unique set of model-consistent
probability beliefs; because it is a consistency criterion, rather than a hypothesis
about how beliefs are formed, it essentially deﬁnes a ﬁxed-point problem. RE beliefs
are a ﬁxed point of the mapping from possible subjective probabilities into the implied
objective probabilities; see Evans and Honkapohja (2001) for further discussion of this
“T-mapping.” Such a ﬁxed-point problem may or may not have a solution, and the
solution may or may not be unique. In the case of a linear system such as (1.23),
Blanchard and Kahn (1980) establish that the existence and uniqueness of bounded
solutions depend on the eigenvalues of the matrix B. Because no elements of zt are
predetermined, RE equilibrium is determinate (a unique bounded RE solution exists)
if and only if both eigenvalues of B lie inside the unit circle. Under the assumption
that the response coeﬃcients in (1.21) satisfy ϕπ , ϕy ≥ 0, one can show (Woodford,
2003, chap. 4) that this condition is satisﬁed if and only if the response coeﬃcients
also satisfy
1−β
ϕπ +
ϕy > 1,
(1.24)
κ
sometimes called the “Taylor Principle.”14 If monetary policy satisﬁes (1.24), (1.23)
can be “solved forward” for zt as a linear function of current and expected future
values of the exogenous disturbances; in the case that the exogenous disturbances
follow linear-Markovian dynamics, so that Et ξ t+1 = Λξ t for some stable matrix Λ,
this solution is given by
zt = Z ξ t ,
(1.25)
14

See Proposition 4.3 in Woodford (2003, chap. 4). Woodford analyzes a system of the form
(1.23) but in which the vector zt has inﬂation and the output gap as elements. But since this vector
is a non-singular linear transformation of the vector zt used here (plus an exogenous term, which
does not aﬀect the determinacy calculation), the eigenvalues of the matrix B in Woodford (2003)
are the same as those of the matrix B here.

14

where15
Z≡

∞
∑

B j bΛj .

j=0

The implied responses of inﬂation, output and interest rates to exogenous disturbances of various kinds are discussed further in Woodford (2003, chap. 4) and Gali
(2008, chap. 3).
If instead (1.24) is not satisﬁed, there are an inﬁnite number of REE (even restricting our attention to bounded solutions), including solutions in which inﬂation
and output ﬂuctuate in response to “sunspots” (random events with no consequences
for the economic fundamentals ξ t ) or in which the ﬂuctuations in inﬂation and output
are arbitrarily large relative to the magnitude of the exogenous disturbances. In the
case of such a policy, the economy may be vulnerable to instability due purely to the
volatility of expectations, even under the assumption that the economy must evolve
in accordance with an REE. Because instability of this kind is undesirable, it is often
argued that a policy commitment should be chosen that ensures the existence of a
determinate RE equilibrium (see, e.g., Woodford, 2003, chaps. 2, 4); in the context of
New Keynesian models of the kind sketched here, this provides an argument for the
desirability of an interest-rate rule that conforms to the Taylor Principle (see, e.g.,
Clarida, et al., 2000).16 Apart from the use of the determinacy result as a criterion
for the choice of a monetary policy rule, the predicted character of the ﬂuctuations
due to self-fulﬁlling expectations when the Taylor Principle is not satisﬁed has been
proposed by some as a positive theory of the aggregate ﬂuctuations observed during
periods when monetary policy has arguably been relatively “passive” (e.g., Clarida
et al., 2000; Lubik and Schorfheide, 2004). As discussed below, however, relaxation
of the RE hypothesis opens up additional possibilities for instability under regimes
that fail to pin down expectations suﬃciently precisely.
Some argue that avoidance of indeterminacy of REE need not be a concern when
15

Note that this inﬁnite sum must converge, because we have assumed that both B and Λ have
all eigenvalues inside the unit circle.
16
Some object to this argument for the Taylor Principle on the ground that it ensures only a locally
unique REE — there is only one equilibrium in which the endogenous variables remain forever near
the target steady state — but does not exclude the possibility of other REE, including sunspot
equilibria, that do not remain near the steady state (e.g., Benhabib et al., 2001). This is issue is
beyond the scope of the current review, owing to our reliance on a local log-linear characterization
of equilibrium dynamics; but see Woodford (2003, chap. 2, sec. 4) for further discussion.

15

choosing a monetary policy rule, on the ground that even in the indeterminate case,
there is no reason to expect people’s expectations to coordinate on a sunspot equilibrium, or even on one with excessive ﬂuctuations in response to fundamental disturbances (e.g., McCallum, 1983). Such authors argue that a model’s positive prediction
should be based on some further reﬁnement of the set of equilibria, such as a restriction to Markovian equilibria, in which endogenous variables depend only on those
aspects of the state of the world that aﬀect either the equilibrium relations that determine those variables, or the conditional probabilities of states that will be relevant
for equilibrium determination in the future.17
If {ξ t } is Markovian in the above example, this would mean restricting attention
to REE of the form (1.25), for some matrix Z. Since (1.25) represents an REE if and
only if the matrix Z satisﬁes
Z = BZΛ + b,
and these are a system of 6 linear equations for the 6 elements of Z, there is a
unique solution of this form for generic parameter values, even when the monetary
policy rule fails to satisfy (1.24). (McCallum, 1983, calls this the “minimum-statevariable solution.”) But the question whether, or under what circumstances, we
should expect people to coordinate on the particular expectations speciﬁed by the
Markovian solution is a question that cannot be answered by the RE hypothesis
itself; and the consideration of plausible restrictions on expectations that do not
simply assume RE can be of help in justifying a particular selection from among the
set of REE, as proposed by McCallum.

2

Rationalizable TE Dynamics

As discussed in the introduction, one broad approach to the formulation of a criterion
for reasonableness of beliefs — without simply postulating an exact correspondence
between people’s forecasts and those that are correct (according to one’s model of
the economy) — is to assume that people should correctly understand the economic
model, and be able to form correct inferences from it about possible future outcomes.
This approach supposes that beliefs should be reﬁned through a process of reﬂection,
17

This reﬁnement is closely related to the idea of restricting attention to the Markov perfect
equilibria of dynamic games (Maskin and Tirole, 2001).

16

independent of experience and not necessarily occurring in real time, that Guesnerie (1992) calls eduction. While RE beliefs would certainly withstand a process of
scrutiny of this kind, such beliefs need not be the only ones that could be rationalized
in this way.

2.1

“Eductive Stability” Analysis

For the sake of concreteness, let us consider the case of Ricardian expectations and
monetary policy speciﬁed by (1.21). The assumption that people in the economy “understand the model” means, in the present context, that people understand that the
TE dynamics of inﬂation, output and interest rates will be determined by equations
(1.16), (1.17) and (1.21) each period, given the average one-period-ahead forecasts of
others. In order for someone’s expectations regarding the paths of the endogenous
variables to be consistent with this knowledge, the expected paths must be able to be
generated by these equations, under some supposition about the average expectations
of others.
Let a possible conjecture about the evolution of average one-period-ahead forecasts
be speciﬁed by a vector stochastic process e ≡ {et }, where at any date the two
∫
∫
i
elements of et specify Êti v̄t+1
di and Êtj p∗j
t+1 dj. For any such evolution of average
forecasts, the structural equations determine unique TE processes {π t , Yt , it }. Hence
any agent (household or ﬁrm) that expects average expectations to evolve in the future
in accordance with the process e, and that understands the model, must (in order to
have internally consistent beliefs) forecast precisely this particular evolution of the
variables {π t , Yt , it }. There is then a unique internally consistent anticipated evolution
i
of this agent’s own one-period-ahead forecasts {Êti v̄t+1
} (in the case of a household),
implied by (1.10), and similarly a unique internally consistent anticipated evolution
{Êtj p∗j
t+1 } (in the case of a ﬁrm), implied by (1.15). This allows us to determine a
new vector stochastic process e′ ≡ {e′t } that describes the one-period-ahead forecasts
that must be made by agents who understand the model and believe that the average
forecasts of others will evolve according to e.
Let Ψ denote the mapping that determines e′ = Ψ(e) in the way just described.
Then individual beliefs ei are consistent with knowledge of the model only if there
exists some speciﬁcation of average beliefs e such that ei = Ψ(e). In this case we can
say that the beliefs ei can be rationalized by the conjecture e about average beliefs.

17

Because of the linearity of the mapping Ψ, it is evident that if all agents understand
the model, a speciﬁcation of average beliefs e is rationalizable if and only if there exists
some conjecture about average beliefs e1 such that e = Ψ(e1 ). But if in addition all
agents understand that all agents understand the model, their conjectures about
average beliefs are consistent with this knowledge only if e1 can itself be similarly
rationalized, which is to say, if there exists a conjecture e2 such that e1 = Ψ(e2 ). Any
number of levels of rationalization might be demanded in a similar way.
Even if we assume that agents’ forecasts should be grounded in reasoning of this
kind, it may be reasonable only to demand some ﬁnite number of levels of rationalization, either because it is only assumed that people understand that others understand
... that others understand the model, to some ﬁnite order of recursion; or because it
is not considered practical for agents to check their beliefs for this degree of internal
consistency beyond some ﬁnite number of levels.18 In this case, kth-order beliefs (for
some ﬁnite k) are allowed to be speciﬁed arbitrarily (required to be internally consistent, but not necessarily consistent with understanding the model). In this case,
obtaining deﬁnite conclusions requires a speciﬁc theory of kth-order beliefs (perhaps
some fairly simple speciﬁcation), or at least some bounds on the class of possible
speciﬁcations of kth-order beliefs that may be entertained.
Alternatively, one may, as in the literature on “rationalizable equilibria” in game
theory (Bernheim, 1984; Pearce, 1984), require that beliefs be consistent with an
inﬁnite hierarchy of beliefs, each level of which is rationalized by the next higher
level of beliefs. RE beliefs represent one possible type of rationalizable beliefs in this
sense; but not all rationalizable beliefs need be RE beliefs, and even when REE is
determinate, there may be a large multiplicity of rationalizable beliefs, even under the
requirement that beliefs satisfy some uniform bound at all levels. Guesnerie (1992,
2005) calls an investigation of whether the REE beliefs are the unique rationalizable
beliefs “eductive stability analysis.” If the REE is eductively stable, he considers
the REE outcome to be a reasonable prediction of one’s model; but if not, the other
rationalizable paths are taken to be equally plausible predictions.
The existence of a large set of possible equilibrium outcomes, including the possibility of ﬂuctuations in response to sunspots, or large ﬂuctuations in response to small
18

See, e.g., Phelps (1983) or Evans and Ramey (1992) for proposals of this kind. Evans and
Ramey propose to endogenize the number of levels of rationalization in terms of “calculation costs”
involved in iterating the mapping Ψ another time.

18

changes in fundamentals, is regarded as an undesirable form of instability. Hence
Guesnerie proposes as a criterion for policy choice the desirability of ﬁnding a policy
under which the REE is eductively stable.19 This is in the spirit of the proposal,
discussed above, that policy be designed to ensure determinacy of RE equilibrium,
but is an even stronger requirement, since uniqueness of rationalizable equilibrium
necessarily implies determinacy of REE, while the converse is not true.

2.2

The Taylor Principle and Determinacy Reconsidered

As an illustration, let us consider whether a monetary policy rule of the form (1.21)
ensures unique (uniformly bounded) rationalizable dynamics. To simplify, as in Guesnerie (2008), let us consider the limiting case of perfectly ﬂexible prices. In this limit,
output Yt is determined by exogenous fundamentals, and (1.16) and (1.21) jointly
determine it and π t given expectations and exogenous fundamentals. Calculations
are also simpliﬁed if there are assumed to be no exogenous disturbances (including
no variation in Yt ), as the issue of the multiplicity of solutions is unaﬀected by the
amplitude of disturbances. Hence the monetary policy rule (1.21) reduces simply to
it = ϕπ π t . REE is determinate if and only if ϕπ > 1.20 When this condition is satisﬁed,
the unique bounded REE has v̄t = 0 for all t, implying that it = π t = 0 for all t.
While ϕπ > 1 is therefore also a necessary condition for uniqueness of the rationalizable dynamics, it is not suﬃcient. Guesnerie (2008) shows that if 1/2 < β < 1
and
ϕπ > (2β − 1)−1 > 1,
(2.1)
then even though REE is determinate, there is a large multiplicity of uniformly
bounded rationalizable equilibria. For example, consider the hierarchy of beliefs that
may support a rationalizable TE at some date t. The requirement of rationalizability
does not establish any necessary linkages between what happens at diﬀerent dates:
only between what happens at date t and what people expect at date t that people
will expect at later dates about what people will expect ... will happen at still later
dates. Thus for each date t we may separately specify what happens at that date,
along with the hierarchy of forecasts of forecasts that rationalize it.
19

Since the REE is necessarily a rationalizable equilibrium, uniqueness of rationalizable equilibrium requires that the REE be the only such equilibrium.
20
This is the implication of (1.24) in the limit in which κ → ∞.

19

Substituting the policy rule for it in (1.10), and then using (1.8) to eliminate π t ,
we obtain the requirement that
i
v̄ti = (1 − βϕπ )v̄t + β Êti v̄t+1

(2.2)

for all i. In a rationalizable TE, not only must this hold at date t, but everyone must
expect anyone else to expect anyone else ... to expect it to hold at any future date.
One such speciﬁcation of the hierarchy of beliefs is given by v̄ti = ϵ, and
in
Êti1 Êti12 · · · Êt+j
v̄ in = (−µ)1−n ϕπ ϵ,
n−1 t+jn
in
Êti1 Êti12 · · · Êt+j
v̄ n+1 = (−µ)−n ϵ
n−1 t+jn
i

for any sequences of households and dates of the kind assumed above, where ϵ is an
arbitrary real number and
βϕπ − 1
µ≡
.
(1 − β)ϕπ
These beliefs satisfy all of the requirements for rationalizability for any real number
ϵ, as discussed further in the Appendix (available online). If (2.1) is satisﬁed, µ > 1,
and forecasts of all orders also satisfy a uniform bound. There is thus (at least) a
continuum of uniformly bounded rationalizable TE. Moreover, ϵ may represent the
realization of a “sunspot” event unrelated to fundamentals, so that there are seen to
exist bounded sunspot equilibria, despite the fact that monetary policy satisﬁes the
Taylor Principle.
If instead
1 < ϕπ < (2β − 1)−1 ,
(2.3)
one can show that the determinate REE is also the only uniformly bounded rationalizable TE. Note that (2.2) implies that
∫
−1
i
v̄t = ϕπ
Êti v̄t+1
di.
(2.4)
Hence if it is common knowledge that there exists some ﬁnite bound κ such that
|v̄ti | ≤ κ for all i and t, it follows from (2.4) that it must also be common knowledge
that |v̄t | ≤ ϕ−1
π κ for all t. Using this bound, (2.2) then implies that
|v̄ti | ≤ |1 − βϕπ |ϕ−1
π κ + βκ = λκ,

20

where
−1
0 < λ ≡ max{ϕ−1
π , 2β − ϕπ } < 1.

Hence common knowledge that |v̄ti | ≤ κ implies that it must be common knowledge
that |v̄ti | ≤ λκ. By the same reasoning, it must then be common knowledge that
|v̄ti | ≤ λ2 κ, and so on, until a bound smaller than any positive quantity is established.
Thus it must be common knowledge that vti = 0 for all i and all t, and hence that
it = π t = 0 for all t.
In such a case, Guesnerie says that the REE is “eductively stable,” and argues
that there is reason (in this case, and this case only) to expect this equilibrium
to obtain. While this is possible, the restrictions on the coeﬃcient ϕπ are much
more stringent than those required for determinacy under the RE hypothesis. If,
for example, β = 0.99 (a common calibration for quarterly New Keynesian models),
(2.3) requires that 1 < ϕπ < 1.02. This very tight bound is violated by the rule
recommended by Taylor (1993), as well as by most estimated central-bank reaction
functions.
If the avoidance of instability due to self-fulﬁlling expectations of this particular
type is a design criterion for monetary policy, it follows that one must be careful
about seeking to stabilize inﬂation in the face of real disturbances simply by using a
rule of the form (1.21) with a very strong inﬂation response coeﬃcient. Instead, the
simultaneous achievement of eductive stability and stable inﬂation despite exogenous
disturbances is possible only in the case of a policy rule that directly responds to
the underlying determinants of inﬂation, namely, the exogenous disturbances and
observed subjective forecasts.

3

Learning Dynamics

An alternative way of disciplining the speciﬁcation of expectations does not demand
that they be consistent with a correct structural model of the variables that are
forecasted, but instead requires that the probabilities assigned to possible future
outcomes are not too diﬀerent from the probabilities with which outcomes actually
occur. The idea is that it is not reasonable to suppose that people should fail to
notice predictable regularities in economic data, whether or not they understand why
those regularities exist.

21

But which regularities are the ones that one can reasonably expect people to take
into account? A common answer assumes that forecasts should be derived through
extrapolation from prior observations. Such approaches, based on explicit models
of learning, have the advantage of explaining how the postulated similarity between
subjective beliefs and actual patterns in the data comes about. They also reduce
the problem of indeterminacy of the model’s predictions, pervasive in the case of
approaches like those discussed thus far, which demand only that beliefs be a ﬁxed
point of a certain mapping. While there may be many possible asymptotic states of
belief under an explicit model of learning, with the one that is reached depending
on initial conditions and/or random events along the way, a model of learning often
makes a unique prediction conditional upon initial conditions and the subsequent
history of shocks.
The most common approach of this general type assumes that agents’ forecasts at
any time t are derived from an econometric model, estimated using the data observed
up until that date.21 Let the model be speciﬁed by a vector θ of parameters, and
suppose that any model θ implies that forecasts et should be some function of the
current state ζ t . Then in any period t, new estimates θ̂t and ζ̂ t are formed of the
parameters and of the state, based on the data available at that point. Under a
recursive estimation scheme, the new estimates are functions of the prior estimates
and of the new data observed since the formation of the prior estimates,
θ̂t = Θt (θ̂t−1 , ζ t−1 , xt ),

(3.1)

ζ̂ t = Zt (θ̂t−1 , ζ̂ t−1 , xt )

(3.2)

where xt is some vector of new data.22 Given these new estimates, period t forecasts
are given by a function23
et = Ψ(ζ̂ t ; θ̂t ).
(3.3)
21

See Evans and Honkapohja (2001, 2009) and Sargent (2008) for reviews of work of this kind.
The time subscripts on the functions Θt (·) and Zt (·) allow for the possibility that the updating
rules may depend on the size of the existing dataset. Equation (3.15) below for the evolution of the
mean estimates provides a simple example.
23
Here, for simplicity, I assume that every household i and every ﬁrm j forecasts in the same way,
using the same observed data, so that average forecasts are simply the common forecasts, given by
a function of the common estimates. One may, however, allow each household and to have its own
i
estimated model θ̂t , evolving according to a separate equation of the form (3.1), and then deﬁne
∫ i i
i
Êt v̄t+1 di as a function of the entire probability distribution of estimates {θ̂t }, rather than simply
as a function of a single estimate θ̂t ; and similarly with the ﬁrms.
22

22

Given these beliefs, the TE values of the variables zt are determined by (1.22), given
the exogenous disturbances ξ t . This system, possibly along with additional structural
equations, determines the new data xt .24 Thus the system of equations (1.22) and
(3.1)–(3.3) jointly determines θ̂t , ζ̂ t , et , and xt , given the lagged estimates and the
disturbances ξ t . Solution of these equations in each of a succession of periods yields
the predicted dynamics of both beliefs and endogenous variables, as a function of the
history of exogenous disturbances.

3.1

Restricted Perceptions Equilibrium

A focus of much of the literature on TE dynamics with learning has been to ask
whether learning dynamics should converge asymptotically to REE; indeed, much
of the early literature (beginning with Bray, 1982) was concerned more with the
foundations of the REE concept — seeking to provide a causal explanation for how
the postulated coincidence between subjective and objective probabilities could come
about — than with the provision of an alternative model of economic dynamics.
Obviously this is only possible if the class of forecasting models that are contemplated
includes a model θRE that produces the forecasts associated with the REE. If one
does not assume that economic agents are endowed with knowledge of the structural
model, and hence with the information required to compute the REE, it is not obvious
that their forecasting approach should even entertain as a possibility the precise
forecasting rule implied by the REE; but if no value of θ results in forecasts of this
kind, convergence to REE beliefs (and hence to the REE dynamics) is obviously
impossible.
There might, however, still be convergence of beliefs to some ﬁxed point θ̄ with
the property that under the TE dynamics generated by the beliefs θ̄, θ̄ is the model
(among the class of models considered) that yields the best forecasts (under some
24

It is common in the literature on learning dynamics to specify a recursive causal structure by
assuming that the data xt are actually determined in period t − 1 (i.e., they include π t−1 rather
than π t , and so on). In this case, all of the arguments of the functions in (3.1)–(3.2) are predetermined, so that these equations determine the new estimates (θ̂t , ζ̂ t ) independently of the period-t
shocks; equation (3.3) then determines the forecasts et ; and ﬁnally equations (1.22) determine the
endogenous variables zt given the shocks. But it is not obvious why, in the logic of the NK model
presented here, one should suppose that period t forecasts must be made prior to the observation of
period t endogenous variables.

23

criterion that is used for the estimation). For example, suppose that the class of
models considered consists of those in which both v̄t+1 and p∗t+1 are linear functions
of ζ t and unforecastable disturbances at t + 1; that the elements of ζ t are all part
of the history of the observables {xt , xt−1 , . . .}, so that ζ t is observable; and that the
coeﬃcients of the linear model are estimated so as to minimize the mean squared
′
error of the forecasts of v̄t+1 and p∗t+1 . Then forecasts will be of the form et = θ̂ ζ t ,
where the vector ζ t is assumed to include an element equal to 1 each period; and
with an inﬁnite sequence of data generated by the TE dynamics under beliefs θ̄, the
estimated coeﬃcients will satisfy
′

θ̂ = E[zt+1 ζ ′t ]E[ζ t ζ ′t ]−1 ,

(3.4)

where E[·] indicates an unconditional expectation under the ergodic TE dynamics
resulting from some beliefs θ. Alternatively, we can write et = Pt [zt+1 ], where Pt [·]
denotes the linear projection of the random variable inside the brackets on the space
spanned by the elements of ζ t .
The beliefs θ̄ constitute a restricted perceptions equilibrium (RPE) if the optimal
estimate θ̂ given by (3.4) is equal to θ̄ when the unconditional expectations are the
ones implied by the TE dynamics generated by beliefs θ = θ̄ (Evans and Honkapohja,
2001, chap. 13; Branch, 2004). This is a weaker requirement than that of an REE, as
forecasts are assumed to be optimal only within a particular class of linear models,
rather than within the class of all forecasts that might be made on the basis of
information available in period t. Note that in the special case that the optimal
forecast of zt+1 is indeed a linear function of ζ t , so that
Et [zt+1 ] = Pt [zt+1 ] = T (θ)′ ζ t

(3.5)

when the TE dynamics are generated by beliefs θ, then (3.4) implies that θ̂ = T (θ).
Hence in this case, θ̄ describes RPE beliefs if and only if T (θ̄) = θ̄, which is also the
condition for REE beliefs. More generally, however, when the forecasting variables
ζ t do not span a large enough space, or at any rate not the correct one, RPE beliefs
will diﬀer from REE beliefs.
Conditions can be established under which the learning dynamics resulting from
repeated re-estimation of an OLS forecasting equation (least-squares learning dynamics) converge with probability 1 to an RPE as the length of the observed data set
grows large enough. But even in such a case, the dynamics need not coincide, even
24

asymptotically, with the model’s REE dynamics. Fuster et al. (2010, 2011, 2012)
provide examples in which more complex dynamics of asset prices, consumption and
investment are implied by RPE dynamics than would be associated with REE dynamics of the same models; here the suboptimality of forecasts results from estimation of
lower-order autoregressive models of the data than the correct model.
3.1.1

Application to the NK Model

Suppose that we equate the subjective expectations in (1.22) with linear projections,
to obtain
zt = BPt zt+1 + bξ t .
(3.6)
This is the set of conditions that must be satisﬁed in order for the evolution of the
expectational variables {zt } to represent an RPE, under either of two possible interpretations of how forecasts for horizons more than period in the future are formed.
On the one hand, we might assume, as Preston (2005) does, that forecasts for
arbitrary future horizons are formed by estimating a vector-autoregressive system
Pt xt+1 = Λx ζ t ,

Pt ζ t+1 = Λζ ζ t ,

where xt is the vector of variables that must be forecasted, other than the future values
of the forecasting variables ζ t themselves. Forecasts for arbitrary future horizons can
then be computed as
i
i
· · · Êt+j−1
xt+j = Λx Λζj−1 ζ t
Êti xt+j = Êti Êt+1

for any j ≥ 1. That is, forecasts for horizons more than one period in the future are
formed by forecasting one’s own future one-period-ahead forecasts, while one-periodahead forecasts are given by linear projections on the forecasting variables ζ t .25 Given
forecasts of this kind, the deﬁnitions (1.9) and (1.12) of the expectational variables
then imply that their evolution must satisfy (3.6).
Alternatively, we might assume, as Evans and McGough (2009) propose, that
people estimate the values of the expectational variables zt , not using the deﬁnitions
(1.9) and (1.12) of these variables in terms of long-horizon forecasts of variables with
25

An advantage of this method is that forecasts Êti xt+j can be formed for arbitrarily large j,
using coeﬃcients that can be estimated using ﬁnite data sets, as there is no need to actually regress
observed values of xt+j on the prior forecasting variables ζ t .

25

objective deﬁnitions, but instead using the recursive relations (1.10) and (1.15) to
estimate values on the basis of one’s current forecasts of one’s own estimates in the
next period. These forecasts of one’s own future estimates can be obtained by collecting data on what one’s estimates have been, and regressing them on the previous
period’s values of the forecasting variables ζ t . Also under this assumption, if there
is convergence to an RPE, the expectational variables will necessarily satisfy (3.6).
Note that these two approaches to “least-squares learning” are not mathematically
equivalent, but if in each case there is convergence to an RPE, then the RPE is the
same in both cases.26
Given a solution for the dynamics of the expectational variables {zt }, the dynamics
of inﬂation, output, and interest rates are then determined by equations (1.8), (1.11)
and (1.21), as under other speciﬁcations of expectations. The diﬀerence between
REE and RPE predictions then stems entirely from the diﬀerence between (3.6) and
(1.23). When (3.5) holds, the predictions are necessarily the same.
3.1.2

Failure of Ricardian Equivalence

As an illustration of how macroeconomic dynamics in an RPE may diﬀer from the
REE dynamics predicted in the case of a given policy rule, let us reconsider the
argument for Ricardian equivalence. Suppose that expectations are not Ricardian,
i.e., that people do not assume that the future path of primary surpluses must satisfy
(1.7), and instead estimate an econometric model to forecast future surpluses that
does not impose this condition as an a priori restriction.27 The TE dynamics are then
determined by the system consisting of (1.5), (1.17) and (1.18), given expectations of
i
the future evolution of the variables {p∗j
t , vt } deﬁned by (1.6) and (1.15), and speciﬁed
paths for the policy variables {it , st }.
Suppose further that monetary policy is described by a Taylor rule of the form
(1.21), the coeﬃcients of which satisfy the Taylor Principle (1.24), while ﬁscal policy
26

Since the learning dynamics outside the RPE are in general not identical, the conditions for
convergence to an RPE are not always the same in the two cases.
27
Note that each household needs only to forecast its own tax obligations in excess of the value of
government purchases; its use of a forecasting model that violates (1.7) does not necessarily imply
that it believes that aggregate tax collections do not satisfy the present-value relation. While I
assume that the tax obligations of all households are the same, this is not necessarily known to the
households.

26

is described by a feedback rule of the form
st = ϕb bt + ϵst ,

(3.7)

1 − β < ϕb < 1,

(3.8)

where
and ϵst is an exogenous disturbance. This speciﬁcation, together with (1.5), implies
debt dynamics that remain bounded in the case of any bounded processes for inﬂation
and the nominal interest rate, and hence that model-consistent expectations will be
Ricardian, in the case of any REE involving bounded ﬂuctuations. Such a speciﬁcation of monetary and ﬁscal policy implies the existence of a determinate REE in the
case of any bounded disturbance processes, and in this REE, the ﬁscal shocks {ϵst }
have no eﬀects on the evolution of output, inﬂation or interest rates.28 Hence in such
a model, rational expectations imply Ricardian equivalence.
Let us consider instead the possible character of RPE dynamics. Suppose, for
example, that the vector of forecasting variables ζ t consists only of the single state
variable st .29 Then RPE forecasts are of the form et = ψst ,30 for some vector of
coeﬃcients ψ. Substituting these forecasts into (1.17) and (1.18), one can solve for
the TE values of π t , yt , it , and bt+1 as linear functions of bt , st and ξ t .
The calculations are especially simple if we consider a case in which ϕy = sb =
κ = 0, and assume that there are no exogenous disturbances other than the ﬁscal
shock {ϵst }, which is assumed to be unforecastable (white noise). In this limiting case,
there are no equilibrium ﬂuctuations in π t or it , and the solutions for yt and bt+1 are
given by
yt = (β −1 − 1)(bt − st ) + ψ v st ,
(3.9)
28

See Woodford (2001) for further discussion of the consequences of a “locally Ricardian” ﬁscal
policy of this kind, under an REE analysis.
29
Note that under the REE dynamics, if the disturbances are all unforecastable (white noise),
none of the state variables that must be forecasted by households or ﬁrms are forecastable, except
the primary surplus (that must be forecasted in order to estimate vti ). It is perhaps not implausible
to suppose that households forecast future primary surpluses using only the current level of the
surplus. This would not, however, constitute a model-consistent forecast, as (1.5) and (3.7) imply
that an optimal forecast of future primary surpluses depends on the value of bt+1 , or alternatively
upon both st and bt .
∫
30
i
In this non-Ricardian case, the ﬁrst element of et is assumed to be Êti vt+1
di rather than
∫ i i
Êt v̄t+1 di.

27

bt+1 = β −1 (bt − st ),

(3.10)

where ψ v (to be determined) is the ﬁrst element of ψ. It then follows from (1.6) that
vti = yt − (1 − β)bt

(3.11)

for all i.
From this one can show that
e1t = Pt [yt+1 − (1 − β)bt+1 ]
= (β −1 − 1)(1 − β)Pt [bt+1 ] + (ψ v + 1 − β −1 )Pt [st+1 ]
= [(1 − β − ϕb )(β −1 − 1) + ϕb ψ v ]Pt [bt+1 ],
where for any variable xt+1 known at date t, Pt [xt+1 ] denotes the linear projection
of xt+1 on st . (Here the ﬁrst line uses the fact that (3.11) must also hold at date
t + 1; the second line uses the fact that (3.9) must also hold at t + 1; and the third
line uses the fact that st+1 is determined by (3.7).) Writing Pt [bt+1 ] = Λb st , where
the coeﬃcient Λb depends only on β and ϕb (not the assumed value of ψ v ), one then
observes that ψ v must satisfy the consistency condition
ψ v = [(1 − β − ϕb )(β −1 − 1) + ϕb ψ v ]Λb .

(3.12)

Under assumption (3.8), this equation has a unique solution for ψ v , and implies
that31
ψ v < β −1 − 1.
(3.13)
Equation (3.9) then implies that in the unique RPE, an exogenous positive innovation
in the size of the primary surplus st lowers current output yt . It will also reduce the
debt bt+1 carried into the next period, with persistent eﬀects on economic activity in
later periods as well. Hence Ricardian equivalence does not hold in the RPE, even
though the speciﬁcation of ﬁscal policy implies that in the model’s unique bounded
REE, ﬁscal shocks have no eﬀect on output, either immediately or subsequently.
While (3.10) implies that even under the RPE dynamics, a correct forecast would
satisfy (1.7) at all times, households’ forecasts do not satisfy this condition, as a
resulting of forecasting future surpluses purely on the basis of the current primary
surplus; and because of this systematic forecasting error, Ricardian equivalence fails.
31

See the Appendix for details.

28

3.2

“Learnability” of REE

Even when the class of contemplated forecasting models does include the REE forecasts, and even when the estimator used to determine θ̂ is one that should be asymptotically consistent, in the case of a suﬃciently long series of data generated by the
REE, it need not follow that θ̂ must converge asymptotically to θRE under the TE
dynamics with learning. The reason is that, at each point in time, the observed data
will actually be generated by the behavior that results from current beliefs θ̂t , and
not by REE behavior. If a departure of people’s estimates from θRE gives rise to patterns in the data that justify estimates even farther from θRE , the learning dynamics
may diverge from RE beliefs almost surely, even if people start out with beliefs quite
near to RE beliefs. The question whether the REE can in fact be reached as the
asymptotic outcome of a learning process of the kind described above is therefore a
non-trivial one. Authors such as Bullard and Mitra (2002) and Evans and Honkapohja (2003, 2006) propose as a design criterion for a monetary policy rule not only
that the rule should be consistent with a desirable REE, but that the rule should
imply that learning dynamics should converge to that REE, so that the desirable
equilibrium is “learnable.”
3.2.1

Adaptive Estimation of Means

As a simple example, suppose that the disturbances ξ t are all independently and
identically distributed (i.i.d.) random variables, with mean zero. In this case, there
is a unique Markovian REE, in which zt = bξ t each period, and the RE forecasts
satisfy Et zt+1 = 0 at all times. In this equilibrium, π t , yt and it will also each be
a linear function of ξ t , and the RE forecast of each variable will be zero (i.e., the
constant steady-state value) at all times. Suppose furthermore that the class of
forecasting models considered by decisionmakers consists of all models under which
the forecast of each variable is a constant (that is, people believe that each of these
is an i.i.d. random variable, and seek only to estimate its mean). This simple class of
models includes the forecasting rule used in the Markovian REE, so the assumption
of such a restricted class does not in itself rule out the possibility of convergence to
RE beliefs.
Finally, suppose that people estimate the means of each of the stationary variables

29

using the sample mean of the values observed to date, so that
−1

x̂t = t

t
∑

xs ,

(3.14)

s=1

where xt refers to any of the variables π t , yt , it or to any of the elements of ξ t ; x̂t is
the estimate of the variable’s mean at date t (common to all agents); and 1 is the
date at which the available data series begins.32 This can be written recursively in
the form
x̂t = x̂t−1 + γ t (xt − x̂t−1 ),
(3.15)
where the “gain” γ t = 1/t indicates the degree to which estimates are adjusted in
response to an observation that diﬀers from what has been forecasted. Note that if the
case that the economy were to reach the REE, each of the variables xt would indeed
be i.i.d., and the estimators (3.14) would almost surely converge asymptotically to
the true means (and hence to the REE beliefs), by the law of large numbers. Hence
the estimation strategy is not inherently incompatible with learning the REE beliefs.
Any set of estimates of the means implies forecasts given by33
i
Êti v̄t+1
= ŷt − ĝt −

Êtj p∗j
t+1 =

σ
(βı̂t − π̂ t ),
1−β

1
π̂ t + ξ ŷt + µ̂t ,
1 − αβ

(3.16)
(3.17)

for each household and each ﬁrm. Hence in vector form we can write
et = C x̂t ,

(3.18)

for a certain matrix of coeﬃcients C, where x̂t is the vector of estimates (3.14). The
system consisting of (1.16), (1.17) and (1.21) allows us to solve for TE values
xt = D et + d ξ t ,

(3.19)

for certain matrices D and d, where xt is the vector of actual values of the variables
xt . Equations (3.15), (3.18) and (3.19) then completely describe the TE dynamics of
32

This is an example of least-squares learning, in which the vector st has a single element, 1, each
period.
33
Here I use the notation ĝt for the current estimate of the mean of the composite disturbance
gτ − Yτn , for simplicity.

30

actual values and forecasts with adaptive learning, given the exogenous disturbances
{ξ t } and initial prior estimates x̂t−1 .
Combining these equations, we obtain a law of motion
[I − γ t DC] x̂t = (1 − γ t )x̂t−1 + γ t dξ t

(3.20)

for the estimates; thus the TE dynamics are uniquely deﬁned as long as the matrix
in square brackets is non-singular, as I shall assume.34 In fact, all that matters about
these estimates is the implied forecasts et ; so we can reduce the dimension of the
system (3.20) by pre-multiplying by the matrix C, yielding
[I − γ t A] ∆et = −γ t [I − A] et−1 + γ t aξ t ,

(3.21)

where A ≡ CD, a ≡ Cd. This equation determines the dynamics of the forecasts {et }
given initial forecasts and the evolution of the exogenous disturbances; the paths of
the other relevant variables are then given by (3.19). The TE dynamics converge
asymptotically to the REE dynamics (and subjective expectations coincide asymptotically with the REE forecasts) if and only if et → 0 for large t.
Using the stochastic approximation methods introduced by Marcet and Sargent
(1989) and expounded in detail in Evans and Honkapohja (2001), one can show that
in the case of a decreasing gain sequence {γ t } like the one implied by (3.14), the path
for {et } implied by the stochastic law of motion (3.21) eventually converges to one of
the trajectories of the ordinary diﬀerential equation (ODE) system
ė = −[I − A] e(τ ),

(3.22)

∑
where τ is a re-scaled time variable deﬁned by τ t ≡ ts=1 γ s , and the dot indicates a
derivative with respect to τ .
The ODE system (3.22) has a unique rest point ē = 0 (corresponding to REE
forecasts) if and only if the 2 × 2 matrix A has no eigenvalue exactly equal to 1 (so
that I − A is non-singular); and the trajectories of (3.22) converge asymptotically
to this rest point if and only if both eigenvalues of A have real parts less than 1 (so
that both eigenvalues of I − A have positive real parts). If the latter condition holds,
(3.21) implies that et → 0 with probability 1 as t grows large; beliefs asymptotically
34

For any matrices C and D, this will be true for all small enough values of the gain γ t . We are
here only concerned with TE dynamics in the low-gain case.

31

approach the REE forecasts, and one may say that the REE is “learnable” following
the procedure postulated above. If, instead, A has an eigenvalue with real part
greater than 1, the trajectories of (3.22) diverge from the rest point for almost all
initial conditions, and correspondingly, one can show that there is zero probability
of the beliefs implied by (3.21) remaining forever within a neighborhood of the REE
beliefs, even if people begin with initial beliefs near (or exactly equal to) the REE
beliefs.
Hence the learnability of the REE depends on the eigenvalues of A. In the case
of a policy (1.21) with ϕπ , ϕy ≥ 0, one can show that both eigenvalues of A have real
part less than 1 (implying learnability) if and only if the response coeﬃcients satisfy
(1.24) — that is, policy conforms to the Taylor Principle.35 This is identical to the
condition for determinacy of the REE dynamics, and the connection between the two
results is not accidental. The matrix A has an eigenvalue equal to 1 if and only if the
model’s steady-state inﬂation rate and output gap are indeterminate: the associated
right eigenvector ē indicates the direction in which a constant forecast (et = ē for
all t) may diﬀer from zero and still constitute a perfect foresight equilibrium if the
disturbances equal zero.36 (Any multiple of ē is also a possible perfect-foresight steady
state in such a case.) But there exists a continuum of steady states if and only if the
matrix B in (1.23) has an eigenvalue equal to 1, and ē must also be the associated
right eigenvector of B. We have seen above that B has such an eigenvalue if and only
if (1.24) holds with equality.
Intuitively, the Taylor Principle guarantees determinacy of the REE dynamics,
because perturbations of the expected future values of the elements of z result in a
current TE value of zt that is closer to zero than whatever is expected for the next
period; hence REE forecasts Et zt+j cannot be bounded for all j and also consistent
with this contraction requirement, unless they are exactly zero for all j. But the
fact that forecasts et diﬀerent from zero give rise to TE values zt that are closer to
zero (on average) also implies that adaptive learning will move the forecasts closer
to zero (on average), so that the learning dynamics eventually converge to the REE
35

In fact, when (1.24) is satisﬁed, both eigenvalues of A are inside the unit circle. When it fails,
there is a real eigenvalue greater than 1.
36
If Aē = ē, then forecasts et = ē each period lead to outcomes xt = Dē each period. Then
x̂t = Dē will be a perfect-foresight estimate each period, implying that the correct forecasts each
period will be CDē = ē.

32

forecasts.37
The analysis above assumes a very simple kind of least-squares learning, in which
the only contemplated forecasting rules are ones in which the forecasts are constants
(estimates of the means of the various variables) and the same for all horizons. But
Preston (2005) establishes the same conditions for learnability of the REE when
people use forecasting rules of the form
Êt xt+1 = â + b̂′ ξ t
for each variable x, and estimate the coeﬃcients â, b̂′ by regressing observations of
xt−j on ξ t−j−1 (for 0 ≤ j ≤ t − 1). Longer-horizon forecasts are then formed using
Êt xt+k = â + b̂′ Êt ξ t+k−1 ,
where forecasts of the future disturbances are based on estimated autoregressive models of each disturbance.38
A policy inconsistent with the Taylor Principle still leads to instability, because
perturbations of the estimated constant terms â result in average values of the variables that diﬀer from zero by an even greater amount, leading to explosive dynamics
for the estimates as above. And on the other hand, conformity to the Taylor principle remains suﬃcient for stability of the learning dynamics, since the conditions
under which estimates of the response coeﬃcients b̂′ diverge are even more restrictive
than those required for divergence of the estimates of the constant terms. Preston
also shows that the Taylor Principle is necessary and suﬃcient for learnability of the
MSV REE (1.25) using this approach, in the case that the disturbances are AR(1)
processes (and hence Markovian). This result again follows because the key to convergence to the REE forecasting rule is the convergence of the estimates of the constant
terms â, and the mean dynamics of these estimates are unaﬀected by the stationary
ﬂuctuations in the disturbances.39
37

See Woodford (2003, chap. 4, sec. 2.3) for further discussion.
See the discussion above in section 3.1.1 for further description of Preston’s method of VARbased forecasts.
39
Bullard and Mitra (2002) reach a similar conclusion, though on the basis of assumed TE dynamics derived by substituting subjective expectations for objective expectations in certain Euler
equations of the REE model, rather than deriving the TE dynamics from inﬁnite-horizon optimization under subjective expectations, as above. For comparison of this “Euler-equation approach” to
modeling learning dynamics with the one used here, see Preston (2005) and Evans and McGough
(2009).
38

33

3.2.2

The Possibility of a “Deflation Trap”

Thus under this approach we again conclude that a rule (1.21) that fails to conform
to the Taylor Principle (1.24) makes the economy vulnerable to instability due to
self-fulﬁlling ﬂuctuations, though through a diﬀerent mechanism than in section 1.5
above. The explosive dynamics of forecasts in the case of insuﬃcient feedback from
aggregate outcomes (especially for inﬂation) to the interest-rate target generalizes
the informal argument of Friedman (1968) about the instability resulting from an
interest-rate peg.40
The problem is not necessarily avoided, however, by commitment to a rule that
satisﬁes the Taylor principle. The reason is that the linear TE dynamics analyzed
above cannot hold globally; in particular, policy cannot be described by (1.21) for
all possible inﬂation rates and output gaps, because of the zero lower bound on the
nominal interest rate.41 Even if the central bank follows (1.21) with coeﬃcients satisfying (1.24) until the lower bound becomes a binding constraint, the altered response
at low levels of inﬂation and output implies the existence of a second (deﬂationary)
perfect-foresight steady state consistent with the policy rule, as discussed by Benhabib et al. (2001); and the insensitivity of the interest rate to variations in inﬂation
and output once the lower bound binds implies that the learning dynamics will be
unstable near the forecasting rule associated with the deﬂationary REE.42
This is illustrated in Figure 1, where the global behavior of the ODE system
corresponding to (3.22) is plotted now taking into account the zero lower bound
(ZLB). Note that the third row of (3.19) can be written as it = Di′ et , if we average
out the values of ξ t (in order to describe the mean dynamics, which approximately
characterize the asymptotic dynamics of our system). The asymptotic dynamics
described by (3.22) are therefore consistent with the zero lower bound as long as e(τ )
40

Howitt (1992) was the ﬁrst attempt to formalize Friedman’s argument through an analysis of
the convergence of learning dynamics to the REE.
41
The other structural relations assumed above are merely local approximations to relations that
should actually be nonlinear; but even if they are assumed to hold globally, the zero lower bound
prevents (3.21) from holding globally.
42
Evans and Honkapohja (2010) and Benhabib et al. (2012) show this in the context of NK models
with adaptive learning closely related to the one presented here.

34

remains in the region satisfying the inequality43
r̄ + Di′ e ≥ 0,

(3.23)

where r̄ > 0 is the steady-state real rate of interest.44 Because both elements of Di
are positive under the sign assumptions stated above, the region in Figure 1 where
the dynamics (3.22) apply is the region above and to the right of the line labeled
ZLB, along which (3.23) holds with equality.
When (3.23) is violated, (1.21) must instead be replaced by
it = −r̄ < 0.

(3.24)

Solving the system consisting of (1.16)–(1.17) and (3.24), one obtains a linear solution
of the form
xt = x + Det + dξ t
(3.25)
instead of (3.19). The complete TE solution for xt is then given by (3.19) when
(3.23) is satisﬁed, and (3.25) otherwise. (Note that this is a continuous, piecewise
linear solution.) Repeating the derivation of (3.22), one ﬁnds that ė is given by (3.22)
when (3.23) is satisﬁed (a region that includes a neighborhood of the origin), and
instead by
ė = −(I − A)e + Cx
(3.26)
in the region where the inequality is reversed, where A ≡ CD. (Note that this makes
ė a continuous, piecewise-linear function of e.) This is the system the trajectories of
which are plotted in Figure 1.45
One observes that the origin e = 0 (corresponding to the zero-inﬂation steady
state) is a rest point of these dynamics, and locally stable under the ODE dynamics
as discussed above. If the dynamics (3.22) applied globally (i.e., if the ZLB constraint
were not an issue), this steady state would also be globally stable: the learning
dynamics would converge to it asymptotically from all possible initial states of belief.
43

Recall that in the notation used here, it is the amount by which the nominal interest rate exceeds
its steady-state value, so that the requirement for the nominal interest rate to be non-negative is
r̄ + it ≥ 0.
44
Because we log-linearize our equations around a stationary equilibrium with zero inﬂation, r̄ is
also the steady-state nominal interest rate.
45
Analytical derivations of qualitative properties of this ﬁgure are given in the Appendix.

35

But the dynamics when the ZLB constraint binds are diﬀerent; as a consequence,
there is a second steady state in the region below the ZLB line, at
e = e∗ ≡ (I − A)−1 Cx,
corresponding to steady-state values
π ∗ = i∗ = −r̄ < 0,

y ∗ = −(1 − β)r̄/κ < 0.

Because I − A has two real eigenvalues, one positive and one negative, trajectories
of (3.26) converge to e∗ only from initial conditions along the line SM in the ﬁgure,
the one-dimensional stable manifold. Trajectories above and to the right of this
line eventually converge to the zero-inﬂation steady state, while those below and
to the left of it diverge from e∗ in the opposite direction, eventually being drawn
into (and remaining forever in) the shaded region. Because the actual dynamics of
inﬂation are stochastic (even for arbitrarily large t) rather than precisely equal to
the approximating ODE dynamics, there is actually zero probability of convergence
of the learning dynamics to the REE represented by e∗ , even from initial conditions
on the line SM ; the learning dynamics must diverge from e∗ in one direction or the
other.46
One might think that the non-learnability of the deﬂationary REE (while the
learning dynamics are instead locally convergent near the REE consistent with the
central bank’s inﬂation target) implies that one need not be concerned about the
possibility of falling into a self-fulﬁlling “deﬂation trap” of the kind stressed by Benhabib et al., on the basis of the REE analysis. But the divergent dynamics near the
46

Figure 2 of Evans and Honkapohja (2010) is qualitatively similar, though plotted in the plane
of inﬂation and output expectations (π̂ t , ŷt ). These authors obtain an autonomous diﬀerential
equation system in the π̂ − ŷ plane only by assuming that interest-rate forecasts are obtained from
inﬂation and output forecasts using people’s knowledge of the policy rule. This is not consistent
with the assumption made here that interest rates (like all other variables) are forecasted on the
basis of past observations of that variable. In particular, when trajectories in Figure 1 cross the
ZLB line, the nominal interest rate becomes positive, and under the learning rule assumed here, a
positive nominal interest rate must be expected in the future as well. Under the Evans-Honkapohja
forecasting assumption, instead, people would continue for some time to forecast a zero nominal
interest rate into the indeﬁnite future, because inﬂation and output expectations (which lag behind
actual inﬂation and output) would still be at levels that would imply an expectation that the zero
lower bound should continue (indeﬁnitely) to bind.

36

deﬂationary REE include the existence of trajectories that diverge in the direction of
ever-lower levels of inﬂation and output (those in the shaded region of the ﬁgure),47
as a result of which the learning dynamics do imply the possibility of a “deﬂation
trap,” albeit not one that involves convergence to the deﬂationary REE emphasized
by Benhabib et al. As Evans and Honkapohja (2010) and Benhabib et al. (2012) discuss, to the extent that expectations are necessarily formed in this backward-looking
way, the only way out of such a “trap” is to use other tools of policy (such as ﬁscal
stimulus48 ) to raise inﬂation and/or output long enough for inﬂation and output expectations to return to the region in which the learning dynamics can be expected
to converge toward the target REE without further artiﬁcial support. In this view,
other tools of policy have an important stabilization role to play in deep crises, even
if monetary policy alone suﬃces as a stabilization tool except when unusual shocks
drive expectations far enough away from the target REE forecasting rule.

3.3

Learning Dynamics as a Source of Persistence

Much of the early literature on TE dynamics with learning was concerned with the
question of asymptotic convergence to an REE; the positive prediction of interest was
whether an REE (or which REE) should be reached, and hence observed in practice.
But the learning dynamics themselves might also be regarded as a source of positive
predictions. One such positive prediction of particular interest is the existence of
persistent ﬂuctuations resulting from the dynamics induced by evolving estimates of
the coeﬃcients of people’s forecasting rules.
47

In fact, one can show that all trajectories that begin in the region that is below both the ZLB
line and the SM line converge eventually to the shaded region, where they remain forever, and
diverge farther and farther from the deﬂationary steady state.
48
Even if ﬁscal policy expectations are Ricardian, and the forecasts et are purely backward-looking
as assumed above, an increase in government purchases should increase output and inﬂation, by
increasing the term gt in (1.16). If a current increase in net government transfers does not reduce
the present value of forecasted future net transfers — for example, because future primary surpluses
are forecasted using an estimator like (3.14) — then an increase in net transfers will also increase
output and inﬂation, by increasing the term bt+1 in (1.18), while (if anything) also increasing the
i
forecasts Ê i vt+1
.

37

3.3.1

Constant-Gain Learning

To study the macroeconomic dynamics that result from learning, it is convenient to
assume that the gain γ t in (3.15) takes some constant value 0 < γ < 1 for all t,
so that convergence to the REE never occurs, even asymptotically. A “constantgain” learning algorithm of this kind may be justiﬁed as making sense if people
believe that the coeﬃcients of the correct forecasting model may shift over time, and
consequently place more weight on the most recent observations in their estimates of
the current coeﬃcients.49 In this case, the predicted TE dynamics are time-invariant,
and can be characterized in terms of predicted unconditional moments (variances,
autocovariances, etc.).
The dynamics of forecasts are again given by (3.21), but now with the constant
value γ substituted for γ t ; the implied TE dynamics of other variables are then given
by (3.19).50 Equation (3.21) can alternatively be written in the form
et = Λ et−1 + λ ξ t ,

(3.27)

where
Λ ≡ (1 − γ)[I − γA]−1 ,

λ ≡ γ[I − γA]−1 a.

If policy satisﬁes (1.24), both eigenvalues of A are inside the unit circle, so that
[I − γA] is invertible, Λ and λ are well-deﬁned, and both eigenvalues of Λ are also
inside the unit circle. Hence (3.27) deﬁnes stationary dynamics for the forecasts {et }
and consequently for the variables {xt } as well.
Equation (3.21) implies that the forecasts will be serially correlated, even if the
disturbances are i.i.d. More precisely, it implies that each element of et will be
a linear combination of two ﬁrst-order autoregressive processes (the innovations in
which are generally correlated), with coeﬃcients of serial correlation equal to the
49

See Sargent (1993) or Evans and Honkapohja (2001) for further discussion.
The type of adaptive learning dynamics considered here are again of a fairly simple kind, since
people’s forecasting rules are assumed simply to forecast constant future values for each of the
variables, and the only coeﬃcients that must be learned are the estimated means of each variable.
However, as Eusepi and Preston (2012b) discuss, even if one allows updating of the slope coeﬃcients
of a more complex linear regression model, in a local linear approximation to the implied TE
dynamics, linearizing around the REE steady state, there are no additional dynamics resulting from
the updating of the slope coeﬃcients; the updating of the additional coeﬃcients has only secondorder eﬀects on the TE dynamics.
50

38

two eigenvalues of Λ. If γ is small (estimates are based on a fairly long history), the
eigenvalues of Λ will be near 1, and these processes will be highly persistent. It then
follows from (3.19) that ﬂuctuations in inﬂation and the output gap will have highly
persistent components under the TE dynamics with learning. This contrasts sharply
with the prediction of the REE analysis, according to which inﬂation and the output
gap should both be serially uncorrelated if all fundamental disturbances are, as a
consequence of (1.25).
If the fundamental disturbances are instead themselves serially correlated, then
persistent ﬂuctuations in inﬂation and output are possible even under the REE dynamics. However, empirical New Keynesian models, such as those of Christiano et
al. (2005) or Smets and Wouters (2007), generally ﬁnd it necessary to introduce
additional sources of persistence (indexation of prices and wages to past inﬂation,
adjustment costs for expenditure), of debatable microeconomic realism, in order to
ﬁt the kind of persistence that is actually observed.51 Learning dynamics provide an
alternative potential source of intrinsic persistence, and some studies (e.g., Milani,
2005, 2007, 2011; Slobodyan and Wouters, 2009) ﬁnd that there is less need for ad
hoc structural persistence in econometric models that assume least-squares learning
rather than rational expectations.52
3.3.2

Consequences for Policy Evaluation

The additional dynamics resulting from learning can change one’s conclusions regarding the relative desirability of alternative monetary policy rules, even with respect to
comparisons among rules that do not imply explosive learning dynamics. As a simple
example, suppose that the central bank’s short-run inﬂation target depends linearly
on the cost-push shock,
π ∗t = ϕu ut ,
(3.28)
51

See Woodford (2003, chap. 5) for discussion of the reasons for this.
Eusepi and Preston (2011) similarly ﬁnd that the introduction of learning dynamics introduces
a new channel for the propagation of the eﬀects of technology shocks in an otherwise standard real
business cycle model, and argue that the model with learning produces ﬂuctuations more similar to
observed business cycles. Even larger departures from REE business-cycle dynamics are predicted
in the case of a model of learning that involves discrete switching between simple forecasting models
of dramatically diﬀerent character, as proposed by DeGrauwe (2010).
52

39

for some 0 ≤ ϕu ≤ 1, and it is adjusted each period as necessary in order to ensure
that π t = π ∗t . The required interest rate can be determined, as a function of current
disturbances and expectations, from equations (1.16) and (1.17); these equations also
indicate the implied evolution of the output gap.
Under the further assumption of RE beliefs, the model predicts that
yt = −(1 − ϕu )κ−1 ut ,

(3.29)

and hence that the unconditional variances of inﬂation and of the output gap will be
var(π) = ϕ2u σ 2u ,

var(y) = (1 − ϕu )2 κ−2 σ 2u ,

where σ 2u is the variance of the cost-push shock. It follows that for all ϕu in this
interval, increasing ϕu increases the volatility of equilibrium inﬂation, but reduces
the volatility of the equilibrium output gap. If policy is concerned to minimize some
weighted average of the two variances, the optimal choice of ϕu will be somewhere
between the two extremes, at a point that depends on the relative weight on the two
stabilization objectives.
If we instead assume adaptive learning of the kind speciﬁed by (3.15), substitution
of the policy rule (3.28) into the TE relation (1.17) implies that the output gap each
period will be given by
yt = −(1 − ϕu )κ−1 ut − (1 − α)βκ−1 p̂∗t ,

(3.30)

where p̂∗t is the common forecast at date t of the value of p∗t+1 . The latter forecast
will be given by (3.17); if the estimates of the means of each of the variables evolve
in accordance with (3.15), for some 0 < γ < 1, this implies that
p̂∗t = (1 − γ)p̂∗t−1 + γ[(1 − αβ)−1 π t + ξyt + µt ].
Substituting (3.28) and (3.30) for π t and yt respectively in this expression yields a
law of motion for the forecast of the form
p̂∗t = ρp̂∗t−1 + ϕu ψut ,
where
0<ρ≡

(1 − γ)(1 − αβ)
< 1,
1 − (1 − γ)αβ
40

ψ≡

γ
>0
α[1 − (1 − γ)αβ]

(3.31)

both are independent of the choice of ϕu .
Equation (3.31) implies that if ϕu > 0, a positive cost-push shock immediately
raises the forecast p̂∗t , and the forecast continues to be higher in subsequent periods
as well (to an extent that decreases exponentially over time). Comparing (3.30) with
the REE prediction (3.29), we see that with adaptive learning, the output reduction
in the period of the shock is greater than would occur under rational expectations;
moreover, the negative eﬀect on the output gap persists, rather than being limited
to the period of the shock. For both reasons, a given value of ϕu > 0 does not
reduce the predicted variance of the output gap as much as is predicted by the REE
analysis, though it continues to to increase the predicted variance of inﬂation by
the same amount. Thus the trade-oﬀ between inﬂation stabilization and output-gap
stabilization is steeper in the case of learning: less reduction in the variance of the
output gap is achieved by a given increase in the variance of inﬂation. The implication,
as argued by Orphanides and Williams (2005), is that under given preferences with
regard to inﬂation and output-gap stability, it will be optimal to choose a lower value
of ϕu (maintaining tighter control of inﬂation) when one recognizes that people must
learn to forecast macroeconomic conditions, relative to what one would conclude from
the REE analysis.53

4

TE Dynamics with Nearly Correct Beliefs

There is, however, another way of ensuring that one’s model’s predictions do not
depend on a supposition that people will fail to notice patterns in the data that
should actually be easily discerned. These alternative approaches are based not on
an explicit speciﬁcation of the procedure used to look for such patterns, as in the
case of econometric learning models, but rather on a direct requirement that probability beliefs — however obtained — not be too diﬀerent from the true probabilities
(according to one’s model). Approaches of this kind propose no model of how people
reason to the probability beliefs that they hold, but instead focus on deﬁning the
respects in which subjective beliefs should reasonably be expected to be similar to
53

Orphanides and Williams consider a one-parameter family of policies similar to the one considered here, but in the context of a simpler model of the way in which expectations aﬀect aggregate
supply. For implications of learning dynamics for the optimal choice of a policy rule within more
complex families of candidate policies, see Gaspar et al. (2011).

41

objective probabilities, and the other respects in which one might expect more variation in subjective beliefs. In this section, I discusses two examples of how this might
be done: the “rational belief equilibria” of Mordecai Kurz and coauthors (Kurz, 1994,
1997, 2012; Kurz and Motolese, 2011), and the “near-rational expectations” proposed
by Woodford (2010) and explored further in Adam and Woodford (2012).
Before describing these approaches, it is important to note that a hypothesis that
beliefs are “nearly correct” does not imply that they are nearly the same as (any
possible) REE beliefs. The extent to which beliefs are correct depends on their conformity with the actual TE dynamics, which may diﬀer greatly from REE dynamics,
and not their conformity with REE predictions. This diﬀerence is emphasized in
particular by Kurz (2012), who emphasizes the possibility of sizeable aggregate ﬂuctuations even when the magnitude of exogenous disturbances to “fundamentals” is
much smaller than must be postulated to account for the ﬂuctuations using DSGE
models that assume rational expectations.

4.1

“Rational Belief Equilibria”

Kurz (1994) proposes a relaxation of the rational expectations hypothesis in which
the probability beliefs of decisionmakers are required to imply model-consistent values
for some data moments, but not for all of the data moments that are relevant to their
forecasts and hence to their decisions. Certain quantities (including conventional
macroeconomic aggregates, such as rate of growth of GDP or the CPI) are assumed
to be objectively measurable, and as a consequence everyone is assumed to agree
about the current and past values of these variables. The postulate of “rational
beliefs” (RB) then requires that in any stationary equilibrium (a “rational belief
equilibrium,” RBE) consistent with some time-invariant policy, everyone must also
agree about all of the unconditional ﬁrst and second moments54 of these objectively
measurable variables, and assign values to these moments that coincide with the
predictions of the model about this particular RBE.55
54

By “all second moments” I mean to include all covariances between leads and lags of the various
variables.
55
In fact, Kurz (1994) proposes the stronger postulate that the subjective assessment of the
unconditional joint distribution of the objectively measurable variables must coincide with their
model-implied unconditional distribution. In the case of a linear model with additive Gaussian
disturbances, of the kind used in applications such as Kurz (2012), and in the example presented

42

But these variables are not the only ones on the basis of which individuals form
their forecasts; there are also subjective variables (“belief states”) about which they
need not agree. A given decisionmaker is assumed to have coherent probability beliefs
about the joint distribution of her own belief states and the objectively measurable
variables, on the basis of which the belief states modify her forecasts of the future
paths of the objectively measurable variables; but these data moments need not be
ones about which others agree, and the probability beliefs of an individual need not
coincide in this respect with the predictions of the model. It is in this latter respect
that the RB postulate is weaker than RE. Insofar as people are assumed to learn the
correct values of some data moments but not others, the RBE concept is a cousin of
the RPE concept discussed in section 3.1.
The content of the RB postulate, as well as the sense in which it is weaker than
RE, is best illustrated using an example. Suppose that the natural rate of output is
the sum of two components,
Ytn = Ȳtn + ξ 2t ,
(4.1)
where the permanent component Ȳtn evolves as a random walk,
n
Ȳtn = Ȳt−1
+ ξ 1t ,

(4.2)

with {ξ 1t } an i.i.d. innovation distributed as N (0, σ 21 ), and the transitory component ξ 2t is another i.i.d. innovation, distributed as N (0, σ 22 ) and independent of the
permanent shocks. If the process {Ytn } is objectively measurable but its permanent
and transitory components are not, and no other objectively measurable variables
provide information about this decomposition, then an optimal estimate of the permanent component (or optimal forecast of the long-run level) of Ytn at any time t is
given by an exponentially-weighted moving average56
Ȳt ≡ (1 − λ)

∞
∑

n
λj Yt−j
,

j=0

where the smoothing factor 0 < λ < 1 is given by
λ=

2
√
,
2 + q + q 2 + 4q

q≡

σ 21
.
σ 22

below, identity of the two unconditional distributions is equivalent to identity of the complete list
of ﬁrst and second moments.
56
This corresponds to the Bayesian posterior mean, or minimum-mean-squared-error forecast,
using a Kalman ﬁlter (Harvey, 1989, chap. 4), as originally derived by Muth (1960).

43

Conditional only on objectively measurable data, then, an optimal forecast of the
future natural rate at any horizon k ≥ 0 will be given by
n
Ēt Yt+k
= Ȳt .

(4.3)

Suppose, however, that in addition to the objectively measurable data, each individual price-setter j has a subjective estimate of the permanent component, that I
shall denote ztj . If each price-setter correctly understands the laws of motion (4.1)–
(4.2), this implies that subjective forecasts will be given by
n
Êtj Yt+k
= ztj ,

(4.4)

rather than by (4.3). Note that each individual’s beliefs are described by a completely
speciﬁed, internally consistent probability measure, that is moreover consistent with
the true ﬁrst and second moments of all objectively measurable data; for example,
these beliefs imply correct (model-consistent) values for the unconditional moments
n
E[∆Ytn ] and cov(∆Ytn , ∆Yt−k
) for all k, as these can be derived from (4.1)–(4.2).57
But individual beliefs about the statistics of the subjective belief state ztj and its
co-movement with objectively measurable data need not coincide with the beliefs of
others, or with the way that the model describes the evolution of these variables.
In our example, while each individual j believes that ztj = Ȳtn , it does not follow
that ztj must take the same numerical value for all j. Moreover, even if, as in Kurz
and Motolese (2011) and Kurz (2012), we suppose that the population distribution
∫
of subjective beliefs, and hence the population mean Zt ≡ ztj dj, are objectively
measurable data, it does not follow that ztj must equal Zt for each individual. Individuals can be aware that their personal estimate ztj diﬀers from the average estimate, without any internal inconsistency of their beliefs. The RB postulate requires
that people all have model-consistent beliefs about unconditional moments such as
n
E[Ytn − Zt ], E[∆Zt ], cov(∆Yt+k
, Ytn − Zt ), and so on. But awareness of these moments
and observation of Zt does not give a price-setter any reason to doubt the validity
of her forecast (4.4), given her belief in the laws of motion (4.1)–(4.2) and her belief
57

Kurz does not refer to these common beliefs as “correct” beliefs about unconditional moments,
but only as “empirical frequencies.” However, in applications such as Kurz and Motolese (2011) or
Kurz (2012), the calculations used to explain or predict data are carried out under the assumption
that the empirical frequencies correspond to model-implied unconditional moments, under timeinvariant stochastic processes for the various disturbances speciﬁed in the model.

44

that ztj is an accurate (but personal) observation of the value of Ȳtn . (This simply
requires each individual to believe that others’ personal assessments of the value of
the permanent component are erroneous, even though she understands that, like her,
they each believe their personal assessments to be correct.58 )
As one possible example of how this makes possible an additional source of
aggregate ﬂuctuations, suppose that people’s subjective assessments are given by
ztj = Ȳt + ν jt , where ν jt is a random term that evolves independently of all “fundamental” variables, including both the permanent and transitory components of Ytn .
Thus, since Ȳt is objectively measurable, the subjective state ztj reﬂects no additional
information about the future evolution of the natural rate (or any other fundamentals). Moreover, suppose that the errors ν jt are correlated across individuals, so that
∫
the aggregate error ν t ≡ ν jt dj is not equal to zero. Then because ν t represents
an error in the average estimate of a variable that is relevant for pricing decisions
∫
(the error in the average estimate Êtj [Ȳtn − Ȳt ]dj), it will aﬀect the determination of
endogenous aggregate variables, such as output and inﬂation; and variation in ν t will
be an additional source of variability in these variables, in addition to the random
variation in fundamentals such as {ξ 1t , ξ 2t }.
To illustrate the eﬀects of ﬂuctuations in the aggregate belief state on endogenous
variables, let the monetary policy rule be speciﬁed by a target criterion: that is, the
central bank adjusts its instrument as necessary in order to ensure that the linear
relationship
π t + ϕ(Yt − Ȳt ) = 0
(4.5)
holds at all times.59 This represents a form of “ﬂexible inﬂation targeting” (Svensson,
1999), where the concept of the output gap in the central bank’s target criterion
58

Thus this equilibrium concept allows a much wider range of possible speciﬁcations of belief
dynamics than a rational-expectations model with “private information,” of the kind considered by
Rondina and Walker (2012). In the latter paper, all individuals are assumed to agree about the
joint distribution of all publicly or privately observable variables, though individuals do not observe
other individuals’ private signals about the separate components of the aggregate disturbance. In
Kurz’s work, instead, people “agree to disagree.” It is therefore not necessary to suppose that
there is anything secret about individuals’ subjective beliefs; it is only the basis for accepting these
subjective assessments as correct that is not shared.
59
The state-contingent path for the interest rate it required in order for (4.5) to hold each period
will depend on the subjective expectations of both price-setters and consumers. I suppose here that
the central bank observes average expectations when setting it , and so can implement a reaction
function that makes (4.5) a necessary consequence of the TE relations that determine π t and yt ,

45

is output relative to the central bank’s estimate of long-run potential, rather than
relative to the current natural rate of output. As a simple example in which belief
ﬂuctuations provide an independent source of aggregate variability, suppose that ν t
evolves as an AR(1) process,
ν t = ρν t−1 + ϵt ,
(4.6)
where 0 ≥ ρ < 1, and {ϵt } is an i.i.d. innovation, with distribution N (0, σ 2ϵ ) independent of all fundamental states. We can then solve for the equilibrium dynamics
of inﬂation and output implied by the TE relations, (4.5) and the above assumptions
about subjective expectations, using the method of undetermined coeﬃcients.
Let us conjecture beliefs on the part of each price-setter j of the form
j
Êtj p∗j
t+1 = γ 1 (Ȳt − zt ) + γ 2 (Ȳt − Zt ),

(4.7)

for coeﬃcients γ 1 , γ 2 that remain to be determined. Average beliefs are then given
by
∫
Êtj p∗j
t+1 dj = γ(Ȳt − Zt ),
where γ ≡ γ 1 + γ 2 . Let us also suppose for simplicity that the cost-push shock ut is
equal to zero at all times.60 The TE relation (1.17) then implies that inﬂation and
the output gap must be given by
πt =

κϕ
(1 − α)βγϕ
(Ȳt − Ytn ) −
ν t,
κ+ϕ
κ+ϕ

(4.8)

yt =

(1 − α)βγ
ϕ
(Ȳt − Ytn ) +
ν t.
κ+ϕ
κ+ϕ

(4.9)

Since equations (4.8)–(4.9) are relationships among objectively measurable variables,61 the RB postulate requires that the subjective probability beliefs of each
price-setter be consistent with them. These relations, together with the laws of motion (4.1)–(4.2) and (4.6) for the exogenous aggregate state variables, further imply
regardless of what those subjective expectations may be. Thus (4.5) can be treated as an equilibrium
relation in solving for the equilibrium dynamics under a given hypothesis about expectations.
60
Note that even under this assumption, the model implies the existence of equilibrium ﬂuctuations
in inﬂation and in the output gap, owing to the discrepancy between the concept of potential output
(Ȳt ) used in the central bank’s target criterion (4.5) and the one (Ytn ) that shifts the AS relation
(1.17).
61
Recall that ν t = Zt − Ȳt , and the average belief state Zt is assumed to be objectively measurable.

46

that correct forecasts of future inﬂation and output are given by
Et π t+k =
Et yt+k =

(1 − α)βγϕ k
κϕ k
λ (Ȳt − Ȳtn ) −
ρ ν t,
κ+ϕ
κ+ϕ
ϕ
(1 − α)βγ k
λk (Ȳt − Ȳtn ) +
ρ νt
κ+ϕ
κ+ϕ

for any horizon k ≥ 1, where Et [·] refers to the expectation conditional on the history
of all exogenous states up through period t, including the (unobserved) value of Ȳtn .
If price-setters are assumed to correctly understand these laws of motion,62 then
their subjective forecasts of future inﬂation and output gaps must conform to these
equations as well, but with the value of Ȳtn replaced by each individual’s subjective
estimate of this state. Thus for any price-setter j, each of the forecasts is a linear
function of Ȳt − ztj and ν t ≡ Zt − Ȳt .63
Substituting these subjective forecasts into deﬁnition (1.12), we can obtain an
j
expression for Êtj p∗j
t+1 as a linear function of Ȳt − zt and Ȳt − Zt , as conjectured
in (4.7). We now however have expressions for the coeﬃcients γ 1 , γ 2 (given in the
Appendix) as functions of the assumed value of γ. Requiring the implied values of
these coeﬃcients to equal their conjectured values yields two linear equations to solve
for the unknown coeﬃcients γ 1 , γ 2 . As shown in the Appendix, our sign assumptions
on parameters imply the existence of a unique solution, with γ > 0.
We thus obtain TE dynamics consistent with the RB postulate in which ﬂuctuations in the aggregate belief state ν t cause random variations in inﬂation and output.
62

The RB postulate requires that price-setters all correctly understand the autocorrelation function of the objectively measurable process {ν t }, but it does not require that they agree that an
unbiased forecast of ν t+k at time t depends only on the current value ν t ; they may have subjective
judgments about the likely future path of the aggregate belief state that they believe are more accurate than the forecast that could be made on the basis of objectively measurable data alone. Here
I make the more restrictive assumption that no one believes that they have additional insight into
the future evolution of any exogenous states except for believing in their personal estimates of the
permanent component Ȳtn .
63
Kurz and Motolese (2011) say that “those who believe the economy is stationary” will necessarily
forecast using the “empirical measure” — that is, using only the information contained in the history
of objectively measurable variables, and so make forecasts such as (4.3). But in fact, the subjective
probability beliefs speciﬁed here imply that {π t , yt , Ȳt − Ȳtn , Ytn − Ȳtn , Ȳt − Zt , ∆Ȳtn } are jointly
stationary processes; and the same is true of the RBE beliefs speciﬁed in the applications proposed
by Kurz and Motolese (2011) and Kurz (2012). The crucial issue is actually not stationarity, but
whether variables other than objectively measurable variables are also used in forecasting.

47

It is instructive to compare this solution with the REE dynamics under policy rule
(4.5). We may assume as above that each individual observes a personal state variable
ztj (a “gut feeling,” if one likes), that is distributed as assumed above; but under the
RE hypothesis, each individual must correctly understand the joint distribution of ztj
and all other variables. This would mean correctly understanding that ztj contains no
information that is useful for predicting the future path of the natural rate of output
(given that Ȳt is independently observable), and similarly that Zt is uninformative.
RE forecasts of all variables would then correspond simply to the expectations of
those variables conditional on the observed history of the natural rate of output;
thus, for example, the common forecast of the future natural rate of output would be
given by (4.3). It is shown in the Appendix that under policy rule (4.5), the unique
stationary REE is one in which inﬂation and the output gap are given by equations
(4.8)–(4.9), but with γ = 0, whereas γ > 0 in the RBE discussed above. Thus the
RBE beliefs do not change the response of inﬂation or output to exogenous ﬂuctuations in the natural rate of output, but result in increased variability of both inﬂation
and the output gap for any value of ϕ, relative to the REE prediction, owing to the
existence of ﬂuctuations unrelated to any changes in fundamentals, but due purely
to variation in the aggregate belief state.
The above simple calculation may make it appear that the RBE hypothesis makes
deﬁnite quantitative predictions about the evolution of endogenous variables under
a given policy rule, but this is actually not true; the RBE constructed above is only
one possible example of TE dynamics consistent with the RB postulate under the
assumed policy rule. First of all, there is an RBE of the kind assumed above for
any speciﬁcation of the serial correlation coeﬃcient ρ and of the innovation variance
σ 2ϵ for the process {ν t }. Moreover, there is no reason why {ν t } must be an AR(1)
process; this allowed us to verify the conjecture that subjective forecasts were of
the form (4.7), but we might equally well have assumed a more complex process for
{ν t }, and still solved for an RBE, in which however, subjective forecasts would be
correspondingly more complex. Thus if we allow {ν t } to be any process in some
larger parametric family, we can obtain a multi-parameter family of RBE associated
with the given policy (4.5). But even this understates the multiplicity of possible
RBE. For it was not necessary to have assumed that people believe that they have
an additional (personal) awareness of the decomposition of Ytn into permanent and
transitory components, but no additional personal insight into the economy’s future
48

evolution of any other sort. Allowing for other types of subjective beliefs (that need
not be correlated with actual outcomes, according to one’s model, in the way that
people believe that they are) would further expand the set of RBE solutions consistent
with a given policy rule.
Kurz and coauthors argue that the more ﬂexible relationship between the evolution of exogenous fundamentals and that of endogenous variables allowed by this
relaxation of the RE hypothesis can make sense of some of the empirical diﬃculties
faced by RE models. For example, Kurz and Motolese (2011) discuss RBE of an assetpricing model in which there is a risky asset in ﬁxed supply and an exogenously given
riskless rate of return (independent of the quantity invested in the riskless asset).
The dividend on the risky asset is an exogenous process, about the future evolution
of which individual investors believe they have additional personal insight, beyond
the information contained in the past history of the dividend, just as in the case of
subjective forecasts of the natural rate of output in the above example. In the RBE,
variations in the aggregate belief state become an additional source of variation in
equilibrium asset prices, and in particular result in a time-varying risk premium, of
the kind that is found to be empirically important in many asset markets.
Kurz and Motolese estimate the parameters of their model using data on term
premia associated with federal funds futures and Treasury bills, and ﬁnd that allowance for the more ﬂexible class of equilibria allows the data to be ﬁt better; their
best-ﬁtting RBE implies that more than half of the measured risk premia are due to
ﬂuctuations in the aggregate belief state. This suggests that the kind of additional
ﬂexibility allowed by the concept of an RBE may be of empirical relevance. At the
same time, because the predictions of the more general theory are much less speciﬁc,
it is not obvious that ﬁndings such as those of Kurz and Motolese can be regarded
as conﬁrming a speciﬁc theoretical view of the nature of subjective beliefs.64
Relaxation of the RE hypothesis also has potential consequences for policy design;
64

While the sets of possible RBE discussed in papers such as Kurz and Motolese (2011) and
Kurz (2012) involve only a few free parameters, this is not because the RB postulate alone allows
one to derive such speciﬁc conclusions — a large number of additional (theoretically unmotivated)
assumptions are made as well, in order to obtain equilibria of a particular form. Moreover, in neither
of these applied papers are all of the restrictions implied by the RB postulate imposed; the solutions
proposed as possible accounts of actual data are actually examples of an even weaker version of the
RBE concept, and the proposed restrictions on the stochastic processes characterizing the data are
mainly adopted for convenience rather than following from a conception of rationality.

49

as illustrated by the above example, the degree of macroeconomic stability guaranteed by commitment to a given policy rule may not be as great as a mere analysis of
the REE dynamics consistent with it would suggest. This raises the possibility that
alternative rules might provide more robust approaches to stabilization, even if they
do not lead to a superior REE. While there will not be a unique RBE consistent with
a given policy rule, or even a unique RBE associated with a given restricted state
space (as in the analysis of MSV-REE above), it may be compare the data moments
associated with the entire range of possible RBE, for alternative parameterizations
of a policy rule. Kurz (2012) undertakes an illustrative analysis of this kind of the
consequences of alternative central-bank reaction functions in the context of a New
Keynesian model closely related to the one presented here. However, the comparisons undertaken consider only certain parametric classes of RBE, and it is unclear
why attention should be restricted to these speciﬁc types of equilibria. This seems
an important limitation of the Kurz approach for purposes of policy analysis. The
alternative approach presented next instead allows a clear delineation of the set of
equilibria consistent with a given policy rule.

4.2

“Near-Rational Expectations”

Rather than distinguishing a priori between data moments that individuals should
correctly assess and those that they may not, depending on the nature of the variable in question, the assumption of “near-rational expectations” in Woodford (2010)
instead deﬁnes a set of probability beliefs that are close enough to the predictions
of one’s model to be plausibly held by decisionmakers in such a situation, on purely
statistical grounds. Essentially, an alternative probability distribution is “close” to
the predicted probabilities of outcomes in a given equilibrium if the alternative distribution represents a sample distribution of outcomes that could be observed in some
ﬁnite number of repetitions of the equilibrium. This requires, for example, that “nearrational” subjective expectations assign zero probability to all outcomes that occur
with zero probability in equilibrium.
This means that each agent’s subjective probability measure over possible paths
for all variables must be absolutely continuous with respect to the equilibrium probability measure. This in turn implies there must exist a scalar stochastic process {mt }
for each agent — the agent’s belief distortion factor — with mt ≥ 0, Et mt+1 = 1 at

50

all times, such that the agent’s subjective one-period-ahead forecast of any variable
Xt+1 is given by
Êt Xt+1 = Et [mt+1 Xt+1 ],
(4.10)
where Et [·] indicates the conditional expectation under the true (model-implied) probabilities in the particular equilibrium. Thus a value mt+1 > 1 in a particular state
of the world at date t + 1 implies that, conditional on reaching the predecessor state
at date t, the agent exaggerates the probability of reaching this state relative to the
correct equilibrium probability. Internal consistency of individual probability beliefs
then implies that longer-horizon subjective forecasts are correspondingly given by
Êt Xt+j = Et [mt+1 · · · mt+j Xt+j ].
The degree of discrepancy between subjective and objective probability beliefs can
then be measured by the degree to which the distortion factor {mt } diﬀers from a
constant factor, equal to 1 in all states. A measure of the degree of discrepancy in oneperiod-ahead beliefs (looking forward from any period t) with appealing properties is
the relative entropy between the subjective and objective conditional probabilities
Rt ≡ Et [mt+1 log mt+1 ].

(4.11)

This is non-negative convex function of the belief distortion factor that achieves its
minimum possible value of zero if and only if mt+1 = 1 almost surely (the RE case).
Moreover, the probability of observing a sample frequency distribution for the possible
outcomes at date t + 1 that is close to any given subjective measure, in the case of
a large (but ﬁnite) number of independent draws from the equilibrium probability
measure, is (in the case of a large enough number of draws) a decreasing function of
the relative entropy of the subjective measure.65 Hence subjective beliefs under which
Rt is small (though positive) each period are ones that could plausibly be maintained
even by an agent with considerable experience of typical equilibrium outcomes.
Woodford (2010) accordingly deﬁnes an equilibrium with “near-rational expectations” (NRE) as a situation in which each agent optimizes on the basis of internally
consistent probability beliefs for which Rt is suﬃciently small each period, when calculated with respect to the equilibrium probability measure describing the outcomes
that result (in each possible state of the world) from their collective choices. Note
65

See, for example, Cover and Thomas (2006).

51

that the equilibrium measure will not generally be the REE measure, because people
act on the basis of non-REE beliefs; hence NRE equilibrium outcomes need not be
near the REE outcomes in order for beliefs to be “near-rational.”
In the context of the NK model described above, an NRE equilibrium (NREE)
corresponds to stochastic processes {v̄ti } and distortion factors {mit } for each housej
hold, and processes {p∗j
t } and distortion factors {mt } for each ﬁrm, such that (1.10)
and (1.15) hold each period when subjective forecasts are given by (4.10) for each
agent, and the distortion factors imply that the relative entropy for each agent remains within some bound. If, for example, we assume a monetary policy rule of the
form (1.21) and restrict attention to the special case of common subjective probability beliefs for all agents, then an NREE corresponds to a vector stochastic process
{zt } and distortion factor {mt }, such that
zt = B Et [mt+1 zt+1 ] + bξ t

(4.12)

holds each period (where B and b are again the matrices in (1.22)), and the relative
entropy (4.11) implied by the distortion factor satisﬁes the speciﬁed bound.

4.3

Robustly Optimal Policy

For any positive upper bound on the allowable relative entropy, the set of NREE
consistent with a given policy rule will be large. How, then, can this kind of theory
provide a basis for selection of a particular policy rule? Woodford (2010) proposes
that one choose the policy that implies the highest possible lower bound for one’s
welfare objective (or lowest possible upper bound for one’s loss function), across the
entire set of NREE consistent with the rule, under some speciﬁed bound on the
allowable size of belief distortions. Such a “maximin” approach to policy choice is
in the spirit of the “robust control” approach to dealing with model uncertainty
advocated by Hansen and Sargent (2008).
This approach requires one to determine, for any candidate policy rule, the “worstcase” belief distortion process, that implies an NREE that is the worst possible for the
policymaker’s welfare objective, subject to the bound on the size of belief distortions
that are contemplated. As an example, suppose that the objective of policy is to
minimize a discounted loss function of the form
∞
∑
(4.13)
E0
β t [π 2t + λ(yt − y ∗ )2 ],
t=0

52

for some relative weight λ > 0 on output-gap stabilization, and some optimal output
gap y ∗ > 0, as in Clarida et al. (1999). Here the expectation E0 [·] used to deﬁne
the objective refers to the probability beliefs of the policymaker, which need not be
shared by others. And let us again consider policy commitments in the simple family
(3.28).
If for simplicity we restrict attention to equilibria in which belief distortions are
common to all agents, (1.11) and (1.20) imply that
π t = κyt + ut + βEt [mt+1 π t+1 ]
each period, which is just the NRE generalization of the “New Keynesian Phillips
curve” assumed by Clarida et al. Substituting (3.28) for the path of inﬂation, this
implies that the output gap must satisfy
yt = −κ−1 {(1 − ϕu )ut + βϕu Et [mt+1 ut+1 ]}

(4.14)

in the NREE corresponding to any distortion process {mt }.
Since the path of inﬂation is independent of belief distortions under a policy
commitment of the hypothesized type, the belief distortions that maximize (4.13)
involve a choice of the one-period-ahead distortion factors {mt+1 } looking forward
from any date t so as to maximize (yt − y ∗ )2 subject to an upper bound
Rt ≤ R̄,

(4.15)

where Rt is deﬁned in (4.11), and the size of R̄ > 0 indicates the allowable degree
of departure from model-consistency. Hence the factors {mt+1 } should be chosen to
maximize
1
(yt − y ∗ )2 + θt Et [mt+1 log mt+1 ]
2
subject to the constraint that Et mt+1 = 1, where yt is given by (4.14) and θt is a
Lagrange multiplier associated with the constraint(4.15).
If ut+1 is i.i.d. N (0, σ 2u ), the solution to this problem is easily shown to involve a
state-contingent distortion factor
log mt+1 = α + γut+1 ,
where
α = −R̄,

γ=±
53

(2R̄)1/2
.
σu

The positive root for γ is optimal if yt < y ∗ (the most common case), while the
negative root is optimal if yt > y ∗ . (When yt < y ∗ , the policymaker’s tradeoﬀ is
made even more painful by an increase in inﬂation expectations, that shift the shortrun Phillips curve in a way that increases the tension between the goals of keeping
inﬂation near zero and the output gap near y ∗ ; and expected inﬂation is increased
if people exaggerate the likelihood of positive cost-push shocks. If yt > y ∗ , instead,
the worst-case belief distortions would be ones that reduce inﬂation expectations, by
exaggerating the likelihood of negative cost-push shocks.)
The worst-case beliefs then imply
Et [mt+1 ut+1 ] = γσ 2u = ±(2R̄)1/2 σ u ,
taking care to select the root that implies the largest gap between yt and y ∗ . It follows
that
|yt − y ∗ | = |y ∗ + (1 − ϕu )κ−1 ut | + ϕu βκ−1 (2R̄)1/2 σ u
(4.16)
for all realizations of ut . Equation (4.16) shows that increasing ϕu reduces the sensitivity of yt − y ∗ to cost-push shocks (as in the RE analysis), but at the cost of making
it possible for the absolute value of the gap in the absence of any cost-push shock to
be larger, as a result of belief distortions.
The upper bound for (4.13) in the case of any policy in the simple family (3.28)
is then given by
(1 − β)−1 [Lπ + λLpess
],
y
where
Lπ ≡ E[π 2t ] = ϕ2u σ 2u
is the same function of ϕu as in the RE analysis, and
Lpess
≡ E[(yt − y ∗ )2 ]
y
is evaluated under the worst-case belief distortions; in both expressions the expectation is over possible realizations of ut . One observes that ∂Lπ /∂ϕu = 2ϕu σ 2u , regardless
of the degree of concern for robustness; but one ﬁnds that allowance for belief dis/∂ϕu less negative (or more
tortions (R̄ > 0) makes the value of the derivative ∂Lpess
y
positive) at each value of ϕu . Hence the value of ϕu at which the marginal reduction
in expected losses with respect to output-gap stabilization no longer outweighs the
marginal increase in expected losses with respect to inﬂation stabilization will be
54

reached at a lower value of ϕu under the worst-case beliefs (when R̄ > 0) than under
the RE analysis. In fact, the upper bound for expected losses may be minimized
at ϕu = 0, whereas complete inﬂation stabilization is never optimal under the RE
analysis; and the optimal ϕu remains bounded away from 1, no matter how large the
weight λ on the output-gap stabilization objective may be, whereas the optimal ϕu
approaches 1 as λ → ∞ in the RE analysis.
The “robustly optimal” policy within this simple family thus involves greater
stability of inﬂation in the face of cost-push shocks than would be optimal if one
could be sure that people would have model-consistent expectations. This is similar
to the conclusion obtained in section 3.3.2 when analyzing alternative policies under
the assumption of adaptive learning, and again the basic reason is that variations of
inﬂation in response to cost-push shocks make it too easy for people to mis-estimate
the average future rate of inﬂation, causing undesirable instability in the short-run
Phillips curve tradeoﬀ.
The reasons for inﬂation expectations to be insuﬃciently well-anchored are somewhat diﬀerent in the two cases: in the learning analysis, it was assumed that inﬂation
expectations necessarily drift in response to certain observations of inﬂation outcomes,
and a large value of ϕu was dangerous because it increased the frequency of occurrence
of observations that would lead to signiﬁcant expectational errors; here, instead, no
precise prediction is made about what expectations must be, but a large value of ϕu
is dangerous because it allows more signiﬁcant expectational errors to be consistent
with the assumed bound on relative entropy. Yet ultimately, the problematic feature
of the large-ϕu policy is the same in both cases: it makes sample paths in which average observed inﬂation diﬀers signiﬁcantly from the actual long-run inﬂation target
(in particular, paths in which the sample average is signiﬁcantly higher) occur too
frequently.
Woodford (2010) extends the above analysis by considering a much more ﬂexible
family of policies, in which the short-term inﬂation target π ∗t is an arbitrary linear
function of the history of cost-push shocks, and shows how the optimal commitment
of this form diﬀers from the optimal commitment in the RE analysis of Clarida et
al. (1999). As in the simpler exercise above, the robustly optimal policy commitment involves a lower amplitude of inﬂation surprises in response to cost-push shocks;
Woodford shows that it also involves a greater degree of commitment to subsequent

55

reversal of any eﬀects on the price level of past cost-push shocks.66 Kwon and Miao
(2012) show how a similar method can be used to characterize the robustly optimal
policy commitment for a broad class of linear-quadratic policy problems, and generalize the results of Woodford (2010) to the cases of persistent cost-push shocks and of
a more general form of aggregate-supply relation that incorporates intrinsic inﬂation
inertia.
Adam and Woodford (2012) further extend the analysis of Woodford (2010), considering policy commitments that are not necessarily expressed in terms of inﬂation
targets that depend only on the history of exogenous disturbances. They ﬁnd that the
conclusions mentioned above continue to hold, as a description of how inﬂation must
be expected to evolve in response to cost-push shocks under the worst-case beliefs,
even if a robustly optimal policy commitment (within the more general family) need
not require inﬂation to evolve this way regardless of the nature of belief distortions.
In the analysis of Adam and Woodford, there is not a uniquely deﬁned policy rule
that is robustly optimal; instead, there exists a large class of policy rules that all
imply the same dynamics under the worst-case belief distortions, and hence achieve
the same minimum upper bound for the loss function, though they may be associated with diﬀerent TE dynamics under other kinds of distorted beliefs that are also
consistent with the relative-entropy bound.67
Among the robustly optimal policy rules is one that involves commitment to a
target criterion: the central bank uses its policy instrument to ensure that the joint
evolution of inﬂation and output satisfy a linear relationship of the form
π t + ϕs (π t − Et−1 π t ) + ϕy (yt − yt−1 ) = 0
66

(4.17)

This kind of robust policy problem is compared to a alternative ways of introducing robustness
to uncertainty about the correctness of model equations into an optimal monetary stabilization
policy problem, in the context of the same linear-quadratic New Keynesian framework used here, in
Hansen and Sargent (2012).
67
It should be recalled that also under the RE analysis, the optimal policy commitment is not
uniquely deﬁned. Instead, the optimal REE dynamics are uniquely deﬁned, while there are many
diﬀerent policy rules that can achieve these dynamics as a determinate equilibrium outcome; the
rules diﬀer in the behavior that they prescribe out of equilibrium, though the policy instrument
evolves in the same way in equilibrium under each of them. Under the robust policy analysis, the
diﬀerent robustly optimal rules also diﬀer in the sets of possible equilibrium outcomes associated
with them, since a given rule does not imply a determinate equilibrium, except under a particular
speciﬁcation of the belief distortions.

56

each period, where ϕs , ϕy are both positive coeﬃcients, that depend both on model
parameters and on the relative weight λ assumed in the objective (4.13),68 and Et−1 π t
indicates the policymaker’s forecast of inﬂation a period earlier. Here the coeﬃcient
ϕs > 0 multiplying the inﬂation surprise results from the concern for robustness,
and this coeﬃcient is larger the greater the concern for robustness (as measured
by the relative-entropy bound). The presence of this term reduces the extent to
which a “cost-push shock” should be allowed to cause a surprise change in the rate
of inﬂation, since it requires the surprise reduction in the output gap to be (1 +
ϕs )/ϕy times as large as the surprise increase in inﬂation, rather than only 1/ϕy
times as large, as under the optimal commitment assuming rational expectations
(Woodford, 2003, chap. 7). Thus one again concludes, as in the analysis of robustness
to adaptive learning dynamics in section 3.3.2, that ensuring greater robustness to
potential (modest) departures from fully model-consistent expectations requires one
to adjust the relative weights on inﬂation and the output gap in a monetary policy
rule, in the direction of stronger relative responses to ﬂuctuations in the rate of
inﬂation.

5

Conclusion

This review has been able to illustrate only a few of the possible methods of macroeconomic analysis that depart in one way or another from the complete requirements
of the rational expectations hypothesis. Rather than presenting all of the possible
speciﬁcations of expectations or reviewing all of the conclusions obtained using them
in particular models, I have sought only to compare broad classes of approaches, that
diﬀer in the respects in which they maintain or depart from particular aspects of the
knowledge assumptions maintained in the RE literature. Even this brief overview
has shown that there is a considerable range of alternative approaches, leading to
diﬀerent conclusions about a variety of issues.
It may be asked how macroeconomic analysis can be possible with such a wide
range of candidate assumptions. One answer would be that empirical studies should
68

Adam and Woodford also show how to characterize welfare-maximizing policy, when welfare is
deﬁned by the expected utility (under the policymaker’s expectations) of a representative household.
There is again a robustly optimal target criterion of the form (4.17), the coeﬃcients of which now
depend purely on model parameters.

57

be undertaken to determine which of these possible speciﬁcations of subjective expectations best describe observed behavior. A few studies of that kind already exist,
but the empirical literature remains at a fairly early stage. Much of the early work on
the alternatives surveyed here has been undertaken in order to clarify or criticize the
conceptual foundations of rational expectations equilibrium, rather than to provide
a positive analysis of observed phenomena; further empirical applications are much
to be desired.
Nonetheless, it is probably a mistake to suppose that empirical investigations
should identify a single model of expectations that can be judged to have been historically valid, and that can then be treated as the way in which expectations must
be formed in the future, for purposes of counterfactual policy analyses. It is more
reasonable, in my view, to search for policies that should be robust to a variety of
possible speciﬁcations of expectations. Of course, it is not possible (and probably
would not be desirable, even if feasible) to demand that a policy be robust to all
possible views of the world; it is therefore important that macroeconomists continue
to seek greater certainty about which models of the economy are more accurate. But
one need not settle upon a single model speciﬁcation before policy analysis is possible.
Indeed, the approaches discussed in sections 2 and 4 above seek to deﬁne classes
of reasonable speciﬁcations of expectations under a given policy regime, rather than
a single correct speciﬁcation; and even in the case of the econometric learning models
discussed in section 3, the identiﬁcation of a best-ﬁtting learning rule for some historical data set would better be taken as providing evidence about the types of learning
rules that should be allowed for in a robustness analysis, rather than as identifying
a “true” learning rule that can relied upon in the future. If macroeconomic analysis
is approached in this spirit, then awareness of a variety of arguably reasonable speciﬁcations should contribute to the robustness of the conclusions reached, rather than
preventing any policy recommendations from being given.

58

e2
)1=0
ZLB

)2=0

0
SM

)1=0

e*

)2=0
0

e1

Figure 1: ODE trajectories that approximate asymptotic learning dynamics, when
interest-rate policy is constrained by the zero lower bound. The points at which the
constraint binds are those below and to the left of the line ZLB. The steady state in
which the inﬂation target is achieved (corresponding to the origin) is a locally stable
rest point of the ODE dynamics, but there is also a second steady state (point e∗ ) at
which the ZLB constraint binds, with stable manifold SM.

59

References
[1] Adam, Klaus, and Michael Woodford, “Robustly Optimal Monetary Policy in
a Microfounded New Keynesian Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics 59:
468-487 (2012).
[2] Bassetto, Marco, “A Game-Theoretic View of the Fiscal Theory of the Price
Level,” Econometrica 70: 2167-2195 (2002).
[3] Benhabib, Jess, George W. Evans, and Seppo Honkapohja, “Liquidity Traps and
Expectation Dynamics: Fiscal Stimulus or Fiscal Austerity?” NBER Working
Paper no. 18114, May 2012.
[4] Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, and Martin Uribe, “The Perils of
Taylor Rules,” Journal of Economic Theory 96: 40-69 (2001).
[5] Bernheim, Douglas, “Rationalizable Strategic Behavior,” Econometrica 52:
1007-1028 (1984).
[6] Blanchard, Olivier J., and Charles Kahn, “The Solution of Linear Diﬀerence
Equations under Rational Expectations,” Econometrica 48: 1305-1311 (1980).
[7] Branch, William A., “Restricted Perceptions Equilibria and Learning in Macroeconomics,” in D. Colander, ed., Post Walrasian Macroeconomics: Beyond the
Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Model, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
[8] Bray, Margaret, “Learning, Estimation and Stability of Rational Expectations,”
Journal of Economic Theory 26: 318-339 (1982).
[9] Bullard, James, and Kaushik Mitra, “Learning About Monetary Policy Rules,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 49: 1105-1129 (2002).
[10] Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans, “Nominal
Rigidities and the Dynamic Eﬀects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of
Political Economy 113: 1-45 (2005).
[11] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, “The Science of Monetary Policy,” Journal of Economic Literature 37: 1661-1707 (1999).
60

[12] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, “Monetary Policy Rules and
Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 115: 147-180 (2000).
[13] Cover, Thomas M., and Joy A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory, New
York: Wiley-Interscience, 2d ed., 2006.
[14] Deaton, Angus, Understanding Consumption, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1992.
[15] De Grauwe, Paul, “Top-Down Versus Bottom-Up Macroeconomics,” CESifo Economic Studies 56: 465-497 (2010).
[16] Eusepi, Stefano, and Bruce Preston, “Expectations, Learning and Business Cycle
Fluctuations,” American Economic Review 101: 2844-2872 (2011).
[17] Eusepi, Stefano, and Bruce Preston, “Debt, Policy Uncertainty, and Expectations Stabilization,” Journal of the European Economic Association, forthcoming
2012a.
[18] Eusepi, Stefano, and Bruce Preston, “Fiscal Foundations of Inﬂation: Imperfect
Knowledge,” unpublished, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, September 2012b.
[19] Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja, Learning and Expectations in
Macroeconomics, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001.
[20] Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja, “Expectations and the Stability
Problem for Optimal Monetary Policies,” Review of Economic Studies 70: 807824 (2003).
[21] Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja, “Monetary Policy, Expectations and
Commitment,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 108: 15-38 (2006).
[22] Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja, “Learning and Macroeconomics,”
Annual Review of Economics 1: 421-451 (2009).
[23] Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja, “Expectations, Deﬂation Traps, and
Macroeconomic Policy,” in D. Cobham, et al., eds., Twenty Years of Inflation
Targeting: Lessons Learned and Future Prospects, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010.
61

[24] Evans, George W., Seppo Honkapohja, and Kaushik Mitra, “Does Ricardian
Equivalence Hold when Expectations are Not Rational?” Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking, forthcoming 2012.
[25] Evans, George W., and Bruce McGough, “Learning to Optimize,” unpublished,
University of Oregon, March 2009.
[26] Evans, George W., and Garey Ramey, “Expectation Calculation and Macroeconomic Dynamics,” American Economic Review 82: 207-224 (1992).
[27] Friedman, Milton, “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review
58: 1-17 (1968).
[28] Fuster, Andreas, David Laibson, and Brock Mendel, “Natural Expectations
and Macroeconomic Fluctuations,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 24: 6784 (2010).
[29] Fuster, Andreas, Benjamin Hebert, and David Laibson, “Natural Expectations,
Macroeconomic Dynamics, and Asset Pricing,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual
26: 1-48 (2011).
[30] Fuster, Andreas, Benjamin Hebert, and David Laibson, “Investment Dynamics
with Natural Expectations,” International Journal of Central Banking 8: 243-265
(2012).
[31] Gali, Jordi, Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction
to the New Keynesian Framework, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2008.
[32] Gaspar, Vitor, Frank Smets, and David Vestin, “Inﬂation Expectations, Adaptive Learning and Optimal Monetary Policy,” in B.M. Friedman and M. Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, volume 3B, Amsterdam: Elsevier,
2011.
[33] Grandmont, Jean-Michel, “Temporary General Equilibrium Theory,” Econometrica 45: 535-572 (1977).
[34] Grandmont, Jean-Michel, ed., Temporary Equilibrium: Selected Readings,
Boston: Academic Press, 1988.

62

[35] Guesnerie, Roger, “An Exploration of the Eductive Justiﬁcations of the Rational
Expectations Hypothesis,” American Economic Review 82: 1254-1278 (1992).
[36] Guesnerie, Roger, Assessing Rational Expectations 2: Eductive Stability in Economics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005.
[37] Guesnerie, Roger, “Macroeconomic and Monetary Policies from the Eductive
Viewpoint,” in K. Schmidt-Hebbel and C. Walsh, eds., Monetary Policy Under
Uncertainty and Learning, Santiago: Central Bank of Chile, 2008.
[38] Hansen, Lars Peter, and Thomas J. Sargent, Robustness, Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2008.
[39] Hansen, Lars Peter, and Thomas J. Sargent, “Three Types of Ambiguity,” unpublished, University of Chicago, July 2012.
[40] Harvey, Andrew C., Forecasting, Structural Time Series Models and the Kalman
Filter, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
[41] Hicks, John, Value and Capital, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1939.
[42] Howitt, Peter, “Interest-Rate Control and Nonconvergence to Rational Expectations,” Journal of Political Economy 100: 776-800 (1992).
[43] Kurz, Mordecai, “On the Structure and Diversity of Rational Beliefs,” Economic
Theory 4: 877-900 (1994).
[44] Kurz, Mordecai, ed., Endogenous Economic Fluctuations: Studies in the Theory
of Rational Belief, Berlin: Springer, 1997.
[45] Kurz, Mordecai, “A New Keynesian Model with Diverse Beliefs,” unpublished,
Stanford University, February 2012.
[46] Kurz, Mordecai, and Maurizio Motolese, “Diverse Beliefs and Time Variability
of Risk Premia,” Economic Theory 47: 293-335 (2011).
[47] Kwon, Hyosung, and Jianjun Miao, “Woodford’s Approach to Robust Policy
Analysis in a Linear-Quadratic Framework,” unpublished, Boston University,
December 2012.
63

[48] Lindahl, Erik, “Theory of Money and Capital,” London: Allen and Unwin, 1939.
[49] Lubik, Thomas A., and Frank Schorfheide, “Testing for Indeterminacy: An Application to U.S. Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review 94: 190-217
(2004).
[50] Marcet, Albert, and Thomas J. Sargent, “Convergence of Least Squares Learning
Mechanisms in Self-Referential Linear Stochastic Models,” Journal of Economic
Theory 48: 337-368 (1989).
[51] Maskin, Eric, and Jean Tirole, “Markov Perfect Equilibrium: I. Observable Actions,” Journal of Economic Theory 100: 191-219 (2001).
[52] McCallum, Bennett T., “On Nonuniqueness in Linear Rational Expectations
Models: An Attempt at Perspective,” Journal of Monetary Economics 11: 134168 (1983).
[53] Milani, Fabio, “Learning, Monetary Policy Rules, and Macroeconomic Stability,”
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 32: 3148-3165 (2005).
[54] Milani, Fabio, “Expectations, Learning and Macroeconomic Persistence,” Journal of Monetary Economics 54: 2065-2082 (2007).
[55] Milani, Fabio, “Expectation Shocks and Learning as Drivers of the Business
Cycle,” Economic Journal 121: 379-401 (2011).
[56] Muth, John F., “Optimal Properties of Exponentially Weighted Forecasts,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 55: 299-305 (1960).
[57] Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams, “Imperfect Knowledge, Inﬂation
Expectations and Monetary Policy,” in B.S. Bernanke and M. Woodford, eds.,
The Inflation Targeting Debate, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005.
[58] Pearce, David, “Rationalizable Strategic Behavior and the Problem of Perfection,” Econometrica 52: 1029-1050 (1984).
[59] Phelps, Edmund S., “The Trouble with ‘Rational Expectations’ and the Problem of Inﬂation Stabilization,” in R. Frydman and E.S. Phelps, eds., Individual
Forecasting and Aggregate Outcomes: “Rational Expectations” Reconsidered,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983.
64

[60] Preston, Bruce, “Learning about Monetary Policy Rules when Long-Horizon Expectations Matter,” International Journal of Central Banking 1: 81-126 (2005).
[61] Rondina, Giacomo, and Todd B. Walker, “Information Equilibria in Dynamic
Economies with Dispersed Information,” with Todd B. Walker, unpublished,
U.C. San Diego, March 2012.
[62] Sargent, Thomas J., Bounded Rationality in Macroeconomics, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1993.
[63] Sargent, Thomas J., “Evolution and Intelligent Design,” American Economic
Review 98: 5-37 (2008).
[64] Slobodyan, Sergey, and Raf Wouters, “Learning in an Estimated Medium-Scale
DSGE Model,” CERGE-EI working paper no. 396, November 2009.
[65] Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters, “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles:
A Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review 97: 586-606 (2007).
[66] Svensson, Lars E.O., “Inﬂation Targeting as a Monetary Policy Rule,” Journal
of Monetary Economics 43: 607-654 (1999).
[67] Taylor, John B., “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy 39: 195-214 (1993).
[68] Walsh, Carl E., Monetary Theory and Policy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 3d
ed., 2010.
[69] Woodford, Michael, “Fiscal Requirements for Price Stability,” Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking 33: 669-728 (2001).
[70] Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
Policy, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003.
[71] Woodford. Michael, “Robustly Optimal Monetary Policy with Near-Rational
Expectations,” American Economic Review 100: 274-303 (2010).

65

A

Appendix: Details of Calculations

This appendix provides additional details of several derivations referred to in the
main text.

A.1

Derivation
Conditions

of

the

Temporary

Equilibrium

The equilibrium conditions given in the text represent linearized versions of the conditions required for a temporary equilibrium in a model described more fully here.
The economy is made up of a continuum of identical inﬁnite-lived households, indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. In the plan that each household i formulates in period t, it seeks
to maximize its estimate (based on subjective probabilities) of the discounted sum of
utilities in the remaining periods of its life,
Êti

∞
∑

β T −t [u(CTi ; ξ T ) − v(HTi ; ξ T )].

(A.1)

T =t

Here Cti is a Dixit-Stiglitz (or CES) aggregate of the household’s purchases of diﬀerentiated consumer goods,
θ
[∫ 1
] θ−1
θ−1
i
i
ct (j) θ dj
Ct ≡
,
(A.2)
j=0

where cit (j) is the quantity purchased of good j and θ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution among diﬀerent goods; Hti is hours worked by the household in period t; and
ξ t is a vector of exogenous disturbances that includes possible disturbances to both
the urgency of immediate consumption and the disutility of labor (that need not be
correlated, since ξ t is a vector).
Given the assumption of a single ﬁnancial asset, a one-period riskless nominal
bond, the household’s bond holdings evolve according to
[
]
∫ 1
∫ 1
i
i
i
Bt+1 = (1 + it ) Bt + Wt Ht +
Πt (j)dj −
pt (j)ct (j)dj − Tt ,
(A.3)
j=0

j=0

where Bti is the nominal value at maturity of the bonds carried into period t, Wt
is the nominal wage, Πjt is nominal proﬁts of ﬁrm j (distributed in equal shares to
the households who own the ﬁrms), pt (j) is the price of good j, and Tt is the net
nominal (lump-sum) tax obligation (assumed to be equal for all households). (Note
that here I write Ht for hours worked by the household, because of the assumption
that available hours of work are allocated equally to each household.) Each ﬁrm’s
proﬁts are given by
Πt (j) = pt (j)yt (j) − Wt Ht (j),
66

where yt (j) is the quantity produced and sold of good j and Ht (j) is labor hired by
ﬁrm j. Integrating this over ﬁrms and noting that
∫ 1
Ht (j)dj ≡ Ht ,
j=0

we see that each household’s income other than from its bond holdings must equal
∫ 1
∫ 1
Wt Ht +
Πt (j)dj =
pt (j)yt (j)dj.
j=0

j=0

Finally, the form of the Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator (A.2) implies that in the case
of an optimal allocation of household expenditure across diﬀerentiated goods, total
expenditure will equal
∫
1

pt (j)cit (j)dj = Pt Cti ,
j=0

where

[∫

1
] 1−θ

1

Pt ≡

pt (j)

1−θ

dj

j=0

is the Dixit-Stiglitz price index. As this holds for all purchasers of goods (including
the government, it is assumed), total sales revenues will similarly equal
∫ 1
pt (j)yt (j)dj = Pt Yt ,
j=0

where Yt is total demand for the composite good deﬁned in (A.2). Substituting these
expressions into (A.3), the law of motion for bond holdings can be written more
simply as
[
]
i
Bt+1
= (1 + it ) Bti + Pt Yt − Pt Cti − Tt .
(A.4)
The household’s consumption plan can then be formulated purely as a choice of a
planned state-contingent evolution for {CTi }∞
T =t , and the household’s perceived intertemporal budget constraint (i.e., the set of plans that are believed to be feasible)
depends only on the household’s initial wealth Bti and the expected evolution of the
variables {YT , PT , iT , TT }∞
T =t .
The household’s planning problem at date t is then the choice of state-contingent
paths {CTi , BTi +1 }∞
T =t consistent with (A.4) at all dates T ≥ t (together with a bound
on how negative bond holdings can be asymptotically, to rule out Ponzi schemes) so
as to maximize (A.1), given the household’s initial wealth Bti and its expectations
regarding the evolution of the variables {YT , PT , iT , TT }∞
T =t outside its control. (Note
∞
that the evolution of {HT }T =t is also outside the household’s control, under the labor
market institutions assumed in the model; but the household’s consumption-planning
67

problem is independent of its expectations about how much it will be working.) While
we are at present agnostic about the nature of households’ expectations about the
future evolution of the variables outside their individual control (and do not assume,
in general, that households are necessarily aware of any of the structural relations
that determine such variables), we assume that households correctly understand the
constraints (A.4) that deﬁne their own problem, and accordingly that each chooses a
plan that solves the problem just stated, under some internally consistent subjective
expectations about the evolution of the variables outside its control.
A.1.1

Subjectively Optimal Expenditure

The ﬁrst-order conditions for the problem just deﬁned are
[
]
i
uC (CTi ; ξ T ) = β(1 + iT )ÊTi Π−1
T +1 uC (CT +1 ; ξ T +1 )

(A.5)

for any state of the world that might be reached at any date T ≥ t, where ΠT +1 ≡
PT +1 /PT is the gross rate of inﬂation. The household’s subjectively optimal plan is
then a pair of processes {CTi , BTi +1 }∞
T =t satisfying (A.4) and (A.5) at all dates T ≥ t,
together with bounds on the asymptotic growth of net ﬁnancial wealth (a transversality condition) that guarantee both consistency with the borrowing limit and no
ineﬃcient overaccumulation of wealth. We can approximately characterize the optimal plan, looking forward from any date t, by linearizing the conditions that implicitly
deﬁne the optimal plan around the steady-state values of the endogenous variables
that represent a solution in the case of no random ﬂuctuations in the exogenous
states.
Assuming constant values ξ T = ξ̄ for all of the exogenous disturbances and that
expectations about the economy’s deterministic evolution are correct (i.e., perfect
foresight), the structural relations (A.4) and (A.5) are consistent with a stationary
solution in which ΠT = 1 (a zero steady-state inﬂation rate), iT = β −1 − 1 > 0,
biT ≡ BTi /PT −1 = b̄, YT = Ȳ , CTi = C̄, and τ T ≡ TT /PT = τ̄ with certainty for all
T ≥ t, under the assumption that (i) the household’s initial ﬁnancial wealth is given
by bit = b̄;69 (ii) the value of C̄ satisﬁes
C̄ = (1 − β)b̄ + T̄ − τ̄ ;
and (iii) these steady-state values are also consistent with the remaining model structural relations (discussed further below), and in particular with the speciﬁcations of
monetary and ﬁscal policy. We now with to solve for a solution to the structural
relations (A.4) and (A.5) near this steady-state solution, in the case of values for
the exogenous disturbances that remain near enough to the values ξ̄ for all T ≥ t; a
level of initial ﬁnancial wealth bit near enough to b̄; and subjective expectations about
69

Note that bit is deﬁned as Bti /Pt−1 rather than Bti /Pt so that it is a predetermined state variable.

68

the future evolution of all variables that are close enough to being correct (i.e., near
enough to model-consistency).70
We obtain a local linear approximation to the perturbed solution by solving local
linear approximations to the structural equations (A.4) and (A.5). In terms of the
perturbations
b̂it ≡

bit − b̄
,
Ȳ

ı̂t ≡ log(1 + it ) − log(β −1 ),

π t ≡ log Πt ,

C i − C̄
τ t − τ̄
Yt − Ȳ
,
ĉit ≡ t
,
τ̂ t ≡
,
Ȳ
Ȳ
Ȳ
a linear approximation to (A.4) can be written in the form
Ŷt ≡

b̂it+1 = sb (ı̂t − β −1 π t ) + β −1 (b̂it + Ŷt − ĉit − τ̂ t ),

(A.6)

where sb ≡ b̄/Ȳ . A local linear approximation to the marginal utility of expenditure
can similarly be written in the form
log uC (Cti ; ξ t ) = log uC (C̄; ξ̄) − σ −1 (ĉit − c̄t ),

(A.7)

where σ > 0 is a parameter proportional to the intertemporal elasticity of substitution
of expenditure, and c̄t is an exogenous disturbance (a shock to the urgency of private
expenditure), indicating the shift in the size of ĉit required in order to maintain a
constant marginal utility of expenditure. A local linear approximation to (A.5) then
can be written in the form
ĉit − c̄t = −σ(ı̂t − Êti π t+1 ) + Êti [ĉit+1 − c̄t+1 ].

(A.8)

One can show that there is a unique solution to equations (A.6) and (A.8) for
periods T ≥ t consistent with the transversality condition
lim β T −t Êti b̂iT = 0.

T →∞

Rearranging the terms in (A.6), we can alternatively write
b̂it = −(Ŷt − τ̂ t ) − sb (βı̂t − π t ) + c̄t + (ĉit − c̄t ) + β b̂it+1 .
This can then be “solved forward” to obtain
∞
}
{
∑
i
b̂t = −
Êti (ŶT − τ̂ T ) + sb (βı̂T − π T ) + c̄T + (ĉiT − c̄T )

(A.9)

T =t
70
Because of the local approximation that is relied upon after this point, there is a sense in
which all of the analysis in the paper assumes “near-rational expectations.” Nonetheless, while
the linearized temporary-equilibrium relations are relied upon throughout the text, bounds on the
possible expectational errors are not assumed except when additional restrictions on expectations
are explicitly introduced, as for example in section 4.2 of the text.

69

But (A.8) implies that for any T > t,
Êti [ĉiT

− c̄T ] =

(ĉit

− c̄t ) + σ

T −1
∑

Êti [ı̂s − π s+1 ],

s=t

so that
∞
∑

β T −t Êti [ĉiT − c̄T ] = (1 − β)−1 (ĉit − c̄t ) + (1 − β)−1 σ

T =t

∞
∑

β T +1−t Êti [ı̂T − π T +1 ].

T =t

Substituting this last result into (A.9), we obtain
b̂it = −

∞
∑
T =t

= −

∞
∑

{
}
Êti (ŶT − τ̂ T ) + sb (βı̂T − π T ) + c̄T + (1 − β)−1 βσ(ı̂T − π T +1 ) + (1 − β)−1 (ĉit − c̄t )
{
}
Êti (ŶT − τ̂ T ) + sb (βı̂T − π T ) + (1 − β)−1 βσ(ı̂T − π T +1 ) + (1 − β)−1 β(c̄T +1 − c̄T )

T =t

+(1 − β)−1 ĉit .
This equation can be solved for the value of ĉit under the subjectively optimal plan.
This yields equation (1.1) in the text. (Note, however, that hats are omitted from all
variables in the text. That is, bit in the text refers to the perturbation variable here
denoted by b̂it , and so on.)
A.1.2

Labor Supply and Wage Determination

If we instead write the law of motion (A.3) for a household’s ﬁnancial wealth in real
terms, we observe that the household’s intertemporal budget set looking forward from
any date t depends only on the value of the household’s real period t wealth
ait ≡

Bti + Wt Hti
Pt

(prior to proﬁt distributions,
taxes and transfer payments) and the expected paths
∫
∞
of the variables {YT , iT , j ΠT (j)dj, τ T }∞
T =t and {ΠT }T =t+1 outside the household’s
control. Let Vti (ait ) denote the household’s subjective evaluation in period t of the
maximimum attainable value of the continuation utility (A.1) given the value of ait ,
where the time subscript indicates the dependence of this function on expectations at
t regarding the variables outside the household’s control. Using the envelope theorem,
we observe that the derivative of this value function will equal
Vti′ (ait ) = uC (Cti ; ξ t )
70

(A.10)

where Cti is the household’s optimal period t expenditure, characterized above.
Under the assumed labor market institution, then, the union supplies Ht hours of
work from each household in period t so as to maximize the value of
∫ 1
Vti (bit /Πt + wt Ht )di − v(Ht ; ξ t ),
0

in the case of any real wage wt ≡ Wt /Pt . The ﬁrst-order condition for optimal aggregate labor supply is then
∫ 1
Vti′ (ait )di · wt = vH (Ht ; ξ t ).
0

Using (A.10), this can alternatively be written in the form
∫ 1
uC (Cti ; ξ t )di · wt = vH (Ht ; ξ t ).

(A.11)

0

We can then log-linearize relation (A.11) around the same steady-state values as
above. Using (A.7), the local linear approximation takes the form
∫ 1
−1
ŵt − σ
(ĉit − c̄t )di = ν t ,
(A.12)
0

introducing the notation
ŵt ≡ log(wt /w̄),

ν t ≡ log vH (Ht ; ξ t ) − log vH (H̄; ξ̄)
∫1
where w̄ is the steady-state real wage. Finally, letting Ct ≡ 0 Cti di denote aggregate
household expenditure and introducing the notation
ĉt ≡ log(Ct /C̄),
we observe that to a linear approximation
∫ 1
ĉt =
ĉt (i)di.
0

Substituting this into (A.12), we obtain
ŵt − σ −1 (ĉt − c̄t ) = ν t .
This is the log-linear wage equation given in section 1.3 of the text, except that once
again hats are omitted in the notation used in the text.
71

A.2

Non-uniqueness of Rationalizable Equilibrium

Here we present additional details of the calculations involved in establishing the
non-uniqueness of rationalizable equilibrium (or, failure of “eductive stability”) in
the example of Guesnerie (2008), as stated in section 2.2 of the text. Under the
assumption of a monetary policy rule of the form it = ϕπ π t , the TE dynamics must
satisfy
i
v̄ti = (1 − βϕπ )v̄t + β Êti v̄t+1
(A.13)
for all i, as explained in the text.71 In a rationalizable TE, not only must this hold at
date t, but everyone must expect anyone else to expect anyone else ... to expect it to
hold at any future date. We wish to consider whether the RE equilibrium in which
v̄ti = 0 for all i and all t constitutes the unique bounded process {v̄ti } consistent with
common knowledge of (A.13). In the case that |ϕπ | < 1, the solution is obvious not
unique, because in this case, there is not even a unique RE equilibrium, as is well
known; and all REE are also rationalizable TE. Here we show that even when ϕπ > 1,
so that v̄ti = 0 is the unique bounded REE, it is possible to have a large multiplicity
of bounded rationalizable TE.
Common knowledge that (A.13) holds for all i and all t implies that the hierarchy
of beliefs at any date t must satisfy
in
in
v̄
v̄ in
= (1 − βϕπ )Êti1 Êti12 · · · Êt+j
Êti1 Êti12 · · · Êt+j
n−1 t+jn
n−1 t+jn
in
v̄ in
,
+β Êti1 Êti12 · · · Êt+j
n−1 t+jn +1

(A.14)

i

in
in
v̄
v̄ n+1 = (1 − βϕπ )Êti1 Êti12 · · · Êt+j
Êti1 Êti12 · · · Êt+j
n−1 t+jn
n−1 t+jn
i

i

in
n+1
Êt+j
v̄ n+1 ,
+β Êti1 Êti12 · · · Êt+j
n t+jn +1
n−1

(A.15)

where t < t1 < · · · < tn+1 is any sequence of dates beginning with t, and i1 ̸= i2 ̸=
··· =
̸ in+1 is any sequence of households. At the same time, any hierarchy of beliefs
satisfying (A.14)–(A.15) will describe a rationalizable TE. The hierarchy of beliefs
regarding the future paths of inﬂation and the interest rate is derivable from the
hierarchy of beliefs about the {v̄τi }, using the assumption that both equation (1.8) in
the text and the policy rule are common knowledge.
One possible solution to (A.13), (A.14) and (A.15) is given by v̄ti = ϵ, and
in
Êti1 Êti12 · · · Êt+j
v̄ in = (−µ)1−n ϕπ ϵ,
n−1 t+jn
in
Êti1 Êti12 · · · Êt+j
v̄ n+1 = (−µ)−n ϵ
n−1 t+jn
i

71

See equation (2.2) in the text.

72

for any sequences of households and dates of the kind assumed above, where ϵ is an
arbitrary real number and
βϕπ − 1
µ≡
.
(1 − β)ϕπ
These beliefs satisfy all of the requirements for rationalizability for any real number
ϵ, as can be veriﬁed by substituting the candidate solution into equations (A.13),
(A.14) and (A.15) and verifying that each condition is satisﬁed.
Moreover, if 1/2 < β < 1 and ϕπ > (2β − 1)−1 > 1 is satisﬁed, as stated in
the text, then µ > 1, and forecasts of all orders satisfy a uniform bound. There
is then (at least) a continuum of uniformly bounded rationalizable TE. Moreover, ϵ
may represent the realization of a “sunspot” event unrelated to fundamentals, so that
there are seen to exist bounded sunspot equilibria, despite the fact that monetary
policy satisﬁes the Taylor Principle.

A.3

Restricted Perception Equilibrium

Here we explain further details of the example of a restricted perception equilibrium
in which Ricardian Equivalence fails. The policy regime assumed in the example of
section 3.1.2 implies that the dynamics of bt and st are given by
bt+1 = β −1 (bt − st )

(A.16)

st = ϕb bt + ϵst

(A.17)

where {ϵst } is an i.i.d. random variable with mean zero and variance σ 2 . Substitution
of (A.17) into (A.16) yields the univariate law of motion
bt+1 = ρbt − β −1 ϵst ,
where ρ ≡ β −1 (1 − ϕb ). Under the assumption that
0 < 1 − β < ϕb < 1,

(A.18)

0 < ρ < 1 and this law of motion implies that {bt } is stationary AR(1) process with
positive serial correlation.
It follows from this law of motion that the unconditional variance of the stationary
process is given by
β −1 σ 2
.
(A.19)
E[b2 ] =
1 − ρ2
It then follows from (A.17) that
E[s2 ] = ϕ2b E[b2 ] + σ 2 ,

E[sb] = ϕb E[b2 ],
73

(A.20)

and from (A.16) that
E[bt+1 st ] = (ρ − β) E[b2 ].

(A.21)

The linear projection is then deﬁned as Pt [bt+1 ] = Λb st , where
Λb ≡

E[bt+1 st ]
E[s2t ]

(A.22)

is the OLS regression coeﬃcient. It follows from (A.20), (A.21) and this deﬁnition
that
(ρ − β)E[b2 ]
ρ−β
1−β
1
Λb = 2 2
<
,
(A.23)
<
<
2
2
ϕb
ϕb E[b ] + σ 2
ϕb
ϕb
where the last inequality relies upon (A.18).
The linear equation (3.12) in the text, to solve for ψ v , can be written in the form
A(ψ v ) = 0,
where the function A(ψ v ) is deﬁned as the left-hand side of (3.12) minus the righthand side. This is a linear function of the form
A(ψ v ) = aψ v + b,
where
a = 1 − ϕb Λb > 0
as a consequence of (A.23). There will thus be a unique value of ψ v for which
A(ψ v ) = 0. Moreover, we observe that
)
(
1−β
−1
−1
−1
−1
> 0,
A(β − 1) = (β − 1) − (1 − β)(β − 1)Λb > (β − 1) 1 −
ϕb
where the ﬁrst inequality follows from (A.23) and the second from (A.18). Then since
A(ψ v ) is an increasing function, the zero of the function must occur for a value of ψ v
less than this. Hence the unique solution satisﬁes ψ v < β −1 − 1, as asserted in the
text.

A.4

Phase Dynamics Shown in Figure 1

When the zero lower bound (ZLB) constraint does not bind, the non-stochastic part
of the solution given in equation (3.19) of the text can be written explicitly as




]
κ
(1 − α)β(1 + σϕy ) [
πt
1
e
1t

1
−(1 − α)βσϕπ 
≡ Det ,
xt ≡  yt  =
e2t
∆
it
κϕπ + ϕy
(1 − α)βϕπ
74

where
∆ ≡ 1 + κσϕπ + σϕy > 0,
allowing us to identify the matrix D. Using the elements of the matrix C indicated
by the coeﬃcients of the linear equations (3.16)–(3.17) in the text, we then ﬁnd that
]
[ σ
σ
[κ(ϕ
−
1)
+
ϕ
]
(1
−
α)β[(ϕ
−
1)
−
σϕ
]
1
y
y
π
π
1−β
1−β
I − A ≡ I − CD =
.
κσϕπ +(1−β)(1+σϕy )
κ
∆
− (1−α)(1−αβ)
1−αβ
This matrix deﬁnes the linear ODE system given by (3.22) in the text, for the part
of the plane where the ZLB constraint does not bind.
The two rows of the matrix M ≡ I − A give the coeﬃcients of the linear equations
that deﬁne the loci ė1 = 0 and ė2 = 0 respectively. Let the elements of M be denoted
{mij }. Then since m21 < 0, m22 > 0, the locus ė2 = 0 is necessarily an upward-sloping
line, as shown in the ﬁgure. Furthermore, ė2 < 0 for all points in the phase plane
above this line, while ė2 > 0 for all points below it.
Because m12 cannot be signed in general, the locus ė1 = 0 may have either a
positive or negative slope (or may be perfectly vertical). However, in the case of
response coeﬃcients satisfying
ϕπ +

1−β
ϕy > 1,
κ

(A.24)

i.e., consistent with the Taylor Principle, m11 > 0, which implies that ė1 > 0 for all
points to the left of this locus, while ė1 < 0 for all points to its right. In addition,
assumption (A.24) implies that
]
[
m22 m12
(1 − α)∆
1−β
−
=−
ϕy − 1 < 0,
ϕπ +
m21 m11
κ(ϕπ − 1) + ϕy
κ
so that the inverse slope de1 /de2 must be greater (more positive) for the ė2 = 0
locus than for the ė1 = 0 locus. Hence the relative slopes of the two loci in the
unconstrained region are necessarily as shown in Figure 1.
It also follows from the above discussion that at all points above the ė2 = 0 locus
and to the right of the ė1 = 0 locus, trajectories must all move down and to the left;
while at all point above the ė2 = 0 locus and to the left of the ė1 = 0 locus, they
must all move down and to the right; and so on. Hence the phase dynamics in the
unconstrained region (the region above the line labeled “ZLB”) must be as shown
in the ﬁgure. These sign restrictions suﬃce to imply that in an open set around
the zero-inﬂation steady state (point e = 0 in the ﬁgure), all trajectories converge
asymptotically to that steady state (i.e., the zero-inﬂation steady state is locally
asymptotically stable under the ODE dynamics). If there were no ZLB constraint,
75

so that equation (3.22) in the text applied globally, this steady state (which would
then be the unique rest point of the ODE system) would also be globally stable.
The equation of the locus of points at which the ZLB constraint just binds (line
ZLB in the ﬁgure) is of the form
a′ e = −r̄∆ < 0,
where

a′ ≡

[

κϕπ + ϕy (1 − α)βϕπ

]

.

(This follows from equation (3.23) in the text, and our explicit solution above for
the matrix D.) Since a1 , a2 > 0, this equation describes a downward-sloping straight
line, located below and to the left of the point e = 0, as shown in Figure 1. The
points above and to the right of this line constitute the values of e for which the
ZLB constraint will not bind, while below and to the left of the line, the constraint
is strictly binding (and hence the ODE system given by (3.22) in the text does not
apply).
Then since the ė2 = 0 locus is upward-sloping, as established above, it must
intersect the line ZLB at a point below and to the left of the point e = 0, as shown
in the ﬁgure. The locus ė1 = 0 is not necessarily upward-sloping (as drawn in the
ﬁgure), but under assumption (A.24), one can show that
(1 − α)βϕy ∆
a2 m12
> 0.
−
=−
a1 m11
[κ(ϕπ − 1) + ϕy ](κϕπ + ϕy )
This implies that the inverse slope of the line ZLB is necessarily more negative than
that of the locus ė1 = 0, so that the two lines also must intersect, as shown. It further
follows from our conclusion above about the relative slopes of the ė1 = 0 and ė2 = 0
loci in the unconstrained region that the point at which the locus ė1 = 0 intersects
the line ZLB must lie below and to the right of the point at which the locus ė2 = 0
intersects this line, as shown in the ﬁgure. Hence the qualitative dynamics in the
unconstrained region are as shown in the ﬁgure.
In the constrained region, the dynamics are instead deﬁned by the alternative
linear ODE system speciﬁed in equation (3.26) of the text, where the matrix D is
obtained by substituting ϕπ = ϕy = 0 into the expression given above for the matrix
D. This system can alternatively be written in the form
ė = −M (e − e∗ ),

(A.25)

where the matrix M is obtained by substituting ϕπ = ϕy = 0 into the expression
given above for the matrix M .
The elements of the matrix M then deﬁne the coeﬃcients of the equations corresponding to the loci ė1 = 0 and ė2 = 0 in the constrained region. Since m11 , m12 < 0,
76

the ė1 = 0 locus must be upward-sloping; and similarly, since m21 < 0 and m22 > 0,
the ė2 = 0 locus must be downward-sloping, as shown in Figure 1. Then given the
relative positions of the points at which these loci intersect the line ZLB, discussed
above, the two loci necessarily intersect at a point e∗ in the interior of the constrained
region, as also shown in the ﬁgure. (As discussed in the text, this point represents a
second, deﬂationary steady state.)
The signs of the elements of M also imply that in the region above the ė1 = 0
locus but below the ė2 = 0 locus, all trajectories must move up and to the right, and
so on. In particular, they imply that all trajectories starting in the grey region of the
ﬁgure must move down and to the left. Hence all trajectories starting in this region
remain trapped in it forever.
The signs of the elements of M also imply that the determinant of the matrix is
negative, implying that the matrix must have two real eigenvalues, one positive and
one negative. It then follows from standard results regarding linear ODE systems
that the stable manifold of the system deﬁned by equation (A.25) is one-dimensional:
it corresponds to a line (the line SM shown in Figure 1) passing through point e∗
along which trajectories converge asymptotically to point e∗ starting from any point
on this line. Instead, all trajectories starting from points oﬀ this line diverge from
the line, and hence diverge from the steady state e∗ , which is thus locally unstable
under the dynamics deﬁned by (A.25).
Moreover, at any points in the constrained region that are below the line SM but
above the ė2 = 0 locus, ė2 < 0, so that trajectories starting at any such point must
eventually enter the grey region, unless they leave the constrained region (i.e., they
cross the line ZLB, in which case equation (A.25) would no longer apply). Similarly,
trajectories starting at any point below the line SM but to the right of the ė1 = 0
locus must eventually enter the grey region, unless they leave the constrained region.
Thus all trajectories beginning in the constrained region and below the line SM must
eventually enter and be permanently trapped in the grey region, unless they leave
the constrained region before entering the grey region.
It remains to determine whether trajectories beginning in the constrained region
below the line SM can ever leave the constrained region. To answer this, we need
to examine whether trajectories point into or out of the constrained region, at points
along the line ZLB that deﬁnes the boundary of the region. The line ZLB consists
of all points e such that
a′ e = −r̄∆;
(A.26)
the constrained region consists of all points e for which a′ e is more negative than
this. Thus at any point on the line ZLB, the trajectory points out of the constrained
region if a′ ė > 0, and into the constrained region if instead a′ ė < 0. At points between
the point where the ė2 = 0 locus intersects the line ZLB and the point where the
ė1 = 0 locus intersects it, both elements of ė are positive, and hence a′ ė > 0. Hence
77

the trajectories all point outside the constrained region along this interval, as shown
in Figure 1.
Consider instead the point where the line SM intersects the line ZLB, if such a
point exists. The line SM consists of all points e of the form
e = e∗ + αu,

(A.27)

for arbitrary (positive or negative) values of the coeﬃcient α, where u is the right
eigenvector of the matrix M corresponding to the positive eigenvalue. Thus
M (e − e∗ ) = λ(e − e∗ )

(A.28)

for some λ > 0. Then at any point on the line SM, we must have
a′ ė = −a′ M (e − e∗ )
= −λ a′ (e − e∗ ),
using (A.25) and (A.28). Because e∗ is in the interior of the constrained region,
a′ (e − e∗ ) > 0 for all points on the line ZLB deﬁned by (A.26). Hence at a point
that is both on the line SM and on the line ZLB, we must have a′ ė < 0, and the
trajectory of the ODE system through this point points into the constrained region,
as shown in Figure 1.
Now suppose that the stable manifold SM intersects the line ZLB at a point
below and to the right of the point where the ė1 = 0 locus intersects ZLB, as shown
in the ﬁgure. Because a′ ė = −a′ M (e − e∗ ) is a linear function of e, the fact that
it is positive at the point of intersection with the ė1 = 0 locus but negative at the
point of intersection with SM implies that it must also take an even more negative
value at all points on the line ZLB that are below and to the right of the intersection
with SM . Hence the ODE trajectories point into the constrained region at all such
points, as shown in Figure 1, and it is not possible for a trajectory that begins in the
constrained region and below the line SM to ever leave the constrained region.
Alternatively, suppose that the stable manifold intersects the line ZLB at a point
above and to the left of the point where the ė2 = 0 locus intersects ZLB. In this case,
the fact that a′ ė > 0 at the point of intersection with the ė2 = 0 locus while a′ ė < 0
at the point of intersection with SM implies that we must have a′ ė < 0 at all points
on the line ZLB above and to the left of the intersection with SM . Hence the ODE
trajectories again point into the constrained region at such points, and again it is not
possible for a trajectory that begins in the constrained region and below SM to ever
leave the constrained region.
Finally, suppose that the stable manifold SM is exactly parallel to the line ZLB
(the case in which a′ u = 0). In this case, SM never intersects ZLB, and trajectories
that begin below SM can never approach the boundary of the constrained region.
78

Thus in all possible cases, we conclude that trajectories that begin in the constrained
region and below the line SM remain forever in the constrained region, as stated
in the text (and illustrated in Figure 1). It follows that all such trajectories must
eventually enter the grey region and remain trapped there forever, as stated in the
text.

A.5

An Example of Rational Belief Equilibria

Here we provide additional details of the calculations referred to in the example
discussed in section 4.1 of the text. It follows from the deﬁnition of the subjective
variable p∗j
t in section 1.3 of the text that
[
]
∞
∑
α
∗j
j
k
κ yt+k .
pt =
(αβ) Êt π t+k +
1
−
α
k=0
(This can be obtained, for example, by “solving forward” equation (1.15) in the text,
and then using equation (1.11) in the text to substitute for the Êtj p∗t+k terms in terms
of Êtj π t+k .) This in turn implies that
[
]
∞
∑
α
j
j ∗j
k
(αβ) Êt π t+k+1 +
Êt pt+1 =
κ yt+k+1 .
(A.29)
1
−
α
k=0
Then substituting the expressions given in the text for the subjective expectations
and Êtj yt+k , we obtain a solution for Êtj p∗j
t+1 of the form conjectured in equation
(4.7), with coeﬃcients
κϕ
λ
1
,
(A.30)
γ1 =
1 − α κ + ϕ 1 − αβλ

Êtj π t+k

(1 − α)ϕ − ακ βρ
.
(A.31)
κ+ϕ
1 − αβρ
This is not, however, a complete solution, as the expression obtained for γ 2 is a
function of γ, the sum γ 1 + γ 2 .
The solutions (A.30)–(A.31) imply that
γ 2 = g · γ,

g≡

γ = γ 1 + gγ,

(A.32)

where γ 1 and g are both explicit functions of the model parameters given above.
We further note that under our assumptions that 0 < α, β, λ < 1, 0 ≤ ρ < 1, and
κ, ϕ > 0, the coeﬃcients of the linear equation (A.32) satisfy γ 1 > 0 and g < 1. Hence
the equation has a unique solution, given by
γ=

γ1
> 0.
1−g
79

(A.33)

Substituting this solution into (A.30) and (A.31), we obtain unique solutions for γ 1
and γ 2 .
We thus obtain a unique solution for the TE dynamics under beliefs of the postulated form. The complete system of equations describing these dynamics consists
of equations (4.1)–(4.2) in the text, specifying the exogenous evolution of the natural
rate of output Ytn ; the equation
Ȳt = λȲt−1 + (1 − λ)Ytn

(A.34)

for the dynamics of the central bank’s estimate of the permanent component; equation
(4.6) in the text for the evolution of the aggregate belief state ν t ; and equations (4.8)–
(4.9) in the text, giving the TE dynamics of inﬂation and the output gap, where the
value of γ in these equations is given by (A.33).
Note that this does not mean that there is a unique equilibrium in this model
consistent with the rational belief postulate. The assumption, in this derivation, that
the aggregate belief state follows dynamics of the form (4.6) is an arbitrary one — not
only our assumption that ν t is an AR(1) process, but that it evolves independently of
the fundamental disturbances — chosen purely to illustrate the kind of calculations
that are involved in verifying the existence of an RBE. The assumption that each ﬁrm
j regards its subjective belief state ztj as an accurate observation of the current value
of Ȳtn , rather than simply a random state that provides information about Ytn , is also
an extreme special case. By relaxing either or both of these assumptions, we could
construct a very large class of alternative RBE for this model, so that the predictions
about such matters as the serial correlation of observed ﬂuctuations in inﬂation are
not nearly as sharp as the calculation above might suggest.
It may be useful to compare this example of RBE ﬂuctuations to the REE dynamics implied by the assumed policy rule. Under the RE hypothesis, equation (1.20)
implies that72
κ
p∗t =
yt + βEt p∗t+1 ,
1−α
or alternatively (using equation (1.11) in the text), that
π t = κyt + βEt π t+1
= κ(Yt − Ȳt ) + κ(Ȳt − Ytn ) + βEt π t+1 .

(A.35)

Then using equation (4.5) in the text to substitute for the Yt − Ȳt term, we obtain
πt =

κϕ
βϕ
(Ȳt − Ytn ) +
Et π t+1
κ+ϕ
κ+ϕ

72

Recall that in this discussion, we assume that the cost-push disturbance ut is equal to zero at
all times.

80

as an equation that the REE dynamics of inﬂation must satisfy.
Since βϕ/(κ + ϕ) < 1, this equation can be “solved forward” to yield
)k
∞ (
κϕ ∑
βϕ
n
].
πt =
Et [Ȳt+k − Yt+k
κ + ϕ k=0 κ + ϕ

(A.36)

But since the RE forecasts of the future natural rate of output are given by equation
(4.3) in the text, one has
n
Et [Ȳt+k − Yt+k
]=0
for all k ≥ 1, so that (A.36) reduces to
pit =

κϕ
(Ȳt − Ytn ).
κ+ϕ

(A.37)

The implied solution for the output gap is then
yt =

ϕ
(Ȳt − Ytn ).
κ+ϕ

(A.38)

Comparing these equations with equations (4.8)–(4.9) in the text for the RBE
dynamics of inﬂation and the output gap, one sees that the REE dynamics are given
by the same equations, but with the value γ = 0 instead of the positive value given
in (A.33). Since the exogenous dynamics of the variables Ȳt − Ytn and ν t are the same
in either case, this allows us to directly compare the RBE dynamics with the REE
dynamics. As discussed in the text, we see that the responses of both π t and yt to
the variations in exogenous fundamentals Ȳt − Ytn are the same in both equilibria;
the diﬀerence is that in the RBE dynamics, variations in the aggregate belief state
ν t (independent of the ﬂuctuations in fundamentals) cause additional variation in π t
and yt , causing each variable to be more volatile in the RBE than it would be under
the REE dynamics.

81

