NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FROM SUDDEN STOPS TO FISHERIAN DEFLATION:
QUANTITATIVE THEORY AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS
Anton Korinek
Enrique G. Mendoza
Working Paper 19362
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19362
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

We would like to acknowledge An Wang for his superb research assistance. Korinek thanks Olivier
Jeanne for his coauthorship and inspiration on a number of projects on which we draw in this survey.
He also acknowledges financial support from CIGI/INET and the IMF. The views expressed are those
of the author and should not be attributed to the IMF. Mendoza would like to thank Javier Bianchi,
Emine Boz, Bora Durdu, Katherine Smith, Marco Terrones, and specially Guillermo Calvo for the
opportunity to collaborate with them on several papers on the Sudden Stops phenomenon that served
as background material for this article. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Data for our event
analysis of sudden stops, Matlab source codes and supplementary materials are available at
http://www.korinek.com/suddenstops
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Anton Korinek and Enrique G. Mendoza. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

From Sudden Stops to Fisherian Deflation: Quantitative Theory and Policy Implications
Anton Korinek and Enrique G. Mendoza
NBER Working Paper No. 19362
August 2013, Revised September 2013
JEL No. E44,F34,F41
ABSTRACT
The 1990s Sudden Stops in emerging markets were a harbinger for the 2008 global financial crisis.
During Sudden Stops, countries lost access to credit, causing abrupt current account reversals, and
suffered Great Recessions. This paper reviews a class of models that yields quantitative predictions
consistent with these observations, based on an occasionally binding credit constraint that limits debt
to a fraction of the market value of incomes or assets used as collateral. Sudden Stops are infrequent
events nested within regular business cycles, and occur in response to standard shocks after periods
of expansion increase leverage ratios sufficiently. When this happens, the Fisherian debt-deflation
mechanism is set in motion, as lower asset or goods prices tighten further the constraint causing further
deflation. This framework also embodies a pecuniary externality with important implications for
macro-prudential policy, because agents do not internalize how current borrowing decisions affect
collateral values during future financial crises.
Anton Korinek
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
440 Mergenthaler Hall
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
anton@korinek.com
Enrique G. Mendoza
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
egme@sas.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

From the surface, the debacle of the Mexican economy that began in December 20th of 1994 seemed a familiar event. Episodes of failed stabilization plans
anchored on managed exchange rate regimes abound in the annals of the developing world, and in Mexico in particular this was a recurrent event that had
coincided with every presidential election since 1976. Yet, the 1994 Mexican
crash was di¤erent. It was the beginning of a new era of …nancial instability
in the newly-created global …nancial system. It was the …rst of a collection of
similar events that swept through emerging markets wordlwide during the 1990s
and that we now refer to as Sudden Stops.1
The de…ning characteristic of a Suddent Stop is a sharp reversal in external
capital in‡ows, which is often measured by a sudden jump in the current account.
At about the same time as the access to foreign …nancing is lost, or shortly after,
the economies a- icted by Sudden Stops experience deep recessions, in many
countries the largest since the Great Depression, sharp real depreciations and
collapses in asset prices.2 Moreover, Sudden Stops typically come in clusters:
The 1994 Mexican Crash triggered a Sudden Stop in Argentina in 1995 – this
spillover e¤ect is often referred to as the Tequila E¤ect. In 1997-98, the East
Asian crisis engulfed Korea, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, Singapore, Hong
Kong and the Philippines, and before the 1990s were over there were Sudden
Stops in emerging economies across the world in Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia,
Ukraine, Ecuador, Morocco, Venezuela, Russia and Turkey.3
Academic research on Sudden Stops surged starting in the second half of the
1990s and led to many valuable contributions that aimed to connect the dots
between the …nancial instability at the root of Sudden Stops and their disastrous macroeconomic consequences. Many of these contributions are collected
in prestigious conference volumes and reviewed in related surveys.4 They were
also published in leading academic journals.5 The central focus of research on
Sudden Stops was precisely on the intersection of macroeconomics and …nance,
and especially on the connection between …nancial instability and macroeconomic collapse. This was at a time when much of modern macroeconomics
1 The term “Sudden Stop” was …rst used in this context in a paper by Dornbusch, Goldfajn
and Valdés (1995), inspired by an old bankers’adage.
2 Interestingly, nominal devaluations are not a necessary condition for Sudden Stops. In
Argentina in 1995 and Hong Kong in 1998, the nominal exchange rate remained constant, yet
the real exchange rate collapsed and deep recessions followed.
3 Moreover, the 1998 Russian crash was followed by a sudden “‡ight to quality” in global
capital markets, which caused the infamous collapse of hedge fund Long Term Capital Management. Conditions in capital markets in the United States worsened to the point that the
Federal Reserve was forced into lowering interest rates to ease access to liquidity and brokering
an arrangement for the orderly winding down of LTCM amongst its creditors.
4 See for example the symposia issues of the Journal of International Economics (1996, 2000
and 2006), the Journal of Money, Credit and Banking (2001), and the Journal of Economic
Theory (2004), as well as the NBER conference volumes edited by Krugman (2000), Edwards
and Frankel (2002), and Dooley and Frankel (2003).
5 See e.g. Calvo and Mendoza (1996, 2000), Cole and Kehoe (2000), Caballero and Krishnamurty (2001, 2003, 2004), Chang and Velasco (2001), Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999),
Martin and Rey (2006), Lorenzoni (2008), Mendoza (2010).

2

Declining
Relative Prices
Falling Individual
Spending

Tightening
Constraint

Figure 1: Financial ampli…cation e¤ects
was not paying attention to …nancial frictions and their potentially catastrophic
consequences for the real economy. Moreover, many of the developments in
theoretical analysis and quantitative tools produced by this literature are now
serving as a key building block in the growing literature on the 2008 …nancial
crash and the reinassance of the macro/…nance …eld (see e.g. the handbook
article by Gertler and Kiyotaki 2010).
In this paper, we …rst document the key stylized facts that characterize
Sudden Stops and then provide an analytical review of one of the dominant
modeling approaches in the literature that emerged as a framework capable of
yielding both qualitative and quantitative predictions in line with those facts.
This approach is based on occasionally binding collateral constraints that trigger a …nancial ampli…cation mechanism similar to the debt de‡ation mechanism originally proposed in the pioneering work of Irving Fisher (1933). We
start with a simple but general characterization of this Fisherian ampli…cation
mechanism and then discuss applications to Sudden Stops models that involve
liability dollarization (i.e. debts denominated in di¤erent units than incomes
and collateral), asset price de‡ation, and a full blown equilibrium business cycle
model. Finally, we review the main policy implications that follow from this
class of models, particularly for the design of macro-prudential …nancial regulation that is at the center of the new e¤orts to re-construct …nancial regulation
in the aftermath of the 2008 crash.
Figure 1 illustrates the basic mechanics of …nancial ampli…cation schematically: Assume an emerging economy that borrows from abroad and is subject
to a collateral constraint. Since the current account is countercyclical, periods
of expansion are also periods of leverage buildup. Hence, if at su¢ ciently high
leverage ratios the collateral constraint becomes binding, it forces agents to reduce their spending, which lowers aggregate demand and leads to declines in
real exchange rates, relative prices and asset prices. Since the value of collateral
is tied to these relative prices, such declines tighten the collateral constraint
and force agents to cut back further on spending, triggering a vicious circle of
falling borrowing ability, falling spending, and collapsing exchange rates and
asset prices.
3

The common thread of the applications of the Sudden Stops framework we
study, and which distinguishes it from the rest of the literature, is the emphasis
on studing the models’quantitative predictions using global, nonlinear numerical methods in experiments calibrated to data from actual economies. This is
essential in order to capture the nonlinear dynamics of …nancial ampli…cation
that make …nancial crises so severe, the transition from states of loose …nancial
constraints to states with binding …nancial constraints, and the associated implications for precautionary savings. The same tools also prove to be essential
for the use of these models to analyze normative issues and examine issues such
as the optimal design of macro-prudential …nancial regulation.
It is worth noting that some of the issues raised in the analysis of Sudden
Stops, particularly the adjustment problems induced by a large surge in capital out‡ows, have long been emphasized in the international economics literature. One example is the well-known work of Keynes and Olin on the “transfer
problem.”Their discussion centered on the contractionary forces at play in postWW-1 Germany, which owed massive reparations to France and therefore had to
run a large current account surplus and su¤er from a depreciated real exchange
rate. There is also a large and well-established literature on …nancial ampli…cation via asset prices in closed economy settings that predates the Sudden
Stop models with asset price de‡ation we examine in this paper. These models
can be traced back to the classic article by Fisher (1933), the work of Minsky
(1986), the early formal models by Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Greenwald
and Stiglitz (1993) in simple two period settings, and the more general models
proposed by Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), as well as quantitative applications
of these models using perturbation methods in DSGE environments, as in the
work of Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997), Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999)
and Iacoviello (2005).

2

Stylized Facts

The key de…ning characteristic of a Sudden Stop is a sharp, sudden reversal in
international capital ‡ows, which is typically measured as a sudden increase in
the current account or the balance of trade. A second empirical regularity are
large, negative deviations from trend in the main macroeconomic aggregates
(GDP, private consumption and investment) that follow the reversal in capital
‡ows. That is, Sudden Stops are typically associated with deep recessions. A
third characteristic are sharp changes in relative prices, including exchange rate
depreciations and declines in asset prices in both equity and housing markets.
The empirical literature on Sudden Stops generally focuses on the use of
event analysis methods that apply …lters to current account or net exports data
to identify the dates of Sudden Stops and then constructs event windows of
macroeconomic aggregates centered around those dates in order to study the
characteristics of Sudden Stops.
In our empirical description of Sudden Stops we follow the …lter used by

4

Figure 2: The dynamics of sudden stops
Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2006).6 They de…ne a Sudden Stop as a large
fall in capital ‡ows, as measured by a year-over-year increase in the current
account/GDP ratio by more than two standard deviations above the average
change in this ratio. Furthermore, they de…ne a Sudden Stop as systemic if the
aggregate EMBI spread is more than two standard deviations above its mean.7
Figure 2 provides …ve-year event windows centered around Sudden Stop
events at date t. To construct these event windows, we started with the list
of Sudden Stop events provided by Calvo et al. (2006) who identi…ed 33 Sud6 Other classic articles on this subject include Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejía (2008), Calvo,
Izquierdo and Talvi (2006) and Calvo, Izquierdo, and Loo-Kung (2006). Earlier studies include
Calvo and Reinhart (1999) and Milesi-Ferretti and Razin (2000).
7 In some of their work they also apply a third …lter to isolate Sudden Stops in which the
drop in output was unusually large. We do not use this …lter so as to let the data speak about
the severity of the median recession across all Sudden Stop events.

5

den Stop events using data for emerging markets (EM) from 1980 to 2004. We
extended their analysis by adding emerging markets data from 2005 to 2012
and including advanced economies (AE) data from 1980 to 2012, so as to capture more recent Sudden Stops in both emerging markets (particularly Eastern
Europe) and advanced economies (especially around the 2008 crash). See Appendix A for a full description of the data and the identi…cation procedure used.
The event windows use annual data from 1978 to 2012 to show the cross-country
medians of the cyclical components of output (Y), consumption (C), investment
(I), the net exports-GDP ratio (TB/Y), the real exchange rate (RER), and real
stock prices (indeces re-based so that year t-1 equals 100) , where we detrended
Y, C and I using the Hodrick-Prescott …lter.
The event windows show that Sudden Stops are preceded by periods of expansion, with GDP, consumption and investment above trend, the trade balance
below trend, the real exchange rate appreciated, and asset prices high. The typical Sudden Stop, de…ned as the median across all events in the data, shows a
reversal in the cyclical component of TB/Y of about 3 percentage points at date
t. Consumption and GDP fall 2 and nearly 3 percent below trend respectively,
and investment drops by 12 percentage points. A weak recovery follows, but the
economies that go through Sudden Stops remain below trend in all three key
macro-aggregates (output, consumption and investment), and the trade balance
remains above trend two years later. Stock prices reach their lowest point also
at date t and they are sharply lower than in the pre-Sudden-Stop peak. Two
years later they rise somewhat but only recover about 2/5ths of their loses.
The event windows also show a striking contrast in the Sudden Stop dynamics across EMs and AEs. In particular, AEs do not show the inverted-J pattern
that EMs display, indicating that the through of the recession is not reached
when the Sudden Stop hits. In fact, two years after the Sudden Stop event,
output and consumption continue to move deeper below trend and investment
remains ‡at. Almost half of the Sudden Stop events in AEs that we identi…ed in
our sample occurred around the 2008/09 crisis and were indeed followed by an
extremely slow recovery. In EMs there is also a clear and strong real appreciation before the Sudden Stops hit, followed by a real exchange rate collapse and
then a modest, gradual recovery. In contrast, this pattern is absent from the
Sudden Stops in AEs and in the combined sample. This is in line with Mendoza
and Terrones (2012) who show that credit boom events display a similar asymmetry: real appreciation followed by collapse in EMs and no noticeable pattern
in AEs.
Mendoza (2010) highlights three other important empirical regularities of
Sudden Stops: (1) they are infrequent events nested within typical business cycles; (2) they generate negative skewness in macroeconomic aggregates, because
we do not observe symmetric episodes of sudden large capital in‡ows coupled
with economic expansions; (3) in a standard growth accounting exercise, a signi…cant fraction of the drop in output during a Sudden Stop is accounted for
by a drop in the Solow residual rather than a decline in measured capital and

6

labor.8
Producing quantitative predictions in line with the stylized facts of Sudden
Stops is a tall order for standard open-economy macro DSGE models, including
real-business-cycle (RBC) models and New Keynesian models. In these models, credit markets are assumed to work as an e¢ cient vehicle for consumption
smoothing and investment …nancing. Even if state-contingent securities are absent, frictionless trading in non-state-contingent bonds allows agents to smooth
out drops in output by borrowing from abroad and thus running larger current
account de…cits. This is precisely the opposite of what we observe during Sudden Stops: The external accounts rise sharply precisely when consumption and
output collapse. This key observation indicates that a crucial starting point for
developing a framework of Sudden Stops must be to abandon the assumption
that credit markets are perfect.9

3

General Model Structure

We start by describing a general structure for the class of models of Sudden
Stops that follow the Fisherian debt de‡ation approach. The essential feature
of this structure is that borrowers are subject to a …nancial constraint that is
itself a function of the endogenous aggregate states of the economy, which play
a particularly important role as the determinants of the market prices at which
collateral is valued. As we describe below, this endogeneity gives rise to rich
dynamics: it reproduces the asymmetry and ampli…cation of negative shocks
that can be observed during sudden stops when debt levels in the economy are
high. It also generates regular business cycle dynamics when debt levels in the
economy are moderate and the …nancial constraint is loose.
After describing the general setup, we impose additional structure on the
…nancial constraint to highlight a number of particular channels through which
the Fisherian de‡ation mechanism can operate, focusing on (i) contractionary
exchange rate depreciations, (ii) contractionary asset price de‡ation and (iii)
a general equilibrium extension of the latter in which the collateral constraint
also restricts working capital …nancing. This allows us to describe a full-blown
equilibrium business cycle model with Sudden Stops.

3.1

Model Setup

Assume a small open economy in in…nite discrete time t = 1; 2; ::: The economy
is inhabited by a representative agent who receives a stochastic endowment
yt every period and who values consumption ct according to a standard time8 This is due in part to factors that bias the Solow residual as a measure of e¤ective total
factor productivity, TFP, such as changes in the price of imported inputs, capacity utilization,
and labor hoarding–see Mendoza (2006) and Meza and Quintin (2007).
9 An alternative explanation is the possibility of growth shocks as explored by Aguiar and
Gopinath (2007), which rely on the existence of persistent growth shocks that can be di¢ cult
to identify in the short samples of macro time series of several emerging economies.

7

separable expected utility function
X
U=

t

E [u (ct )]

(1)

where < 1 is the subjective discount factor and u (ct ) is a standard twicecontinuously di¤erentiable, strictly concave period utility function that satis…es
the Inada conditions.
Foreign creditors are large in comparison to the small open economy and
trade one-period non-state-contingent discount bonds b with the domestic agent.
International bonds carry an exogenous, time- and state-invariant price of 1=R,
where R is the gross world real interest rate. As explained below, we require
R < 1 in order to ensure a well-de…ned equilibrium. We denote the repayment
on the bond holdings of the home agent at the beginning of period t by bt
and the value of bond purchases carried as savings into the ensuing period by
bt+1 =R. Since in this simple setup b is the only internationally traded asset, it
also de…nes the country’s net foreign asset (NFA) position. The period budget
constraint is
ct + bt+1 =R = yt + bt
(2)
The assumption that bonds are not state-contingent implies that risk markets are incomplete; thus the small open economy has an incentive to self-insure.
In addition, we introduce a moral hazard problem that limits how much domestic consumers are able to borrow and that generates a second form of market
incompleteness: after contracting debt in period t, we assume that they have an
option to abscond. Lenders can detect this, and if they take immediate action,
they can recover up to b units of the amount lent, otherwise the entire loan is
lost and lenders have no further recourse or means of punishment. For borrowers
to refrain from absconding, lenders limit their lending to b.
The borrowing limit b generally depends on the aggregate state of the economy. For example, in a booming economy with an appreciated exchange rate
and elevated asset prices, lenders will …nd it easier to recover funds than in a depressed economy with low exchange rates and asset prices. It proves convenient
to assume that the …nancial constraint depends on aggregate consumption Ct ,
which is taken as given by the representative agent. In equilibrium, of course,
Ct = ct . In the setting described so far, Ct serves as a su¢ cient statistic for aggregate demand and relative prices in the economy. We express the dependence
of the borrowing constraint on aggregate conditions by assuming the functional
form:
bt+1 =R
b (Ct )
(3)
where b0 (Ct ) > 0, i.e. higher aggregate consumption increases borrowing capacity. In the following two sections, we will examine variants of this setting
based on relative price changes that are associated with declines in aggregate
consumption: we will describe Fisherian models in which falling consumption
leads to real exchange rate depreciations and asset price declines. We will also
allow for additional variables to a¤ect the borrowing limit of domestic agents,
such as individual holdings of assets or individual production plans. However, at
8

the most general level, the relationship captured by the reduced form constraint
(3) lies at the heart of the Fisherian e¤ects that we want to capture.
The combination of the non-state-contingent debt and the collateral constraint is critical for producing Sudden Stops as an equilibrium outcome in this
setup. Taken together, these two …nancial imperfections imply that there is a
mismatch between the denomination of the agent’s …nancial liabilities and his
borrowing capacity, and this mismatch drives the …nancial ampli…cation e¤ects:
the liabilities of the agent are non-state-contingent whereas the borrowing limit
‡uctuates in parallel with aggregate states over the business cycle, for example
because of …re sales of goods and assets. In the event of adverse shocks, this implies that the borrowing limit tightens but the level of debt remains the same.
Instead of being able to smooth the impact of adverse shocks over time, the
representative agents experiences a Sudden Stop. In short, the key ingredient
of a Fisherian model of …nancial ampli…cation is a relative price that connects
the value of collateral with borrowing ability.
Impatience Vs. Precaution One of the key trade-o¤s in this framework
is between impatience and precaution. The assumption R < 1 is necessary
because without it agents would …nd it optimal to accumulate an in…nite amount
of foreign assets.10 On the other hand, this assumption implies that there are
gains from intertemporal trade – domestic agents are less patient than foreign
creditors, which gives them the incentive to accumulate debt. If domestic agents
were risk-neutral, they would simply borrow up to the borrowing limit b in
order to take maximum advantage of this opportunity to trade. In that case,
the borrowing constraint would always be binding. Since domestic agents are
risk-averse but asset markets are incomplete, however, agents have an incentive
to accumulate precautionary savings against stochastic endowment risk. Hence,
they raise their bond holdings above the minimum level b in order to self-insure.
The level of precautionary savings depends on the relative importance of the
impatience versus the precautionary motive. Standard results from the theory of
optimal savings under incomplete markets imply that impatience grows stronger
relative to the precautionary motive the further R is below one, and that the
precautionary motive is stronger as R rises, the more risk-averse agents are,
and the greater the volatility and persistence of the uninsurable shocks they
face.
It is important to notice that both the precautionary and impatience motives, and the requirement that R < 1, are present even without the collateral
constraint, as long as asset markets are incomplete. What is key, however,
is that the endogenous …nancial ampli…cation strengthens the precautionary
motive, because it increases the risk of (very) low consumption when the constraint binds. This leads agents to accumulate larger stocks of precautionary
savings than without the collateral constraint, which reduce the probability
1 0 If R
1, optimal plans when the collateral constraint does not bind imply that ct ; bt+1 !
1; because the Euler equation for bonds forms a Supermartingale process, and the convergence
of this process implies that u0 (ct ) ! 0 almost surely, which in turn implies ct ; bt+1 ! 1 (see
ch. 18 of Ljungqvist and Sargent (2012) for further details).

9

of hitting the constraint along the equilibrium path, thereby providing selfinsurance against …nancial crises states. This mechanism will play a key role
in allowing our framework to nest infrequent Sudden Stops within regular business cycles. Still, as we will explain in Section 7, the extra precautionary savings
induced by the risk of Sudden Stops are insu¢ cient from a socially-optimal perspective, due to the pecuniary externality embedded in the collateral constraint.

3.2

Equilibrium

We de…ne the competitive equilibrium of the economy as follows.
De…nition 1 Given an initial asset position b1 , a world interest rate R and a
1
stochastic output process f(yt )t=1 g, the competitive equilibrium of the economy
1
consists of a set of stochastic allocations f(bt+1 ; ct )t=1 g that maximize the utility
of the representative agent (1) subject to the series of budget constraints (2) and
borrowing constraints (3) and the consistency condition Ct = ct .
We assign the shadow price t to borrowing constraint (3). Observe that
the representative agent takes Ct as given. The resulting optimality condition
is
u0 (ct ) = RE [u0 (ct+1 )] + t
(4)
The equilibrium is described by the Euler equation (4) together with the borrowing constraint (3), and the budget constraint (2).
The following assumption is a su¢ cient condition for a well-de…ned equilibrium:
Assumption 1 The slope of the borrowing limit satis…es b0 (Ct ) < 1.
Intuitively, the assumption states that a one dollar increase in aggregate
consumption relaxes the borrowing constraint by less than one dollar. If this
assumption was violated for any value of Ct when the constraint is binding, then
a coordinated increase in aggregate consumption would become self-…nancing
and the economy would exhibit multiple equilibria.11 As we will discuss below in
further detail, this assumption is important in models of …nancial ampli…cation
to guarantee uniqueness.
Recursive Formulation We now reformulate the above equilibrium in recursive form, which we will use in our numerical solution algorithms below.
First, the stochastic income process can be approximated as a …rst-order, irreducible Markov process with realization vector y and transition probabilities
(yt ; yt+1 ).12 The state variables of the representative agent’s problem are his
holdings of bonds b bt , his income realization y yt , and the aggregate bond
position of the economy that the agent takes as given B.
1 1 We refer the interested reader to appendix A of Jeanne and Korinek (2011) for further
details.
1 2 The well-known Tauchen-Hussey quadrature algorithm is widely used in quantitative applications for this purpose.

10

The optimal plans of the representative agent solve the Bellman equation

V (b; y; B)
s.t.

0

b
R

where B 0

=

8
<
max
u y
b0 :

b0
+b +
R

X
y0

b (C)

= H(B; y);

C=y

9
=
(y; y 0 )V (b0 ; y 0 ; B 0 )
;

B0
+B
R

The agent chooses b0 taking as given both the aggregate state B and a conjectured law of motion H(B; y). Together, the two pin down aggregate consumption and determine b (C). The law of motion H(B; y) determines how
the agent’s expectations about the aggregate state variable B, aggregate consumption C and thus the borrowing capacity of the economy will evolve in the
future.
For a given H(B; y), the solution to the above problem is given by a policy
function ^b0 (b; y; B). In a rational expectations equilibrium, however, we also
require that the conjectured law of motion of B must match the actual one
implied by the policy function: H(B; y) = ^b0 (B; y; B) identically in B.
De…nition 2 (Recursive Equilibrium) The recursive equilibrium is de…ned
by the policy function ^b0 (b; y; B) and associated value function V (b; y; B) such
that (a) they solve the above Bellman equation and (b) the rational expectations
equilibrium condition holds H(B; y) = ^b0 (B; y; B) identically in B.
To keep the notation simple, we will denote the resulting policy function of
the recursive equilibrium as b0 (b; y) ; omitting the aggregate state that becomes
redundant once condition (b) holds. In general, recursive equilibria of this form
do not have explicit closed-form solutions, except in special cases like the perfectforesight example we study next. Several global, nonlinear numerical solution
methods can be used to solve models in this class. In Appendix A we provide
an example based on an endogenous gridpoints method along with a sample
calibration and source code.13

3.3

Ampli…cation: A Deterministic Example

We illustrate the potential for ampli…cation in this class of models by …rst
focusing on a deterministic setup with constant income (yt = y) R = 1. Given
these assumptions, there are two possibilities for how equilibrium is determined,
depending on the initial asset position of the representative consumer b1 .
1 3 Algorithms that solve recursive formulations of the optimality conditions, instead of solving directly Bellman equations like the one above, have the advantage that they can impose
the rational expectations equilibrium condition directly, and thus sidestep the need to iterate
to convergence on actual and conjectured laws of motion of aggregate states.

11

Unconstrained Equilibrium For su¢ ciently high period 1 bond holdings
b1 , the borrowing constraint is loose in period 1 and in all following periods.
The model collapses to a standard Friedman-style permanent income model of
consumption with perfectly smooth consumption ct = y + (1
) b1 , where
consumption is a fraction 1
of wealth, de…ned as the present discounted
value of income plus initial net worth, which reduces to w y=(1
) + b1 .
Observe that, since the model is fully stationary, bond holdings in all future
periods are a strictly increasing function of initial bond holdings: bt+s = b1 8s.
Hence, a one-dollar increase in initial bond holdings is re‡ected one-for-one in
future bond holdings dbt =db1 = 1, and since w increases by b1 consumption
rises by the fraction 1
. In short, the increase in wealth is spread out over
the inde…nite future and there is no ampli…cation. Intertemporal markets play
a stabilizing role by allowing consumers to smooth the consumption e¤ect of
changes in net worth over time. Moreover, instead of thinking of shocks to
initial net worth, we could do the analysis using wealth neutral shocks to date-1
income, such that y1 falls and yt+s increases to keep w unchanged. Intertemporal
markets would play the same role to keep consumption unchanged (see Mendoza
(2005)).
Constrained Equilibrium The unconstrained equilibrium is feasible if the
initial bond holdings satisfy
b1

b (y + (1

) b1 )

Since bt+s = b1 8s, this condition guarantees that the same property applies to
all the sequence of optimal choices of future bond holdings. Given assumption
1, there is a unique cut-o¤ value of ^b1 for which this equation is satis…ed with
equality. Below this threshold, for b1 < ^b1 , the …nancial constraint is binding in
period 1 and new borrowing is given by b2 =R = b (C1 ) > b1 .
Putting together the unconstrained and constrained cases, borrowing b2 =R
is given by whichever is lower – the unconstrained debt b2 =R = b1 =R or the
constrained debt level b (C1 ). Hence the budget constraint yields C1 as the
solution to the implicit equation
C1 = c1 (C1 ) = y + b1 + min b (C1 ) ; b1 =R
This equation is depicted in Figure 3. The …rst equality corresponds to the consistency condition of the representative agent c1 = C1 and can be represented by
the 45 -line in the …gure. The second equality starting with c1 (C1 ) = ::: re‡ects
that individual consumption is the minimum of its desired and its feasible level
given di¤erent levels of aggregate consumption C1 . This equality is represented
by the solid line labeled c1 (C1 ) that starts at the intercept y + b1 . As long as
the …nancial constraint is binding, it starts at the intercept y + b1 + b (0) > 0
and rises at slope b0 ( ). When the …nancial constraint becomes loose, it remains
constant at the desired level of consumption y + (1
) b1 . By Assumption
1, the slope of the right-hand side in the …gure is always less than the slope

12

c₁
45
constrained

unconstrained

c₁(C₁)
A
D

y+b₁
b

b

B
Z

E

y+b₁’
C₁’

C₁

C₁*

Figure 3: Financial ampli…cation dynamics
of the left-hand side, guaranteeing a unique intersection which indicates the
equilibrium.
The line labeled c1 (C1 ) depicts a situation in which initial net worth and
output y + b1 are su¢ ciently high so that the …nancial constraint is loose and
intersects the 45 -line at point A, resulting in the unconstrained level of conb.
sumption C1 . Suppose that we reduce initial net worth by b to b01 = b1
This situation is represented by the dashed line. In the unconstrained region at
the right side of the Figure, we can see that the desired unconstrained level of
consumption falls just by a fraction (1
) b. In the region in which the …nancial constraint is binding, however, the feasible level of individual consumption
c1 (C1 ) declines by the full amount b. If aggregate consumption remained constant at C1 , this would force the representative agent to reduce his individual
consumption as indicated by the vertical movement from point A to point B.
(Observe that the distance between A and B is less than b since we started in
a situation in which the …nancial constraint was slack.) In general equilibrium,
however, lower individual consumption reduces aggregate consumption from B
to D, which tightens the …nancial constraint further, forcing a reduction in individual consumption to point E and so forth, moving the economy along the
zigzag line. Equilibrium is restored in point Z in which the new individual level
of consumption c01 can be supported by the …nancial constraint, given an aggregate level of consumption C10 = c01 . The total decline in consumption is larger
than the decline in initial net worth b, re‡ecting ampli…cation e¤ects.
Analytically, a marginal change in initial wealth b1 (or in output y1 ) when
the equilibrium is constrained leads to a change in consumption of
dC1
dC1
=
=
db1
dy1
1

1
>1
b0 (C1 )

(5)

The term 1 b01(C1 ) > 1 can be interpreted as the coe¢ cient of ampli…cation
to initial net worth shocks or output shocks when the …nancial constraint is
binding. The larger b0 , the response of the constraint to changes in aggregate
13

consumption, the stronger the ampli…cation e¤ects. For b0 ! 1, the ampli…cation coe¢ cient becomes arbitrarily large. As we discussed under Assumption 1,
we rule out the case b0 1 because it would result in multiple equilibria.

4

Contractionary Depreciations

The …rst application of our general model focuses on contractionary depreciations under liability dollarization as proposed …rst in Mendoza (2002) and
explored further in Mendoza (2005). Financial liabilities in emerging markets
are often denominated in hard currencies (or tradable goods) but backed up
by income or assets from the nontraded sector or the economy (see e.g. Calvo
1998 and Eichengreen and Hausmann 2005). Hence, the relevant price between
liabilities and the value of collateral is the relative price of nontraded to traded
goods.
To introduce liability dollarization, we extend our general model to include
traded and a non-traded good. The representative agent receives endowments
(yT;t ; yN;t ) every period, and has a period utility function u (c) that depends
on the composite good c = c (cT;t ; cN;t ) in which the two goods enter as complements (typically a CES aggregator). Assuming that traded goods are the
numeraire and denoting the relative price of non-traded goods by pN;t , the budget constraint becomes
cT;t + pN;t cN;t + bt+1 =R = yT;t + pN;t yN;t + bt

(6)

In case domestic agents abscond with their debts, we follow Mendoza (2005)
and Korinek (2010) in assuming that international investors can seize a fraction
of the market value of the endowment of consumers, resulting in a …nancial
constraint
bt+1 =R
(yT;t + pN;t yN;t )
(7)
Observe that the borrowing ability of consumers depends on their total income, which consists of both traded and non-traded goods, but their debt bt+1
is denominated entirely in traded goods in budget constraint (6).
Maximizing the consumer’s expected utility subject to the budget constraint
(6) and borrowing constraint (7) and denoting the marginal utility of traded
consumption goods by uT @u=@cT and similarly for uN , we obtain the representative agent’s Euler equation and intra-temporal optimality condition
uT (cT;t ; cN;t )

=

pN;t

=

RE [uT (cT;t+1 ; cN;t+1 )] +
uN (cT;t ; cN;t )
uT (cT;t ; cN;t )

t

(8)

Substituting the market-clearing condition for nontradable goods cN;t = yN;t in
the second optimality condition, it follows that the exchange rate is an increasing function of the aggregate consumption of traded goods and the exogenous
state variable yN;t so that pN;t = pN (CT;t ; yN;t ). The relationship is increasing because traded and non-traded goods are complements, and therefore for
14

greater consumption of traded goods, the consumer would also like to increase
non-traded consumption. However, since the supply is …xed, the relative price
of non-traded goods has to go up instead to clear the market.
We can rewrite the …nancial constraint in the form given by our general
setup as
b (CT;t ; yT;t ; yN;t ) = [yT;t + pN (CT;t ; yN;t ) yN;t ]
where b is increasing in aggregate traded consumption CT;t , as in our general
model, and depends in addition on the exogenous state variables yT;t ; yN;t . In
this case, we need to impose the assumption b0 (CT;t ; ) < 1 to ensure a unique
equilibrium.14 When the constraint is binding, we obtain …nancial ampli…cation
dynamics that magnify the e¤ects of shocks to the system. As in our general
model, for a given pair (yT;t ; yN;t ), we can express traded consumption under a
binding …nancial constraint as the solution to the implicit equation
CT;t = cT;t (CT;t ) = yT;t + bt + b (CT;t ; yT;t ; yN;t )
The graphic representation of this equation is similar to Figure 3. And when
the representative agent experiences a shock to net worth or endowment income
of su¢ cient magnitude, similar ampli…cation dynamics are set in motion. However, the dynamics now occur through movements in the country’s real exchange
rate. A negative shock forces the agent to contract consumption of traded goods
because he is unable to borrow the amount needed to support the unconstrained
allocation. For the economy to absorb the available supply of non-traded goods,
the real exchange rate pN has to depreciate. But this reduces the value of the
agent’s income and collateral, and tightens the …nancial constraint b, which
forces further cut-backs in consumption, and leads to a feedback loop.15 Ampli…cation e¤ects introduce considerable volatility not only in the current account
and aggregate demand of the emerging economy, but also into the real exchange
rate.

4.1

Quantitative Results

We illustrate the quantitative potential of this setup by conducting an experiment using the same intertemporal utility function as in the general model and
following Mendoza (2005) in specifying the composite good as a CES aggregator
h
i 1=
c (cT ; cN ) = acT;t + (1 a) cN;t
. We set the expenditure share on traded
is satis…ed as long as p0N cT;t < 1, which holds for su¢ ciently low . If p0N is
highly convex, then truncating the debt level at some upper level
by de…ning b cT;t ; =
max
yT;t + pN yN;t ;
can guarantee that the condition b0 < 1 is satis…ed globally
and that we rule out degenerate equilibria in which agents consume astronomic levels of traded
goods in order to pump up the price of non-traded goods and relax the constraint su¢ ciently
to a¤ord the traded consumption (see Mendoza 2005).
1 5 The balance sheet e¤ect linking constrained borrowing to tradables demand and real
depreciation is widely used in the Sudden Stops literature, starting with Calvo (1998). In
contrast, the …nancial ampli…cation of this e¤ect via the Fisherian de‡ation mechanism is
only at work in models of the class we review in this paper.
1 4 This

15

:96

R
1:03

2

a
1=3

:8

1=3

y
:03

:05

Table 1: Parameters used in sample calibration of exchange rate model
goods to a = 1=3, which corresponds closely to the weighted average of the
primary and secondary sector in GDP in our sample of emerging economies.
As in Mendoza (2005), we assume an elasticity of substitution 1+1 = :8 and
a maximum credit-to-output ratio of
= 1=3. Finally, we assume a binary
output process yt 2 y H ; y L where y H = 1 and y L = y H
y in which output
drops by y = :03 from trend with an i.i.d. probability of 5%, which re‡ects the
approximate severity and incidence of sudden stop events in the sample used to
determine our stylized facts. The parameters are summarized in Table 1, and
the algorithm to numerically solve the model is described in Appendix A.
The policy functions for saving, tradable consumption and the equilibrium
nontradable price as functions of b, for high and low values of the income shock,
are shown in Figure 4. These policy functions are obtained by solving the
model in recursive form. The top two lines depict pN b; y H as a solid line
and pN b; y L as a dashed line. The next two pairs of lines depict cT (b; y) and
b0 (b; y) for yT = yN = y 2 y H ; y L . We indicate the 45 line by a dotted line.
If saving lies above this line, i.e. b0 (b; y) > b, the agent accumulates savings, if
it lies below this line, the agent decumulates savings.
The Figure can be split into two regions: to the left of the vertical line,
i.e. for low net worth b, the …nancial constraint is binding. Within this region,
…nancial ampli…cation occurs and all variables respond very strongly to changes
in net worth. In particular, traded goods consumption rises more steeply in
net worth than the 45 line. Furthermore, next-period wealth b0 is a declining
function of current wealth. This captures the fact that more wealth implies a
less binding credit constraint, and therefore a higher exchange rate and greater
borrowing capacity, which allows the representative agent to carry a higher level
of debt into the following period.
To the right of the threshold, …nancial constraints are loose and there are no
…nancial ampli…cation e¤ects. Consumption increases in net worth but at a rate
smaller than one, i.e. cT is ‡atter than the 45 line. Within this region, nextperiod wealth b0 is an increasing function of current wealth because consumers
are able to smooth their wealth over time. Observe that b0 lies mostly below
the 45 line within this region, re‡ecting the fact that consumers are impatient
relative to lenders and run down their wealth.
The left panel of Figure 5 shows the response of an economy that has experienced a long series of good shocks y H , interrupted by a one-time adverse shock
y L that is followed by good shock y H again. The shock reduces the endowment
income of the economy by only 3%, but tightens the …nancial constraint and sets
in motion a process of …nancial ampli…cation that leads to an 8% decline in the
real exchange rate and ultimately a 9% reduction in traded consumption. The
overall decline in aggregate consumption is a 9% + (1 a) 3% = 5%, roughly

16

pN

yH
2

yL

1.5
cT

1
0.5

°

45
b’

0
−0.5
−1
−1.2

−1

−0.8

−0.6

−0.4

−0.2

0

0.2

b

Figure 4: Policy functions of contractionary depreciation model

Path of tradable output/consumption
1

yT

0.95

cT

0.9
2

4

6
8
Path of real exchange rate

10

2

12

pN

1.9
1.8
2

4

2

4

6
8
Path of net worth b’

10

12

10

12

−0.7
−0.75

b’
6

8
T

Figure 5: Simulated path of sudden stop

17

in line with the empirical results documented in section 2. The right panel of
the …gure depicts the ergodic distribution of the net worth of the consumer,
i.e. the distribution of net worth in a stochastic simulation of the economy over
5000 periods.
The Sudden Stops literature has examined in detail several extensions and
modi…cations of this setup. In the policy section we will discuss applications
that have been developed to examine normative issues. In terms of positive
analysis, Mendoza (2002) considers production of nontradable goods with labor
and a borrowing constraint of the form: b0 =R
(wL + ), where wL is wage
income collected from endogenous labor supplied to nontradables producers and
are the pro…ts that nontradables producers pay to the representative agent
plus a stochastic endowment of tradables. In equilibrium, the constraint reduces
to b0 =R
(yT + pN yN (L)). Durdu, Mendoza, and Terrones (2009) consider
a similar setup in which nontradable production requires imported intermediate
goods. These models feature a supply-side channel of the Fisherian de‡ation
mechanism, because de‡ation in the relative price of nontradables reduces the
marginal product of labor and intermediate goods, and thus reduces factor demands and output. Hence, in the right-hand-side of the borrowing constraint,
both the price and the quantity of the collateral shrinks as the constraint becomes binding.

5

Asset Price De‡ation

Next we study models of Sudden Stops driven by asset price collapses similar
to those developed by Mendoza and Smith (2006), Bianchi and Mendoza (2010)
and Jeanne and Korinek (2010). This is done by introducing an asset price into
the general framework of Section 2.
We follow the setup of Jeanne and Korinek (2010) and assume that there is
an in…nitely-lived tree that pays a dividend dt every period and that is in …xed
unit supply. The tree can only be held by domestic agents and trades in the
domestic market at a price pt . Denoting the tree holdings carried into period t
by at , the budget constraint of the representative domestic agent becomes:
ct + pt at+1 + bt+1 =R = yt + at (pt + dt ) + bt

(9)

If the agent absconds with her newly issued debt in period t, we assume that
foreign lenders can seize her asset holdings and sell them at the prevailing price in
the domestic market to other domestic agents. However, because of bankruptcy
frictions, lenders can only extract a fraction of the value of the tree. Foreseeing
this possibility, lenders limit borrowing of each individual consumer to
bt+1 =Rt+1

b( ) =

pt at+1

(10)

Observe that there is once again a mismatch between the denomination of debt
and of collateral, as in the previous variants of our general model: debt is uncontingent whereas the value of the asset ‡uctuates in response to shocks to
18

the economy. Also, the dependence of the borrowing constraint on aggregate
consumption is implicit in that the equilibrium price depends on the aggregate
states of the economy.
Maximizing the agent’s expected utility (1) subject to the budget constraint
(9) and the borrowing constraint (10), we obtain the following Euler and asset
pricing equations:
u0 (ct )

=

pt

=

RE [u0 (ct+1 )] + t
E [u0 (ct+1 ) (dt+1 + pt+1 )]
u0 (ct )
t

(11)

Unconstrained Equilibrium When the …nancial constraint (10) is loose,
equation (11) reduces to a standard asset pricing equation whereby the current
asset price corresponds to tomorrow’s expected value of the asset (dividend plus
0
)
future price), discounted at the marginal rate of substitution uu0(c(ct+1
, and the
t)
typical smoothing behavior prevails.
Constrained Equilibrium When the …nancial constraint is binding, the
marginal rate of substitution declines because the valuation of consumption
today u0 (ct ) increases and the valuation of consumption tomorrow u0 (ct+1 )
0
)
declines. Hence, the marginal rate of substitution in consumption uu0(c(ct+1
falls
t)
and assets that pay o¤ tomorrow become less valuable compared to a situation
without
…nancial constraints. The stochastic discount factor for trees becomes
u0 (ct+1 )
, with the extra term
0
t in the denominator representing the colu (ct )
t
lateral value of trees (see also Fostel and Geanakoplos, 2008). This term reduces
the disutility u0 (ct ) of spending one dollar on buying trees by
t since each
dollar of a tree relaxes the constraint by units, providing bene…t t . The
denominator of the asset pricing equation is therefore lower and the asset price
decline that results from binding constraints is mitigated compared to a situation in which trees cannot be used as collateral.
The asset price is still lower, however, than it would be in an unconstrained
equilibrium. To see this, observe that we can use the consumer’s Euler equation
to re-write the denominator of the marginal rate of substitution as a weighted
average of today’s and tomorrow’s expected marginal utility u0 (ct )
t =
(1
) u0 (ct )
RE [u0 (ct+1 )]. Since we assumed < 1, the denominator
will be less than u0 (ct ) whenever t > 0.
Assuming that we know the policy functions of the problem for future periods, we can analytically characterize the constrained equilibrium in a given
time period by expressing all equilibrium objects in terms of current aggregate
consumption C and solve for this C given the state variables (b; y) in a manner
similar to our general model. First, we use the budget constraint to express
end-of-period wealth as b0 (C) = y + b + C and employ the known future policy
functions to express p0 = p (b0 ; y 0 ) and C 0 = c (b0 ; y 0 ).16 Then we can solve for
1 6 As

we noted in the de…nition of the recursive equilibrium, the equilibrium policy functions

19

aggregate consumption C by solving the implicit equation
C

= c (C) = y + d + b + b (C; b; y)
where b (C; b; y) = p (C; b; y) :=

(1

(12)
E [u0 (C 0 ) (d0 + p0 )]
) u0 (C)
RE [u0 (C 0 )]

As in earlier variants of our general model, the function b ( ) is increasing in
aggregate demand since higher demand today increases the stochastic discount
factor and raises the asset price. We impose the assumption b0 (C) < 1 to rule
out multiplicity of equilibrium.
For given state variables (b; y), the implicit equation (12) yields the equilibrium consumption function c (b; y) = C (b; y) under binding constraints. If the
representative agent experiences shocks to y, b or d, the process of reaching a
new equilibrium can be illustrated by shifting the right-hand side of equation
(12), triggering similar dynamics to the ones in Figure 3. For example, under a binding constraint, an adverse output shock yt will lead to a decline in
consumption and/or asset …re sales, which in turn trigger a feedback loop of
declining asset prices, tightening …nancial constraints and further reductions in
consumption.
Equity Premium and Forward Solution of Asset Prices Following Mendoza and Smith (2006), we can work with the optimality conditions to obtain
this expression for the equity premium:
e
E Rt+1

R=

Cov

e
u0 (ct+1 ) ; Rt+1
+ (1
0
E [u (ct+1 )]

)

t

t+1
e
is the state-contingent return on equity. This condition
where Rt+1
= dt+1p+p
t
shows that the collateral constraint has direct and indirect e¤ects all of which
work to increase the equity premium. The direct e¤ect is represented by the
term (1
) t . This term re‡ects the fact that a binding …nancial constraint,
t > 0; drives up the excess return on equity, because being constrained now
makes it less attractive to hold trees that pay dividends in the future. This e¤ect
is mitigated by (1
) since the agent can borrow against a fraction of the
e
tree. The two indirect e¤ects are Cov u0 (ct+1 ) ; Rt+1
and E [u0 (ct+1 )].
The former seems analogous to the standard risk-premium term due to the fact
that equity returns covary negatively with the marginal utility of consumption,
but a binding credit constraint makes this covariance more negative because
it weakens the ability of agents to smooth consumption. The denominator
E [u0 (ct+1 )] is lower for a similar reason, because a binding credit constraint
at t forces a postponement of consumption which lowers the expected marginal
utility of future consumption.

are expressed as functions of (b; y), because B is made redundant by the equilibrium condition
that requires H(B; y) = ^b0 (B; y; B) identically in B.

20

:96

2

1=5

R
1:03

:05

y
:03

Table 2: Parameters used in sample calibration of asset price model
Mendoza and Smith (2006) also showed that we can obtain the following
forward solution for asset prices:
( 1 " s
# )
X
Y
1
e
pt = E
(Et [Rr ])
ds
s=t+1

r=t+1

A higher equity premium – at present or expected at any time in the future
along the equilibrium path –reduces the present discounted value of dividends.
The possibility of future Sudden Stops therefore reduces the equilibrium level
of asset prices even during good times.

5.1

Quantitative Results

We calibrate the framework in line with Jeanne and Korinek (2010) but adapted
to the setting of an emerging economy. We use the same parameters for the
utility function as in our earlier calibrations, and we also pick the collateral
coe¢ cient of the tree to be = 1=4. We assume that the dividend from the tree
t
is a constant fraction = dtd+y
= :05 of total output. This captures the share
t
of total income that derives from pledgeable assets, which represent mostly real
estate in emerging economies. Finally, we also continue to assume the same
binary i.i.d. output process. We summarize the parameters in table 2. The
algorithm to numerically solve the model is described in Appendix A.
The policy functions of the calibration are reported in Figure 6 and are reminiscent of the policy functions in the real exchange rate model of section 4.
Instead of the real exchange rate, however, the two plots labeled p represent the
level of the asset price. To the left of the vertical line that indicates when …nancial constraints become binding, the asset price is a sharply increasing function
of wealth. When the …nancial constraint is loose, the asset price responds only
mildly to changes in wealth.
Figure 7 depicts the response of the economy to a one-time adverse shock y L .
The shock reduces income of the economy by 3% and sets in motion …nancial
ampli…cation e¤ects that leads to a 12% asset price decline and ultimately a 6%
reduction in consumption, roughly twice the initial shock. This is again in line
with the empirical results documented in section 2.
Mendoza and Smith (2006) analyze asset pricing models of Sudden Stops in
which the equity of a small open economy is traded with foreign investors that
face asset trading costs. A Sudden Stop emerges when standard TFP shocks
driving the dividends process trigger a binding collateral constraint, forcing
domestic agents to …re-sale assets. When they do so, asset trading costs imply
that foreign traders are willing to buy those assets only at a discount from
the fundamental price that would prevail in the absence of asset trading costs.
21

1.5
H

f(b;y )

p

f(b;yL)
c

1

0.5

0

b’

−0.5

−1
−1

−0.8

−0.6

−0.4

−0.2

b
0

Figure 6: Policy functions of asset price model

Path of output y and consumption c
1.02
1
0.98
0.96
0.94
0.92

y
c

2

4

6
8
Path of asset price p

10

1.25
1.2
1.15
1.1
1.05

12

p

2

4

2

4

6
8
Path of net worth b’

10

12

10

12

−0.22
−0.24
b’
6

8
T

Figure 7: Simulated path of sudden stop

22

The equilibrium asset price is thus determined by a combination of demand
and supply forces. The supply is driven by asset …re sales, and the demand
by the price elasticity of foreign asset demand, which is inversely related to
asset trading costs. When calibrated to data for Mexico, the model does well at
tracking observed Sudden Stop dynamics in response to TFP shocks of standard
magnitudes. Obtaining large drops in the asset price, however, require a high
price elasticity of foreign asset demand.
The Mendoza-Smith setup also shows that taking models with collateral
constraints into environments with multiple assets and multiple agents requires
additional …nancial frictions for the Fisherian mechanism to work. Their setup
requires both short selling constraints on equity and trading costs of foreign
assets. Without the former, the collateral constraint on debt can be circumvented, and without the latter, the foreigners could buy the …re-sold assets at
the fundamental price, e¤ectively doing away with the asset price de‡ation.
Korinek (2011a) develops a quantitative model of a world economy that
encompasses two regions that may su¤er from binding constraints and crises
due to asset price de‡ation. He shows that a crisis in one region leads to lower
world interest rates and ‡ows of hot money to the other region, which in turn
raises the vulnerability of that region to future crises. This can give rise to the
phenomenon of “serial …nancial crises.”
Mendoza (2010) and Bianchi and Mendoza (2010, 2013) consider models of
Sudden Stops involving asset price de‡ation in which dividends are endogenous
and are a¤ected by the collateral constraint, because working capital …nancing
needed to pay for a fraction of input costs is also a¤ected by the credit constraint.
This introduces a channel through which Sudden Stops a¤ect the supply side of
the economy. We discuss this mechanism in the ensuing section.

6

Equilibrium Business Cycles with Sudden Stops

In this Section, we extend the analysis to a setup in which the collateral constraints are part of a general equilibrium business cycle model. In the absence
of credit constraints, the model reduces to one in the class of widely used realbusiness-cycle DSGE models of small open economies applied to both industrial
and emerging economies (e.g. Mendoza 1991, 1995, Neumeyer and Perri 2005,
Uribe and Yue 2006).The model is similar to other models that study the 1990s
emerging markets crises using credit-market frictions (e.g. Choi and Cook 2004,
Cook and Devereux 2006ab, Braggion, Christiano and Roldos 2009, Gertler,
Gilchrist and Natalucci 2007). These models di¤er from the one we review here
in that they use perturbation methods to study the local quantitative implications of credit frictions that are always binding, and model Sudden Stops as
the result of large, unexpected shocks to external …nancing or the world real
interest rate. On the other hand, it is worth noting that these models feature
nominal rigidities and include a larger set of macroeconomic interactions across
sectors than models that are tractable using global solution methods.
Extending the Fisherian Sudden Stop setup to an equilibrium business cycle

23

environment requires three important modi…cations. First, we need to introduce a production technology. Mendoza (2010) uses a Cobb-Douglas technology
for gross production that depends on capital, labor and imported intermediate
goods. Second, we add endogenous capital accumulation using a Tobin’s-Q
formulation of adjustment costs. Third, we assume that production requires
working capital loans that cover a fraction of the cost of variable inputs. This
requires additional external …nancing. Thus, the collateral constraint now limits
the total external borrowing on intertemporal bonds and working capital loans
to a fraction of the market value of the accummulable physical assets that can
be pledged as collateral.
With these modi…cations, the Fisherian debt-de‡ation mechanism can trigger strong adverse e¤ects on production and factor markets that are absent from
the models we have studied so far. This occurs because the ampli…cation mechanism has two important new features: First, the de‡ation of the price of capital
goods (i.e. Tobin’s Q) causes a collapse in investment, which in turn a¤ects
future productive capacity and factor demand. Second, the binding collateral
constraint causes as a sudden, sharp increase in the …nancing cost of working
capital, captured by the shadow value on the constraint, which in turn leads
to a decline in current factor demand and production. The …rst e¤ect induces
persistence in the output e¤ects of a …nancial crisis, and the second causes a
contemporaneous output drop when the …nancial crisis hits.

6.1

A Representative Firm-Household

We follow Mendoza (2010) in assuming a representative …rm-household that
makes all production and consumption decisions but acts competitively. Preferences are taken from the subclass of small open economy RBC models that use
the Uzawa-Epstein utility function with an endogenous rate of time preference
to support the existence of a well-de…ned long-run distribution of NFA (see Mendoza 1991 for details, and Durdu et al. 2009 for a comparison of the quantitative
implications of this utility function with those of the standard time-separable
preferences).
"1
" t 1
#
#
X
X
E0
exp
v (c
G (L )) u (c
G (L ))
t=0

=0

The period utility function takes the standard CRRA form u( ) = (c G (L))1 =(1
), which depends on the Greenwood-Hercowitz-Hu¤man composite good de…ned by consumption minus the disutility of labor, L. The latter is given by
a constant-elasticity function G( ) = L! =!, where ! > 1 determines the Frisch
elasticity of labor supply 1=(! 1). This removes the wealth e¤ect on labor
supply, which would otherwise deliver a counterfactual increase in labor supply
when consumption falls during deep recessions. The time-preference function is
de…ned as v(:) = ln(1 + c G (L)); where is the semi-elasticity of the rate of
time preference with respect to c G (L) :
The budget constraint of the representative …rm-household is:
24

pt mt
(Rt 1)(wt Lt + pt mt ) qtb bt+1 + bt
h
i
where it = kt + (kt+1 kt ) 1 + a2 kt+1kt kt . The left-hand-side of the constraint adds up consumption and gross investment expenditures. In the de…nition of the latter, denotes the depreciation rate, kt is the capital stock, and a is
an adjustment-cost coe¢ cient for a standard Tobin’s-Q speci…cation of capital
adjustment costs à la Hayashi. The right-hand-side is the sum of gross production, represented by a Cobb-Douglas production function that combines capital,
labor and imported inputs m, and includes also an exogenous TFP shock ", minus the cost of imported inputs (purchased at a stochastic exogenous price p),
minus the interest payments on foreign working capital loans used to pay for a
fraction of the cost of variable factors, minus the cost of purchasing one-period
"real" international discount bonds at an exogenous, stochastic price q b , plus
the payout on the amount of these bonds purchased the previous period. Notice that there are three underlying real shocks driving economic ‡uctuations:
shocks to TFP, the world relative price of imported inputs, and the world real
interest rate.
The Fisherian collateral constraint is:
ct + it = "t kt Lt mt

qtb bt+1

Rt (wt Lt + pt mt )

qt kt+1

Hence, total external debt (one-period debt and within-period external working
capital …nancing) cannot exceed the fraction of the market value of physical
capital that can be pledged as collateral (qt is the market price of capital, which
is also Tobin’s Q).
Two endogenous relative prices appear in the above budget and collateral
constraints: the wage rate wt and the price of capital qt . The assumption that
the representative …rm-household supports a competitive equilibrium requires
that the agent takes these prices as given, so that they satisfy standard optimality conditions: the wage rate equals the marginal disutility of labor and the
price of capital equals the marginal Tobin’s Q (i.e. @it =@ kt , where kt is the
aggregate capital stock taken as given by the representative …rm-household).

6.2

Financial Ampli…cation in a Business Cycle Model

The Fisherian de‡ation mechanism operates in this economy in a manner analagous
to that of the endowment-economy asset pricing model reviewed earlier: When
the collateral constraint binds, agents …re-sell assets to meet the constraint; this
lowers the price of capital, further tightening the constraint, and forces even
more asset …re sales. The constraint introduces again direct and indirect effects that increase the expected excess return on assets (i.e. capital), and has a
forward-looking e¤ect that results in qt being a¤ected by the constraint even in
periods in which it does not bind, as long as the constraint is expected to bind
with positive probability along the equilibrium path.
25

There are two new elements to this mechanism that are crucial for integrating Fisherian de‡ation episodes into a business cycle model: First, the asset …re
sales involve sales of productive assets, which results in a collapse of investment
when a Sudden Stop occurs. This lowers future factor demands and future output, thus providing a mechanism that gives persistence to the contractionary
e¤ects of a …nancial crisis. Second, the Fisherian de‡ation impairs access to
working capital …nancing and thus variable inputs for current production plans.
When the constraint becomes binding, the e¤ective marginal cost of variable inputs suddenly rises by the factor ( t = t ) Rt , where t and t are the Lagrange
multipliers on the borrowing and budget constraints respectively. This mechanism is critical for the model’s ability to generate a sudden output collapse
when the economy hits the collateral constraint.
The combination of the above two e¤ects gives this model the ability to
produce substantial ampli…cation and asymmetry in the responses of macroeconomic aggregates to the underlying real shocks driving the business cycle (see
Mendoza (2010) for quantitative estimates). Ampli…cation in the sense that
when the constraint binds the same size shocks generate much larger recessions
and asset price drops that when it does not, and asymmetry in the sense that
if the constraint does not bind the responses of the shocks are more tepid and
in line with the behavior of a standard RBC model. Both of these properties
are very helpful. Ampli…cation because it is behind the model’s ability to produce …nancial crises with realistic features, and asymmetry because it allows
the model to produce "regular" business cycles with standard features if the
constraint does not bind. If precautionary saving is strong enough to lower
the long-run probability of Sudden Stops to the empirically relevant range, the
model will nest infrequent …nancial crises within regular business cycles, and will
have an endogenous mechanism driving transitions between both that does not
hinge on unusually large, unexpected exogenous shocks. Whether the model,
once it is reasonably calibrated, can deliver these results is a question that can
only be answered with quantitative analaysis.

6.3

Quantitative Findings

The results reported in Mendoza (2010) provide an informative summary of the
strong potential for this model to account for several of the empirical regularities
of Sudden Stops documented in Section 2, and illustrate the large ampli…cation
and asymmetry in macro responses to shocks that result from the Fisherian
de‡ation mechanism. In addition, the results con…rm that precautionary savings
incentives in response to these strong ampli…cation e¤ects lowers sharply the
probability of observing Sudden Stops in the economy’s stochastic stationary
state, and thus the model can nest together endogenous …nancial crises with
realistic, standard RBC dynamics. The results also shed light on some of the
model’s limitations, particularly the inability to produce asset price declines of
the magnitude observed in the data.
Figure 8 is an updated version of Figure 2 in Mendoza (2010), in which we
compare the new Sudden Stop event dynamics documented in Section 2 with the
26

Figure 8: Sudden stop event windows in data and simulations of business cycle
model
predicted Sudden Stop event windows produced by the model. The Figure shows
the median of Sudden Stop events in the model along with + and - one-standarderror bands, the medians from the Sudden Stop events in the data of emerging
economies, and the realizations from Mexico’s 1995 Sudden Stop. We show the
latter because the model was calibrated to Mexican data. In particular, the
production function parameters were set to factor shares in Mexico’s national
accounts. TFP shocks were calibrated to match Solow residuals constructed
with Mexican data, the interest rate shocks were set following Uribe and Yue
(2006) to match the interest rate Mexico faces in world capital markets (i.e.
the EMBI spread), and the shocks to the price of imported inputs were set to
match the ratio of the price of Mexico’s imported inputs to export prices (see
Mendoza (2010) for details).17 The value of was set so as to match the observed
1 7 These

shocks are introduced into the model as a discrete Markov process that approxi-

27

frequency of Sudden Stops in the Calvo et al. (2006) dataset, which was 3.3%.
This required setting = 0:2:
As Figure 8 shows, the model does a very good job at tracking the actual Sudden Stop dynamics of GDP, consumption, investment and net exports.
Moreover, these Sudden Stops are the result of standard realizations of shocks
to TFP, the real interest rate and the price of imported inputs. Sudden Stops
are preceded by periods of economic expansion, and the recoveries that follow
are slow-paced. The model mimics very closely the declines in GDP, consumption, and investment in the through of the Sudden Stop, but predicts a decline
in the price of capital much milder than the one observed in the data. This is
because of the standard Tobin-Q investment setup of the model, which implies
a monotonic relationship between investment and the price of capital in which
large investment (price) declines occur only when the price (investment) moves
slightly. Hence, without a modi…cation that drives a wedge in this relationship, the model cannot do well at matching both the observed large drop in
investment and in the price of capital at the same time.
The supply-side channel operating via the collateral constraint on working capital is crucial for these favorable results. Without it the model cannot
produce ampli…cation in production and factor demands on impact when the
Sudden Stop hits. GDP responds one period later, as the e¤ect of the collapse
of investment lowers future capital and future factor allocations. Moreover,
without this mechanism, the optimal amount of precautionary savings (leaving all the other parameters at the values of the baseline calibration) results in
a negligible long-run probability of observing Sudden Stops, e¤ectively removing the e¤ect of the collateral constraint from the equilibrium dynamics. The
probability of Sudden Stop events declines from 3.32% to 0.07%.

7

Policy Implications

The normative analysis of Sudden Stop models in the class we have reviewed
has focused on two sets of policies: First, macro-prudential or ex-ante policies,
i.e. policies implemented in “good times”in order to mitigate the frequency and
severity of sudden stops in the future (e.g. Bianchi and Mendoza 2010, 2013,
Jeanne and Korinek 2010b, Bianchi 2011). Second, ex-post policies aimed at
dealing with …nancial ampli…cation once the Fisherian mechanism is in motion
(e.g. Benigno et al. 2012ab, Bianchi 2013, Jeanne and Korinek 2013b).

7.1

Macro-Prudential Policies

The fact that the value of collateral is a market price introduces a pecuniary
externality into our Sudden Stop models because agents do not take into account the e¤ect of their individual borrowing plans on the price of collateral,
which matters in particular for future states of nature in which the constraint
mates a …rst-order VAR process estimated with the the data on the three shocks, using the
Tauchen-Hussey quadrature method to construct the Markov process.

28

is binding. As a result, they borrow too much relative to what would be optimal taking this externality into account. Alternatively, we can interpret the
externality in terms of aggregate demand: Agents do not internalize the e¤ects
of their borrowing decisions on future aggregate demand, which is the determinant of future prices. They take on too much debt because they do not realize
that this implies less aggregate demand and tighter …nancial constraints in the
future.
This pecuniary externality is the central market-failure that justi…es macroprudential policy intervention in the described class of models, as …rst noted
in the theoretical work of Korinek (2007).18 The externality also has a simple
interpretation in the theory of the second-best: If the planner reduces borrowing in the economy in periods before binding …nancial constraints occur, this
imposes a second-order cost on the economy because it constitutes a small deviation from optimality. When an adverse state of nature occurs next period, the
policy relaxes the …nancial constraint, which has …rst-order welfare bene…ts.
The approach followed in the quantitative literature on prudential policies
is to compare the features of the competitive equilibria of models similar to the
ones we analyzed earlier with the allocations of a social planner. This planner
chooses (or regulates) the borrowing and saving allocations of private agents
while internalizing the pecuniary externality. In general, the results show that it
is optimal for the planner to intervene in a “prudential”manner: whenever there
is a positive probability that the …nancial constraint may bind in the ensuing
period, the planner reduces borrowing in the present in order to relax the future
constraints and mitigate the associated …nancial ampli…cation e¤ects. Such an
intervention improves social welfare because of the pecuniary externality.
A Prudential Planner A simple way to illustrate the implications of the
pecuniary externality is to study a hypothetical prudential social planner who
maximizes the welfare of private agents by choosing a decision rule for aggregate
bond holdings B 0 (B; y) so as to solve the following Bellman equation:
V (B; y)
s.t.

=

fu (C) + E [V (B 0 ; y 0 )]g
max
0
B

C + B 0 =R = y + B
b (C)
B 0 =R

(13)

The Euler equation of this problem is
u0 (C) = RE u0 (C 0 ) +

0 0

b (C 0 ) +

1

b0 (C)

The di¤erence from the optimality condition (4) of private agents is re‡ected in
the two terms with b0 ( ), which capture that the planner internalizes the e¤ects
1 8 A similar pecuniary externality was also described by Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2003)
and Lorenzoni (2008). In their papers, the ine¢ ciency arises because …nancial markets are
incomplete and a movement in exchange rates or asset prices that is engineered by a social
planner generates a redistribution toward constrained agents. In our setup, by contrast, the
…nancial constraint depends on prices and so a movement in relative prices directly relaxes
the …nancial constraint.

29

of aggregate consumption on the borrowing limit. Observe that this term is
pre-multiplied by the shadow price on the borrowing constraint, i.e. relaxing
the borrowing limit is only relevant when the borrowing constraint is binding.
We distinguish between two cases: when
> 0 the credit constraint is
binding at t. In this case, the binding constraint implies that there is e¤ectively
no free choice variable at time t and the planner’s allocations coincide with those
of the competitive equilibrium.
In the second case, when = 0, the Euler equation reduces to
u0 (C) = RE u0 (C 0 ) +

0 0

b (C 0 )

(14)

In this case, at date t the planner weighs the marginal utility of consumption
today versus the marginal utility of consumption tomorrow plus the marginal
bene…t of relaxing the constraint tomorrow by increasing consumption tomorrow, captured by the term 0 b0 (C 0 ). This is achieved by borrowing less at t so
as to transfer more consumption into t+1. If the constraint is binding with nonzero probability in some of the states attainable at t + 1 along the equilibrium
path, then this term is positive and captures the uninternalized social bene…ts
of greater aggregate consumption tomorrow. This result can be proved formally
by simply comparing the Euler equation of the planner (14) when = 0 to the
Euler equation of private agents (4).
The planner can implement the optimal allocations by imposing a tax on
borrowing that corresponds to the wedge between the social and private Euler
equations. Imposing a tax on borrowing b0 =R that is rebated lump-sum modi…es the Euler equation of private agents to
(1

) u0 (c) = RE [u0 (c0 )] +

In order to attain the same allocations as with the planner’s Euler equation
(14), the optimal tax is:
RE 0 b0 (C 0 )
.
(15)
=
u0 (c)
The tax captures the e¤ects of higher borrowing on tightening the constraint,
which is not internalized by individual agents. It is often referred to as a Pigouvian tax because it o¤sets an externality. The literature has also explored how
similar outcomes can be implemented with other instruments such as statecontingent capital requirements or loan-to-value ratios (see e.g. Bianchi 2011).
Pigouvian taxes to lean against the risk of sudden stops can be interpreted
as prudential capital controls. See Korinek (2011) for a survey of a growing
literature on this topic.
Contractionary Depreciations Model The exchange rate model of Section
4 imposes additional structure on the credit constraint that allows us to interpret
the externality in terms of Fisherian de‡ation of the real exchange rate. In
particular, the externality term in that model can be rewritten as 0 b0 (CT0 ; ) =
0
p0N (CT0 ; ) yN . In this formulation, it is clear that borrowing less in one period
30

increases aggregate consumption of traded goods in the ensuing period, which
in turn increases the price of nontradables and hence the value of collateral,
relaxing the constraint by a fraction of the value of the collateral. Korinek
(2010) and Bianchi (2011) quantify the externalities of Sudden Stops in the real
exchange rate model.
Korinek (2011) develops a su¢ cient-statistics approach following the methodology of Chetty (2009), which identi…es direct empirical counterparts (i.e. suf…cient statistics) to the individual components of the tax formula (15) in order
to quantify the magnitude of externalities. He applies this procedure to the
externalities during the Indonesian crisis of 1997/98 and …nds that each unit of
dollar debt that was repaid in the crisis imposed a 30 cent externality. He also
quanti…es the externalities of other …nancial liabilities and …nds a pecking order
whereby dollar debt imposes the largest externalities, followed by CPI-indexed
debt, local currency debt, portfolio investment and FDI, which creates the least
externalities.19
Bianchi (2011) explores the quantitative implications of the above policy
arguments using a model calibrated to the case of Argentina and …nds that a
tax to internalize the pecuniary externality would average about 5% and would
increase with crisis risk. In the stochastic steady-state of the economy, the
optimal tax policy reduces the probability of a sudden stop by more than 90%.
Gondo Mori (2013) introduces state-contingent assets into this framework
and shows that the opportunity to insure reduces the externalities of foreign
borrowing, but does not make them disappear.
Asset Pricing Model We next consider the case for prudential policy in the
asset pricing model of Section 5. In that model, the externality term in the
Euler equation of the planner (14) can be expressed as 0 b0 (C 0 ; ) = p0 (C 0 ; ).
Higher aggregate consumption increases the asset price and relaxes the borrowing constraint. The planner …nds it optimal to intervene in a prudential fashion
by reducing borrowing in periods when the constraint is loose but when there
is risk of binding constraints and …nancial ampli…cation in the following period.
Lower borrowing increases aggregate demand and asset prices in crisis times,
which implies that private agents need to delever less.
Bianchi and Mendoza (2010) and Jeanne and Korinek (2010b) conduct a
quantitative investigation of the above arguments.20 They calibrate their models to the sudden stop experienced by the US economy in 2008, and compute
taxes on borrowing that are positively correlated with leverage when the con1 9 Observe that local currency debt still imposes negative externalities (of about 9 cents per
dollar of debt in Korinek’s analysis) even though there is no mismatch between the denomination of the debt and of the collateral. The reason is that having lower …nancial liabilities –
no matter in which currency – implies higher aggregate traded consumption next period and
a higher price of the non-traded collateral, which relaxes the …nancial constraint.
2 0 Korinek (2011) analyzes the externalities created by di¤erent types of …nancial liabilities
in a stylized model of …re sales. He …nds that the externalities are higher the greater the
mismatch between the payo¤ pro…le of liabilities and the assets to be sold. For example,
uncontingent debt imposes large externalities, whereas equity …nance creates signi…cantly
smaller externalities.

31

straint is not binding and go to zero during crashes when the constraint is
binding. The optimal prudential intervention not only reduces the incidence
and severity of sudden stops but also raises the equilibrium level of asset prices.
Bianchi and Mendoza also introduce a supply-side channel for the …nancial
friction by adopting a formulation similar to the setup of Mendoza (2010) of
representative …rm-households that require working capital (subject to the collateral constraint) to pay a fraction of the wages bill, and they also focus on
time inconsistency issues that we discuss brie‡y below.
Bianchi and Mendoza (2013) show that time inconsistency can be a serious
issue in the analysis of macro-prudential policies, because the social planner’s
problem is inherently forward-looking. This is of particular importance in the
asset pricing model because of the forward-looking nature of asset prices. In our
model structure above, the economy’s borrowing limit is b = p(B; y). Suppose
that the constraint binds in a given period. Then the planner would have an
incentive to promise low C 0 in the next period in order to prop up the price in
the current period and relax the credit constraint. Once the next period arrives,
however, sticking to this promise is no longer optimal.
Bianchi and Mendoza (2010) and Jeanne and Korinek (2010b) conduct their
quantitative experiments with formulations of the planner’s problem that make
it time-consistent by construction. These can be thought of as conditionally
e¢ cient policies, in the sense that the social planner’s allocations are e¢ cient
conditional on the assumptions that rule out the time-inconsistency problem.
Jeanne and Korinek assume that a prudential planner determines the amount
of borrowing, but that the asset price is determined in private markets, i.e. the
asset price is pinned down by the equilibrium condition of decentralized agents.
Bianchi and Mendoza assume that the asset price in the collateral constraint of
the planner is restricted to be the same as the equilibrium asset pricing function
p(B; y) of the unregulated decentralized economy.
In the second approach, the intuition is that when the planner looks at the
menu of feasible debt positions that private agents had available for all (B; y)
pairs in the state space in the unregulated competitive equilibrium, the planner’s
menu is identical and the planner cannot use policy to alter the equilibrium
price for a given (B; y) pair. While the loans menu is the same, the planner
chooses "more wisely" than private agents how much it borrows, because it
still internalizes how much asset prices at t + 1 respond to the debt chosen at t
because of the derivative @p0 (B 0 ; y 0 ) =@B 0 .21 Notice it is critical that the pricing
functions are assumed to be the same, but the dynamics of asset prices along
the equilibrium path are very di¤erent.
Since arbitrary assumptions to limit the ability of the planner to in‡uence
prices are controversial, and intuitively they mean that regulators would not
exploit the full potential of their prudential tools, Bianchi and Mendoza (2013)
study instead the design of time-consistent optimal macro-prudential policy.
2 1 Supporting this optimal policy requires, however, a second instrument to work together
with the debt tax: a tax on dividends (which numerically works on average to a small subsidy).
Taxing debt alone would result on a di¤erent pricing function than the one of the unregulated
economy.

32

Their setup is analogous to a Markov-perfect equilibrium, in which the social
planner chooses optimal plans at t taking as given a policy function that represents the actions that future planners would take, so that at equilibrium the policy is time consistent (i.e. future planners choose optimally the same policy that
the current planner assumes they would take). The results suggest that while
time-consistent macro prudential policy can both improve upon conditionallye¢ cient setups and tackle the time-inconsistency problem without arbitrary
assumptions, the quantitative features of the policies are similar to those obtained assuming the planner values collateral with the pricing function of the
competitive equilibrium.

7.2

Ex-Post Policies

We next focus on policy options that can be taken once a Sudden Stop has
occurred. The primary policy objective at this point is to break the feedback
loop created by ampli…cation e¤ects. Returning to Figure 1, this can be done
at any step of the process and using di¤erent tools, i.e. by supporting aggregate
demand, leaning against the decline in aggregate prices, or relaxing …nancial
constraints. Hence, the quantitative literature analyzing these policies has also
followed di¤erent tracks.
Durdu and Mendoza (2006) investigate the use of asset price guarantees
to mitigate sudden stops in the Mendoza-Smith model of international equity
trading. In particular, they explore the e¤ects of implementing Calvo’s (2002)
proposal to introduce a guarantee on the asset prices of emerging markets (as
an asset class) in order to reduce the risk of Sudden Stops. Foreign investors
can sell their equity holdings of an emerging economy either to other agents at
the market price or to an international agency at the guaranteed price, with
the cost …nanced with lump sum taxation on those investors. This reduces
the downside risk of holding the emerging economy’s assets and neutralizes the
Fisherian de‡ation mechanism. At the same time, it introduces a moral hazard
problem that leads to overinvestment in those assets and in‡ated prices. An
unconditional guarantee reduces welfare because the cost of the moral hazard
distortion is larger than the bene…t of managing Sudden Stops, since the latter
are low-probability events. The policy can be welfare improving if the guarantee is provided conditionally on leverage ratios and the state of TFP, which
intuitively means that in this environment the policy is welfare improving the
more it acts as an ex-post policy rather than ex-ante policy (i.e. a guarantee
present in times of …nancial vulnerability but absent otherwise).
Benigno et al. (2009, 2012ab, 2013) analyze the scope for ex-post interventions when …nancial constraints are binding as well as the implications of these
constraints for the desirability of ex-ante interventions. They show that, if collateral constraints depend on prices and if a planner can costlessly manipulate
these prices, then it is always possible to restore the unconstrained equilibrium.
Second, even if it is costly to prop up exchange rates or asset prices, it may be
desirable to do so in order to relax …nancial constraints. Such intervention o¤ers
an alternative and more direct mechanism to mitigate …nancial constraints and,
33

if successful, may o¤er higher welfare gains than ex-ante interventions. These
policies, however, may also be more di¢ cult to implement in practice, because
of the time-inconsistency issues raised above, which also emerge in this context.
Moreover, these results expose a weakness of the Sudden Stops models that
we have studied, which is that the collateral constraints are generally imposed
directly on the optimization problems of agents, rather than embedding an optimal contracting problem within the Sudden Stops framework. Hence, while the
results of these studies clearly show that it is technically possible to restore the
equilibrium without credit constraints, it is not clear by which market mechanism the planner would …x the actual contractual friction that led lenders to
limit credit.
Jeanne and Korinek (2013b) study a number of the issues brought up by the
interaction of ex-ante and ex-post policy measures in our Sudden Stop framework by using a simpli…ed analytic framework of asset price de‡ation. They …nd
that it is generally desirable to engage in both types of interventions up to the
point where the marginal cost of each policy measure equals the (expected) marginal bene…t of relaxing binding constraints. Ex-post measures have the bene…t
of being more state-contingent because they can be imposed conditional on the
state of nature that is realized, whereas prudential measures are contingent on
the expectation of the state of nature. However, prudential interventions can
resolve the time inconsistency problem created by ex-post intervention.

8

Conclusions

This paper documented the empirical regularties of Sudden Stops and reviewed
a class of quantitative models that aimed to explain this phenomenon using occassionally binding credit constraints that can trigger non-linear …nancial ampli…cation dynamics in the vein of the classic Fisherian debt-de‡ation framework. Leverage ratios exhibit regular, procyclical ‡uctuations driven by the
same underlying shocks that drive business cycles, and when those ratios are
high enough they trigger credit constraints. These constraints limit debts not to
exceed a fraction of the market value of the assets or incomes pledged as collateral. Hence, when the constraint becomes binding, agents …re sale goods and/or
assets in e¤orts to meet their …nancial obligations, but as they do they cause a
decline in prices that tightens further the credit constraint forcing further …re
sales.
We developed a simple dynamic framework to emphasize the commonalities
of di¤erent versions of models of sudden stops and …nancial ampli…cation, and
showed how di¤erent variants of this setup perform quantitatively. We focused
in particular on three models very relevant for Sudden Stop events: A model in
which liability dollarization yields a mechanism by which Fisherian de‡ation induces contractionary real devaluations, a model in which the Fisherian de‡ation
triggers collapses in asset prices, an a business cycle model that can replicate
the dynamics of both regular business cycles and Sudden Stops. Finally, we also
discussed prudential policy measures and ex-post crisis interventions that are

34

supported by this class of models.
Following the crisis of 2008/09, a number of emerging economies have received large capital in‡ows as investment opportunities in advanced economies
were scarce and zero interest policies induced investors to seek for higher returns elsewhere. Given the boom-bust pattern in global capital ‡ows, it is only
a question of time when the next episode of Sudden Stops will occur, and the
recent increased expectations of higher U.S. real interest rates, as the era of
unconventional monetary policy winds down, are already raising this prospect.
This suggests that further research on the mechanics of Sudden Stops and on
policy measures available to reduce crisis risk and alleviate crises is urgently
needed.
One important avenue for future research concerns the causes for risk-taking
that leads to binding constraints. Our analytical framework and most of the
works covered in our survey simply assume that emerging market investors are
impatient and therefore take on leverage, but there are a number of other factors
that contribute to such risk-taking, including bounded rationality, herding, or
moral hazard. Boz and Mendoza (2013) and Bianchi et al. (2012), for example,
make a step in this direction by emphasizing the need for agents to learn about
risk.
Another important direction of research concerns the aftermath of balance
sheet crises, which often leads to sustained periods of below-trend growth that
are di¢ cult to explain in the set of models that we have surveyed. Jeanne and
Korinek (2013), for example, develop a framework in which sudden stops reduce
trend growth.
A third avenue of research concerns the development of numerical methods
that combine the strenghts of global solution methods in describing non-linear
dynamics with the power of perturbation methods in dealing with a large number of variables so as to analyze sudden stops in even richer macroeconomic
models.

References
Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bacchetta, and Abhijit Banerjee, 2001, “Currency
Crises and Monetary Policy in an Economy with Credit Constraints,”European
Economic Review 45(7), pp. 1121-1150.
Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bacchetta, and Abhijit Banerjee, 2004, “A Corporate Balance-Sheet Approach to Currency Crises,”Journal of Economic Theory
119(1), pp. 6-30.
Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath, 2007, “Emerging Market Business Cycles:
The Cycle is the Trend,” Journal of Political Economy 115(1), pp. 69-102.
Benigno, Gianluca, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and
Eric R. Young, 2009, “Revisiting Overborrowing and its Policy Implications,”
in Luis Cespedes, Roberto Chang and Diego Saravia (editors), Monetary Policy
under Financial Turbulence, Central Bank of Chile.
35

Benigno, Gianluca, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and
Eric R. Young, 2012a, “Capital Controls or Real Exchange
Rate Policy? A Pecuniary Externality Perspective,” manuscript, LSE.
Benigno, Gianluca, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and
Eric R. Young, 2012b, “Optimal Policy for Macroprudential Stability,” manuscript, LSE.
Benigno, Gianluca, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and
Eric R. Young, 2013, “Financial Crises and Macro-Prudential Policies”, Journal
of International Economics 89(2), pp. 453-470.
Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler, 1989, “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,” American Economic Review 79(1), pp. 14-31.
Bianchi, Javier, 2011, “Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle,” American Economic Review 101(7), pp. 3400-3426.
Bianchi, Javier, 2013, “E¢ cient Bailouts?” NBER Working Paper w18587.
Bianchi, Javier, and Enrique Mendoza, 2010, “Overborrowing, Financial Crises,
and ’Macroprudential’Taxes,” NBER Working Paper w16091, June.
Bianchi, Javier, and Enrique Mendoza, 2013, “Optimal Time-Consistent Macroprudential Policy in a Model of Overborrowing and Financial Crises," manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.
Bianchi, Javier, Emine Boz, and Enrique G. Mendoza, 2012, “Macroprudential
Policy in a Fisherian Model of Financial Innovation,” IMF Economic Review
60(2), pp. 223-269.
Braggion, Fabio, Lawrence J. Christiano, and Jorge Roldos, 2009, “Optimal
Monetary Policy in a ‘Sudden Stop,’” Journal of Monetary Economics 56(4),
pp. 582-595.
Caballero, Ricardo J., and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2001, “International and
Domestic Collateral Constraints in a Model of Emerging Market Crises,”Journal
of Monetary Economics 48(3), pp. 513-548.
Caballero, Ricardo J., and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2003, “Excessive Dollar Borrowing: Financial Development and Underinsurance,”Journal of Finance 58(2),
pp. 867-894.
Caballero, Ricardo J., and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2004, “Smoothing Sudden
Stops,” Journal of Economic Theory 119(1), pp. 104-127.
Calvo, Guillermo A., 1998, “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The
Simple Economics of Sudden Stops,” Journal of Applied Economics 1, pp. 3554.
Calvo, Guillermo A., 2002, “Globalization Hazard and Delayed Reform in Emerging Markets,” Economia 2(2), Spring..

36

Calvo, Guillermo A., and Enrique G. Mendoza, 1996, “Mexico’s Balance-ofPayments Crisis: a Chronicle of a Death Foretold,” Journal of International
Economics 41(3), pp. 235-264.
Calvo, Guillermo A., and Enrique G. Mendoza, 2000, “Capital-Market Crises
and Economic Collapse in Emerging Markets: An Informational-Frictions Approach,” American Economic Review 90(2), pp. 59-64.
Calvo, Guillermo A., Alejandro Izquierdo, and Ernesto Talvi, 2006, “Phoenix
Miracles in Emerging Markets: Recovering without Credit from Systemic Financial Crises,” NBER Working Paper w12101.
Calvo, Guillermo A., Alejandro Izquierdo, and Rudy Loo-Kung, 2006, “Relative Price Volatility under Sudden Stops: the Relevance of Balance Sheet Effects,”Journal of International Economics 69(1), pp. 231-254.
Calvo, Guillermo A., Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis-Fernando Mejia, 2008, “Systemic Sudden Stops: the Relevance of Balance-Sheet E¤ects and Financial Integration,”NBER Working Paper w14026.
Cespedes, Luis Felipe, Roberto Chang, and Andres Velasco, 2011, “Exchange
Market Intervention as Unconventional Monetary Policy,” manuscript.
Chang, Roberto, and Andres Velasco, 2001, “A Model of Financial Crises in
Emerging Markets,”Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(2), pp. 489-517.
Chetty, Raj, 2009, “Su¢ cient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge Between
Structural and Reduced-Form Methods,” Annual Review of Economics 1, pp.
451-487.
Choi, Woon Gyu, and David Cook, 2004, “Liability Dollarization and the Bank
Balance Sheet Channel,”Journal of International Economics 64(2), pp. 247-275.
Cole, Harold L., and Timothy J. Kehoe, 2000, “Self-Ful…lling Debt Crises,”
Review of Economic Studies 67(1), pp. 91-116.
Cook, David, and Michael B. Devereux, 2006a, “External Currency Pricing and
the East Asian Crisis,”Journal of International Economics 69(1), pp. 37-63.
Cook, David, and Michael B. Devereux, 2006b, “Accounting for the East Asian
Crisis: a Quantitative Model of Capital Out‡ows in Small Open Economies,”Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking 38(3), pp. 721-749.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, Ilan Goldfajn and Rodrigo O. Valdés, 1995, “Currency
Crises and Collapses,”Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1995:2, pp. 219293.
Durdu, C. Bora, and Enrique G. Mendoza, 2006, “Are Asset Price Guarantees
Useful for Preventing Sudden Stops?: A Quantitative Investigation of the Globalization Hazard-Moral Hazard Tradeo¤,” Journal of International Economics
69(1), pp. 84-119.
Durdu, C. Bora, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Marco E. Terrones, 2009, “Precautionary Demand for Foreign Assets in Sudden Stop Economies: An Assessment
37

of the New Merchantilism,”Journal of Development Economics 89(2), pp. 194209.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Ricardo Hausmann, 2005, “Other People’s Money:
Debt Denomination and Financial Instability in Emerging Market Economies,”
University of Chicago Press.
Fisher, Irving, 1933, “The Debt-De‡ation Theory of Great Depressions,”Econometrica 1(4), pp. 337-357.
Gertler, Mark, Simon Gilchrist, and Fabio M. Natalucci, 2007, “External Constraints on Monetary Policy and the Financial Accelerator,”Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking 39(2), pp. 295-330.
Gertler, Mark and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, 2010, “Financial Intermediation and
Credit Policy in Business Cycle Analysis,” Handbook of Monetary Economics,
Vol. 3, pp. 547-599.
Gondo Mori, Rocio, 2013, “State Contingent Assets, Financial Crises and Pecuniary Externalities in Models with Collateral Constraints,” mimeo, University
of Maryland.
Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2002, “Equilibrium and Welfare in Markets
with Financially Constrained Arbitrageurs,” Journal of Financial Economics
66(2-3), pp. 361-407.
Jeanne, Olivier, and Anton Korinek, 2010a, “Excessive Volatility in Capital
Flows: A Pigouvian Taxation Approach,” American Economic Review P&P,
pp. 403-407.
Jeanne, Olivier, and Anton Korinek, 2010b, “Managing Credit Booms and
Busts: A Pigouvian Taxation Approach,”NBER Working Paper w16377.
Jeanne, Olivier, and Anton Korinek, 2013a, “Booms, Busts and Growth,”work
in progress.
Jeanne, Olivier, and Anton Korinek, 2013b, “Macroprudential Regulation versus
Mopping Up After the Crash,”NBER Working Paper w18675.
Kaminsky, Graciela L., and Carmen M. Reinhart, 1999, “The Twin Crises: the
Causes of Banking and Balance-of-Payments Problems,” American Economic
Review 89(3), pp. 473-500.
Kato, Ryo, and Takayuki Tsuruga, 2011, “Bank Overleverage and Macroeconomic Fragility,”IMES Discussion Paper Series 11-E-15.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John H. Moore, 1997, “Credit Cycles,” Journal of
Political Economy 105(2), pp. 211-248.
Korinek, Anton, 2007, “Excessive Dollar Borrowing in Emerging Markets,”manuscript,
University of Maryland.
Korinek, Anton, 2010, “Regulating Capital Flows to Emerging Markets: An
Externality View,” manuscript, University of Maryland.
38

Korinek, Anton, 2011a, “Hot Money and Serial Financial Crises,” IMF Economic Review 59(2), pp. 306-339.
Korinek, Anton, 2011b, “The New Economics of Prudential Capital Controls,”
IMF Economic Review 59(3), pp. 523-561.
Korinek, Anton, 2011c, “Systemic Risk-Taking: Ampli…cation E¤ects, Externalities, and Regulatory Responses,”ECB Working Paper 1345.
Korinek, Anton, and Jonathan Kreamer, 2013, “The Redistributive E¤ects of
Financial Deregulation,” manuscript, University of Maryland.
Krugman, Paul R., 1999, “Balance Sheets, the Transfer Problem, and Financial
Crises,”in Isard, P., Razin, A., and Rose, A. K., editors, International Finance
and Financial Crises: Essays in Hornor of Robert P. Flood Jr., pp. 31-44.
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Krugman, Paul R., 2009, “How Did Economists Get It So Wrong?,” New York
Times 2(9).
Lahiri, Amartya and Carlos Végh, 2003, “Delaying the inevitable: interest rate
defense and balance of payments crises,” Journal of Political Economy 111(2),
pp. 404-424.
Lipsey, Richard, and Kelvin Lancaster, 1956, “The General Theory of Second
Best,”Review of Economic Studies 24(1), pp. 11-32.
Lorenzoni, Guido, 2008, “Ine¢ cient Credit Booms,”Review of Economic Studies
75(3), pp. 809-833.
Martin, Philippe, and Helene Rey, 2006, “Globalization and Emerging Markets:
with or without Crash?” American Economic Review 96(5), pp. 1631-1651.
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria, and Assaf Razin, 2000, “Current Account Reversals and Currency Crises, Empirical Regularities” in Paul Krugman, editors,
Currency Crises, pp. 285-326, NBER, University of Chicago Press.
Mendoza, Enrique G., 1991, “Real Business Cycles in a Small Open Economy,”
American Economic Review 81(4), pp. 797-818.
Mendoza, Enrique G., 1995, “The Terms of Trade, the Real Exchange Rate, and
Economic Fluctuations,” International Economic Review 36(1), pp. 101-137.
Mendoza, Enrique G., 2002, “Credit, Prices and Crashes: Business Cycles with
a Sudden Stop,” in S. Edwards and J. Frankel (editors), Preventing Currency
Crises in Emerging Markets, pp. 335-392, NBER, University of Chicago Press.
Mendoza, Enrique G., 2005, “Real Exchange Rate Volatility and the Price of
Nontradables in Sudden-Stop-Prone Economies,” Economia 6(1), pp. 103-148.
Mendoza, Enrique G., 2006, “Endogenous Sudden Stops in a Business Cycle
Model with Collateral Constraints:A Fisherian De‡ation of Tobin’s Q,” NBER
Working Paper w12564.

39

Mendoza, Enrique G., 2010, “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises and Leverage,”
The American Economic Review 100(5), pp. 1941-1966.
Mendoza, Enrique G., and Katherine A. Smith, 2006, “Quantitative Implications of a Debt-De‡ation Theory of Sudden Stops and Asset Prices,” Journal
of International Economics 70(1), pp. 82-114.
Mendoza, Enrique G., and Marco E. Terrones, 2012, “An Anatomy of Credit
Booms and their Demise,”NBER Working Paper w18379.
Meza, Felipe, and Erwan Quintin, 2007, “Factor Utilization and theReal Impact
of Financial Crises,”The BE Journal of Macroeconomics 7(1), article 33.
Neumeyer, Pablo A., and Fabrizio Perri, 2005, “Business Cycles in Emerging
Economies: the Role of Interest Rates,”Journal of Monetary Economics 52(2),
pp. 345-380.
Reinhart, Carmen, and Guillermo Calvo, 2000, “When Capital In‡ows Come
to a Sudden Stop: Consequences and Policy Options,” in: Peter Kenen and
Alexandre Swoboda (editors), Reforming the International Monetary and Financial System, Washington DC: IMF, pp. 175-201.
Reinhart, Carmen, Kenneth Rogo¤ and Miguel Savastano, 2003, “Debt Intolerance,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 34, 2003-1, pp. 1-74.
Uribe, Martin, and Vivian Z. Yue, 2006, “Country Spreads and Emerging Countries: Who Drives Whom?”Journal of International Economics 69(1), pp. 6-36.

A

Data Appendix and Numerical Appendix

The data appendix to this paper describes how the empirical event analysis of sudden stops was performed. The numerical appendix outlines how
the model simulations were implemented and o¤ers source codes of the
programs used.
Both are available at http://www.korinek.com/suddenstops

40

