NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IDENTIFYING MONETARY POLICY IN MACRO-FINANCE MODELS
David Backus
Mikhail Chernov
Stanley E. Zin
Irina Zviadadze
Working Paper 19360
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19360

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013, Revised December 2018

Previously circulated as "Identifying Taylor Rules in Macro-Finance Models." The project started
with our reading of John Cochrane's paper on the same subject and subsequent emails and
conversations with him and Mark Gertler. We thank them both. Earlier versions of this work by
the first three authors circulated with the title “Identifying Taylor rules in macro-finance models”.
We are grateful to the two anonymous referees and the Editor, Andrew Karolyi, for their
thoughtful comments, which have helped us improve the manuscript. We also thank Rich Clarida,
Patrick Feve, Kei Kawai, Guillaume Roussellet, Ken Singleton, Gregor Smith, Roman Šustek,
Tommy Sveen, and Tao Zha for comments on earlier drafts, and participants in seminars at
ADEMU/CERGE-EI, BI Norwegian Business School, New York University, Stony Brook
University, the Swedish House of Finance, Queen Mary University of London, and the Toulouse
School of Economics. The latest version of the paper is available at https://sites.google.com/site/
mbchernov/BCZZ latest.pdf. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2013 by David Backus, Mikhail Chernov, Stanley E. Zin, and Irina Zviadadze. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Identifying monetary policy in macro-finance models
David Backus, Mikhail Chernov, Stanley E. Zin, and Irina Zviadadze
NBER Working Paper No. 19360
August 2013, Revised December 2018
JEL No. E43,E52,G12
ABSTRACT
Identification problems arise in New Keynesian and macro-finance models when the Taylor rule
includes both responses to observable variables like inflation and output, and a shock unseen by
economists. Identification of the rule's parameters requires additional restrictions on this
unobserved shock. We demonstrate how this can be accomplished in a macro term structure
model using only long-run neutrality restrictions consistent with a wide variety of theories. The
resulting Taylor rule is comparable to those commonly found in the literature. The unobserved
shock is closely related to the slope factor of empirical term structure models.

David Backus
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012-1126
Mikhail Chernov
Anderson School of Management
University of California, Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C-417
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and CEPR
and also NBER
mikhail.chernov@anderson.ucla.edu

Stanley E. Zin
Department of Economics
Leonard N. Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 7-91
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
stan.zin@nyu.edu
Irina Zviadadze
Department of Finance
Stockholm School of Economics
Drottninggatan 98, 111 60
Stockholm, Sweden
Irina.Zviadadze@hhs.se

1

Introduction

The field of macro-finance has the potential to give us deeper insights into macroeconomics
and macroeconomic policy by combining information about aggregate quantities with asset
prices. The link between bond-pricing and monetary policy seems particularly promising
if central banks implement monetary policy through short-term interest rates as in the
so-called “Taylor rule” of Taylor (1993). And when policy involves temporary departures
from simple rules, such as recent unconventional monetary policy, it may even introduce an
important source of financial-market risk.
If the combination of macroeconomics and finance holds promise, it also raises challenges.
We address one of them here: the challenge of identifying monetary policy parameters and
monetary policy shocks. If we see that the short-term interest rate rises with inflation, does
that reflect the policy of the central bank, a temporary departure from that policy, the
valuations of private agents, or something else? Can we tell the difference?
Some prominent scholars argue that the answer is no. Cochrane (2011, page 606) puts
it this way: “The crucial Taylor rule parameter is not identified in the new-Keynesian
model.” He devotes most of his paper to making the case. Joslin, Le, and Singleton (2013,
page 597) make a related point about interpretations of estimated bond pricing models. In
their words: “Several recent studies interpret the short-rate equation as a Taylor-style rule.
... However, without imposing additional economic structure, ... the parameters are not
meaningfully interpretable as the reaction coefficients of a central bank.” Canova and Sala
(2009), Carrillo, Feve, and Matheron (2007), and Iskrev (2010) also question aspects of the
identification of New Keynesian models.
The contribution of this paper is twofold. First, we revisit this conclusion and propose
an approach to monetary policy identification. Using a state-space model as a unifying
framework, we find that what matters for identification of the parameters of the Taylor rule
is our knowledge of the structure of the shock to that one equation alone, specifically how it
responds to changes in the current state. In equilibrium, all endogenous variables including
the interest rate, the inflation rate, and real output growth, depend on the state. But the
unobservable Taylor rule shock also depends on the state. Without more structure on that
shock we have no way of decomposing an observed interest rate changes into the various
components of the Taylor rule, such as changes in inflation, output growth, and the policy
shock.
Second, we develop a specific set of identifying restrictions in the context of what Joslin,
Priebsch, and Singleton (2014) call a “macro-finance affine term structure model” – an
arbitrage-free term structure model that includes as factors, macroeconomic variables such
as GDP growth and inflation. The restrictions are based on long-run neutrality of the monetary policy shock. Since short-run responses to policy are unconstrained, these identifying
assumptions are consistent with a broad class of structural macroeconomic models. Estimation of the model results in estimates of the parameters of the systematic response of

the Taylor rule to inflation and output growth, and estimates of the unobservable shock to
the Taylor rule. We explore the dynamic correlations of both macro and financial variables
to these policy shocks.
We find that the shock to the Taylor rule has relatively small and short-lived correlations
with real GDP growth and inflation. On the other hand, it has a more substantial positive
effect on the short rate and a negative effect on risk premiums embedded in long bond
yields. In other words, it is closely related to the traditional “slope factor” of reduced-form
term structure models, and the “conundrum” often expressed by monetary policy makers.

2

The identification problem

We use two examples to illustrate the nature of identification problems in macro-finance
models with Taylor rules. The first comes from Cochrane (2011). The second is an affine
bond-pricing model. The critical ingredient in each is what we observe. As the New
Keynesian literature, we assume that economic agents observe everything but we economists
do not. In particular, we do not observe the shock to the Taylor rule. The question is how
this affects our ability to infer the Taylor rule’s parameters. We provide answers for these
two examples and discuss some of the questions they raise.

2.1

Cochrane’s example

Cochrane’s example consists of two equations, an asset pricing relation (the Fisher equation)
and a Taylor rule (which depends here only on inflation):
it = r + Et πt+1

(1)

it = τ0 + τ πt + s2t .

(2)

Here it is the (one-period) nominal interest rate, r is the real interest rate (assumed constant
in this example), πt is the inflation rate, and s2t is a monetary policy shock (the need for
subscript 2 will be apparent shortly). The Taylor rule parameter τ > 1 describes how
aggressively the central bank responds to inflation.
The state of the economy is an n-dimensional vector xt and the Taylor rule shock is a linear
function of it: s2t = d>
2 xt . The state follows the autoregressive process
xt+1 = Axt + Bwt+1 ,

(3)

with A stable, B lower triangular with positive diagonal elements, and disturbances {wt } ∼
NID(0, I). (All vectors and matrices conform in size to the dimension of xt .) The unconditional covariance matrix of xt , Vx , is the solution to Vx = AVx A> + BB > . To maintain a
2

clear distinction between theory and empirical applications, we assume that xt is exogenous,
and the parameters A and B are part of the structure of the economy. Since xt and wt have
the same dimension, assuming that B is lower triangular is without loss of generality.
For simplicity we will assume that xt is observable in our examples, hence, it can be used
for estimation. Appendix A demonstrates that this has no bearing on the identification
problem of interest. Replacing xt with an estimate x̂t obtained through Kalman filtering
using strictly observable variables, adds noise but does not change the fundamental structure
of the identification problem.
We solve the model by standard methods; see Appendix B. Equations (1) and (2) imply
the forward-looking difference equation or rational expectations model
Et πt+1 = τ0 − r + τ πt + s2t .
The solution for inflation has the form πt = b0 + b> xt for some coefficient vector b and
intercept b0 to be determined. Then Et πt+1 = b0 + b> Et xt+1 = b0 + b> Axt . Lining up
terms, we see that b satisfies b> A = τ b> + d>
2 which we can solve for b,
−1
b> = −d>
2 (τ I − A) .

(4)

Likewise, b0 satisfies b0 = τ0 − r + τ b0 , which implies b0 = (τ0 − r)/(1 − τ ). This is the
unique stationary solution if A is stable (eigenvalues less than one in absolute value) and
τ > 1 (the so-called Taylor principle). Equation (1) then gives us it = a0 + a> xt where a
satisfies a> = b> A, which implies
−1
a> = −d>
2 (τ I − A) A.

(5)

Likewise, we can solve for the intercept, a0 = (τ0 − τ r)/(1 − τ ).
Now consider estimation. Do we have enough information to estimate the Taylor rule
parameter τ ? We might try to estimate equation (2) by running a regression of it on πt ,
with the shock s2t as the residual. The problem is evident in equation (4). There is no
sense in which we can condition on πt while allowing s2t to vary, since they both depend
on xt . We need to distinguish the effect of the state on the interest rate (represented by
τ b> ) from the effect of the shock (represented by d>
2 ). Least squares delivers a coefficient
−1
>
−1
>
>
of Var(πt ) Cov(πt , it ) = (b Vx b) b Vx a = τ + (b Vx b)−1 b> Vx d2 , which is not in general
equal to τ . Note that since the bias is not the result of the endogeneity of πt , but rather
the endogeneity of the omitted variable, s2t , other regression methods like two-stage least
squares will suffer the same fate. Instrumental variables estimation would require a valid
instrument for s2t , which we discuss below.
What about the intercept b0 ? We can estimate b0 with the mean of πt , but since it depends
on three unknown parameters, τ0 , r, and τ , it neither separately identifies τ0 and r, nor
does it help in identifying τ . (Throughout the paper we use identified to mean that we

3

can distinguish a unique value of a parameter from local alternatives, i.e., the parameter is
locally point identified .)
How then can we estimate τ ? The critical issue is whether we observe the shock s2t . If we
observe xt , we can estimate A and Vx . We can also estimate the parameter vectors a and b
connecting the interest rate and inflation to the state. If we observe the shock s2t , then we
can estimate the parameter vector d2 . We now have all the components of b in (4) but τ ,
which we can infer. The Taylor rule parameter τ is not only identified, it is over-identified.
If xt has dimension n, we have n equations that each determine τ . In addition, we could
identify r with the mean of it − πt , then given τ and r, infer the value of τ0 from either the
mean of it or πt . Note, however, that identifying τ0 is always predicated on first identifying
τ.
Suppose, however, that we do not observe s2t . This is precisely the situation considered
throughout the New Keynesian literature. If we do not observe s2t , then we cannot estimate
the coefficient vector d2 . Equation (4) then has n equations in n + 1 unknowns, the n shock
coefficients d2 and the Taylor rule parameter τ , hence it cannot be solved for a unique
values of these parameters. This is a concrete example of the identification issue faced by
all empirical work based on forward-looking models with unobserved shocks.
Cochrane’s example illustrates the challenges we might face in identifying the parameters
of the Taylor rule, but given its stylized nature – most theoretical and empirical research
uses more complicated models – one might question its generality. In particular, the shock
to the Taylor rule in Cochrane’s example is the only shock in the model, which is not a
common assumption. We know that simple models in which both supply and demand are
driven by a single shock suffer identification issues, so could the introduction of more shocks
in other equations help with identification in this case too? For example, a model with a
state-dependent real interest rate would introduce a shock in Cochrane’s first equation, so
that the example becomes
it = r + Et πt+1 + s1t
it = τ0 + τ πt + s2t ,
where r is now the mean of the real interest rate. Can the presence of this additional shock
identify the Taylor rule?
Suppose that s1t and s2t are independent – a common assumption in New Keynesian models.
If s1t is observed, we can use it as an instrument for πt to estimate the Taylor rule equation,
which gives us an estimate of τ . Given τ , we can then estimate r and τ0 as before, and
back out the shock s2t . It would seem, therefore, that the introduction of a shock to the
first equation solved the identification problem.
This example, though perfectly logical, is misleading in one respect. Identification of τ is not
a consequence of the presence of a shock in the first equation, but rather identification follows
from the restriction we placed on the Taylor rule shock, s2t , by assuming its independence
4

with s1t . Independence is just one example of a restriction on s2t that can identify τ . Later
examples will show how other restrictions can serve the same purpose.
Another general feature that this example demonstrates is that identifying τ and backing
out the unobserved shock s2t are complementary activities: if we can do one, we can do the
other. We will return to this feature in the empirical application of Section 4.

2.2

An affine extension

The identification problem arises because we cannot distinguish the pricing relation for the
nominal interest rate (1) from the Taylor rule (2). But what about long-term interest rates?
Unlike the short rate, they are not the direct focus of monetary policy, yet they will respond
to expected inflation. Can they help identify the Taylor rule?
We explore this possibility in an affine model, which has become the standard framework
for empirical term-structure research. In the macro-finance branch of this literature, the
state includes macroeconomic variables like inflation and output growth. Examples include
Ang and Piazzesi (2003), Moench (2008), Rudebusch and Wu (2008), Smith and Taylor
(2009), Chernov and Mueller (2012), Jardet, Monfort, and Pegoraro (2013), Hamilton and
Wu (2012), Joslin, Le, and Singleton (2013), and Joslin, Priebsch, and Singleton (2014).
The model starts with the specification of the log pricing kernel,
>
− log m$t+1 = a0 + a> xt + λ>
t λt /2 + λt wt+1 ,

(6)

where λt = λ0 + λxt . The nominal (log) pricing kernel m$t is connected to the real (log)
pricing kernel mt and inflation by m$t = mt − πt . The one-period nominal interest rate is
then
it = − log Et exp(mt+1 − πt+1 )
=

− log Et exp(m$t+1 )

(7)
>

= a0 + a xt .

(8)

Equations (7) and (8) are a more complex version of the Fisher equation – equation (1) –
popular in the empirical finance literature because of its ability to capture dynamic risks.
We can think of Cochrane’s example as a linear approximation of (7) with Et mt+1 equal to
a constant r, which suppresses the impact of both real and nominal risk. Note that we can
still estimate a0 with the mean of it , and a by projecting it onto the state xt .
Does the more general model in (8) help to identify parameters of a Taylor rule? Using
observations on inflation πt and the state xt , we can estimate the intercept b0 and coefficient
vector b connecting the two: πt = b0 + b> xt . Then the Taylor rule implies
it = τ0 + τ πt + s2t = τ0 + τ b0 + τ b> xt + d>
2 xt .

5

Equating our two interest rate relations then gives us a> = τ b> + d>
2 and a0 = τ0 + τ b0 .
It is clear, now, that we have the same difficulty we had in the previous example: if we do
not know the shock parameter d2 , we cannot infer τ from estimates of a and b. If xt has
dimension n, we have n equations to solve for n + 1 unknowns (d2 and τ ).
The situation is no different if we rotate the state vector so that its first element is the
inflation rate, zt = T xt = [πt x2t . . . xnt ]> . In that case, it would be tempting to
interpret an equation like (8) linking it to zt , i.e. it = ã> zt as a Taylor rule, with the
first element of ã equal to the inflation coefficient τ , and [0 ã2 . . . ãn ]> as the shock
coefficients d2 . However, the first element of ã is actually τ + d21 , and the vector we would
like to interpret as d2 is actually [0 d22 d23 . . . d2n ]. In other words, τ and d2 are still
not identified.
Sims and Zha (2006, page 57) anticipated this issue: “The Fisher relation is always lurking
in the background ... one might easily find an equation that had the form of the ... Taylor
rule ... but was something other than a policy reaction function.” Cochrane (2011, page
598) echoes the point: “If we regress interest rates on output and inflation, how do we know
that we are recovering the Fed’s policy response, and not the parameters of the consumer’s
first-order condition?” And finally, Joslin, Le, and Singleton (2013, page 583) draw a very
clear conclusion about affine macro-finance models: “the parameters of a Taylor rule are
not econometrically identified.”
We find it more natural to interpret (8) as an asset pricing relation, analogous to (1), and
complete the model by adding the Taylor rule (2). Here, too, it is evident that we cannot
distinguish the systematic component of monetary policy (represented by τ b) from shocks
to policy (represented by d2 ) without more information. Generalizing the asset pricing
relation from (1) to (8) has no effect on this conclusion.
Now we add long-term interest rates to the model. Given the pricing kernel and the linear
(h)
transition equation (3), the absence of arbitrage implies that the date-t price, qt , of an
h-period default-free pure-discount bond with a face value of 1, is log-linear in the state:
(h)

− log qt

(h)

= B0 + B (h) xt ,

(9)

where
B (h) = a> (I − A∗ )−1 (I − A∗h )
(h)

B0

(h−1)

= a0 + B0

+ B (h−1) A∗0 − B (h−1) BB > B (h−1)> /2

A∗ = A − Bλ
A∗0 = −Bλ0 ,
where A∗0 and A∗ are, respectively, the risk-neutral mean and persistence of xt associated
with the pricing kernel m$t+1 .

6

(1)

(1)

Since it = yt , we have initial conditions B0 = a0 and B (1) = a> . Continuously compounded yields for h > 1 are also linear in the state:

1  (h)
(h)
(h)
yt
= − log qt /h =
B0 + B (h) xt .
(10)
h
We saw that even though we can estimate a = B (1) by projecting it onto xt , that is not
sufficient to identify the Taylor rule parameters on which a is based. We can also estimate
(h)
B (h) by projecting hyt onto xt . But since B (h) = a> (I − A∗ )−1 (I − A∗h ) this adds nothing
to the identification problem: given an estimate for b, any configuration of the parameters
τ and d2 that leaves a unchanged, will also leave B (h) unchanged. (Note that A∗ can
be identified without reference to the Taylor rule, since A∗ = A − Bλ and values for A
and B can be identified from the the dynamics of the state and λ from the cross-section of
yields.) Information in longer-term yields may be important for efficient estimation of other
parameters of the model or the state vector when it is unobserved, but the term structure
of interest rates does not provide a solution to the problem of identifying the Taylor rule.
This is a more general property shared by the mathematical structure of forecasts. Denote
(h)
a forecast of variable zt at a horizon of h by ft = Et zt+h , where zt = a0 + a> xt , for some
(h)
arbitrary coefficients (a0 , a). The transition equation then implies ft = a0 + a> Ah xt .
(Recall that yields are just averages of forward rates, which are forecasts of future shortterm interest rates using the risk-neutral dynamics of xt .) A collection of forecasts can be
used the same way we used yields. Or we could add forecasts to our collection of observables.
Chernov and Mueller (2012), Chun (2011), and Kim and Orphanides (2012) are examples
that use survey forecasts in state-space frameworks. The forecasts add useful information
in all of these applications, but they do not resolve the identification problem.

3

Macro-finance models with Taylor rules

Both Cochrane’s original example and the affine term-structure extension of that model
have a reduced-form quality. That is, given an abstract specification of the pricing kernel,
equilibrium will impose restrictions on observables. But the dependence of the pricing
kernel on deeper parameters of preferences and technologies is left unspecified. Macrofinance models often include this additional structure. Could that added structure provide
the basis for identifying the Taylor rule?
We use two representative-agent examples, one without any monetary non-neutralities and
one with a Phillips curve, and a so-called structural VAR – a time-series model with parameters identified by imposing specific economic structure – to explore this question. We
find that just like the more reduced-form examples above, deeper structural models alone
will not restrict the Taylor rule shock, hence will not provide the identifying information
we seek.
7

3.1

A representative-agent model without frictions

A growing body of macro-finance research combines representative-agent asset pricing with
a rule governing monetary policy. Gallmeyer, Hollifield, Palomino, and Zin (2007) is a good
example. We simplify their model, using power utility instead of Epstein-Zin recursive
preferences, and a constant-volatility transition equation for the state.
The model consists of the previous bond-pricing relation, equation (7), plus
mt = −ρ − αgt

(11)

gt = g + s1t

(12)

it = τ0 + τ πt + s2t .

(13)

Again, equations (7) and (13) mirror the two equations of Cochrane’s example. Equations
(11) and (12) characterize the real pricing kernel based on a representative-agent’s optimization problem and the equilibrium condition in a frictionless endowment economy. The
first is the logarithm of the marginal rate of substitution of a power utility agent with time
preference parameter ρ, relative risk aversion parameter α, and log consumption growth gt .
The second connects fluctuations in the agent’s log consumption growth to the growth of a
random endowment g + s1t with mean growth of g. As in Section 2, the state x obeys the
transition equation (3) and shocks are linear functions of it: sj = d>
j x for j = 1, 2.
Once again, the solution combines equilibrium asset pricing with a forward-looking difference equation. We posit a solution of the form πt = b0 + b> xt , then solve (7) to get
it = a0 + a> xt ,

(14)

with
a0 = ρ + αg + b0 − Vm /2
>
a> = (αd>
1 + b )A
>
>
Vm = (αd>
1 + b )BB (αd1 + b).

Note the obvious similarity of the short rate equation (14) and the example of Section 2.2.
Equating (13) and (14) gives us
>
>
>
(ρ + αg + b0 − Vm /2) + (αd>
1 + b )Axt = (τ0 + τ b0 ) + (τ b + d2 )xt .

Lining up similar terms, we have b0 = (τ0 − ρ − αg + Vm /2)/(1 − τ ) and
>
>
>
(αd>
1 + b )A = τ b + d2

⇒

>
−1
b> = (αd>
1 A − d2 )(τ I − A) .

As before, this gives us a unique stationary solution when A is stable and τ > 1.
Now consider identification. Suppose that along with the state xt , we also observe the
interest rate it , the inflation rate πt , and log consumption growth gt , but not the shock
8

s2t to the Taylor rule. From observations of the state, we can estimate the autoregressive
matrix A, and from observations of consumption growth we can estimate its mean g and
the shock coefficients d1 . We can also estimate a and b by projecting it and πt onto the
state. With a and b known, that leaves us to solve
a> = τ b> + d>
2

(15)

for the Taylor rule’s inflation parameter τ and shock coefficients d2 : n equations in the n+1
unknowns (τ, d2 ). The identification problem is the same as in Cochrane’s original example;
without further restrictions, the Taylor rule coefficient τ is not identified. Similarly, the
mean of it − πt will identify ρ + αg − Vm /2, but the value of τ0 cannot be identified from b0
without first identifying τ .
We can, however, identify the monetary policy rule if we place one or more restrictions on
its shock coefficients d2 . One such case was mentioned earlier: choose d1 and d2 so that the
shocks s1t and s2t are independent. We will return to this shortly. Another example is a
zero in the vector d2 – what is traditionally termed an exclusion restriction. Suppose the
jth element of d2 is zero. Then the jth element of (15) is
aj

= τ bj .

As long as bj 6= 0, this determines τ . Given τ , and our estimates of a and b, we can now
solve (15) for the remaining components of d2 .
We can do the same thing with any restriction on d2 . Suppose d>
2 e = 0 for some known
vector e. Then we find τ from a> e = τ b> e. Any such restriction on the shock coefficient
d2 allows us to identify the Taylor rule. An exclusion restriction sets the jth element of e
equal to 1 and the others equal to 0. Independence of s1t and s2t is also a special case with
e = Vx d1 . Likewise, independence of the innovations to these shocks is a linear restriction
on d2 with e = BB > d1 . These restrictions have no particular economic rationale at this
point, but they illustrate how independence works as an identifying assumption. Similar
“orthogonality conditions” for unobserved shocks appear throughout applied econometrics.
In the New Keynesian literature (discussed below), the shocks are typically low-order ARMA
models, assumed to be independent of the rest of the model. Independence serves as a set
of restrictions on the shocks that identify the model parameters, including the parameters
of the monetary policy rule.
Cochrane’s example has the shocks to consumption growth turned off: d1 = 0. But as we
now know, since this has nothing to do with s2t , the identification conclusion is the same.
We need one restriction on d2 to identify the Taylor rule parameter τ . The general lesson is
clear: Taylor rule identification requires a restriction that applies to the Taylor rule shock.
Adding more structure to the other equations is irrelevant unless that structure implies such
a restriction.

9

3.2

A model with a Phillips curve

Monetary policy could affect real variables such as consumption or output growth, as well
as nominal variables such as the interest rate and inflation. To explore whether such nonneutralities impact the Taylor rule identification problem, we add a Phillips curve to the
representative agent model of Section 3.1 and an output gap to the Taylor rule. As a result,
output growth gt becomes endogenous. New Keynesian models with similar features are
described by Carrillo, Feve, and Matheron (2007), Canova and Sala (2009), Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005), Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1999), Cochrane (2011), Gali
(2008), Iskrev (2010), King (2000), Shapiro (2008), Smets and Wouters (2007), Woodford
(2003), and many others.
As in Gallmeyer, Hollifield, and Zin (2005), our model consists of the pricing relation in
equation (7), the real pricing kernel in equation (11), and
πt = βEt πt+1 + κgt + s1t

(16)

it = τ0 + τ1 πt + τ2 gt + s2t .

(17)

The first equation is a Phillips curve. The second is a Taylor rule, which now includes an
output growth term. In addition, we have the transition equation (3) for the state and the
shocks sjt = d>
j xt for j = 1, 2.
We now have a two-dimensional rational expectations model in the forward-looking variables
πt and gt . The solution of such models is described in Appendix B. As others have noted,
the conditions for a unique stationary solution are more stringent than before. We will
assume that they are satisfied.
To solve the model we guess a solution for the two endogenous variables πt = b0 + b> xt and
gt = c0 + c> xt (see Appendix B). Then the pricing relation gives us
it = ρ + αc0 + b0 − Vm /2 + a> xt
with a> = (αc> + b> )A and Vm = (αc> + b> )BB > (αc + b). If we equate this to the Taylor
rule and collect terms, we have b0 = (τ0 − ρ − αc0 + Vm /2 + τ2 c0 )/(1 − τ1 ) and
a> = τ1 b> + τ2 c> + d>
2.

(18)

Similarly, the Phillips curve implies
b> = βb> A + κc> + d>
1.

(19)

The intercept terms are b0 = [τ0 − ρ + Vm /2]/[1 − τ1 + α(1 − β)/κ − τ2 (1 − β)/κ], and
c0 = [τ0 − ρ + Vm /2]/[(1 − τ1 )κ/(1 − β) + α − τ2 ]. Our goal is to solve these equations for
the Taylor rule parameters (τ0 , τ1 , τ2 ).
Along with the state xt , assume we observe the interest rate it , the inflation rate πt , and
log consumption growth gt , but not the shocks (s1t , s2t ) to the Phillips curve and Taylor
10

rule, respectively. From the observables, we can estimate the autoregressive matrix A, the
coefficient vectors (a, b, c), and intercepts (a0 , b0 , c0 ). In equation (18), representing the
Taylor rule, the unknowns are the policy parameters (τ1 , τ2 ) and the coefficient vector d2
for the shock. If we do not observe the shock, we need two restrictions on its coefficient
vector d2 to identify (τ1 , τ2 ).
Despite the additional economic structure, the logic for identification is the same: we need
restrictions on the shock coefficients d2 to identify the Taylor rule. All that changes is the
number of restrictions we need. Since the Taylor rule has two parameters, we now need two
restrictions.
The same logic applies to identifying the parameters of the Phillips curve. If we do not
observe the shock s1t , then two restrictions are needed to identify the parameters β and κ.
The identification problem for the Phillips curve has the same structure as the Taylor rule,
although in practice they have been treated separately. See the extensive discussions in
Canova and Sala (2009), Gali and Gertler (1999), Iskrev (2010), Nason and Smith (2008),
and Shapiro (2008).
Standard implementations of New Keynesian models typically use independent AR(1) or
ARMA(1,1) shocks. See, for example, Gali (2008, ch 3) and Smets and Wouters (2007). In
our framework, an independent AR(1) amounts to n − 1 zero restrictions on the coefficient
vectors dj : none of the other state variables affect the shock. That is generally sufficient to
identify the structural parameters of the model, including those of the Taylor rule. With
respect to the Taylor rule, each element j for which d2j = 0 leads, via equation (18), to an
equation of the form aj = τ1 bj + τ2 cj . As long as (bj , cj ) 6= (0, 0), any two such equations
will identify the Taylor rule parameters (τ1 , τ2 ). Similar logic applies to the Phillips curve.

3.3

Vector autoregressions

There is an influential body of research that uses vector autoregressions (VARs) to characterize the dynamic effects of exogenous shocks to the economy, often interpreted as shocks
to monetary policy. See, for example, the many studies cited by Christiano, Eichenbaum,
and Evans (1999, Sections 3 and 4) and Watson (1994, Section 4). As Watson (1994, page
2898) puts it: “[VARs] provide answers to the ‘impulse’ and ‘propagation’ questions often
asked by macroeconomists.”
This approach to identification of shocks is different than what we have discussed so far.
But since VAR models fit nicely into a state-space framework, we can compare the two
approaches directly, and ask whether VAR identification can also be interpreted as Taylor
rule identification. That is, will the identification of a so-called policy shock in the context
of a VAR correspond to the identification of the Taylor rule shock s2t , and hence solve the
problem posed by Cochrane?

11

A dynamic model in applied monetary economics might be expressed as a system of equations of the form
Dyt = C1 yt−1 + wt ,

(20)

where yt is a vector of observable macroeconomic variables that includes the object of
policy (such as the short-rate in the Taylor rule example), wt is a vector of fundamental
economic shocks of the same dimension, {wt } ∼ NID(0, I), and D is nonsingular. (Note
that for simplicity, we arbitrarily truncate the number of the lags in (20) after the first and
we suppress intercept terms, but the extension to any finite-order of lags with intercepts
is straightforward.) By multiplying (20) by D−1 , this model can be written as a vector
autoregression (VAR),
yt = A1 yt−1 + ut ,

(21)

where A1 = D−1 C1 , {ut } ∼ NID(0, Σ), and Σ = D−1 (D−1 )> . Standard regression methods
provide estimates of A1 and Σ. Note, however, that each element of ut is now a linear
combination of all the fundamental shocks, wt . The dynamic response of yt+j , j ≥ 0, to a
unit change in the exogenous shock wt , other things equal, is given by Aj1 D−1 . But since
D is not separately identified from A1 and Σ, these fundamental impulse responses also
remain unidentified unless we impose more structure on D.
Identifying restrictions imposed on D can take a variety of forms. A popular choice is a
recursive identification scheme that assumes D is lower triangular. But one might also
consider other restrictions on D such as the long-run restrictions of Blanchard and Quah
(1989), or the sign restrictions of Uhlig (2005). And for some questions it is sufficient to
restrict just certain blocks of D, rather than the entire matrix. For our purposes, these
will all work in much the same way: they result in a VAR that identifies the endogenous
impulse response to a fundamental exogenous shock.
To see the relationship to Taylor rule identification, consider Cochrane’s example of Section
2.1. Define the vector of endogenous variables yt = [πt it ]> . The equilibrium restrictions in
(4) and (5) imply that yt is linear in xt ,
 >  

b
−d>
(τ I − A)−1
2
yt = Rxt , R =
=
.
(22)
−1
a>
−d>
2 (τ I − A) A
For simplicity, assume that the dimension of xt , is the same as yt . The dynamics of xt in
equation (3) imply an equation for yt of same form as (21),
yt = (RAR−1 )yt−1 + RBwt .
Note that without further restrictions on the model, changes to either shock, w1t or w2t ,
affect both πt and it directly, and the impulse responses of πt+j and it+j , j ≥ 0, through
(RAR−1 )j RB. In other words, there is nothing in the model that implies that RB has the
lower-triangular structure commonly used in VAR shock identification.
12

Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1999, Section 6) make a similar point: “Why did we
not display or interpret the [relevant equation of a VAR as a monetary policy rule]? The
answer is that these parameters are not easily interpretable.” Why, you might ask? They
continue: “In [two of our] examples the decision maker reacts to a variable that is not in the
econometrician’s data set. The policy parameters are a convolution of the parameters of the
rule ... and the projection of the missing data onto the econometrician’s data set.” That’s
the essence of our problem: “the missing data” (the shock s2t ) is not in “the econometrician’s
data set.” As a consequence, the “convolutions” we see in a VAR will be the regression
matrix A1 = RAR−1 and the covariance matrix Σ = RBB > R> .
The structure of the Taylor rule in (2), leads Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1999,
Section 4) to consider what seems like a natural definition of a “policy shock” in a VAR
model: the change in the policy variable that is unrelated to changes in other endogenous
variables. In the context of Cochrane’s example, the policy variable is it and the other
endogenous variable is πt , so that the policy shock is defined such that the upper-right
element of RB is zero. This associates the policy shock with the structural shock w2t , which
will now have a direct effect only on the policy variable it , and not the other endogenous
variable πt . The other structural shock, w1t , can have a direct effect on both variables. Note
that the policy shock will still have an effect on the dynamics of πt+j , j > 0, through the
upper-right element of the matrix (RAR−1 )j , since assuming that RB is lower triangular
does not imply that RAR−1 is also lower triangular.
It is important to note that this definition of a policy shock is not an implication of the
Taylor rule in (2), which places no restrictions on the correlation structure between the
Taylor rule shock, s2t , and inflation, πt . The VAR definition of a policy shock, therefore, is
an additional assumption.
Does this additional assumption identify τ and d2 ? The answer is no, at least not without
more information. None of the VAR parameters correspond directly to the Taylor rule
parameters. The VAR will result in estimates of the matrices A1 and Σ, which in theory
are both functions of the deeper structural parameters, τ , d2 , A, and B: A1 is equal to
RAR−1 , the lower-triangular Choleski decomposition of Σ is now equal RB, and R depends
on τ , d2 , and A through (22). But we cannot recover these structural parameters from VAR
estimates alone, hence we cannot identify τ and d2 without more information.

4

Empirical application

The analysis thus far gives us a deeper understanding of how models can fail to meet
the requirements for Taylor rule identification. Although it does not lead directly to some
optimal solution to this fundamental problem, it does give us a framework for understanding
and evaluating the content of any particular identification scheme. We need to restrict the
factor loadings on the Taylor rule shock, d2 , without much theoretical guidance. It would
13

seem sensible, therefore, to find restrictions that are consistent with as broad a class of
theoretical models as possible. In this section we detail how this can be done in the context
of a macro term structure model and demonstrate how long-run neutrality of the policy
shock for both real quantities and real asset prices provide exactly the type of robust
identification we seek. We begin by estimating an affine macro term structure model, then
we show how long-run neutrality restrictions lead to identification. Finally, we explore the
empirical properties of our identified Taylor rule and the unobservable policy shock.

4.1

Affine term structure estimation

We estimate an affine term structure model as outlined in Section 2.2 using quarterly US
data from 1982Q3 to 2017Q2. Along with discount bond yields of various maturities, the
system of equations is expanded to include two key macroeconomic variables, real GDP
growth and inflation, as in a wide variety of macro term-structure models. The sample
period is chosen to be sufficiently far from Volcker’s regime shift to allow for short-term
adjustments and to establish credibility for Taylor-rule-based monetary policy. We use continuously compounded default-free pure-discount bond yields as measured by Gürkaynak,
Sack, and Wright (2007), along with real GDP growth rates from the National Income and
Product Accounts, and core CPI inflation from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Figures 1
displays these standard data for our sample period.
GMM estimation of the parameters of this model is detailed in Appendix C. The results are
summarized in Table 1. Our system of equations has seven variables: the nominal interest
rate, 4 longer nominal yields corresponding to maturities of 8, 20, 28, and 40 quarters,
real GDP growth, and inflation. We assume that these seven variables are driven by four
common factors, i.e., n = 4. The linear relationships between yields and the state variable
is given in Section 2.2. In addition, we assume that the macro factors are also linear
functions of the state variable: inflation is given by πt = b0 + b> xt and GDP growth is
given by gt = c0 + c> xt . Since these are unrestricted relationships, our reduced-form model
is consistent with a wide variety of both New Keynesian and neoclassical structural macro
models.
The affine term structure model has 45 parameters: 26 parameters governing the dynamics
of the state space (A and B), 9 more parameters governing the nominal pricing kernel (A∗ ,
a0 and λ0 ), and 10 more parameters governing the macro variables (b0 , c0 , b, and c). These
parameters are just-identified using 45 first- and second-moment restrictions implied by the
theory. Since the goal in this empirical exercise is Taylor rule identification rather than
an exhaustive analysis of the term structure, we do not impose additional over-identifying
restrictions on our estimation.
The estimated parameter values have a number of noteworthy features. The risk-neutral
dynamics encoded in the non-zero elements of A∗ , are more persistent than the actual
dynamics of the statespace in A. The absolute values of the 4 eigenvalues of A, which
14

govern the persistence in the process for xt , are 0.9761, 0.8648, 0.6329, and 0.6329 (the
last pair corresponds to complex conjugates). The diagonals of A∗ are 0.9862, 0.9250,
0.8609, and 0.6775, and they are very precisely estimated – a consequence of the additional
information in the cross-equation restrictions implied by the absence of arbitrage – and all
significantly different than zero.
Many of the off-diagonal elements of the matrix B are significantly different from zero,
suggesting that our vector of state variables does not have orthogonal innovations. This
will play an important role when we explore dynamic correlations below.
The inflation rate has significant and positive loadings (the values of b) for all 4 factors.
On the other hand, real GDP growth has significant and positive loadings (the values of c)
for only the first three factors. This suggests that the model is capturing a purely nominal
feature in the data.
The average price of risk, λ0 , appears to be different from zero for three of the four factors:
the second factor (the second most persistent under the risk-neutral distribution), is both
small and statistically insignificant. The average price of risk for the first factor (the most
persistent factor) is negative and close to zero, but it is statistically significant, whereas two
less persistent factors have average prices of risk that are larger and with opposite signs.

4.2

Identification through long-run neutrality restrictions

As we have seen, when we add a Taylor rule to the model, our just-identified system becomes
under-identified, and we need to add identifying restrictions. We use the version of the rule
that depends on both inflation and real GDP growth given in equation (17). We need to
impose at least two more restrictions on the parameters of our empirical model to identify
the two key parameters, τ1 and τ2 .
Macro models that include a shock to the Taylor rule do not attach any deep structural
interpretation to that shock. Conceptually, there are many possibilities that seem reasonable. For example, real-time measurement error in inflation and output, a high-frequency
risk premium (the policy rate is typically an overnight federal funds rate whereas macro
models work at a quarterly frequency), changes in the preferences of the median voter on
policy-setting committees like the FOMC, or the market microstructure of interactions between the central bank and its network of private brokers, all sound like plausible models
of a policy shock. However, each of these structural models is likely to result in a shock
that has a different relationship with the state variable, and hence, a different impact on
both macro variable and asset prices. Since we are not imposing much economic structure
beyond the absence of arbitrage on our model, we would like the identification restrictions
we introduce to be equally robust. We would ideally like our reduced-form model to be
consistent with as large a set of structural models as possible.

15

The first restriction we impose is a standard assumption in both New Keynesian and neoclassical models: shocks to monetary policy may have short-run real consequences but they
do not have a permanent impact on the level of real output. This is analogous to the longrun restriction used in structural VAR models popularized by Blanchard and Quah (1989).
Denote the log of the level of real GDP as yt and note that in our specification, yt is a
unit-root process, yt = yt−1 + gt , which implies
yt+n = yt−1 + gt + gt+1 + · · · + gt+n
= yt−1 + nc0 + c> [xt + xt+1 + · · · + xt+n ].
The conditional covariance of gt+j and s2t for j ≥ 0 is
Covt−1 (gt+j , s2t ) = Et−1 [c> xt+j x>
t d2 ]
= c> Aj BB > d2 ,

(23)

which implies
lim Covt−1 (yt+n , s2t )

n→∞

=

P∞

> j
>
j=0 c A BB d2

= c> (I − A)−1 BB > d2 .
The assumption that this long-run covariance is zero implies a linear restriction on d2 ,
c> (I − A)−1 BB > d2 = 0,

(24)

that we can use to help identify the parameters of the Taylor rule. In principal, it would
seem reasonable to add other real quantities to the model, e.g., consumption and investment, and impose similar restrictions on their long-run response to s2t . But given the high
correlation of other real variables with real output, such restrictions would not add much
new information beyond (24). Instead, we make use of our pricing-kernel model and explore
asset prices as the source for additional identifying restrictions.
The second restriction we impose is the natural analog to (24) applied to real asset prices:
shocks to monetary policy may have short-run real consequences for asset markets, but they
do not have a permanent impact on the level of real asset prices. Since we have already
assumed that long-run real quantities are unaffected by the policy shock s2t , what this
assumption adds is a restriction on the real marginal utility of wealth. Following Alvarez
and Jermann (2005), Hansen and Scheinkman (2009), and Hansen (2012), we decompose
shocks to the real marginal utility of wealth, i.e., the real pricing kernel, into permanent
and transitory components. In Appendix D we detail this decomposition for our affine
model. We show that the permanent component of the real pricing kernel is also a linear
function of the state, xt . The assumption that the current policy shock is uncorrelated
with the permanent component of the real marginal utility of wealth implies another linear
restriction d2 that takes the form
−1
>
[(b> − a> )(I − A∗ )−1 − λ>
0 B ]BB d2 = 0.

(25)

Note that given the dependence on A∗ and λ0 , a well-specified pricing-kernel model is
essential to the construction of this second restriction.
16

4.3

Empirical properties of the Taylor rule

Given these two additional restrictions, we can identify the Taylor rule parameters, τ0 ,
τ1 , and τ2 , as well as the factor loadings for the shock to the Taylor rule, d2 . Note that
once we have identified τ1 and τ2 , identification of τ0 and d2 follows from equation (17):
τ0 = a0 − τ1 b0 − τ2 c0 and d2 = a − τ1 b − τ2 c. Estimates of these parameters are presented
in Table 1.
It is both reassuring and surprising that although we have adopted a novel approach for
identification, the estimates for the Taylor rule parameters are quite conventional. The
coefficient on πt is 2.5771, which safely satisfies the Taylor-principal stability condition,
τ1 > 1. It is larger than Taylor’s original specification of τ1 = 1.5, suggesting a somewhat
more aggressive policy. Our estimate of τ2 is 0.3972, which is quite close to Taylor’s value
of τ2 = 0.5, however, the units are difficult to compare directly as we use output growth
rather than deviations from a potential-output trend.
The estimates for the factor loadings for the policy shock, d2 , are significant for only three
of the four factors. The loading on the first (the most persistent) factor is small and
insignificant, which stands in contrast to real GDP growth which had a significant loading
on that factor, but not the fourth. Again, this reinforces the interpretation that one of the
dimensions of the model is purely nominal.
To get a sense of the sign and the magnitude of these policy shocks, the upper panel of
Figure 2 plots the Taylor rule with and without the shock s2t . We see large and persistent
negative shocks in the early 1990s followed by large and persistent positive shocks in the
late 1990s. The zero lower bound shows up as large positive shocks in 2009-2010, followed
by persistent negative values for the shock over the last five years of our sample.
Since we have identified the Taylor rule shock as part of our dynamic macro-term structure
model, we can use that model to get better understanding of how policy shocks affect the
economy. The Taylor rule shock is affected by the entire vector of innovations, wt . To
measure the average dynamic response of an endogenous variable, say πt = b0 + b> xt , to a
Taylor rule shock, s2t = d>
2 xt , we calculate a dynamic covariance
Covt−1 (πt+j , s2t ) = Covt−1 (b> xt+j , d>
2 xt )
= b> Aj BB 0 d2 ,
for j ≥ 0. In Table 3 we graph this covariance – in the form of a correlation coefficient –
for GDP growth, inflation, the short rate, the two-year and ten-year discount bond yields,
and the ten-year forward premium, i.e., the difference between the ten-year forward rate
and the short rate. (The factor loadings for the ten-year forward rate are B (40) − B (39) .)
GDP growth has a small positive correlation with the policy shock, but it is neither significant nor persistent. Similarly, inflation has a small negative correlation that is marginally
17

significant at short horizons, but which also dies out quickly. Medium-term bond yields – in
this case the two-year yield – has virtually no correlation with the policy shock. However, at
both the short and the long ends of the maturity structure, the response is quite different.
The short rate has a significant positive correlation and the long yield – in this case the
10-year yield has a significant negative correlation with the shock to the Taylor rule, that
is still significant at a one-year horizon. The combined effect is a near perfect negative
correlation between the slope of the yield curve – measure here by the 10-year forward
premium – and the monetary policy shock, and this correlation dies out even more slowly,
as depicted in the lower right panel of Figure 3. In other words, the policy shock exhibits a
strong negative correlation with the risk premium on long bonds. A positive shock to the
Taylor rule results in a higher short-rate and a lower forward rate on long bonds.
Without a structural model linking risk premiums to Taylor rule shocks we can only speculate on the source of these strong correlations. However, these results do cast some light on
the so-called conundrum that has puzzled policy makers in the past: long rates often move
in ways that appear disconnected from the policy rate. Alan Greenspan (1994) attributed
the increase in long yields in early 1994 to expectations of increases in future values of gt
and πt : “In early February, we thought long-term rates would move a little higher as we
tightened. The sharp jump in [long] rates that occurred appeared to reflect the dramatic
rise in market expectations of economic growth and associated concerns about possible inflation pressures.” What Figure 2 suggests is that since the tightening in late 1993 and
early 1994 was warranted by values of GDP growth and inflation alone, i.e., small values of
s2t , monetary policy was not a big contributor to the risk premiums that were driving the
long-end of the yield curve.
A decade later Greenspan (2005) once again voiced puzzlement regarding the behavior of
long yields: “Long-term interest rates have trended lower in recent months even as the
Federal Reserve has raised the level of the target federal funds rate by 150 basis points.
Historically, even distant forward rates have tended to rise in association with monetary
policy tightening... For the moment, the broadly unanticipated behavior of world bond
markets remains a conundrum.” What Figure 2 suggests once again is that the monetary
policy tightening of 2004-05 was warranted by values of GDP growth and inflation alone.
The implied small values of s2t suggests that whatever was driving risk premiums at the
long-end of the yield curve, it had little to do with policy shocks.
In contrast, Bernanke (2013) expresses a greater appreciation for the relationship between
risk premiums and the large positive Taylor rule shocks implied by the zero lower bound
in 2009-10: “Two changes in the nature of this interest rate risk have probably contributed
to a general downward movement of the term premium in recent years. First, the volatility
of Treasury yields has declined, in part because short-term rates are pressed up against
the zero lower bound and are expected to remain there for some time to come. Second,
the correlation of bond prices and stock prices has become increasingly negative over time,
implying that bonds have become more valuable as a hedge against risks from holding other
assets.” Although it is not obvious from just looking at the lower panel of Figure 1 that risk
18

premiums on long bonds were small around this period, it is true that on average, positive
values of s2t are coincident with small values of risk premiums.
Backus and Wright (2007) summarize the situation: “We think the evidence points to a
declining term premium as the primary source of the recent fall in long forward rates.... In
this sense, we follow a long line of work in suggesting that expectations-hypothesis intuition,
based on constant term premiums, is likely to be misleading not only in this case but more
generally.” And they call for a research program to fill this gap in our knowledge: “The next
step, in our view, should be to develop models in which macroeconomic policy and behavior
can be tied more directly to the properties of interest rates. We might want to know, for
example, whether changes in the volatility of output or in the nature or communication of
monetary policy had an impact on the behavior of long rates in the recent past. Neither of
this is possible with existing models.” The work summarized in this section is a small step
in this direction.

5

Conclusion

Identification is always an issue in applied economic work, perhaps nowhere more so than
in the study of monetary policy. That is still true. We have shown, however, that (i) the
problem of identifying the systematic component of monetary policy (the Taylor rule parameters) in New Keynesian and macro-finance models stems from our inability to observe
the nonsystematic component (the shock to the rule) and (ii) the solution is to impose
restrictions on the shock.
We estimate a macro-finance term structure model and use it, along with long-run restrictions that are consistent with a wide-variety of both New Keynesian and Classical monetary
models, to identify the parameters of the Taylor rule and the process for the shocks to this
policy rule. We find that the shock has little or no effect on real GDP growth, and only a
small effect on inflation. However, it has a more substantial effect on the short interest rate
and a persistent negative correlation with risk premiums at the long end of the maturity
structure. To arrive at a deeper understanding of the causes and consequences of these
empirical facts, the challenge we now face is to develop plausible structural models of the
sources of both policy shocks and risk premiums that are capable of accounting for the
strong connection we see in the data between the Taylor rule shock and the slope of the
yield curve.

19

A

State-space models and Kalman filtering

Our examples assume that the state is observable and can form the basis for econometric
estimation. But what happens if we observe the state indirectly? Or observe only a noisy
signal of the state? These questions lead us to state-space models, in which we add to the
transition equation for the state a so-called measurement or observation equation connecting
an unseen state to a collection of observable variables.
State-space models provide a method for estimating the unobserved state through Kalman
filtering. Does this affect any of our conclusions about identification? The answer is no. The
Kalman filter is a recursive algorithm for computing the distribution of x from observations
of y, and through x the distribution of y; see, among many others, Anderson and Moore
(1979, Chapters 3-4), Boyd (2009, Lecture 8), and Hansen and Sargent (2013, Chapter 8).
The classic state-space framework consists of the transition equation (3) and a related
measurement equation for observables,
vt = C0 + Cxt + Dut .

(26)

The measurement errors ut ∼ NID(0, I) are independent of the w’s.
A state-space model is a description of the distribution of observables v, but this distribution
is invariant to linear transformations of the state x. Consider a model with state x̃ = T x,
where T is an arbitrary square matrix of full rank. The transformed model is
e t + Bw
e t+1
x̃t+1 = T AT −1 x̃t + T Bwt+1 = Ax̃
−1
e x̃t + Dut ,
vt = C0 + CT x̃t + Dut = C0 + C
e = T AT −1 , B
e = T B, and C
e = CT −1 . The observational equivalence of models
where A
based on x and x̃ raises new identification issues that are not related to those we discussed
earlier. These issues are generally managed by choosing a canonical form. See, for example,
the extensive discussions in De Schutter (2000), Gevers and Wertz (1984), and Hinrichsen
and Pratzel-Wolters (1989). Variants of this approach are used in dynamic factor models
(Bai and Wang, 2015; Bernanke, Boivin, and Eliasz, 2005; Boivin and Giannoni, 2006;
Stock and Watson, 2012) and affine term structure models (Joslin, Singleton, and Zhu,
2011). Given a canonical form we can generally estimate the matrices (A, B, C0 , C, D).
One of the intermediate outputs of the estimation process described below is a series of
estimates (conditional means) of the state:
x̂t|s = E(xt |v s ),
where v s = (vs , vs−1 , ...) is a history of measurements. The Kalman filter produces, among
other things, x̂t|t and x̂t|t−1 . Given such estimates of the state, we can identify the parameters of a forward-looking model just as in the case of observable xt . The errors in these
20

estimates are orthogonal to observed variables by construction, so projections of observables
on estimates of the state produce the same parameter values in population.
Note that our theoretical models will restrict C0 and C to be functions of deeper parameters. Standard Kalman filtering arguments lead to a multivariate normal one-step-ahead
conditional distribution, p(vt+1 |v t ; A, B, C0 , C, D), for the observable vector
vt+1 |v t ∼ N (C0 + C x̂t+1|t , CΣt C > + D),
where
x̂t|s = E(xt |v s )
= (A − Kt C)x̂t|t−1 + Kt vt
Kt = AΣt C > (CΣt C > + D)−1
Σt+1 = AΣt A> + BB > − AΣt C > (CΣt C > + D)−1 CΣt A,
and x̂1|0 is set equal to 0, the mean of the ergodic distribution of xt , and Σ0 = Var(x)
its variance, Var(x) = AVar(x)A> + BB > . From these conditional distributions, we can
construct the likelihood function for a sample of size T :
p(v T |A, B, C0 , C, D) = ΠTt=1 p(vt+1 |v t ; A, B, C0 , C, D).
In term-structure applications, vt is partitioned into a vector of macroeconomic variables,
zt , whose relationship to xt is unconstrained, and a vector of multi-period bond yields, yt ,
whose relationship to xt is constrained by the absence of arbitrage across bonds of different
maturity. We partition the parameters of the observation equation, C0 , C, and D, into C0z ,
Cz , Dz , C0y , Cy , and Dy , corresponding to the partition of vt . Since the parameters in C0z ,
Cz , and Dz are unconstrained by the term-structure model, they could be estimated by MLE
without further complication. When xt is unobservable, the information provided by bond
yields, yt , will be helpful nonetheless. However, the elements of C0y and Cy , are nonlinear
functions of A, B, and the parameters of the pricing kernel in equation (6). Estimation of
the full system, therefore, requires imposing no-arbitrage restrictions on C0y and Cy .
The free parameters of the model are then a0 , C0z , Cz , A, and the non-zero elements of B,
A∗ and D, which implies a likelihood function
p(v T |a0 , C0z , Cz , A, B, A∗ , D) = ΠTt=1 p(vt+1 |v t ; a0 , C0z , Cz , A, B, A∗ , D),
that can form the basis for method of moments and maximum likelihood estimation or a
Bayesian posterior distribution.

21

B

Solutions of forward-looking models

Consider the class of forward-looking linear rational expectations models,
zt = ΛEt zt+1 + Dxt
xt+1 = Axt + Bwt+1 .
Here xt is the state, Λ is stable (eigenvalues less than one in absolute value), A is also
stable, and wt ∼ NID(0, I). The goal is to solve the model and link zt to the state xt .
(For simplicity, we have suppressed intercept terms so zt and xt should be interpreted as
deviations from long-run means.)
One-dimensional case. If zt is a scalar we have
zt = λEt zt+1 + d> xt ,

(27)

for a some vector d. Repeated substitution gives us
zt =

∞
X

j >

>

λ d Et xt+j = d

∞
X

λj Aj xt = d> (I − λA)−1 xt .

j=0

j=0

The last step follows from the matrix geometric series if A is stable and |λ| < 1. Under
these conditions, this is the unique stationary solution.
The same solution follows from the method of undetermined coefficients, but the rationale
for stability is less obvious. We guess zt = h> xt for some vector h. The difference equation
tells us
h> xt = h> λAxt + d> xt .
Collecting coefficients of xt gives us h> = d> (I − λA)−1 .
This model is close enough to the examples of Sections 2 and 3 that we can illustrate their
identification issues in a more abstract setting. Suppose we observe the state xt and the
endogenous variable zt , but not the shock d> xt . Then we can estimate A and h. Equation
(27) then gives us
h> = λh> A + d> .
If x has dimension n, we have n equations in the n + 1 unknowns (λ, d); we need one
restriction on d to identify the parameter λ.
Multi-dimensional case. If zt is a vector, as in Section 3.2, repeated substitution gives us
zt =

∞
X

Λj DAj xt .

j=0

22

That gives us the solution zt = Hxt where
H =

∞
X

Λj DAj

= D + ΛHA

j=0

or
vec(H) = (I − A> ⊗ Λ)−1 vec(D).
See, for example, Anderson, McGrattan, Hansen, and Sargent (1996, Section 6) or Klein
(2000, Appendix B). The same sources also explain how to solve rational expectations
models with endogenous state variables.

C

Macro Term Structure Model Estimation

We adopt a canonical form of a state space model in which an unobserved state, xt , follows
the process
xt = Axt−1 + Bwt ,
where wt ∼ iid N (0, I), and B is a lower triangular matrix with positive elements on its
diagonal. Calendar time from t to t + 1 is a quarter of a year (3 months). The observed
macro variables are inflation, πt , and GDP growth, gt , which are linear functions of the
unobserved state:
πt = b0 + b> xt
gt = c0 + c> xt .
Bond yields also depend linearly on xt , and their loadings satisfy the arbitrage-free restrictions given in equation (10).
Following Hamilton and Wu (2012), we assume that bond yields for n = 1, i.e., the short
rate, and n = 8, 20, 28, where maturity is also measured in quarters, can be used to identify
(8)
(20)
(28)
the state. Stack these 4 variables into the vector zt = [it yt yt
yt ]> . Rewrite the
dynamics for the state as
zt = R0 + Rxt = R0 + R(Axt−1 + Bwt )
= R̃0 + Ãzt−1 + B̃wt ,
(8)

(20)

(28)

(28)

where R0 = [a0 B0 /8 B0 /20 B0 /28], R = [a B (8) /8 B (20) /20 B (28) /28]> ,
Ã = RAR−1 , R̃0 = (I − Ã)R0 , B̃ = RB, and we adopt the normalization a> = [1 1 1 1].
This rotation of the state space eliminates the need for Kalman filtering the unobserved
state.
23

(40) >
] ,

A 3×1 vector of the two macro variables along with the long bond yield, yt = [πt gt yt
is also linear in the state variable:
yt =

G0 + Gxt + ut

= G̃0 + G̃zt + ut ,

(29)

where ut ∼ iidN (0, σu2 I). The parameters before the rotation of the state space are G0 =
(40)
[b0 c0 B0 /40]> , G = [b> c> B (40)> /40]> . The parameter σu2 is the measurement
(n)
error variance, and the parameters B0 and B (n) are functions of n, A∗ , A∗0 and B. The
parameters after the rotation are G̃ = GR−1 , and G̃0 = G0 − G̃R0 .
We can now write the one-step-ahead conditional distribution for the full system:
vt+1 |v t ∼ N (C0 + Cvt , ΩΩ> ),
where vt = [zt yt ]> , C0 = [R̃0> G̃0 + G̃R̃0 ]> , and




Ã 0
B̃
0
C=
, Ω=
,
G̃Ã 0
G̃B̃ σu I
which we use to calculate the likelihood function for our sample.
The structural parameters of our model are just-identified from the reduced-form parameters
C0 , C, and Ω. Specifically, this 7-variable system has 46 parameters that are functions of the
46 parameters of our structural model. We apply natural conjugate priors to this Gaussian
likelihood function to get a joint posterior for C0 , C, and ΩΩ> . We repeatedly sample
parameter values from this posterior distribution using MCMC methods. For draw, we solve
the 46-equations-in-46-unknowns nonlinear system to obtain the structural parameters. We
use the median values of the empirical distributions from this sampling exercise as starting
values for just-identified GMM estimation.
We estimate 45 parameters – all but σu2 – to exactly match 45 moment restrictions implied
by equations (28) and (29):
E(zt − R̃0 − Ãzt−1 ) = 0
>
E(zt − R̃0 − Ãzt−1 )zt−1
= 0

E(yt − G̃0 − G̃zt ) = 0
E(yt − G̃0 − G̃zt )zt> = 0
E(zt − R̃0 − Ãzt−1 )(zt − R̃0 − Ãzt−1 )> = B̃ B̃ >
Since the variance of the sample analogues of these moment restrictions depends only on
parameters of the model that we have already estimated, asymptotic standard errors require
no further estimation. Derivatives of the moment restrictions are also evaluated at our
estimated parameter values. The measurement error variance, σu2 , is estimated using the
estimated residuals from the ut equations.
24

Average dynamic response. The Taylor rule shock is affected by the entire vector of innovations, wt . To measure the average dynamic response of observable variables to a Taylor
rule shock that is the result of simultaneous innovations in all values of wt , we calculate a
dynamic covariance
Covt−1 (ylt+j , s2t ) = Rl Aj BB 0 d2 , j ≥ 0,
where Rl is the l-th row of R. To calculate a dynamic correlation we scale this conditional
covariance with the product of the conditional standard deviations of each variable.

D

Long-run real asset prices

Following Alvarez and Jermann (2005), Hansen and Scheinkman (2009), and Hansen (2012),
we decompose shocks to the real marginal utility of wealth, i.e. the real pricing kernel,
into permanent and transitory components. Denote as Mt+1 the real marginal utility of
wealth, and a multiplicative decomposition into permanent and transitory components as
P M T . In growth rates, this implies a comparable decomposition for the real
Mt+1 = Mt+1
t+1
pricing kernel
mt+1 =

T
M P Mt+1
Mt+1
= t+1
= mPt+1 mTt+1 .
Mt
MtP MtT

The positive eigenfunction, vt+1 , of the real pricing kernel satisfies the equation
Et mt+1 vt+1 = eρ vt ,

(30)

P will be a martingale when mP
−ρ
where ρ is a positive eigenvalue. Mt+1
t+1 = e mt+1 vt+1 /vt ,
P
P
since by construction, Et mt+1 = 1. In other words, log mt+1 is the additive shock to the
P . Any change in log mP
unit root process for log Mt+1
t+1 creates a permanent change in the
real marginal utility of wealth.

To derive log mPt+1 , we start with the log of the real pricing kernel, log mt+1 , given by the
log of the nominal kernel, log m$t+1 , plus the rate of inflation, πt+1 :
log mt+1 = log m$t+1 + πt+1
>
>
= −a0 − a> xt − λ>
t λt /2 − λt wt+1 + b0 + b xt+1
>
>
>
>
= (b0 − a0 ) − λ>
t λt /2 + (b A − a )xt + (b B − λt )wt+1 .

(31)

Given the affine structure of the pricing kernel, we guess a log-linear solution for the eigenfunction, log vt = k > xt , and solve for k using (30) and (31):
ρ + k > xt = log Et exp[log mt+1 + k > xt+1 ],

25

which implies
k > xt = [(b> + k > )A − a> − (b> + k > )Bλ]xt .
Using risk-neutral dynamics, Bλ = A − A∗ , the solution for k > is
k > = (b> A∗ − a> )(I − A∗ )−1 .
The innovation to log mPt+1 , therefore, is given by
−1
ηt+1 = [b> − λ>
+ (b> A∗ − a> )(I − A∗ )−1 ]Bwt+1
t B
−1
= [(b> − a> )(I − A∗ )−1 − λ>
t B ]Bwt+1 .

The conditional covariance of the innovation to log mPt+1 with the innovation to the Taylor
rule shock, d>
2 Bwt+1 is
>
−1
>
Et (ηt+1 wt+1
B > d2 ) = [(b> − a> )(I − A∗ )−1 − λ>
t B ]BB d2 .

When the shock to the Taylor rule has no permanent impact on the real marginal utility of
wealth, this correlation must be equal to 0, which implies a set of linear restrictions on d2
– one for each value of λt . Since we need only one of these for our Taylor rule identification
exercise, we use the restriction for the average price of risk, λt = Eλt = λ0 .

26

References
Alvarez, Fernando, and Urban J. Jermann, 2005, “Using asset prices to measure the persistence of the marginal utility of wealth,” Econometrica, 73, 1977-2016.
Anderson, Brian D.O. and John B. Moore, 1979, Optimal Filtering, Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Anderson, Evan W., Ellen R. McGrattan, Lars Peter Hansen, and Thomas J. Sargent, 1996,
“Mechanics of forming and estimating dynamic linear economies,” in H.M. Amman,
D.A. Kendrick, and J. Rust, eds., Handbook of Computational Economics, Volume
I , 171-252.
Ang, Andrew, and Monika Piazzesi, 2003, “A no-arbitrage vector autoregression of term
structure dynamics with macroeconomic and latent variables,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 50, 745-787.
Backus, David K., and Jonathan H. Wright, 2007, “Cracking the conundrum,” Finance and
Economics Discussion Series 2007-46, Federal Reserve Board.
Bai, Jushan, and Peng Wang, 2015, “Identification and Bayesian estimation of dynamic
factor models,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 33, 221-240.
Bernanke, Ben S., 2013, “ Long-Term Interest Rates,” Remarks at the Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco, March 1.
Bernanke, Ben, Jean Boivin, and Piotr S. Eliasz, 2005, “Measuring the effects of monetary
policy: A factor-augmented vector autoregressive (FAVAR) approach,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 120, 387-422.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean, and Danny Quah, 1989, “The dynamic effects of aggregate demand
and supply disturbances,” American Economic Review 79, 655-673.
Boivin, Jean, and Marc Giannoni, 2006, “DSGE models in a data-rich environment,” NBER
Working Paper 12772.
Boyd, Stephen P., 2009, “Lecture slides for EE363: Linear Dynamical Systems,” posted
online at http://www.stanford.edu/class/ee363/, accessed March 17, 2015.
Canova, Fabio, and Luca Sala, 2009, “Back to square one: Identification issues in DSGE
models,” Journal of Monetary Economics 56, 431-449.
Carrillo, Julio A., Patrick Feve, and Julien Matheron, 2007, “Monetary policy inertia or
persistent shocks: a DGSE analysis,” International Journal of Central Banking 3,
1-38.
Chernov, Mikhail, and Philippe Mueller, 2012, “The term structure of inflation expectations,” Journal of Financial Economics, 106, 367-394.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans, 1999, “Monetary policy
shocks: What have we learned and to what end?” in J.B. Taylor and M. Woodford,

27

eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1 , 65-148.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L Evans, 2005, “Nominal rigidities and the dynamic effects of a shock to monetary policy,” Journal of Political
Economy 113, 1-45.
Chun, Albert Lee, 2011, “Expectations, bond yields, and monetary policy,” Review of
Financial Studies, 24, 208-247.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, 1999, “The science of monetary policy,”
Journal of Economic Literature 37, 1661-1707.
Cochrane, John H., 2011, “Determinacy and identification with Taylor rules,” Journal of
Political Economy 119, 565-615.
De Schutter, Bart, 2000, “Minimal state-space realization in linear system theory: an
overview,” Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 121, 331-354.
Gali, Jordi, 2008, Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to
the New Keynesian Framework , Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Gali, Jordi, and Mark Gertler, 1999, “Inflation dynamics: a structural econometric analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics 44, 195-222.
Gallmeyer, Michael F., Burton Hollifield, and Stanley E. Zin, 2005, “Taylor rules, McCallum
rules and the term structure of interest rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52,
921-950.
Gallmeyer, Michael F., Burton Hollifield, Francisco J. Palomino, and Stanley E. Zin, 2007,
“Arbitrage-free bond pricing with dynamic macroeconomic models,” Federal Reserve
Bank of St Louis Review 89, 305-326.
Gevers, Michel, and Vincent Wertz, 1984, “Uniquely identifiable state-space and ARMA
parametrizations for multivariable linear systems,” Automatica 20, 333-347.
Greenspan, Alan, 1994, “Statement by Alan Greenspan, Chairman, Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
Affairs, May 27, 1994.” Federal Reserve Bulletin, July.
Greenspan, Alan, 2005, “Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress,” February
16.
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright, 2007, “The US Treasury yield
curve: 1961 to the present,” Journal of monetary economics 54, 2291-2304.
Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu, 2012, “Identification and estimation of Gaussian
affine term structure models,” Journal of Econometrics 168, 315-331.
Hansen, Lars Peter, 2012, “Dynamic value decomposition within stochastic economies,”
Econometrica 80, 911-967.
Hansen, Lars Peter, and Thomas J. Sargent, 2013, Recursive Models of Dynamic Linear

28

Economies, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Hansen, Lars Peter, and Jose Scheinkman, 2009, “Long term risk: an operator approach,”
Econometrica 77, 177-234.
Hinrichsen, D., and D. Pratzel-Wolters, 1989, “A Jordan canonical form for reachable linear
systems,” Linear Algebra and Its Applications 122/123/124, 489-524.
Iskrev, Nikolay, 2010, “Local identification in DSGE models,” Journal of Monetary Economics 57, 189-202.
Jardet, C., Monfort, A., and Pegoraro, F., 2013, “No-arbitrage near-cointegrated VAR(p)
term structure models, term premia and GDP growth,” Journal of Banking & Finance 37, 389-402.
Joslin, Scott, Anh Le, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2013, “Gaussian macro-finance term structure models with lags,” Journal of Financial Econometrics 11, 581-609.
Joslin, Scott, Marcel Priebsch, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2014, “Risk premiums in dynamic
term structure models with unspanned macro risks,” Journal of Finance 69, 11971233.
Joslin, Scott, Kenneth J. Singleton, and Haoxiang Zhu, 2011, “A New Perspective on Gaussian Dynamic Term Structure Models,” Review of Financial Studies 24, 926-970
Kim, Don H., and Athanasios Orphanides, 2012, “Term structure estimation with survey
data on interest rate forecasts,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 47,
241-272.
King, Robert G., 2000, “The new IS-LM model: Language, logic, and limits,” Federal
Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 45-103.
Klein, Paul, 2000, “Using the generalized Schur form to solve a multivariate linear rational
expectations model,” Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control 24, 1405-1423.
Moench, Emanuel, 2008, “Forecasting the yield curve in a data-rich environment: A noarbitrage factor augmented VAR approach,” Journal of Econometrics 146, 26-43.
Nason, James M., and Gregor W. Smith, 2008, “The New Keynesian Phillips curve: Lessons
from single-equation econometric estimation,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
Economic Quarterly, 361-395.
Rudebusch, Glenn D., and Tao Wu, 2008, “A macro-finance model of the term structure,
monetary policy, and the economy,” Economic Journal 118, 906-926.
Shapiro, Adam Hale, 2008, “Estimating the New Keynesian Phillips curve: A vertical
production chain approach,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 40, 627-666.
Sims, Christopher A., and Tao Zha, 2006, “Were there regime switches in US monetary
policy?” American Economic Review 96, 54-81.
Smets, Frank, and Rafael Wouters, 2007, “Shocks and frictions in US business cycles: A

29

Bayesian DSGE approach,” American Economic Review 97, 587-606.
Smith, Josephine M., and John B. Taylor, 2009, “The term structure of policy rules,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 56, 907-917.
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson, 2012, “Disentangling the channels of the 2007-09
recession,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 81-135.
Taylor, John B., 1993, “Discretion versus policy rules in practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy 39, 195-214.
Uhlig, H., 2005, “What are the effects of monetary policy on output? Results from an
agnostic identification procedure,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 381-419.
Watson, Mark W., 1994, “Vector autoregressions and cointegration,” in Handbook of Econometrics, Volume IV , ed. R.F. Engel and D.L. McFadden, Elsevier.
Woodford, Michael, 2003, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a theory of monetary policy,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

30

Table 1. GMM Estimation
A

B

1.0354
(0.0256 )

0.1261
(0.0428)

0.0896
(0.0480)

0.1897
(0.0397)

0.0026
(0.0003)

0

0

0

-0.0701
(0.0035)

0.8205
0.0613)

0.1993
(0.0229)

0.0974
(0.0234)

-0.0050
(0.0026)

0.0057
(0.0014)

0

0

0.0376
(0.0512)

0.0201
(0.0750)

0.5889
(0.0344)

-0.2472
(0.0168)

0.0038
(0.0041)

-0.0063
(0.0022)

0.0030
(0.0007)

0

-0.0819
(0.0504)

-0.0563
(0.0434)

-0.0147
(0.0210)

0.6542
(0.0289)

-0.0012
(0.0012)

0.0010
(0.0006)

-0.0023
(0.0012)

0.0009
(0.0002)

λ0
-0.0442
(0.0097)

b
0.3238
(0.0896)

c
0.2933
(0.0081)

d2
0.0490
(0.0692)

A∗
0.9862
(0.0011)

0

0

0

0

0.9250
(0.0026)

0

0

-0.0188
(0.0219)

0.2187
(0.0950)

0.2757
(0.0099)

0.3268
(0.0405)

0

0

0.8609
(0.0037)

0

-0.4221
(0.0297)

0.2126
(0.0058)

0.1736
(0.0484)

0.3832
(0.0469)

0

0

0

0.6775
(0.0010)

0.4805
(0.0109)

0.2446
(0.0132)

-0.0030
(0.0916)

0.3709
(0.0703)

τ0
-0.0106
(0.0014)

τ1
2.5771
(0.2867)

τ2
0.3972
(0.0807)

a0
0.0099
(0.0041)

b0
0.0068
(0.0020)

c0
0.0070
(0.0006)

Note: Just-identified GMM estimation of the model: xt+1 = Axt + Bwt+1 , it = a0 + a> xt ,
(h)
(h)
(h)
πt = b0 +b> xt , gt = c0 +c> xt , hyt = B0 +B (h) xt , and B (h) = a> (I−A∗ )−1 (I−A∗h ), B0 =
(h−1)
a0 +B0
−B (h−1) Bλ0 +B (h−1) BB > B (h−1)> /2. The Taylor rule is it = τ0 +τ1 πt +τ2 gt +d>
2 xt .
(h)
The state variable xt is 4-dimensional, it is the short interest rate (1 quarter), yt is the
yield on a discount bond of maturity h = 8, 20, 28, 40 (quarters), πt is the inflation rate,
gt is the growth rate of real GDP, and a> = [1 1 1 1]. The sample period is 1982Q3 to
2017Q2. Asymptotic standard errors are in parentheses.

31

Figure 1
US GDP growth, CPI inflation, and select yields

Note: The time period is 1982Q3 to 2017Q2. Real GDP growth is from the NIPA and CPI
inflation is from the BLS, both downloaded from FRED. Yields are from Gürkaynak, Sack,
and Wright (2007).

32

Figure 2
Taylor rule shock

Note: The top panel plots the Taylor rule including the shock, i.e., the short rate, and the
Taylor rule excluding the shock, τ0 + τ1 πt + τ2 gt . The difference is the value of the shock,
s2t , plotted in the lower panel along with the difference between the ten-year forward rate
(40)
minus the current interest rate, ft − it , i.e., the forward premium.

33

Figure 3
Dynamic correlations with Taylor rule shock

1

1

g
0

0

-1

-1
0

10

20

30

40

0

1

10

20

30

40

1

y(8)

i
0

0

-1

-1
0

10

20

30

40

0

1

10

20

30

40

1

y ( 40 )

f

0

( 40 )

-i

0

-1

-1
0

10

20

30

40

0

Horizon (quarters)

10

20

30

Horizon (quarters)

Note: Each panel plots the conditional correlation of a variable at horizons t + j for
j = 0, 1 . . . 40 (quarters), with the Taylor rule shock, s2t . The variables are real GDP
(8)
growth, gt , inflation, πt , the short interest rate, it , the two-year discount bond yield, yt ,
(40)
the ten-year discount bond yield, yt , and the different between the ten-year forward rate
(40)
and the short rate, ft − it . The shaded area represent a 95% confidence interval.

34

40

