                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   IS THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT DIFFERENT FROM ROMNEYCARE? A LABOR
                       ECONOMICS PERSPECTIVE

                                         Casey B. Mulligan

                                        Working Paper 19366
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19366


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2013




I appreciate conversations with Trevor Gallen, Josh Archambault, Amanda Kowalski, suggestions
from three anonymous referees, and the financial support of the George J. Stigler Center for the Study
of the Economy and the State. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Is the Affordable Care Act Different from Romneycare? A Labor Economics Perspective
Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 19366
August 2013, Revised December 2013
JEL No. E24,H31,I18,I38

                                            ABSTRACT

Measured in percentage points, the Affordable Care Act will, by 2015, add about fourteen times more
to average marginal labor income tax rates nationwide than the Massachusetts health reform added
to average rates in Massachusetts following its 2006 statewide health reform. The rate impacts are
different between the two laws for several reasons, especially that: the populations subject to the two
laws are different, the Affordable Care Act’s employer penalty is an order of magnitude greater, before
either reform Massachusetts had already been offering more means-tested and employment-tested
health insurance assistance than other states had, and the subsidized health insurance plans created
by the Massachusetts reform were less substitutable for employer-provided insurance than are the
subsidized plans to be created nationwide next year.


Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19366
          The Affordable Care Act was designed to expand the fraction of the population
covered by health insurance. The act (hereafter, ACA) includes taxes on employers and
various implicit taxes on employees that go into effect over the next two years.
Economic theory suggests that such taxes would contract the labor market in an amount
commensurate with the amount of the new taxes.
          The federal government and other advocates of the Affordable Care Act have
dismissed concerns that the coming labor market contraction would be significant, or
even noticeable, by pointing to Massachusetts’ experience with a reform also designed to
expand insurance coverage (hereafter, Romneycare). Because the Massachusetts labor
market did not noticeably contract relative to the rest of the nation after Romneycare
went into effect (Dubay, Long and Lawton 2012), the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services said “The experience in Massachusetts … suggest[s] that the health care
law will improve the affordability and accessibility of health care without significantly
affecting the labor market” (Contorno 2013). As Jonathan Gruber put it, “We’ve actually
run this experiment, folks: we ran it in Massachusetts” (Gruber 2011, 27:02).1
          This paper assumes for the sake of argument that forecasts of the employment and
work hours effects of the Affordable Care Act ought to rely on, among other things, an
examination of Romneycare and Massachusetts’ labor market activity surrounding its
implementation. 2 However, in doing so it is worthwhile assessing the direction and
magnitude of the incentives created by both reforms, and to do so with a common
methodology. This paper makes such an assessment, drawing on a companion paper
(Mulligan 2013) that reports more details on the methodology and results for the ACA by
itself.



1
  See also the Urban Institute study concluding that “the broad similarities between the ACA and
Massachusetts’ reform suggest that we can expect to see patterns in the response by employers
under the ACA similar to those observed under health reform in Massachusetts” and that “the
evidence from Massachusetts would suggest that national health reform does not imply job loss
and stymied economic growth.” (Dubay, Long and Lawton 2012)
2
  I use “Romneycare” to refer to the MA health law as implemented after 2006 (with special
emphasis on 2010), regardless of whether the implementation details were determined under the
governorship of Mitt Romney or Deval Patrick, who took office in early 2007.
       The Massachusetts reform, passed in 2006 and implemented over the subsequent
two years (Dubay, Long and Lawton 2012), specified that state residents must have
health insurance, or potentially face a monetary penalty. It created a couple of health
plans with means-tested subsidized premiums. The reform also penalized employers for
not providing health insurance for enough of its employees, with the penalty amount
linked to the number of employees on the payroll. Roughly speaking, the nationwide
ACA has the same three elements, which will take effect over the next two years.
       The tax rate effects of Romneycare are in various directions. In combination,
they raised marginal tax rates in 2010 by less than one half of one percentage point
relative to what they would have been without Romneycare. The results account for the
fact that many people will not participate in programs for which they are eligible, the
tendency of the act to move people off of means-tested uncompensated care, and the fact
that Romneycare implicitly taxes unemployment benefits.               Although parts of
Romneycare builds “notches” and “cliffs” into household budget sets – that is,
infinitesimal income intervals over which marginal tax rates are infinite – my quantitative
results are not a consequence of those notches or cliffs.
       Section I reviews the index number framework from Mulligan (2012) that permits
the measurement of statutory marginal tax rates combined over multiple government
programs and averaged over various taxpayer situations.         Section II explains how
Romneycare’s penalty provisions create new, albeit small, implicit taxes on work. The
new implicit tax rates coming from new and expanded Romneycare subsidies, and from
interactions with old subsidy programs, are examined in Section III. Because this paper
assesses the magnitude of the new implicit taxes, and the fractions of the Massachusetts
workforce that faced them, using the same methodology that Mulligan (2013) used for
the ACA, Section IV concludes by comparing the Romneycare results with the ACA
marginal tax rates.




                                                                                         2
A Framework for Measuring Legislated Changes in the Average
Marginal Tax Rate on Labor Income
       Assistance programs available to help people without work or otherwise with low
incomes can be summarized by measuring the combined value of benefits available to a
person who does not work, less taxes paid, and comparing it to the net of tax value of
benefits available to the same person if he or she were working. The difference between
the two combined values is the causal effect of working on the value of benefits
available. The more that working reduces the net of tax value of available benefits, the
more the programs have reduced the reward to working.
       The effect of a work decision on the value of assistance received varies by person
and by the type of work decision. The effect also depends on calendar time because
program eligibility and benefit rules vary over time when new legislation and new
regulations are put in place. In order to focus on the latter – especially the effect of
Romneycare on incentives to work after 2006 – I use index numbers to summarize the
average incentive among a rich variety of incentives for different persons at a point in
time. Each type of work decision – moving between employment and unemployment,
moving between employment and out of the labor force, and changing weekly hours –
has its own “statutory” incentive index time series {bt}. The three margin-specific series
are combined into an overall statutory work incentive index by taking a fixed-weighted
average of the three.
       Each of the three incentive indices is a sum of program-specific terms, such as a
food stamp term, a payroll tax term, etc.


                                     bt   j  j E jt B jt                              (1)


where t indexes time and j indexes safety net programs. Each program’s term is itself the
product of a statutory eligibility index {Ejt} and a statutory benefit-per-participant index
{Bjt}. The two indices, and therefore their product, change only at dates t when new
program rules (“statutes”) go into effect. The program-specific products {EjtBjt} are
combined into the statutory incentive index by aggregating them with a set of time-
invariant program weights j, which can reflect time-invariant estimates of the propensity

                                                                                          3
of people to participate in program j while they are not employed or otherwise with
reduced labor supply.
        The Massachusetts reform can itself be understood as a collection of programs,
each of which has its own term in the sums that form the three work incentive indices.
Those programs are: employer shared responsibility penalties, individual mandate
penalties for persons below 300 percent of the poverty line (hereafter, FPL), individual
mandate penalties for persons above 300 percent FPL, health insurance subsidies for
persons who are not offered affordable employer-sponsored insurance (hereafter, ESI)
even when employed, health insurance subsidies for persons who are offered affordable
ESI when and only when they are employed, and the expansion of Medicaid/CHIP
coverage to children in families between 200 and 300 percent FPL.
        The Romneycare provisions interact with related public policies, especially
unemployment insurance and uncompensated care. In order to include these interaction
terms in my index for the overall safety net, I therefore add two terms quantifying those
interactions: “implicit taxation of unemployment benefits” and “move off implicit
compensated care tax.”
        All eight of these programs are listed in Table 1. The table’s top (middle) panel
shows each program’s benefit (participation weight) terms, respectively.3 The bottom
panel compiles all of the terms into a single benefit index for 2010.         For the purpose of
comparing with the Affordable Care Act, the dollar amounts in the table are expressed in
2014 dollars.4 This paper does not attempt to examine the evolution of Romneycare in
response to the implementation of the ACA in Massachusetts.
        Sometimes, as with a constant replacement unemployment benefit, the dollar
amount of benefits to be received as a consequence of not working varies across persons
according to what they earn when they are working. In these cases, I follow Mulligan
(2012) and Mulligan (2013) and assume a hypothetical non-elderly household head or
spouse (hereafter, “median earner”) who earns $914 (2014 dollars) per week plus fringes,
which is what the Massachusetts median nonelderly household head or spouse earned in
3
  The eligibility indices are not shown because they are trivially 0 before Romneycare and 1
thereafter, as long as the Romneycare eligibility-related statutes and regulations remain
unchanged.
4
  As of the time of writing, the latest available annual price index was for 2012; for the purposes
of calculating 2014 dollars, I assume average annual inflation of 2 percent between 2012 and
2014.
                                                                                                 4
2007 during a week that they were working.5 The same median earner (inclusive of the
value of his fringes) is used to convert Table 1’s bottom line dollar amounts into a bottom
line tax rate. When I identify persons in micro data that are similar to the median earner,
I take any non-elderly head or spouse with weekly earnings within 10% of $914, and
refer to them as “median earners.”
         When the dollar amounts vary across persons for other reasons, such as marital
status or health insurance status or program take-up, I use the Massachusetts average
across non-elderly working household heads and spouses, as noted below. Depending on
data availability, the averages are conditioned on working sometime during the calendar
year and having weekly earnings within 10 percent of the median earner, and usually
calculated from the March 2011 Current Population Survey (referring to calendar year
2010).




Penalty Components of the Marginal Tax Rate Index
         Romneycare included monetary penalties on employers who do not offer health
insurance to their full-time employees and on individuals who fail to participate in the
health plans that are made available to them. These penalties are known as the employer
and individual responsibility provisions, respectively. The individual penalty is also
described as the “individual mandate penalty.”
         Romneycare had two types of employer penalties. The first is a penalty of $295
per full-time-equivalent employee (hereafter, FTE) per year for large employers who fail
to offer health insurance and make a fair and reasonable contribution toward premiums.6
Unlike the ACA’s employer penalty, Romneycare’s $295 is deductible from the
employer’s federal business taxes.
         Because the employer penalty is contingent on a person’s work status and hours
worked, it has many of the economic characteristics of payroll taxes – at least for the
purposes of quantifying incentives to work. In particular, the law defines FTE in terms of

5
  The $914 for Massachusetts is a factor of 1.16 greater than the hypothetical weekly earnings
used by Mulligan (2012) and Mulligan (2013) for national analysis, reflecting the propensity of
Massachusetts workers to earn above the national average.
6
  Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 188th General Court (2013) and Blue Cross Blue Shield of
Massachusetts Foundation (2011).
                                                                                             5
aggregate work hours so that the penalty creates an extra marginal cost on assessable
employers for increasing those hours, as long as the hours are at or above the threshold
for “large employer”.7 Because the marginal cost is based on FTE, it is neutral in terms
of whether an employer adjusts labor hours by adjusting the number of employees or by
adjusting the hours per employee, which is why Table 4 shows $25 per month for all
three labor supply margins.8
        The second employer penalty applies to large employers who fail to provide
employees with “cafeteria plans,” which are arrangements for employees to buy health
insurance (perhaps on the individual market) with pre-tax dollars and with the employer
administrative assistance in terms of withholding of employee health payments and
delivering them to the insurer. Employers are not required to provide any funds for
payments for the insurance employees obtain through the cafeteria plan.                    Large
employers that fail to provide a cafeteria plan are liable for the health safety net
(Massachusetts’ hospitals’ system of uncompensated care) costs incurred by their
uninsured employees. Despite the fact that a nontrivial number of employers do not offer
a cafeteria plan, as of July 2011 no employer in Massachusetts had yet been held liable
under this second employer penalty provision (Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts
Foundation 2011). I therefore treat the second penalty as zero and omit it from Table 4.
        The Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) reports national and region-
specific propensities of employees to work at an employer that does not offer insurance to
any of its employees. To be conservative about the difference between the MA-US
difference in this propensity, I assume that MA has the same propensity as the rest of the
New England region and rescale the ACA participation weight for employer penalties by




7
  Romneycare has a couple of thresholds (11 and 50). Focusing on the 50-employee threshold,
the marginal hiring cost of the 50th employee would be $14,750 for the 50th employee and the
marginal hiring cost zero for the first 49 employees. For simplicity, I treat the marginal hiring
cost as $295 for all employers not offering health insurance, regardless of employer size.
8
  Table 4’s dollar amounts are in units of employee compensation. $25 per month is 295*(2014
price index)/[12*(2010 price index)*(1.0765)]. The factor of 1.0765 reflects the fact that $295 of
employer penalty is less expensive for employers than $295 cash wages would be because the
latter creates an employer payroll tax liability.
                                                                                                6
the ratio of the MEPS New England propensity (9.5%) to the MEPS nationwide
propensity (12.6%).9
        After 2007, Romneycare assessed penalties on each uninsured person as a
function of their household income. The individual mandate by itself need not create an
implicit tax on work, but relief from the mandate does. Figure 1’s solid curves show the
penalty schedule, of which there are two because the penalty varies with age above 300%
FPL (Massachusetts Health Connector and Department of Revenue 2012). The dashed
lines are a linear approximation to the solid curves, and I use the slope of the dashed lines
to calculate the age and household size dependent average marginal labor income tax rate
created by the individual mandate for households between 150 and 300 FPL.10 As in
Mulligan (2013), this approach prevents the results from being driven by the “cliffs” or
“notches” in the law, such as those visible in Figure 1’s solid curves. The $147 average
work disincentive shown in the Table 1’s second row is the product of the average
marginal tax rate of 3.7 percent and the $3,959 monthly earnings of the “median earner.”
The $147 amount is shown in all three columns because this form of individual mandate
relief is an implicit income tax rather than an implicit unemployment benefit.
        A person experiencing hardship is exempt from the individual penalty. The
hardship exemption acts as an implicit tax on work to the extent that not working allows a
person to be classified as experiencing hardship. The text of the Massachusetts law is
unclear as to the exact relation between employment and hardship for the purposes of
granting the exemption. I assume that, conditional on not having insurance and being in
a household above 300 percent FPL, the penalty is paid only when working or out of the
labor force because the unemployed are eligible for a hardship exemption.11 The $95
average value of the hardship exemption shown in Table 1 is the population-weighted



9
  CPS data suggest that, in 2006 (before Romneycare), the uninsurance rate among non-elderly
working household heads and spouses was less in MA than in the New England region generally,
which itself was less than the nationwide rate.
10
   In order to translate a slope from Figure 1 into a marginal tax rate, I divide it by the dollar
amount of the federal poverty line, which is a function of household size.
11
   Long before Romneycare, MassHealth (Massachusetts’ Medicaid and CHIP program) had
health insurance assistance programs for the unemployed. One of those, without asset tests, is the
Medical Security Program for unemployed in families up to 400 percent of FPL (Community
Resources Information 2013). For this reason, the hardship exemption is not relevant for
unemployed persons below 300 or 400 percent of FPL.
                                                                                                7
average of the two 300%+ FPL penalties shown in Figure 1, converted to monthly 2014
dollars.
           Although Table 1’s participation weights for the individual mandate penalty
reflect the fraction of the working population that is uninsured, the weights are different
from the national ACA weights in Mulligan (2013), for several reasons. First of all,
Massachusetts had fewer uninsured than the United States did, even before health reform.
For this reason, my first step in calculating Table 1’s individual mandate weights is to
rescale the weights in Mulligan (2013) by the ratio of the uninsurance rate in
Massachusetts to the uninsurance rate nationwide, with the rates measured in the March
2006 (2011) CPS, respectively, among non-poor median earners aged 27-64.12 Second,
work incentives under the Massachusetts penalty are different depending on whether the
uninsured’s household is above or below 300% FPL, which is why Table 1 has two
individual mandate rows while the corresponding table in Mulligan (2013) has only one.
The single weight from Mulligan (2013) is distributed between the corresponding two
rows in Table 1 according to the propensity of non-poor working uninsured
Massachusetts household heads and spouses ages 27-64 to be below or above 300% FPL.
           Third, under Romneycare, an insured adult living with (more specifically, part of
the same household for tax purposes) an uninsured person has their work incentives
affected by the penalty for violating the individual mandate because the insured adult’s
income is part of the uninsured’s household income.13 Table 1’s weights for the sliding
scale individual penalty therefore need to double count uninsured people who are
married, regardless of whether their spouse is uninsured, because a single penalty alters
work incentives for both spouses. I make the double counting by rescaling those weights
by one plus the fraction of the non-poor working uninsured Massachusetts household
heads and spouses ages 27-64 who are married with spouse present.




12
   Both the ACA and Romneycare exempt the poor from the individual mandate penalty.
13
   The ACA assesses a penalty on the uninsured as the maximum of a flat dollar amount per
uninsured family member and a percentage of household income, and Mulligan (2013) uses the
latter to calculate statutory marginal tax rates. When the percentage of income applies, it doesn’t
matter whether the household had, say, two uninsured adults rather than one.
                                                                                                 8
Jumping onto and Sliding Along the Income Scale: Romneycare’s
Subsidy Components of the Marginal Tax Rate Index
        Massachusetts adults not offered insurance by an employer in the last six months,
not eligible for Medicare or Medicaid, and living in a family with income between 100
percent and 300 percent FPL are, under Romneycare, eligible to participate in
Commonwealth Care (hereafter, CommCare), which was a choice of four health
insurance plans subsidized by the state and managed by Medicaid Managed Care
Organizations (Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts Foundation 2011).14 Figure 2’s
stair-shaped function shows the 2010 sliding scale payment schedule (Massachusetts
Health Connector 2010), which ends at 300% FPL. As an approximation of what it cost
for someone above 300% FPL to buy coverage similar to CommCare (if such coverage
were permitted and desirable to consumers: more on this below) through their employer’s
cafeteria plan, I take CommCare spending per participant of $4,954, multiply it by a tax
exclusion factor, and display the amount as a solid horizontal line in Figure 2.15
        Romneycare’s income-based healthcare payment schedules, such as the two
shown in Figure 1, potentially create several types of work disincentives for persons in
households between 100 and 300 percent FPL. First, a household head or spouse is
denied access to the payment schedule as long as he or she holds a job that offers health
insurance, and (with a delay) granted access when not employed. Second, a household
head or spouse can, with a delay, be granted access as a consequence of moving from
full-time employment to part-time employment if that move results in a loss of
opportunity for ESI. Third, working fewer weeks per year or hours per week enhances
the Commcare subsidies for persons who work in a job not offering health insurance and
participate in CommCare.

14
   Recently a fifth plan was added that is managed by an insurance company (Blue Cross Blue
Shield of Massachusetts Foundation 2011).
15
   Massachusetts Health Connector (2010, Table 2) reports Commcare spending net of enrollee
contributions, so to calculate the $4,954 I add back those contributions, estimated to be a
weighted average of the stair-steps shown in Figure 1 using as weights the CommCare participant
demographics reported by Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts Foundation (2011). I assume
that premiums paid through cafeteria plans avoid personal income taxes at an 18 percent marginal
rate and employee payroll taxes at a 7.65 percent marginal rate, which makes the tax factor equal
to 0.7435. For the purpose of preparing Figure 2, I did not tax-adjust CommCare premiums,
assuming that they are not paid with after-tax dollars (the assumption does not affect the dashed
line and the calculations that depend on its slope).
                                                                                               9
Jumping onto the Income Scale for Health Payments
        A person with ESI who would be eligible for CommCare when not employed
forgoes the value of that subsidy when working. That value depends on the plan features,
that person’s household income (which determines the premium paid), and the
availability of alternative subsidies. For many years before Romneycare, Massachusetts
already had health insurance assistance for the unemployed through its MassHealth
Medical Security Plan and MassHealth Essential programs. I therefore assume that
Romneycare did not significantly add to the value of assistance available to persons
leaving an ESI job for unemployment and thereby enter in Table 1 a zero in the
unemployment column for “HI subsidies for persons w/ ESI at work.”16 I also assume
that Romneycare adds little value to the assistance available to households below 150%
FPL, because Massachusetts already had Medicaid for adults up to 133 percent FPL and
children up to 200 percent FPL (Powell 2012).17
        CommCare is a new source of assistance for persons leaving an ESI job to be out
of the labor force or to work part time without ESI (and in a household between 150 and
300% FPL), which is why benefits are entered in the columns of Table 1 for the other
labor supply margins. If participants valued the subsidy at what it cost Massachusetts
taxpayers, the value of jumping onto the schedule would be the vertical distance between
their position on Figure 2’s stair-step and the horizontal line representing total cost.
Among Massachusetts heads and spouses aged 27-64 with ESI and household income
between 150 and 300% FPL, the average vertical distance is $4,198 in 2014 dollars.
        CommCare has features that probably make it unattractive to a number of
households in the eligible income range, which suggests that participants may not value
the coverage as much as it costs taxpayers. CommCare is for adults only: parents who
left ESI (or left the unsubsidized individual purchase market) for CommCare would have
to put their children on Medicaid/CHIP, buy separate coverage for them, or leave them
uninsured. CommCare is typically Medicaid managed and does not have the same
16
  Take-up of the programs may have been low, but so is CommCare takeup (more on this below).
17
  Due to a lack of precise data (e.g., small sample sizes, income and health plan definitions that
differ between MassHealth and the CPS), I do not attempt to quantify the aggregate value of
Commcare subsidies for adult health insurance going to Massachusetts households between 133
and 150% FPL.
                                                                                               10
network of providers as unsubsidized plans have. Medicaid may carry a social stigma.
Persons cannot join CommCare until they have been six months without the opportunity
for affordable insurance. For these reasons, I take the participant value of CommCare
coverage to be 75 percent of the tax-adjusted cost shown. $262 per month (2014 dollars)
is therefore entered in the middle column of Table 1’s “HI subsidies for persons w/ ESI at
work”: it is my estimate of the value of the new subsidy made available by Romneycare
for persons leaving an ESI job to exit the labor force and live in a household between 150
and 300% FPL, thereby “jumping onto” the sliding income scale for Commcare
premiums.
        Persons in ESI jobs can jump onto the sliding scale with an even lesser reduction
in hours (than they would by exiting the labor force) by moving to a part-time position
that does not offer ESI, because it is the offer of ESI that makes them ineligible for
CommCare. The “reduced hours” column therefore scales up the $262 from the OLF
column by a factor reflecting the facts that (i) the hourly subsidy is greater for hours
reductions that cross the threshold for ESI eligibility than it is for labor force exits and (ii)
some hours reductions do not cross the threshold.18 The result is a benefit amount of
$301.
        The corresponding program weight is small because only 9 percent of
Massachusetts median earners both have ESI and are living in a family between 150 and
300% FPL.19 I discount this percentage with a factor of 0.19 to reflect the propensity of
Massachusetts non-elderly adults in the eligible income range to use CommCare when
they are not employed.20 The resulting weight is 0.02 and is entered in the OLF column
of Table 1’s middle panel.
        If persons with ESI lost their coverage when they moved to a part-time job, then
the reduced hours column would have the same weight as the OLF column. In fact, a


18
   This is the same (nationwide) factor used by Mulligan (2013).
19
   The percentage is even less among all non-elderly Massachusetts heads and spouses.
20
   It is not clear whether the Current Population Survey codes CommCare as Medicaid or as non-
group private coverage. According to the March 2011 interview, 46% of non-elderly non-
employed heads and spouses in Massachusetts between 150 and 300% FPL report having one or
the other. My factor of 0.19 is this 46% rescaled by the ratio of adult CommCare participants
between 150 and 300% FPL (Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts Foundation 2011, 9) to
Massachusetts heads and spouses (regardless of employment status) represented in the March
2011 CPS as having Medicaid or non-group private coverage.
                                                                                              11
fraction of part-time workers are eligible for ESI. I therefore scale the reduced hours
weight accordingly, using the same factor as Mulligan (2013) does.
         Commcare’s similarity to Medicaid and its low enrollment may help explain why
Kolstad and Kowalski (2012) found that employees accepted lower wages when their
employers began offering health insurance under Romneycare: employer insurance in
Massachusetts (including the insurance workers obtain through cafeteria plans) is
valuable to employees because the alternative is something like Medicaid, or no
insurance at all. But that doesn’t mean that employers who begin to offer insurance
under the ACA can be sure that their employees will accept lower wages, because a
significant fraction of those employees could obtain coverage, plus a subsidy, without
employer assistance, and that coverage will be good enough for their Senator (Mulligan
2013).




Sliding Along the Income Scale for Health Payments
         The third disincentive associated with the income scales like the one shown in
Figure 2 involves “sliding down” – rather than jumping onto – the income scale by
working less during the calendar year. This case applies to persons who participate in
CommCare, or has family members participating, even when working. Two points on the
scale are of primary interest for calculating such a person’s work incentives: one point
when working more and a second when working less. The person’s CommCare penalty
for working more is, as a share of household income added by working more, the slope of
the line connecting the two points on the scale divided by the dollar amount of the FPL
applicable to his family.
         Unlike the disincentives associated with jumping onto the income scale, the
marginal tax rates from sliding along the income scale are especially sensitive to the
exact position on the scale because the scale has four discrete notches or cliffs in it. For
example, a person whose family earns 195 percent of FPL when he works less and 205
percent of FPL when he works more would face a CommCare marginal tax rate of about
28 percent. In order to emphasize results that are not especially sensitive to notches and
cliffs, I approximate the slopes of the sliding scales by averaging the various slopes,


                                                                                         12
weighting by the width of the income interval over which they apply. Geometrically, the
weighted average slope is equal to the slope of the dashed secant shown in Figure 2. I
used the weighted average slopes only for the disincentives associated with sliding along
the income scale and not those associated with jumping onto the income scale.
        The weighted average slopes still vary across households according to family
situations, so I average the weighted average slopes across non-elderly working
Massachusetts household heads and spouses in families between 150 and 300 percent
FPL who neither have employer-sponsored health insurance or health insurance through a
family member. When multiplied by the same 0.75 participant-valuation factor, that
average is about 10 percent of earnings, which is the $400 per month shown in the fourth
row of Table 1.21 The same entry is shown in all of the columns of that row because the
disincentive depends on income, and not whether a specific income level is achieved
through unemployment, out of the labor force, or reduced hours.
        As of August 2011, CommCare had only about 54,000 participants (some of them
not working) who were above 150% FPL and thereby would not have been assisted by
Medicaid absent Romneycare. More than 2.3 million other non-elderly working heads
and spouses in Massachusetts do not receive CommCare and thereby could not slide
along its income scale for premiums unless they were married to a CommCare
participant. 22 My estimate for the program participation weight is therefore (i) the
fraction of median earners in in Massachusetts who are in families between 150 and
300% FPL times (ii) the ratio of 150-300% FPL CommCare participation (regardless of
work status) to the total number of non-elderly heads and spouses in Massachusetts
(regardless of work status) in families between 150 and 300 FPL times (iii) one plus an
estimate of the fraction of CommCare participants who are married. 23 The resulting

21
   The $400 entries in Table 1 are greater than the $262 entry because the latter represents a
median earner who obtains the (value associated with the) maximum CommCare subsidy by
eliminating his earnings for a period of time, and those earnings are about 290 percent of FPL.
The former represents, among other things, a median earner without ESI whose work decision
reduces his household income by 200% of FPL – from 300% to 100% FPL – and thereby obtains
the (value associated with the) maximum CommCare subsidy. In other words, the former case
involves more subsidy per dollar of income foregone and thereby has a proportionally greater
entry in Table 1.
22
   Some of the 2.3 million could jump onto the sliding scale by working less: they are represented
by the program participation weights for “HI subsidies for persons w/ ESI at work.”
23
   As with the individual mandate penalty, CommCare participation by one spouse creates an
implicit tax on both spouses’ incomes. I estimate the fraction married among CommCare
                                                                                               13
weight is 0.03 and is the same for all three labor supply margins because movements
along the sliding income scale reflect income changes and not specifically employment or
hours changes.
       Mulligan (2013) explains how, under the ACA, an ESI worker can both jump
onto the scale and slide along it because he may already be out of work and receiving
premium assistance part of the year. This possibility is less common, and represents a
lesser fraction of the year, under Romneycare because Commcare excludes anyone who
had ESI available during the past six months. For the purposes of preparing the program
participation weights in Table 1’s middle panel, a person may count in either the fourth or
fifth row, but, aside from the spousal adjustment noted above, not both.24



Romneycare’s Medicaid/CHIP Expansion
       The Massachusetts reform increased the family income limit for children’s
Medicaid/CHIP eligibility from 200% FPL to 300% FPL (Blue Cross Blue Shield of
Massachusetts Foundation 2011, 10).          In principle, the limit increase could be a
substitution effect toward or away from working, depending on whether a person’s labor
supply absent the program put his family closer to the old or new income limit (Yelowitz
1995). The work-discouraging effect probably dominates for median earners, who by
themselves earn almost 300% FPL when working, plus spousal income. My purpose
here is to calculate an upper bound on this effect, noting that this upper bound turns out to
be extremely low in comparison with the marginal tax rates from the ACA.
       Mulligan (2012) uses the framework (1) to (nationally) model the Medicaid
program between 2007 and 2011 with a program participation weight of 0.47, a constant


participants as the March 2011 CPS fraction married among non-elderly heads and spouses
without ESI and without insurance through a family member and with household income between
150 and 300% FPL. This adjustment, which increases the bottom line marginal rate, was not
made by Mulligan’s (2013) analysis of the ACA because the adjustment is more complicated for
ACA exchanges that offer both family and individual insurance plans (CommCare is for
individuals).
24
   Mulligan (2013) also notes that the workers who slide along the income scale for ACA
premium tax credits often experience two rounds of means tests: one when applying for
subsidized coverage and a second when reconciling the advance premium credits with coverage
year income – a means test indicates the amount of excess credits to be returned – as they file
their personal income tax return for that tax year. Romneycare does not have premium tax credits
that need to be reconciled on the personal income tax return.
                                                                                             14
benefit index of $358 per month (FY 2010 dollars), and a constant eligibility index (one).
Assuming for the moment that Massachusetts would have had the nationwide average
Medicaid program absent Romneycare, the impact on the overall benefit index of
Romneycare’s Medicaid expansion is shown in equation (2):


                E   M , 2010   / EM , 2006 1  M EM , 2006 BM   EM , 2010 1  M  BM     (2)


where M denotes the Medicaid program, 2010 denotes Romneycare eligibility rules, and
2006 denotes eligibility rules absent Romneycare.                        The equality follows from the
normalization of the eligibility index to one absent Romneycare.
       In order to conform with Table 1’s presentation (which does not have a separate
panel for eligibility indices), I enter equation (2)’s square bracket term in the middle
panel for program participation weights and the BM term in the top benefit panel. I take
BM to be the same as in Mulligan (2012) and convert it to 2014 dollars.
       Massachusetts appears to have slightly more Medicaid participation per non-
elderly working heads and spouses, so I rescale the nationwide participation weight of
0.47 to be 0.48 for the purposes of examining Massachusetts. 25 The final necessary
parameter is the percentage change in Massachusetts Medicaid eligibility as a
consequence of the Romneycare CHIP expansion, EM,2010-1. Absolute changes from
March 2006 among children in families between 200 and 300% FPL can be estimated
from various waves of the March CPS, and show increases of -7,661; 10,747; 4,667; and
25,315 for the years 2007-2010, respectively.                      In order to err in the direction of
exaggerating the marginal tax rate effects, I take the largest change of 25,315, which is
2.0 percent of total Massachusetts Medicaid enrollment as measured by the March 2010
CPS. Equation (2)’s square bracket term is therefore 0.01, which is entered in Table 1’s
middle panel for all three labor supply margins.




25
 US and MA numbers of working non-elderly heads and spouses are taken from the March 2011
CPS. US and MA Medicaid enrollment are taken from (Kaiser Family Foundation 2013) for
December 2009.
                                                                                                   15
Romneycare Subsidies Interact with Other Safety Net Programs
        A multitude of social safety net programs predated Romneycare and served to
reduce work incentives. Romneycare replaces or substitutes for some of them, and
thereby might reduce work incentives less than the Ronneycare provisions would if they
were introduced by themselves into a world with no safety net. The Medical Security
Plan and other Medicaid programs have already been examined above; this subsection
examines UI and uncompensated care.
        Unemployment insurance (UI) is a major safety net program, and the benefits
paid by the UI program are implicitly taxed by Romneycare because UI benefits are part
of the household income that determines a household’s assistance with health insurance
premiums. In particular, persons laid off from a non-ESI job before Romneycare would
find their UI benefits taxed at normal marginal personal income tax rates but under
Romneycare those marginal rates jump about 10 percentage points for CommCare
participants as a result of CommCare’s “sliding scale” premium assistance. For someone
receiving $1,462 per month in UI benefits – about the average among UI-eligible persons
with earnings potential near the Massachusetts median – that’s an extra $155 per month
in taxes.
        If all of the unemployed received UI benefits, then the participation weight (for
the unemployment margin) on the implicit taxation of UI benefits would be equal to the
weight on “HI subsidies for persons w/o ESI at work” because the implicit taxation of UI
benefits occurs by moving along the sliding scale for the HI subsidies, as people without
ESI will (conditional on CommCare participation) do as they move in and out of
employment. Because some of the unemployed do not receive UI benefits, I rescale this
weight by the propensity of the unemployed to receive UI benefits, which is Mulligan’s
(2012) program participation weight for the UI program.
        The uninsured sometimes receive uncompensated care from health providers, and
uncompensated care is likely means-tested. To the extent that Romneycare reduces
reliance on uncompensated care, it may reduce the implicit income tax associated with it.
I am not aware of a calculation of the average marginal tax rate from uncompensated
care, but it can be estimated by assuming that its value is a linear function of household
labor income and noting that: (a) the uninsured paid, in 2008, a nationwide aggregate of
$30 billion in health expenses (another $56 billion was uncompensated care for those

                                                                                       16
patients) and (b) aggregate labor income among the uninsured was $510 billion.26 This
puts the average marginal labor income tax rate (including in the average those among
the uninsured who do not use any health care) from uncompensated care of 5.9 percent.
According to this estimate, when spending a month prior to Romneycare without his
$3,959 earnings, an uninsured person could expect to save an average of $233 in medical
expenditures by increasing his uncompensated care. After Romneycare, this help might
not be necessary because he would have private HI coverage. Thus, -$233 per month is
shown in the top panel of Table 1 as a Romneycare impact on the amount of benefits
available as a consequence of not working.
          The participation weight on the uncompensated care program is an estimate of the
impact of Romneycare on the fraction of non-elderly working heads and spouses without
health insurance. The estimate is taken as the difference between the Massachusetts
uninsurance rate in 2010 and the same rate in 2006.




Conclusions

Orders of Magnitude
          The bottom panel of Table 1 accumulates the results of the top and middle panels.
Its top row begins by, conditional on a margin for reducing labor supply, multiplying
each program’s benefit index by its program participation weight and then summing
across programs. The combined effect of Romneycare is to add about $14 per month in
the assistance that people with median earnings potential get when they spend time
unemployed, and about $20 per month when they reduce labor supply on one of the other
two margins.
          The final two rows of Table 1 report the results of aggregating across labor supply
margins using the weights shown in the table reflecting the relative contribution of each
margin to the reduction in aggregate work hours during the recession of 2008-9
(Mulligan 2012). Romneycare adds $16 per month to the overall statutory index. This
assistance is in addition to the cash flow assistance they already get from unemployment
insurance, food stamps, tax policy, and a host of other safety net programs.

26
     Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured (2008, 1).
                                                                                          17
         $16 per month is 0.3 percent of the total full-time compensation of a
Massachusetts head or spouse of roughly median earnings potential. Thus, I conclude
that Romneycare added 0.3 percentage points to the typical marginal labor income tax
rate in Massachusetts.
         With the exception of the employer penalty, the dollar amounts in Table 1’s top
panel are an order of magnitude greater than the $16 overall average. However, as
indicated by the corresponding weights in the middle panel, less than 10 percent of the
Massachusetts workforce was presented with the new work disincentives. The employer
penalty may affect a greater fraction of the workforce, but its magnitude is only $25 per
month.      Thus Romneycare’s average marginal tax rate increase can be roughly
understood as a significant implicit tax for a small fraction of the Massachusetts
population plus a small employer penalty.
         Table 2, reproduced from Mulligan (2013), has the same format as Table 1 except
that Table 2 relates to the nationwide disincentives created by the ACA.27 The ACA adds
about 4.8 percentage points to marginal tax rates: more than ten times Romneycare’s
addition.
         The 0.3 (Massachusetts) and the 4.8 (nationwide) percentage point additions were
calculated for the purpose of “before-after” aggregate labor market analysis. That is, if
all other determinants of Massachusetts tax rates had been constant between 2005 and
2010, a typical Massachusetts non-elderly head or spouse faced 0.3 additional percentage
points of labor income taxation in 2010 than they did in 2005 when Romneycare was not
yet in effect. Per capita work hours in Massachusetts would, all else the same, fall during
that time frame in an amount commensurate with the size of the tax increase and the
sensitivity of work hours to tax rates. If all other determinants of national tax rates
remain constant between 2013 and 2015, the typical non-elderly American head or
spouse will face 4.8 additional percentage points in 2015 than they did in 2013. Per
capita work hours in the United States would, all else the same, fall during that time
frame in an amount commensurate with the size of the tax increase and the sensitivity of
work hours to tax rates.



27
  As noted throughout the paper, whenever possible and appropriate the same techniques and
data sources were used for Table 1 as with Table 2.
                                                                                        18
        The tax rate components shown in Tables 1 and 2 also permit before-after
analysis of employment per capita, hours worked per employee, and the unemployment
rate.   The tax rates and components shown in this paper are not quite the right
calculations for predicting the hypothetical effects of implementing Romneycare
nationwide or of implementing the ACA in Massachusetts because, among other things,
Massachusetts workers are different from the national average and because both health
reform laws interact with each other and with the rest of the social safety net.
        Table 3 decomposes the fourteen-fold difference between the ACA and
Romneycare into its program-specific components. Each row of the table is a program
potentially affecting the reward to work.         Each entry is a monthly dollar amount
calculated as the sum across the three labor supply margins of each of the program’s
benefit indices (from the top panel of Table 1 or Table 2) times the corresponding
program participation weight (middle panel) times the corresponding labor force
weight. 28 The left column is Romneycare (Table 1), the middle column is the ACA
(Table 2), and the last column is the ratio of the ACA dollar amount to the Romneycare
amount.    Table 3’s dollar entries are components of health reform’s impact on the
average marginal tax rate (shown in Table 3’s final row) because the latter is the ratio of
the column sum of dollar entries (shown in the top TOTAL row) to the monthly
compensation of the median earner.
        The primary difference between Romneycare and ACA employer penalties is the
nominal amount: $295 versus $2,000, respectively. Also significant are the facts that the
ACA penalty is not business tax deductible, that Massachusetts employers are especially
likely to offer health insurance even without a penalty, and that the MA penalty cannot be
avoided by moving to part-time work. Overall, the ACA employer penalty is 11 times
more important.29



28
   Mulligan (2012) interprets the sum of products as the program’s contribution to the reward to
work for the average marginal worker (i.e., a worker who adjust labor supply on each of the three
margins in the proportions indicated by the margin weights).
29
   Dubay, Long and Lawton (2012) note that one of the Romneycare thresholds for large
employer is 11, as compared to the 50 employee threshold in the ACA, and that fewer employers
fall under an 50 employee threshold. On the other hand, holding constant the per-employee
penalty, the cost of crossing a 50-employee threshold is greater than crossing an 11-employee
threshold because the penalties levied on employees below the threshold.
                                                                                              19
        With their individual mandate relief, both Romneycare and the ACA create five
or six dollars per month of work disincentive, although I noted above how they do so in
different ways. The next three rows of Table 3 show how both “sliding along” and
“jumping onto” the sliding income scale for health insurance assistance involve more
work disincentive under the ACA than under Romneycare. In both cases, the ACA has
roughly twice the benefit index because the subsidy is more valuable. The ACA’s
participation weight for sliding along the scale is more than twice as large as
Romneycare’s because Massachusetts was offering new subsidies to households in
roughly the 150-300 FPL range, whereas the ACA is offering them in the 100-400 FPL
range. 30   The most dramatic ACA-Romneycare difference comes from the weight
associated with jumping onto the sliding scale, which is greater for the reasons above,
plus higher expected takeup rates, plus the fact that Romneycare comes after other forms
of assistance for Massachusetts workers leaving ESI jobs.31
        CommCare introduces a subsidy for adults above 133 percent of the poverty line
without introducing a subsidy for adults below that line. This by itself increases the
incentive (or, due to longstanding programs for people below the poverty line, decreases
the disincentive) for earning above 133 percent of the poverty line.                  In order to
compartmentalize the range of incentives and disincentives in the Romneycare, this paper
considers short-duration employment decisions – a couple of weeks – that would push
few persons out of, or into, the CommCare eligible income range when income is
measured on a calendar year basis. In this regard, the $16 per month is an overestimate
of the work disincentives created by Romneycare. However, Mulligan’s (2013) results
for longer duration work decisions suggest that the overestimation is economically
insignificant because CommCare also creates incentives to cross the upper income
eligibility threshold from above, not to mention that CommCare participation rates are so




30
   This is the same reason that the ACA’s entry for implicit taxation of UI benefits is also greater
in magnitude than Romneycare’s entry.
31
   “Massachusetts is the only state in the nation to offer a health care plan for unemployment
insurance claimants, by providing assistance with the cost of existing health insurance premiums
or by covering the cost of actual medical expenses.” (Massachusetts Executive Office of Labor
and Workforce Development 2013) An exception to this was a temporary federal COBRA
assistance program under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (Mulligan 2012).
                                                                                                 20
low.    Also note that this paper lacks any data on another disincentive created by
Romneycare: the expansion of MassHealth’s Family Assistance Program.32
        Overall, the ACA will add 12 times more dollars to work disincentives than
Romneycare did. In percentages of total compensation, which is somewhat greater in the
Massachusetts workforce than in America’s generally, the ACA adds fourteen times
more. This bottom line result is so dramatic because program participation rates and
dollar benefit amounts (or costs) per participant are multiplicative in their average effects,
and the ACA involves larger dollar amounts per participant and is expected to directly
alter work incentives for larger fractions of its population.          Also note that ratio
comparisons like these are sensitive to the various measurement assumptions because
Romneycare’s impact on disincentives is so close to zero.



A New Approach to Taxation
        Arguably Romneycare taxes work in more unique ways than the ACA does,
without using any of those taxes with much intensity. From a tax-history perspective,
Romneycare is notable in that it separately taxes both earnings and hours worked.33 It
taxes aggregate hours worked by making employer penalties proportional to full-time
equivalent employees, which are measured according to total hours worked at the
employer. Given the propensity of employers to offer health insurance to full-time
employees but not part-time employees, and that Romneycare creates incentives for
offering health insurance, Romneycare also indirectly affects incentives for part-time
work.
        The ACA goes further in the direction of taxing hours worked by fully exempting
part-time employees from employer penalties and thereby making subsidized health
insurance easily available for part-time employees. As shown by the $19 entry in Table 1



32
   The lack of data derives from the fact that Family Assistance program is a small piece of
MassHealth, which by itself suggests that the aggregate importance of its expansion is small.
33
   Another difference between Romneycare and the ACA – less relevant for calculating marginal
labor income tax rates than for understanding insurance coverage – is that Romneycare uniquely
expanded coverage in part by leveraging federal tax rules excluding employer-provided health
insurance from the payroll and personal income tax bases (see especially Romneycare’s cafeteria
plan provisions).
                                                                                            21
and the $207 entry in Table 2, both laws tax the weekly hours margin of labor supply
about as much as they tax the other two margins.



Federal Lessons from Massachusetts
       Because the ACA’s work disincentives are at least an order of magnitude greater
than Romneycare’s, one cannot reasonably conclude from the Romneycare experience
alone that the ACA would not significantly contract the labor market. In principle, one
could obtain an estimate of Romneycare on the Massachusetts labor market and then
multiply it by roughly 14 to make a forecast of the ACA’s nationwide effect. However,
not only would that be a bold exercise in extrapolation, but it would also require hyper-
accurate estimates of the Massachusetts-average Romneycare effects on marginal tax
rates and the labor market.
       With the exception of the employer penalty, the Romneycare benefit indices in
the top panel of Table 1 are of the same order of magnitude as the ACA benefit indices in
the top panel of Table 2. Thus, there are subpopulations of Massachusetts that may have
experienced something like the national average disincentive from the ACA (without
employer penalties) and a Massachusetts subpopulation’s behavioral change might be
used to forecast the national average. I am not aware of studies of the appropriate
Massachusetts subpopulations, such as heads and spouses without ESI and living in
households with income near 150 and 300 percent of FPL.               More important, this
approach would require accurate estimates for small groups, which may be almost as
difficult as obtaining hyper-accurate estimates for the statewide effect.
       It would help to know the extent of take-up of premium assistance under the
ACA. However, this paper noted that Romneycare and the ACA are quite different in
terms of the types of insurance that is subsidized, with Romneycare subsidizing close
substitutes for Medicaid and the ACA subsidizing potentially close substitutes for
employer-provided insurance.
       Another approach would be to obtain estimates of the ACA’s tax effects from
elsewhere and, treating Romneycare as having approximately zero tax effects (as Kolstad
and Kowalski (2012) conclude), interpret the Massachusetts experience as evidence of



                                                                                       22
the per capita non-tax effects of health reform that could be added to the tax effects.34
However, given that orders of magnitude separate the two laws’ tax incentives, they may
also separate their non-tax effects.
        This paper quantifies employment and hours distortions from health reform.
Estimates like these are necessary, but not sufficient, for a complete cost-benefit analysis
of health reforms, which must also quantify impacts on health and other behaviors.
Health impacts, for example, may well be valuable enough to offset significant labor
market distortions. My work so far only permits us to conclude is that the national labor
market costs of the ACA far exceed, in per capita terms, the Massachusetts labor market
costs of Romneycare.




34
  The non-tax effects could be effects of access to health care, or wealth effects, or changes in the
composition of labor demand.
                                                                                                  23
Table 1: Romneycare and Related Components of the Statutory Marginal Tax Rate Index
Calendar year 2010, average among MA household heads and spouses with median earnings potential

Benefit Index Amounts (constant 2014 dollars per month)

                                                Margins for Reducing Labor Supply
Program                                       Unemployed        OLF Reduced hours
Employer shared responsibility penalty                25          25              25
Individual mandate relief: sliding scale             147         147             147
Individual mandate relief: hardship exemption         95           0               0
HI subsidies for persons w/o ESI at work             400         400             400
HI subsidies for persons w/ ESI at work                 0        262             301
Medicaid/CHIP expansion for children                 389         389             389
Implicit taxation of unemployment benefits          -155           0               0
Move off implicit uncompensated care tax            -233        -233            -233

Program Participation Weights (fractions)

Program                                       Unemployed       OLF Reduced hours
Employer shared responsibility penalty              0.17       0.17         0.17
Individual mandate relief: sliding scale            0.03       0.03         0.03
Individual mandate relief: hardship exemption       0.02          0            0
HI subsidies for persons w/o ESI at work            0.03       0.03         0.03
HI subsidies for persons w/ ESI at work                0       0.02         0.01
Medicaid/CHIP expansion for children                0.01       0.01         0.01
Implicit taxation of unemployment benefits          0.02          0            0
Move off implicit uncompensated care tax            0.03       0.03         0.03


Statutory index, all Romneycare programs              14         20              19
LFS weights                                        0.583      0.089           0.328
Statutory index, all Romneycare programs                 $16/month
 & supply margins                                  = 0.3% of employer cost
Table 2: ACA and Related Components of the Statutory Marginal Tax Rate Index
Calendar year 2015, average among household heads and spouses with median earnings potential

Benefit Index Amounts (constant 2014 dollars per month): benefits accruing as a consequence of working less.

                                             Margins for Reducing Labor Supply
Program                                    Unemployed        OLF Reduced hours         growth rate after 2014
Employer shared responsibility penalty            192         192             220      starts at 192 in 2015,then grows at wages +1.6%/yr
Individual mandate relief                         103           0               0      grows with inflation after 2016
HI subsidies for persons w/o ESI at work          832         832             832
Reconcile advance premium credits                 154         154             154
HI subsidies for persons w/ ESI at work           508         508             582      grows 1.6%/year more than wages
HI subsidies stop at the poverty line            -212        -212            -212
Medicaid expansions for the poor                  198         198             198      grows 1.6%/year more than wages
Implicit taxation of unemployment benefits       -301           0               0      grows with wages
Move off implicit uncompensated care tax         -201        -201            -201      grows with wages

Program Participation Weights (fractions)

Program                                    Unemployed         OLF Reduced hours        growth rate after 2014
Employer shared responsibility penalty           0.23         0.23         0.23
Individual mandate relief                        0.09            0            0
HI subsidies for persons w/o ESI at work         0.09         0.09         0.09
Reconcile advance premium credits                0.04         0.04         0.04        all program participation
HI subsidies for persons w/ ESI at work          0.16         0.16         0.13        weights are constant by
HI subsidies stop at the poverty line            0.03         0.03         0.03        definition
Medicaid expansions for the poor                 0.07         0.07         0.07
Implicit taxation of unemployment benefits       0.06            0            0
Move off implicit uncompensated care tax         0.03         0.03         0.03

Statutory index, all ACA programs                  202         209              207
LFS weights                                      0.583       0.089            0.328
Statutory index, all ACA programs                       $204/month
 & all supply margins                             = 4.8% of employer cost
Table 3. Romneycare and the ACA Compared on Marginal Tax Rate Components

constant 2014 dollars per capita per month

Program                                   Romneycare   ACA ACA as a ratio to Romneycare
Employer penalty                                   4      47       11
Individual mandate relief                          5       6         1
HI subsidies for persons w/o ESI at work          11      74         7
Reconcile advance premium credits                  0       7  infinite
HI subsidies for persons w/ ESI at work            2      81       46
HI subsidies stop at the poverty line            NA       -7      NA
Medicaid/CHIP expansions                           4      14         4
Implicit taxation of unemployment benefits        -2     -10         6
Move off implicit uncompensated care tax          -8      -6         1
TOTAL (2014 $ per capita per month)               16    204        12
TOTAL (percentage of compensation)             0.3%    4.8%        14
      1,200                 Figure 1. Massachusetts Individual Penalty Amounts


      1,000                       Ages 18-26, actual
                                  Ages 18-26, approx.
                                  Ages 27+, actual
                                  Ages 27+ approx.
                  800
2010 $ per year




                  600




                  400




                  200




                    0
                        1   1.5               2             2.5             3   3.5   4
                                               Household income, ratio to FPL
                                          Figure 2. CommCare Premiums and Costs
                     4,000




                                 tax-adjusted CommCare cost
                                 premium
                     3,000
                                 linear approximation
                                 eligibility ends
FY 2010 $ per year




                     2,000




                     1,000




                        0
                             1      1.5                 2            2.5             3   3.5   4
                                                        Household income, ratio to FPL
Bibliography
Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts Foundation. "Health Reform in Massachusetts:
        Assessing the Results." mahealthconnector.org. May 2012.
        https://www.mahealthconnector.org/portal/binary/com.epicentric.contentmanage
        ment.servlet.ContentDeliveryServlet/Health%2520Care%2520Reform/Overview/
        HealthReformAssessingtheResults.pdf.
—. "Massachusetts Health Reform: A Five-Year Progress Report."
        bluecrossmafoundation.org. November 17, 2011.
        http://bluecrossmafoundation.org/sites/default/files/Health%20Reform%20Imple
        mentation%20Massachusetts%20Health%20Reform%205%20Year%20Progress
        %20Report.pdf (accessed August 6, 2013).
Cannon, Michael F. "Massachusetts’ Obama-like Reforms Increase Health Costs, Wait
        Times." cato.org. August 27, 2009.
        http://www.cato.org/publications/commentary/massachusetts-obama-reforms-
        increase-health-costs-wait-times (accessed July 30, 2013).
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 188th General Court. "Chapter 149, Section 188."
        malegislature.gov. 2013.
        https://malegislature.gov/Laws/GeneralLaws/PartI/TitleXXI/Chapter149/Section1
        88 (accessed August 6, 2013).
Community Resources Information. "Medical Security Program." massresources.org.
        2013. http://www.massresources.org/medical-security-program.html (accessed
        August 9, 2013).
Contorno, Steve. "Localities split on providing health benefits for part-time workers."
        The Washington Examiner. February 14, 2013.
        http://washingtonexaminer.com/localities-split-on-providing-health-benefits-for-
        part-time-workers/article/2521655 (accessed August 8, 2013).
Cutler, David M. "The Economics of the Affordable Care Act." nytimes.com. August 7,
        2013. http://http://economix.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/08/07/the-economics-of-
        the-affordable-care-act/ (accessed August 7, 2013).
Dubay, Lisa, Sharon K. Long, and Emily Lawton. Will Health Reform Lead to Job Loss?
        Evidence from Massachusetts Says No. Urban Institute, 2012.
Goolsbee, Austan. Testimony at the Hearing on the Health Care Law's Impact on Jobs,
        Employers, and the Economy. Washington, DC: Committee on Ways and Means,
        U.S. House of Representatives, 2011.
Gruber, Jonathan. "2011 Hewitt Health Care Lecture: The Budgetary Impact of Federal
        Health Care Reform." vimeo.com. March 2011.
        http://vimeo.com/21114715#t=27m2s (accessed August 8, 2013).
Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured. Covering the Uninsured in 2008:
        Key Facts about Current Costs, Sources of Payment, and Incremental Costs.
        Menlo Park, CA: The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, 2008.
Kaiser Family Foundation. "Monthly Medicaid Enrollment." kff.org. 2013.
        http://kff.org/medicaid/state-indicator/monthly-medicaid-enrollment/ (accessed
        August 6, 2013).
Kolstad, Jonathan T., and Amanda E. Kowalski. "Mandate-Based Health Reform and the
        Labor Market: Evidence from the Massachusetts Reform." NBER working paper,
        no. 17933 (March 2012).


                                                                                     24
Massachusetts Executive Office of Labor and Workforce Development. Medical Security
       Program. 2013. http://www.mass.gov/lwd/unemployment-insur/programs-and-
       services-for-claimants/medical-security-program-msp/ (accessed February 20,
       2013).
Massachusetts Health Connector and Department of Revenue. "Data on the Individual
       Mandate." mahealthconnector.org. June 2012.
       https://www.mahealthconnector.org/portal/binary/com.epicentric.contentmanage
       ment.servlet.ContentDeliveryServlet/About%20Us/News%20and%20Updates/20
       12/Week%20Beginning%20June%203/TaxYear2010FinalReport.pdf (accessed
       August 6, 2013).
Massachusetts Health Connector. "Implementation of Health Care Reform. Fiscal Year
       2010." Report to the Massachusetts Legislature, 2010.
Mulligan, Casey B. "Average Marginal Tax Rates under the Affordable Care Act." NBER
       working paper, no. 19365 (November 2013).
—. The Redistribution Recession. New York: Oxford University Press
       (redistributionrecession.com), 2012.
Powell, Jennifer Heldt. "Competing Visions for Massachusetts: Health Reform." In The
       Great Experiment, by Josh D. Archambault. Boston, MA: Pioneer Institute, 2012.
Yelowitz, Aaron S. "'The Medicaid Notch, Labor Supply, and Welfare Participation:
       Evidence from Eligibility Expansions." Quarterly Journal of Economics 11, no. 4
       (November 1995): 909-39.




                                                                                   25
