NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AVERAGE MARGINAL LABOR INCOME TAX RATES UNDER THE AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT
Casey B. Mulligan
Working Paper 19365
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19365
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

I appreciate conversations with Trevor Gallen, Paul Winfree, comments from seminar participants
at Clemson, Suffolk, and Western Kentucky universities, and the financial support of the George J.
Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and the State. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Average Marginal Labor Income Tax Rates under the Affordable Care Act
Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 19365
August 2013, Revised December 2013
JEL No. E24,H31,I18,I38
ABSTRACT
The Affordable Care Act includes four significant, permanent, implicit unemployment assistance programs,
plus various implicit subsidies for underemployment, and expanded Medicaid eligibility for adults.
Every sector of the economy, and about half of nonelderly adults, is directly affected by at least one
of those provisions. This paper calculates the ACA’s impact on the average reward to working among
nonelderly household heads and spouses. The law increases marginal tax rates by an average of five
percentage points (of employee compensation), on top of the marginal tax rates that were already present
before it went into effect. The ACA’s addition to labor tax wedges is roughly equivalent to doubling
both employer and employee payroll tax rates for half of the population.
Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19365

Healthcare is valuable but expensive. As a result, many people believe that poor
and middle-income households should pay less than full price for their healthcare, and the
United States now has its Affordable Care Act (hereafter, ACA) that will soon implement
such a policy.
Economics tells us that redistribution typically comes at the cost of reduced
incentives to work and earn, yet some economic analyses of the ACA’s labor market
effects do not even mention explicit or implicit taxes (Cutler 2011). Others note the
ACA’s employer penalties, without acknowledging that the Act also includes various
implicit taxes on the employee side (Gruber 2012) (Cutler and Sood 2010). The purpose
of this paper is to quantify the contributions of various ACA provisions to time series for
the marginal tax rate on labor income. In doing so, I prepare the estimates so that the
various provisions can be compared with each other, compared with other explicit and
implicit taxes, put in a historical context, and aggregated with each other for the purpose
of aggregate labor market analysis.
The results are startling. The ACA includes both positive and negative tax rate
effects, but nonetheless all provisions combined raise marginal tax rates in 2015 by 11
percentage points of total compensation, on average, for almost half of the nonelderly
adult population and zero percentage points for the rest. From an aggregate point of
view, the employer penalties by themselves are historically significant but nonetheless
smaller than each of two of the ACA’s implicit tax provisions. The ACA will increase
the national average marginal labor income tax rate about fourteen times more (sic) than
the 2006 “Romneycare” health reform law increased the Massachusetts average rate.
The results account for the fact that many people will not participate in programs
for which they are eligible, the tendency of the act to move people off of means-tested
uncompensated care, and the fact that the ACA implicitly taxes unemployment benefits.
Although parts of the ACA build “notches” and “cliffs” into household budget sets – that
is, infinitesimal income intervals over which marginal tax rates are infinite – my
quantitative results are not a consequence of those notches or cliffs.

Section I reviews the index number framework from Mulligan (2012) that permits
the measurement of statutory marginal tax rates combined over multiple government
programs and averaged over various taxpayer situations. Section II explains how the
ACA’s penalty provisions act as taxes on work. The ACA’s subsidy programs and their
contribution to marginal tax rates are reviewed in Section III. Section IV notes how two
ACA provisions interact with pre-ACA safety net programs for the purpose of
determining a person’s reward to working. Section V presents an example of how large
the ACA’s work disincentives can be. Sections VI-VIII look at the Medicaid expansion
and show how the various programs can be weighted for the purposes of comparing and
aggregating their labor market impact. Section IX concludes. Appendices to the paper
show program-specific results for calendar years 2014 and 2016, give more details on
health insurance premiums and the ACA’s sliding income scale, and report sensitivity
analysis.

A Framework for Measuring Legislated Changes in the Average
Marginal Tax Rate on Labor Income
Assistance programs available to help people without work or otherwise with low
incomes can be summarized by measuring the combined value of benefits available to a
person who does not work, less taxes paid, and comparing it to the net of tax value of
benefits available to the same person if he or she were working. The difference between
the two combined values is the causal effect of working on the value of benefits
available. The difference is also a known as a “wedge” between employer labor costs and
employee benefits of working. The more that working reduces the net of tax value of
available benefits, the more the programs have reduced the reward to working and have
increased the wedge.
The effect of a work decision on the value of assistance received varies by person
and by the type of work decision. The effect also depends on calendar time because
program eligibility and benefit rules vary over time when new legislation and new
regulations are put in place. In order to focus on the latter – especially the effect of the
Affordable Care Act on incentives to work in 2014, 2015, and beyond – I use index
2

numbers to summarize the average incentive among a rich variety of incentives at a point
in time. Each type of work decision – moving between employment and unemployment,
moving between employment and out of the labor force, and changing weekly hours –
has its own “statutory” incentive index time series {bt}. The three margin-specific series
are combined into an overall statutory work incentive index by taking a fixed-weighted
average of the three.
Each of the three incentive indices is a sum of program-specific terms, such as a
food stamp term, a payroll tax term, etc.
bt   j  j E jt B jt

(1)

where t indexes time and j indexes safety net programs. Each program’s term is itself the
product of a statutory eligibility index {Ejt} and a statutory benefit-per-participant index
{Bjt}. The two indices, and therefore their product, change only at dates t when new
program rules (“statutes”) go into effect. The program-specific products {EjtBjt} are
combined into the statutory incentive index by aggregating them with a set of timeinvariant program weights j, which reflect time-invariant estimates of the propensity of
people to participate in program j while they are not employed or otherwise with reduced
labor supply.
The Affordable Care Act can itself be understood as a collection of programs,
each of which has its own term in the sums that form the three work incentive indices.
Those programs are: employer shared responsibility penalties, individual mandate relief,
health insurance subsidies for persons who are not offered affordable employersponsored insurance (hereafter, ESI) even when employed, reconciliation of the advance
premium tax credits, health insurance subsidies for persons who are offered affordable
ESI when (and only when) they are employed, health insurance subsidies that stop at the
poverty line, and Medicaid expansions for the poor.
The ACA provisions interact with related public policies, especially
unemployment insurance and uncompensated care. In order to include these interaction
terms in my index for the overall safety net, I therefore add two terms quantifying those

3

interactions: “implicit taxation of unemployment benefits” and “move off implicit
compensated care tax.”
All nine of these programs are listed in Table 1. The table’s top (middle) panel
shows each program’s benefit (participation weight) terms, respectively.1 The bottom
panel compiles all of the terms into a single benefit index for each of the months of 2015,
which can be added to indices of the non-ACA programs.

Appendix I reproduces

versions of Table 1 for calendar years 2014 and 2016.
Sometimes, as with a constant replacement rate unemployment benefit, the dollar
amount of benefits to be received as a consequence of not working varies across persons
according to what they earn when they are working. In these cases, I follow Mulligan
(2012) and assume a hypothetical person (hereafter, “median earner”) who earns $790
(2014 dollars) per week plus fringes, which is what the median nonelderly household
head or spouse earned in 2007 during a week that they were working.2 The same median
earner (inclusive of the value of his fringes) is used to convert Table 1’s bottom line
dollar amounts into a bottom line tax rate. I use a wage from the middle of the skill
distribution because the indices are intended to be used for analysis of nationwide
employment, aggregate hours, and other labor market activity measures that weight each
person equally, rather than giving extra weight to high earners or to people near the
poverty line.3
When the dollar amounts vary across persons for other reasons, such as marital
status or health insurance status or program take-up, I use the average across legally
resident non-elderly working household heads and spouses, as noted below. Depending
on data availability, the averages are conditioned on working sometime during the
calendar year and having weekly earnings within 10 percent of the median earner – I call

1

The eligibility indices are not shown because they are trivially zero before January 1, 2014 and
1 thereafter, as long as the ACA eligibility-related statutes and regulations remain unchanged.
2
As of the time of writing, the latest available annual price index was for 2012; for the purposes
of calculating 2014 dollars, I assume average annual inflation of 2 percent between 2012 and
2014. The 2014 median working household head and spouse will probably earn slightly more
than $790 per week because, among other things, lower skill workers exited the workforce
between 2007 and 2014.
3
Although beyond the scope of this paper, the same methodology could be used to examine other
points in the wage distribution as in Mulligan (2013a).

4

such non-elderly heads and spouses “median earners” – and usually calculated from the
March 2011 Current Population Survey (referring to calendar year 2010).

ACA Penalty Components of the Marginal Tax Rate Index
The ACA includes monetary penalties on employers who do not offer health
insurance to their full-time employees and on individuals who fail to participate in the
health plans that are made available to them. These penalties are known as the employer
and individual shared responsibility provisions, respectively. The individual penalty has
also been described as the “individual mandate.”
Through its employer shared responsibility provision, the ACA penalizes
assessable employers: any large employer that does not offer comprehensive health
insurance to its full time employees. The amount of the penalty is based on the number
of full time employees (beyond 30) on the employer’s monthly payroll during the
calendar year in which it is assessable. A large employer is one with at least fifty fulltime equivalent employees in the prior calendar year.
With a few exceptions related to thresholds and timing, each full-time employee’s
presence on an assessable employer’s payroll creates a marginal cost of employment in
the form of the employer shared responsibility penalty: the employer would owe less
penalty if the employee were working part time instead, or were absent from the payroll
altogether.

Because the employer shared responsibility penalty is contingent on a

person’s work status, it has many of the economic characteristics of unemployment
benefits and payroll taxes – at least for the purposes of quantifying incentives to work.
Taking into account interactions between the penalties and corporate, personal,
and payroll taxes, the monthly amount of the penalty is $192 per month in 2015 and
increases with the growth rate of health care costs thereafter,4 which I assume to be 1.6

4

The $192 monthly amount is $2,000 per year times the growth rate factor of 1.016 times (10.0765-0.18) for employee payroll and income taxes divided by 1.0765*(1-0.39) for employer
taxes. Section 1302 of the ACA provides for a premium adjustment percentage based on the
growth of the average per capita premium for health insurance coverage in the United States. The
ACA specifies a $2,000 penalty for 2014 as well, but the U.S. Treasury will not be enforcing
employer penalties for calendar year 2014.

5

percent per year in excess of wage growth. Thus, for the purposes of constructing work
incentive indices for unemployment and out of the labor force, the shared responsibility
index is zero for all months prior to January 2015, $192 for each month of 2015, $195 for
each month of 2016, etc. The benefit index is expressed in 2014 dollars and shown in the
top row of Table 1’s top panel.
The share responsibility penalty can be avoided for employees if their hours are
reduced below 30.5 For the purpose of constructing the statutory index for weekly hours,
the benefit index can be either greater or less than it is for unemployment. On one hand,
the hourly penalty is about twice as large for hours changes that cross the part-time
threshold than for changing employment status. 6 On the other hand, not all hours
changes cross the part-time threshold and therefore would not change penalty status. The
former effect dominates, so that the hourly penalty is fifteen percent greater when labor
supply is adjusted on the weekly hours margin rather than weeks employed.7
Individuals who have access to affordable health insurance (either through their
employer or through the marketplaces created by the ACA) but fail to participate are
liable for the individual mandate penalty, unless they are experiencing hardship. The
hardship exemption acts as an implicit tax on work to the extent that not working allows a
person to be classified as experiencing hardship. The text of the ACA is unclear as to the
relation between employment and hardship for the purposes of granting the exemption. I
assume that, conditional on not having insurance, the penalty is paid only when working

5

The ACA’s threshold for part-time work is 30 hours per week for hourly employees. For
salaried employees, the threshold is three days per week.
6
Full-time employed (as measured by the Bureau of Labor statistics: employees working 35
hours per week or more; this part of the calculation is intended to represent labor market
conventions rather than statutory definitions of full-time work) household heads and spouses
work an average of 43.5 hours per week. Part-time employed heads and spouses average work
hours are 21.4: the scaling factor is 43.5/(42.5-21.4). Note that the first weekly hour worked over
30 creates a penalty equivalent to about $60 of weekly wages. Working 43.5 hours rather than 30
therefore costs more than $4 per hour (plus payroll and personal income taxes on the additional
wages), which is a significant cost for someone with wages of about $17 per hour.
7
During the 2008-9 recession, 58 percent of per capita hours reductions by full-time workers
involved crossing the part-time threshold (as defined by the BLS: see below for the data source)
as opposed to reductions in average hours among the full-time employed. I therefore rescale the
benefit index on the employment margins by a factor of 0.58*43.5/(43.5-21.4) = 1.15 in order to
obtain a benefit index on the weekly hours margin.

6

or out of the labor force because unemployed persons will be eligible for a hardship
exemption.8
When applicable, the amount of the individual mandate penalty is the maximum
of a flat amount per uninsured household member and a percentage of household income,
both of which vary among the years 2014, 2015, and 2016 (U.S. Internal Revenue
Service 2013a). Because my indices are built for the median earner I use the percentages:
1 percent for 2014, 2 percent for 2015, and 2.5 percent thereafter.
The benefit index (unemployment and out of the labor force) for the individual
mandate relief program is therefore equal to the penalty percentage applicable in the year
times the average monthly household income among uninsured household heads and
spouses with weekly earnings within 10 percent of the median. Those amounts are $51 in
2014, $103 in 2015, and $128 in 2016. For the reduced hours index the benefit index is
zero because I assume that reduced hours will not be considered hardship for the
purposes of relief from the mandate. These amounts derive from relief from the penalty,
not the penalty itself.9 For the reduced hours index the benefit index is zero because I
assume that reduced hours will not be considered hardship for the purposes of relief from
the mandate.

Jumping onto and Sliding Along the Income Scale: The ACA’s
Subsidy Components of the Marginal Tax Rate Index
The ACA requires that each state (or the federal government on behalf of the state
residents) set up health insurance marketplaces or “exchanges” where individuals can
purchase health insurance that conforms to the law. The plans on the exchanges will be
8

Assuming that out-of-the labor force status counts as hardship would add less than one dollar to
my bottom line $204 total work disincentive of the ACA.
9
A mandate by itself need not act as a significant tax on work (Summers 1989). Kolstad and
Kowalski’s (2012) study of Massachusetts suggests that the individual mandate increases labor
supply. Perhaps they have in mind income effects, which are beyond the scope of this paper, or
that Romneycare’s promotion of cafeteria plans makes employment the cheapest way to buy
health insurance in Massachusetts. This paper intends to measure the impact of health reform on
the reward to working more versus less, which would be zero from a mandate that required
workers and nonworkers alike to buy health insurance, at least if insurance could be purchased by
nonworkers at similar prices to the prices paid by workers.

7

subsidized from revenues obtained from taxes on employer-sponsored plans.

More

important, individuals participating in exchange plans may be eligible for significant
assistance (at taxpayer expense) with their premium payments and with their out-ofpocket health expenses on the basis of their household income and the fringe benefits
available on their job, if any. The income and fringe benefit contingencies create a
variety of implicit taxes on work.
Persons not offered insurance by a current employer, not eligible for Medicare or
Medicaid, and living in a tax unit (hereafter, “family” or “household”) with income
between 100 and 400 percent of the federal poverty line (hereafter, FPL), have their cost
of exchange-purchased health insurance capped as a percentage of their household
income. If in addition, their household income is less than 250 percent of the FPL, then
their out-of-pocket costs (copayments, co-insurance, etc.) are discounted.

The cap

percentages increase, and discount rates decrease, with income.
Figure 1’s solid curves show the 2014 sliding scale payment schedule for
exchange plan participants, assuming that they were not offered affordable health
insurance by their employer (if any).

Both premiums and the average amount of

participant out-of-pocket costs are included in Figure 1’s payment. The schedule for
premium payments can be calculated from the ACA without any assumptions about
family composition or the prices that will be quoted by insurance providers on the
exchanges as long as the schedule specifies a payment less than the full premium, but the
out-of-pocket payments depend on the actuarial value (AV) of the policy purchased.10
Figure 1 therefore shows two extremes: a low ratio of AV to FPL (solid blue) and a high
ratio (solid red). Appendix II gives more details on the derivation of Figure 1.
Let Si denote the calendar year exchange subsidy received by the family of worker
i, which is the difference, if any, between the full price of the family’s health care and the
health expenditure caps shown in Figure 1. For the months in which the household is
eligible for subsidies, the subsidies are a function Hi(y) of calendar income y reported on
the personal income tax return, including spousal income (if any) and characteristics of
i’s family such as its size and the age of its members. As long as reported family income
10

Figure 1 shows the payments for the second cheapest silver plan. Participants of any income
can upgrade or downgrade their plan by paying (or receiving) the full cost difference. Thus, the
slopes of Figure 1’s schedules would be the same regardless of plan choice.

8

is in between 100 and 400 percent of FPL, worker i’s family disposable income ci is, net
of taxes, subsidies, and health expenses:

yi  ni hi w  (1  ni )ri w  ai
ci  xi ni hi w  (1  ESI i ni )H i ( yi )  (1  ESI i )U i (ai  ni hi w) Ti

(2)

where, for the moment, I ignore the dynamics of earning and reporting incomes for the
purposes of determining subsidies. ni is the fraction of the year person i was on a payroll,
hi is weekly work hours (full-time hours are normalized to one), and w is the weekly fulltime wage rate excluding untaxed fringes. w does not vary by i because, as noted above,
when it matters I assume that it is $790 per week.

ri is the replacement rate for

unemployment insurance, which is zero for someone ineligible for unemployment
insurance during their non-work time. ai denotes other sources of reported income such
as spousal earnings and asset income. xiw > w denotes the employer cost or total
compensation from full-time work, including fringes.
ESIi is an indicator for having ESI when at work, either through one’s own job or
through a spouse. Ti denotes non-ACA taxes, subsidies, and health expenses, including
uncompensated care when applicable. Ti depends on income, but the marginal tax rates
created by that dependence has been examined extensively in previous work (Mulligan
2012); the purpose of this paper is to look at the additional marginal tax rates created by
the ACA itself. Ui denotes uncompensated care forgone due to ACA HI coverage and
equals zero for persons who would be privately insured but-for the ACA.11
The ACA’s income-based healthcare payment schedule creates several types of
work disincentives because the behavioral variables n and h appear several times in
equation (2). First, a household head or spouse is denied access to the payment schedule
as long as he or she holds a job that offers health insurance, and (if in a family between
100 and 400 percent FPL and not eligible for coverage from a spouse’s employer)
granted access when not employed. Formally, look at full-time employer cost xiw minus
the derivative of ci with respect to ni in the case that ESIi = 1, hi = 1, and yi in between
100 and 400 percent of FPL.
11

Unemployment compensation is assumed to be excluded from consideration in determining the
amount of uncompensated care received by an uninsured person.

9

ci  xi ni w  (1 ni )H i  ni w  (1  ni )ri w  ai  Ti
xi w 

ci
 H i ( yi )  (1  ni ) i w  (1  ni ) i wri
ni

(3)

 i   H i ( yi )
The first term H in c/n reflects the access to the schedule that comes with an ESI’s
worker’s time off the payroll. H is not a slope of the exchange subsidy schedule, but is
the level. As I show below, the H term is perhaps the single largest work disincentive in
the ACA, despite is absence from policy analysis to date. The last two terms relate to the
slope of the schedule are zero for a full-year worker, and are addressed below.
Second, a household head or spouse can be granted access as a consequence of
moving from full-time employment to part-time employment if that move results in a loss
of opportunity for ESI. Third, working fewer weeks per year or hours per week enhances
the exchange subsidies for persons (a) in a household between 100 and 400 percent FPL,
(b) who work in a job not offering health insurance, and (c) who purchase insurance on
the exchanges. Formally, look at the derivatives of ci with respect to ni and hi in the case
that ESIi = 0 and yi in between 100 and 400 percent of FPL.
ci  xi ni hi w  H i ( yi )  U i ( ai  ni hi w)  Ti
xi hi w 

ci
c
  i hi w   i ri w  i hi w , xi ni w  i   i ni w  i ni w
ni
hi

(4)

i  U i (ai  ni hi w)
Equation (4) shows terms for c/n and c/h that relate to the slopes  and  of the
exchange subsidy schedule H and uncompensated care schedule U, respectively.
The positive terms in equations (3) and (4) represent disincentives – the wedge
between employer cost and employee reward is widened – while the negative terms
represent incentives. For the purposes of quantifying overall work incentives, each of the
terms in equations (3) and (4) is best understood as a separate program, which is why I
list them separately in Table 1. The remainder of this section quantifies the incentives

10

one program at a time. Later sections quantify the sizes of the populations that will
experience each of the various incentives.

Jumping onto the Income Scale for Health Payments
A person with ESI who would receive an exchange subsidy when not employed
forgoes the value of that subsidy when working, as represented by the H term in equation
(3). That value depends on the type of plan (a function of household composition) and
that person’s household income. For the sample of persons with ESI and in households
between 100 and 400 percent of FPL, I calculated the average value of the 2014 subsidy
under the assumption that a family plan provides benefits valued at $19,000 per year
(2014 dollars), an individual plan’s benefits are $7,000 per year, and an “employee plus
one” plan has a value equal to the average of the two. 12 My subsidy calculation
recognizes that, depending on family income, exchange plan participants must pay the
plan premium and various out-of-pocket costs like coinsurance according to the ACA’s
“sliding scales.” On average, a month of the 2015 exchange subsidy is worth $508 (2014
dollars), so that $508 is the value of the unemployment and out of the labor force benefit
indices for HI subsidies for persons with ESI at work.13
Each person has a point on a schedule like the two solid schedules shown in
Figure 1 and that point is determined by the amount of his household income when he
works, say, 13 fewer weeks of the calendar year. The vertical distance between that point
and the full expected medical payment (i.e., premiums plus expected out-of-pocket
expenses) associated with the policy is the amount of the ACA’s implicit subsidy for not
working those 13 weeks. The $508 cited above is the average vertical distance among
full-time median earners in the March 2011 Current Population Survey with employersponsored health insurance, and in families between 100 and 400 percent of the FPL. For
this reason, one could describe this work disincentive as persons “jumping onto” the
income scale for health expenses as a consequence of not working.
12

Appendix III has more details on valuing health insurance plans.
The Congressional Budget Office (2013) also projects that the average exchange subsidy will
be about $500 per month.

13

11

Full-time ESI employees can also become eligible for exchange subsidies by
moving to part time, and part-time (and ESI-ineligible) employees at ESI firms will find
that they lose their exchange subsidy by moving to full time. The reduced hours benefit
index for this program is $582, which is the $508 scaled by the same factor as used for
the employer penalty (see above). This incentive to cut hours from full time to part time
is another example of jumping onto the income scale as a consequence of working less.
At first glance, it might appear that Table 1 needs a row to indicate that people
leaving ESI jobs lose the implicit subsidy for ESI associated with the exclusion of ESI
premiums from income for the purposes of payroll, personal income, and business
income taxation. However, Table 1 quantifies the impact of the ACA, and the loss of the
implicit ESI subsidy occurred before the ACA and will continue to occur after it.14

Sliding Along the Income Scale for Health Payments
The third disincentive associated with the income scales like the two shown in
Figure 1 involves “sliding down” – rather than jumping onto – the income scale by
working less during the calendar year.

This case applies to persons who receive

exchange subsidies, or has family members receiving them, even when working. For
such a person, there are two notable points on the scale: one when working more and a
second when working less. The person’s ACA penalty for working more is, as a share of
household income added by working more, the slope of the line connecting the two
points on the scale.15 Algebraically, the penalty is the hw or nw term in equation (4),
for the employment and weekly hours margins, respectively.
Unlike the disincentives associated with jumping onto the income scale, the
marginal tax rates from sliding along the income scale are especially sensitive to the
exact position on the scale because the scale has a number of discrete notches or cliffs in
it. For example, a person who earns 390 percent of FPL when working less and 410
percent of FPL when working more would face an ACA marginal tax rate of about 150
percent. In order to emphasize results that are not especially sensitive to notches and
14

Algebraically, the implicit subsidy for ESI is part of equation (3)’s non-ACA term T.
Note that both axes in Figure 1 are in the same units, with each unit representing a dollar
amount equal to the federal poverty line.

15

12

cliffs, I approximate the slopes of the sliding scales by averaging the various slopes,
weighting by the width of the income interval over which they apply. Geometrically, the
weighted average slope is equal to the slope of the dashed secants shown in Figure 1. I
used the weighted average slopes only for the disincentives associated with sliding along
the income scale and not those associated with jumping onto the income scale.
The weighted average slopes still vary across households according to family
situations, so I average the weighted average slopes across median earners in the Current
Population Survey without employer-sponsored health insurance, and in families between
100 and 400 percent of the FPL. That average is about 24 percent of earnings, which is
the $832 per month (algebraically, w) shown in the third row of Table 1. The same
entry is shown in all of the columns of that row because the disincentive depends on
income, and not whether a specific income level is achieved through unemployment, or
out of the labor force, or reduced hours.

Simultaneously Jumping and Sliding Along the Income Scale
An ESI worker who is employed part of the year may be receiving exchange
subsidies during periods of non-employment.

When such a worker decides, or is

required, to work one less month, he not only jumps onto the income scale for that month
– the H term in equation (3) for the wedge between employer cost and employee benefit –
but also enhances the subsidy received for the other months of non-employment during
the calendar year.

Algebraically, the additional disincentive is represented by the

(1-ni)iw term in equation (3). Workers like these are participating in both the third and
fifth programs listed in Table 1. As explained below, when counting the number of
persons affected by each program, such workers count once toward the H “jumping” term
and at most (1-ni) < 1 times for sliding along the scale.
The double disincentive also applies to workers switching between ESI-eligible
full-time employment to part-time (and ESI-ineligible) employment during the calendar
year. An additional month of part-time employment not only turns on an exchange
subsidy for that month but, by reducing calendar year income, enhances the subsidies
received during the other months of the year that employment is part-time (or zero).

13

Such workers count once in Table 1’s reduced hours column toward the H “jumping”
term and at most (1-ni) < 1 times for sliding along the scale.

Reconciling Advance Premium Credits
The means-tested discounts a family receives during the calendar year (hereafter,
“coverage year”) will often derive from the income they reported on historical tax returns
(usually the return from the second year prior) and its subsidies must be reconciled with
its actual income at the conclusion of the coverage year.16 In principle, the subsidies
could be fully reconciled by having subsidy excesses or shortfalls be debited or credited
on the family’s personal income tax return, in which case there would be no additional
earning disincentive from the reconciliation process itself.

At the other extreme,

reconciliation could be zero in which case the earning disincentives noted above would
apply to earnings in the year-before-last rather than earnings in the coverage year, but the
reconciliation itself would not create additional disincentives.
Appendix II describes the reconciliation process prescribed by the ACA, which in
some ways is in between the two reconciliation scenarios described above. In particular,
premium credits are fully reconciled for any family to be credited on its tax return. Costsharing subsidies are not reconciled. Families who received excess credits during the
coverage year are limited on the amount they must repay, with the limits determined by
family income during the coverage year. Appendix II shows how the means-tested
reconciliation of excess credits adds an additional 4.5 percentage points to the marginal
taxation of income reported on applicable tax returns for the coverage year, which is
about $154 per month.

16

For example, the 2014 federal personal income tax return (filed sometime during calendar year
2015) could provide the income estimate for the purposes of determining health expense
discounts received during 2016. Reconciliation of the 2016 subsidies occurs sometime during
calendar year 2017 when the family files its 2016 federal personal income tax return. In
principle, documents available in late 2015 – such as pay stubs or employer quarterly payroll
reports – would be alternate sources of 2016 income estimates.

14

ACA Subsidies Disappear When Falling Below the Poverty Line
Assuming for the moment that no one above the poverty line is eligible for
Medicaid, the eligible calendar-year income range for ACA’s exchange subsidies is
between 100 and 400 percent of the poverty line. Thus, holding Medicaid eligibility
constant, the ACA introduces a subsidy for persons above the poverty line without
introducing a subsidy for persons below the poverty line.17 This by itself increases the
incentive (or, due to longstanding programs for people below the poverty line, decreases
the disincentive) for earning above the poverty line.
In order to compartmentalize the range of incentives and disincentives in the
ACA, the bulk of this paper considers short-duration employment decisions – a couple of
weeks – that would push few persons out of, or into, the eligible income range when
income is measured on a calendar year basis.

Those incentives are represented

algebraically by the partial derivatives in equations (3) and (4). The purpose of this
section is to complete the incentive calculus by recognizing that longer-duration work
decisions sometimes involve significantly different incentives because those decisions are
more likely to move a family into or out of the eligible income range: that is, crossing the
poverty threshold or crossing four times the poverty threshold. The final result is an
additional “HI subsidies stop at the poverty line” row in Table 1 to include long-duration
employment decisions in the overall marginal tax rate index, to the extent that their ACA
incentives are different from short-duration decisions.
Each column in Table 2 examines a 2014 labor supply decision of a different
duration, ranging from one to twelve months, for the purpose of isolating the average
incentive consequences of crossing the upper or lower income threshold. For simplicity,
Table 2 examines only employment decisions – months unemployed or months out of the
labor force – although the same sort of issues arise with respect to the duration of a
weekly hours decision. For example, an unemployed person who considers returning to
work May 1 rather than January 1 is engaged in a work decision of four month duration.
The consequences for persons crossing an income threshold are different for ESI
workers who jump onto the income scale than they are for persons who have exchange
coverage even when they are working and thereby slide along the scale. Each of these
17

The ACA’s Medicaid expansion is examined separately below.

15

cases is examined in a separate panel of Table 2. The first row of Table 1 displays the
percentage of non-elderly household heads and spouses working with ESI sometime
during 2010 with weekly earnings within 20 percent of the median, and with a work
decision (of duration indicated by table column) that would push the family across the
poverty line (the lower income threshold).18 In order to algebraically examine longer
duration work decisions among ESI-eligible workers, take the difference between the
disposable income formula (3) for the actual work amount ni and a lesser work amount
n*, holding constant the non-ACA term Ti:

(ni  n* )xi w  (ci  ci* )  (1  n* )Hi ( yi* )  (1  ni ) Hi ( yi )

(5)

The left-hand side of equation (5) is the wedge between the employer cost increment and
the employee benefit increment. If the work decision moves a family into or out of the
eligible income range, equation (5) is significantly different from the wedge formula (3)
because one of the two terms on the right-hand side of equation (5) would be zero.
Specifically, the first (second) of the two terms is zero for a decision crossing the lower
(upper) income threshold, respectively, from above. The second row of Table 2 therefore
reports the average (1-n)H(y) for the sample represented in the first row of the table. The
third row reports the forgone subsidy, averaged in the same sample, that was included in
Table 1’s $508 population-average subsidy,19 plus a sliding scale term equal to $832$301 (from two rows of Table 1; the $301 is scaled by the labor supply weight for
unemployment) times one minus the fraction of weeks worked for the sample.
Algebraically, the third row of Table 2 is the marginal wedge formula (3). The difference
between the third and second row can be interpreted as the average amount by which the
rest of Table 1 overestimates the subsidies that would be received during periods of nonemployment by ESI workers in the families near the poverty threshold.
18

As explained below, the percentages reflect the fact that some workers will not receive the
ACA subsidies because they can obtain coverage through a spouse’s employer, or because they
decide not to take up a subsidy for which they are eligible. The percentages also recognize that
part of the population receives unemployment benefits when not working, which helps keep the
family above the poverty line.
19
The $508 is an average over a larger group, most of which would get smaller subsidies when
not working and (due to spousal income and distance from the poverty line) cannot cross the
poverty threshold even if they weren’t working at all during the year.

16

For example, if a six-month work decision were of interest, the six-month column
of Table 2 tells us that 1.3% of working non-elderly heads and spouses would both (a)
have ESI when working and (b) move from inside the eligible income range to below the
poverty threshold as a consequence of reducing months worked by six. Rather than
getting the additional $7,567 subsidy assigned to them by Table 1’s rows 3, 5, and 8, they
would forgo subsidies worth $920.
The next three rows in Table 2 examine ESI workers whose decisions would push
them below 400 percent of the poverty line but not below the poverty line. Because their
actual income is outside of the eligible income range, they are assigned zero forgone
subsidy in the rest of Table 1, which is why zeros are recorded in the sixth row of Table
2. Equation (5) shows that crossing the upper income threshold initiates a subsidy for all
of the months in which the worker is not on the payroll, even those non-employment
months that were not the result of the work decision. The average amount of the subsidy
initiated (among those workers with decisions that cross the upper threshold) is shown in
Table 2’s fifth row.
For full-time workers without ESI, the incentives for crossing an income
threshold is found in the difference between the disposable income formula (4) for the
actual work amount ni and a lesser work amount n*, holding constant the non-ACA term
Ti and setting hi = 1:
(ni  n* ) xi w  (ci  ci* )  H i ( yi* )  H i ( yi )  (ni  n* ) w

(6)

For decisions that cross the poverty line, the first term on the right-hand side is zero
because the poor cannot receive exchange subsidies. The remaining terms are shown in
the second row of Table 2’s middle panel. The third row shows the disincentive recorded
for this group in the rest of Table 1.
The middle term on the right-hand side of equation (6) is zero for decisions that
cross the upper income threshold. The remaining terms are shown in the fifth row of
Table 2’s middle panel. The follow row has zeros because the rest of Table 1 assigns no
forgone subsidies to families outside the eligible income range.
The bottom panel of Table 2 combines the results from the four scenarios
quantified above. For example, 3.3 percent of non-elderly working heads and spouses
17

earning near the median on a weekly basis would cross into or out of the eligible income
range by working three months less and thereby turn on or turn off their exchange
subsidy. On average, a $39 subsidy is lost, or about 0.3 percent of the compensation at
stake, by working three months less. By examining only short-duration work decisions,
the rest of Table 1 assumes that a $597 subsidy, or 4.7 percent of three month’s
compensation, is gained by such workers when they work three months less. If three
month’s work decisions were of interest rather than short-duration decisions, then Table 1
overstates the ACA’s impact on the work incentives for this group by 5.0 percentage
points (4.7 + 0.3). Because this group is 3.3 percent of the overall working population,
Table 1 would overstate the overall average by 0.2 percentage points, which is the
amount shown in the last row of Table 2.
The final row of the table shows how ACA incentives for longer duration work
decision are less well approximated by the short-duration incentives.

Ideally, the

distribution of work decisions considered by employers and employees would be
measured and each column of Table 2 would be weighted accordingly to arrive an
estimate of the ACA’s impact on overall work incentives. Measurement of such a
distribution is beyond the scope of this paper. For now, I note that the median duration of
unemployment rarely surpassed 10 weeks before 2009. The 2008-9 recession added 1012 weeks to median durations. Thus, a two, three, or four month duration would be a
worthy focal point in Table 2.
I take the three month estimate, for which 3.3 percent of the median-earner
population face a disincentive that is 5.0 percentage points, or $212 per month, less than
they do for short-duration work decisions. -$212 is therefore entered in Table 1’s sixth
row, with a corresponding 0.033 weight entered in the bottom panel.20

ACA Subsidies Interact with Other Safety Net Programs
A multitude of social safety net programs predated the ACA and served to reduce
work incentives. The ACA replaces or substitutes for some of them, and thereby might
20

Table 2 does not examine long duration weekly hours decisions, but the same kinds of effects
are present so the same entry is in all three columns of Table 1’s sixth row.

18

reduce work incentives less than the ACA provisions would if they were introduced by
themselves into a world with no safety net.
Unemployment insurance (UI) is a major safety net program, and the benefits
paid by the UI program are implicitly taxed by the ACA because UI benefits are part of
the household income that determines a household’s assistance with health insurance
premiums and out-of-pocket costs. In particular, persons laid off from a non-ESI job
before the ACA would find their UI benefits taxed at normal marginal personal income
tax rates but under the ACA those marginal rates jump about 24 percentage points for
recipients of exchange subsidies thanks to the ACA’s “sliding scale” premium assistance.
For someone receiving $1,265 per month in UI benefits – about the average among UIeligible persons with earnings potential near the median – that’s an extra $301 per month
in taxes.
The uninsured sometimes receive uncompensated care from health providers, and
uncompensated care is likely means-tested. To the extent that the ACA reduces reliance
on uncompensated care (Goolsbee 2011, oral testimony at 77:45), it may reduce the
implicit income tax associated with it. I am not aware of a calculation of the nationwide
average marginal tax rate from uncompensated care, but it can be estimated by assuming
that its value is a linear function of household labor income and noting that: (a) the
uninsured paid, in 2008, an aggregate of $30 billion in health expenses (another $56
billion was uncompensated care for those patients) and (b) aggregate labor income among
the uninsured was $510 billion.21 This puts the average marginal labor income tax rate
(including in the average those among the uninsured who do not use any health care)
from uncompensated care of 5.9 percent. According to this estimate, when spending a
month prior to the ACA without his $3,424 earnings, an uninsured person could expect to
save an average of $201 in medical expenditures by increasing his uncompensated care.
After the ACA, this help might not be necessary because he would have private HI
coverage. Thus, -$201 per month is shown in the top panel of Table 1 as an ACA impact
on the amount of benefits available as a consequence of not working.

21

Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured (2008, 1).

19

Part of the Population Will Have Their Work Incentives Erased: An
Example
Consider a person comparing a part-time position to a full-time position. The fulltime position, shown in the left column of Table 3 requires 40 hours of work and $100 of
employment expenses (such as commuting or child care) per week, for 50 weeks per
year. The part-time position requires 29 hours of work and $75 employment expenses
per week. Each of the positions costs the employer $26 per hour worked, including
employer payroll taxes and employer contributions for health insurance (if any).
Only the full-time position includes affordable health insurance, which means that
a full-time employee would not be eligible to receive assistance from the ACA for
premiums or for out-of-pocket health expenses.

The employer pays 78% of the

premiums for the family insurance plan, and withholds the remaining premiums of
$3,146 from the paychecks of participating full-time employees.

Each full-time

employee’s income subject to tax is $35,021, which excludes employer payroll taxes
(7.65% of the $35,021), employer health insurance contributions, and employee
premiums withheld.
Part-time employees get less total compensation – $37,700 – because they work
fewer hours.

The part-time employees are not eligible for ESI and the tax exclusions

that go with it, which makes their income subject to tax ($35,021) equal to their total
compensation minus employer payroll taxes. It is a coincidence that income subject to
tax is the same for full-time and part-time employees: more on this below.
The part-time employees are eligible for subsidized health plans from the ACA’s
exchanges because they are not offered affordable health insurance by their employer. I
assume that the second cheapest silver plan has the same expected medical payments as
the employer plan: namely, $17,300 per year including out-of-pocket health expenses.
By definition of silver plan, the full premium is $12,110.

However, because the

employee has a family income subject to tax of 145% of the federal poverty line (the
employee is the sole earner in a family of four), the ACA caps premiums for the second
cheapest silver plan at 3.7 percent of their income subject to tax, or $1,304 per year. The
other $10,806 is paid by the U.S. Treasury to the insurer pursuant to the ACA.
20

By design, the silver health plans have lower premiums and greater out-of-pocket
costs (deductibles, copayments, etc.) than the typical employer plan. That design feature
is visible in my Table 3 because exchange plan out-of-pocket costs total $5,190 rather
than the $3,000 of out-of-pocket health expenses associated with ESI. However, because
the employee’s family is at 145% of the poverty line, the employee gets an 80% discount
on the out-of-pocket expenses, with the remainder paid by the U.S. Treasury to the
insurer pursuant to the ACA.
After health and work expenses, the part-time employee makes $28,929 per year,
which exceeds the full-time income ($27,021) after health and work expenses! Table 3
does not show the employee payroll and personal income taxes, but those would be the
same for the full-time and part-time employee because the amount of the income subject
to the two taxes is, in this example, independent of full-time status.
Table 3’s example is special, and a bit simplified, in that part-time employees
have: more disposable income than full-time employees, the same income subject to tax,
and the same hourly employer cost. But the Table contains a general lesson: moving
from full-time employment to part-time employment can trigger generous assistance with
health premiums and out-of-pocket expenses that can offset much of the income lost due
to reduced work hours. That’s why Table 1 includes a significant entry for the “HI
subsidies for persons w/ ESI at work” program benefit amount in the reduced hours
column. Moreover, Table 3’s key parameters – $26 per hour employer cost, $14,300
premiums for ESI, and a single-earner family of four – are not extraordinary, which is a
symptom of the fact that, under the ACA, it will not be extraordinary for people to be
able to have more disposable income from a part-time position than from a full-time one.

Program Participation Weights
Table 1’s top panel shows that the ACA’s work incentives vary according to the
program, if any, that might be relevant to a worker and his family. For example, a person
eligible for the exchange subsidies while working full time will have $832 per month
additional help during times of unemployment (minus offsets, if any, from the ACA’s
implicit taxation of UI benefits and its substitution away from uncompensated care),
whereas a worker that is ineligible solely due to his employer’s offer of affordable
21

insurance would get $508 per month added. An uninsured full-time worker is getting
only $103 of additional help. For many workers, none of these programs are affecting
their incentives to work. The purpose of Table 1’s middle panel is to weight the top
panel’s programs according to the fraction of the population affected.
A program, such as a universally enforced flat-rate payroll tax, that applied to the
entire population of non-elderly household heads and spouses would get a program
participation weight of one. If instead, say, 30 percent of the population were randomly
chosen to pay the tax, then the program weight would be 0.30.
Actual programs, especially on the subsidy side, have eligibility based on
personal and household characteristics like income that can be altered by households.
For example, giving a subsidy to employees who are not offered health insurance will
cause more people to take jobs without health insurance. To form a weight for such a
program, I follow index number theory and take the simple average of (i) the fraction of
the population that would be eligible and participate with behavior held fixed at its noACA values, and (ii) the fraction of the population actually participating under the ACA.
Given that I am writing before the ACA goes into full effect, I make conservative
estimates of ACA behavioral patterns (i.e., for the purpose of forming weights I error on
the side of assuming that the ACA’s behavioral effects are minor), drawing on the
literature whenever possible. I also report sensitivity analysis in Appendix V.
Table 1’s weights often cannot be independently varied, because eligibility for
one of the programs often implies ineligibility for another. Table 4 shows how Table 1’s
weights are related to each other by partitioning the entire population of non-elderly
household heads and spouses who would be working absent the ACA. The partitions are
based on the source of health insurance (Table 4’s “HI holder” column indicates which
case applies), the income interval for the person’s household (the “FPL interval” column
indicates which case applies), and the health benefits offered by his employer (indicated
at the top of the table). Each column in each of Table 4’s four panels has three entries:
one for each labor supply margin. The sum of all of the weights for “FT-not employed”
plus the sum of all of the weights for “PT-not employed” is one because the entire wouldbe working population has the option of reducing their labor supply by not working.
Each “FT-PT” weight is identical to the corresponding “FT-not employed” weight
22

because a full-time employee can reduce labor supply either by reducing hours or by not
being employed.
For example, the entry of 0.131 in the top row of Table 4 means that 13.1 percent
of the would-be working population of non-elderly household heads and spouses
(hereafter, “population”) (i) would be employed with ESI from his or her employer (who
does not offer health benefits to its part-time employees) (ii) lives in a household with
income between 100 and 400 percent of the federal poverty line, (iii) could not obtain
coverage through a spouse’s employer during periods of non-employment, and (iv) would
take up an exchange subsidy if it were available.22 The majority of the population is
represented in the “all others” panel because they are insured through an employer and
have household income above 400 percent FPL, or because their household income is
below the poverty line, or because they have ESI and would obtain coverage through a
spousal employer during times when they were not full-time employed.23
Most of Table 4’s entries are calculated from cross-tabulations of health insurance
status, full-time status, and family income relative to the poverty line. The no-ACA
tabulation is from the March 2011 CPS, with income items referring to the prior calendar
year. The ACA tabulation is constructed from the no-ACA tabulation and assumed
impacts of the ACA on (i) the fraction of employers offering ESI to their full-time
employees, weighted by employment of persons in families between 100 and 400 percent
of the federal poverty line (-10 percent impact) and (ii) the fraction of the population
without insurance (the ACA is assumed to cut the fraction in half among would-be
working non-elderly household heads and spouses).24
Take, for example, the 0.028 and 0.131 entries in Table 4’s second row, which
total 0.160 and represent full-time employed persons who would receive an exchange
22

Recall that Table 4’s entries are averages of values for the ACA and no-ACA. The 0.131 entry
is the average of 0.125 (ACA) and 0.138 (no-ACA).
23
The ACA does not subsidize coverage for people who are eligible for coverage through a
spouse’s employer even if that coverage is quite expensive. If subsequent legislation, or lax
enforcement, fixes this so-called “family glitch” by subsidizing all non-employed adults in the
eligible income range, then the ACA’s impact on the overall marginal labor income tax rate
would be even greater.
24
The Congressional Budget Office (2013) estimates that the ACA will reduce the uninsured
population by about half. Forecasts for the fraction of employees who lose ESI range widely; -10
percent (conditional on 100-400 percent FPL) is closer to zero than many, but not all, of the
forecasts.

23

subsidy if they left employment. In 2011, 35.1% of non-elderly working household
heads and spouses with earnings potential near the median were simultaneously working
full-time, obtaining coverage through their employer, and in a family between 100 and
400 percent of the poverty line. With the ACA, that percentage may fall to 31.5.
Multiplying the average of the two by the assumed exchange subsidy participation rate of
48 percent (see below) yields the combined fraction of 0.160 noted above.
The entries are color coded according to the program(s) applicable to the relevant
subpopulation. Take the green color codes, for example. The aforementioned 0.131
entry (first row) represents all the persons who would jump onto the sliding income scale
for exchange subsidies merely by switching to part-time work: 0.13 is therefore Table 1’s
entry for the “HI subsidies for persons with ESI at work” program on the “reduced hours”
margin. For the employment margin, another 0.033 of the population can also jump onto
the sliding scale, as indicated by the green-coded 0.028 and 0.005 entries in Table 1’s
second and third rows. The sum of all three of Table 4’s green-coded employment
entries is 0.16, which is entered in Table 1 for the “HI subsidies for persons with ESI at
work” program.
Table 1’s program weights for the individual mandate penalty (employment
margin) are small because about 12 percent of the non-poor population is uninsured and
about six percent are expected to be uninsured.25 The program weights for “HI subsidies
for persons w/o ESI at work” (that is, movements along the sliding income scale for the
exchange subsidies) include the combination of persons who are already covered by nongroup insurance and workers who are currently uninsured but will get subsidized NGI
once the exchanges come on-line. Both of these groups are thought to be small, which is
and by themselves would make a program weight of only 0.07. Thus, while the sliding
scale for exchange subsidies may be the most recognized source of high ACA marginal
tax rates, it is less common than: the employer penalties, the withholding of exchange
25

For this purpose, “uninsured” does not include persons aged 25 or less and without dependents
because I assume that they satisfy the individual mandate by participating in their parents’ plan.
The individual mandate program weight of 0.09 does not imply that the ACA would penalize 6
percent of household heads and spouses between the ages of 26 and 64 (about 7 million people)
because many of them would be unemployed (indeed, that possibility is the reason why the
individual mandate adds to the marginal tax rate). The Congressional Budget Office (2010)
predicts that 3.9 million household heads and spouses will be penalized for lack of insurance
among family members; my program weight is consistent with about that many penalty payers.

24

subsidies from persons working in ESI jobs, and perhaps even less common than the
hardship relief attached to the individual mandate penalty.
As noted above, ESI workers also slide along the scale to the extent that they are
not employed part of the year and satisfy the other eligibility criteria for the exchange
subsidies, although, unlike non-ESI workers, the scale is only relevant for their months of
non-employment. On the other hand, when an ESI worker slides along the family income
scale, his spouse (if any) does too because family income is the combination of income
from both spouses. I therefore include the ESI workers represented by the 0.16 entry in
the fifth row of Table 1’s middle panel, scale down by the average fraction of their year
that they would be non-employed if they reduced their labor supply by 6 weeks (0.17:
this is the (1-ni) term in equation (3)), scale down again by the fraction 0.43 of aggregate
hours changes that can be attributed to changes in weeks worked (as opposed weekly
work hours or the propensity to work any weeks during the calendar year), scale up by
one plus the 0.33 fraction of the sample in a dual-earner couple, and add them to the 0.07
non-ESI workers noted above to get an overall sliding scale weight of 0.09 for the two
employment margins in Table 1. 26 The formula is used to add to the hours margin
weight, but the addition is less because some full-time ESI workers would continue to
have ESI if they worked part time.
The participation rate for the exchange subsidies among persons leaving employer
plans is an important determinant of the entries shown in Table 4’s top panel, and by
subtraction a determinant of the entries shown in Table 4’s bottom panel. I assume a
48% participation rate. In making my estimate, I noted that law is currently written with
Congressmen and their staffs required to get their health insurance on the exchanges and
that the Administration plans a large advertising campaign for promoting the exchange
plans and keeping them distinct from anti-poverty health programs like Medicaid. In this
regard, the exchange plans look like a well-advertised version of the COBRA subsidy
provided by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, which had about a 48%
participation rate among persons laid off from ESI jobs (see Appendix IV). The 48% rate
26

Each non-ESI dual couples is already counted twice (once for each spouse as a worker who
would have been uninsured or covered by a non-group plan) in the 0.07 weight, unless one of the
spouses is outside the age 26-64 age range, so it should not be scaled up by a dual-earner
propensity.

25

could also be an underestimate of exchange subsidy participation because hospitals and
other health providers will have an incentive to urge their patients to enroll in subsidized
exchange plans, which will be more prevalent and more permanent than the COBRA
subsidy was. I also note from the Oregon Medicaid Study that 60 percent of households
that won by lottery (conditional on meeting an income requirement) a Medicaid
participation opportunity filed an application to participate.27
Table 1’s weights for the employer penalty program are greater than those for the
HI subsidies for persons without ESI at work because any full-time employee creates a
penalty at the margin if his employer does not offer ESI, even if that employee does not
buy insurance from the exchanges or is ineligible for subsidies due to family income.
Because I intend to estimate marginal tax rates for market-level analysis, I treat the
employer penalty as $2,000 for any full-time employee hired by any firm not offering
ESI to its full-time employees, implicitly ignoring the facts that (i) employers with less
than 49 full-time equivalent employees will pay zero penalty at the margin and (ii)
employers with exactly 49 employees will pay approximately $40,000 for an additional
full-time employee. As a result, Table 1’s weight for the employer penalty is 0.23, which
is the sum of one entry from the last column of each of Table 4’s four panels.
Another important determinant of the program weights is the fraction of
employees whose employer does not offer ESI, even to its full-time employees. The
CBO estimates 27 percent for 2008 (Congressional Budget Office 2007). Using Census
Bureau data, Janicki (2013) estimates 29 percent in 2010.

Using the Medical

Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), Carroll and Miller (2011) estimate 13 percent in
2011. The simple average of these three is 23 percent, but I use 24 percent in order to put
somewhat less weight on the outlying MEPS estimate.28 With a few employers dropping
ESI under the ACA, the 24 percent could become 28 percent.
27

The lottery population is poorer, less educated, etc., than the population represented in my
Table 4’s top panel, and for this reason the former group might be less likely to accept health
insurance assistance than the latter group would be. Medicaid may also be more stigmatized and
less well advertised than the exchange subsidies will be. On the other hand, the ACA’s exchange
subsidies require participants to spend some of their own money, whereas Medicaid participants
pay little (if anything) to participate.
28
The Congressional Budget Office (2007) uses a variety of sources, including the MEPS and the
Census Bureau data. Therefore my weight on MEPS is a bit larger than CBO’s, but still much
less than 50 percent. Cutler and Sood (2010) only consider the MEPS, and thereby conclude that

26

When a full-year ESI worker considers the alternative of working, say, eleven
months, the price of exchange coverage during that month would be set during the
coverage year, and there would likely be good information about income for the calendar
year, and thereby little need to reconcile a large premium tax credit at the end of the year.
Conditional on exchange participation, part-year ESI workers already get a subsidy for
that part of the year, and spending more weeks at work might result in an excess credit
that has to be repaid (according to the means-tested repayment schedule) at the end of the
year. Non-ESI workers are in a similar situation. Since both of these groups are counted
in the 0.09 sliding-along the scale weight, the program weight for reconciling advance
premium credits is 0.09 times an assumed 50 percent propensity to have actual income
sufficiently exceed the amount that was used to estimate income at the time of
enrollment.
As explained above, 3.3 percent of non-elderly working heads and spouses
earning near the median on a weekly basis would cross into or out of the eligible income
range by working three months less. 0.033 is therefore Table 1’s participation weight for
the “HI subsidies stop at the poverty line” program.
My estimates assume that roughly half of workers with earnings potential near the
median are not directly affected by any of the ACA provisions noted above. Less than 10
percent of such workers will be uninsured while working and therefore liable for the
individual mandate penalty while working. Less than 15 percent will have non-group
insurance while working and some of those will not be eligible for subsidies because their
household income will be outside the 100-400 percent FPL interval. About 54 percent of
median earners will have ESI at work, but more than half of them will not take up the
subsidy while not working or will be ineligible for exchange subsidies when not working
because their household income will be outside the subsidized interval or because
coverage during non-employment is available through the spouse’s employer.

The

only 2 million employees work in large firms not offering health insurance, as compared to the
CBO’s estimate of more than 15 million. This reason alone makes my estimate of the
participation weight for the employer penalty program 6 or 7 times greater than it would be under
Cutler and Sood’s (2010) approach. In addition, Cutler and Sood appear to ignore the
extraordinary penalty levied on the 50th employee hired, and did not anticipate that the ACA’s
employer penalty would not be deductible from employer taxes.

27

remainder of workers with near median earnings potential will be covered by someone
else’s plan (e.g., spouse or parents), Medicare, or Medicaid.29
The weight for the ACA’s implicit taxation of UI benefits is 0.06, which is the
program weight for “HI subsidies for persons w/o ESI at work” times the fraction of the
workforce who would, during times of unemployment, be UI eligible.30 The program
weight for the uncompensated care interaction term is the (magnitude of the) difference
between the weight on the uninsured and the pre-ACA fraction of workers who were
uninsured. Unlike several of the other program weights, the uncompensated care weight
is not restricted to families between 100 and 400 percent of the poverty line.

Medicaid Expansions for the Poor
Medicaid is a longstanding health insurance program for the poor, and is
essentially free for its participants. Income eligibility limits are set by states, and in 2012
averaged 84% of the poverty line for working parents and somewhat less for jobless
parents.31 Many states also impose asset limits, especially for adult participants. The
ACA expands Medicaid participation in three ways: raising the income threshold for

29

Another way to calculate the fraction with work incentives directly affected is to add (i) the
fraction of workers with ESI and in a family with income in the 1-4 FPL range (adjusted for
imperfect take-up, this is the fraction who would obtain an exchange subsidy as a consequence of
leaving their job), (ii) the fraction of workers at firms not offering ESI even to full-time
employees (they are affected because their employer pays a penalty, or faces a large marginal cost
of expanding beyond 49 employees), (iii) the non-poor uninsured aged 26-64 who work at
employers offering ESI to full-time employers (if they remain uninsured, they will be subject to
the individual mandate penalty and its relief provisions). The three groups cited above do not
overlap. Fraction (i) is roughly 0.25 or 0.30. Fraction (ii) is roughly 0.20 or 0.25, which means
that the sum (i)-(iii) is close to or exceeding 0.5.
30
In order to calculate the benefit index for the “HI subsidies for persons w/ ESI at work,” I took
the household incomes of workers as they were in 2010, without any reduction for the income
that would be lost by working less and thereby somewhat underestimating the amount of the
subsidy (recall that subsidies are enhanced by reducing household income). That excluded lost
household income would be net of UI benefits, which is why, for consistency, my Table 1 must
also exclude an UI offset for “HI subsidies for persons w/ ESI at work.”
31
The cross-state average weights thresholds from Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation (2012)
were weighted by 2010 state population. The average threshold for children aged 1-5 was 141
percent FPL.

28

adult eligibility (in some states), reducing barriers to participation, and eliminating some
of the alternatives to Medicaid.
The ACA gives states the option, and funding if they exercise the option, of
increasing the income threshold for adults to 133 percent of the poverty line, without an
asset test. Holahan and Headen (2010) estimated that, if all states expanded, Medicaid
participation would increase by 27.4 percent. Above I already examine ACA programs
made available to persons above 100 percent of the poverty line (defined on a calendar
year basis), so this section avoids double-counting by focusing on Medicaid expansions
for the poor population. Also note that Medicaid income limits are not necessarily
examined on a calendar year basis, and a family could be in poverty for part of a year
even while they are above poverty for the calendar year.
Using the March 2011 CPS, I found that, among the non-elderly heads and
spouses working some time during 2010 and part of the population examined by Holahan
and Headen, 14 percent were both below the poverty line and living in a state where
Medicaid will be expanded (or the state was creating a substitute health premium
assistance program for that population). 32 I therefore assume that, by increasing the
income threshold in some states, the ACA increases the eligibility index (recall equation
(1)) for the Medicaid program by 4 percent (14 percent of 24.7 percent). Changes in the
eligibility index are translated into expansion program participation weights for Table 1
by multiplying by the Medicaid program participation weight from Mulligan (2012).
In preparing their 24.7 percent estimate Holahan and Headen just looked at the
relative size of the population with incomes below the new threshold and below the hold
threshold. But the ACA also reduces barriers to participation among persons already
eligible. When it works, healthcare.gov is supposed to quickly show people whether they
are eligible for Medicaid and facilitate their enrollment. Healthcare.gov will not be assettesting applicants, and states will be encouraged to waive asset tests too.
Another barrier, so to speak, to Medicaid participation has been the availability of
low-premium private health insurance coverage that lower income families sometimes
prefer to Medicaid. The ACA eliminates low-premium plans by requiring underwriters
32

When Holahan and Headen wrote, states were required to expand Medicaid.
optional.

Now it is

29

to provide a wide range of benefits, leaving Medicaid as sometimes the next best option
(Hopkins 2013). Unlike the private plan participation, Medicaid is income tested, so this
transition subjects a part of the population to means test that they otherwise would not
have experienced.
Sonier, Boudreaux and Blewett (2013) examine the Massachusetts health reform
and estimated that it increased Medicaid participation by 36 percent among persons
previously Medicaid eligible. However, they note that part of the 36 percent may be an
increase in reported participation rather than actual participation. I also notice that the
participation effect visible in their data seems to decline over time. Holahan and Headen
(2010) look at the possibility of increased national Medicaid participation, holding
eligibility constant, and guess that it could increase 12 percent as a consequence of the
ACA. I take the 12 percent estimate and, to avoid double-counting persons above the
poverty line, scale it by the incidence of poverty (define annually) among non-elderly
heads and spouses working sometime during the calendar year and below 133 percent
FPL. The combination of this “barriers” effect and the income-expansion effect noted
above is a Table 1 Medicaid expansion program participation weight of 0.07.

Results for the Overall Index
The bottom panel of Table 1 accumulates the results of the top and middle panels.
Its top row begins by, conditional on a margin for reducing labor supply, multiplying
each program’s benefit index by its program participation weight and then summing
across programs. The combined effect of the ACA is to add about $204 per month in the
assistance that people with median earnings potential get when they spend time not
employed.
On average, the ACA adds $207 per month to the assistance, if any, they get when
they move from full-time work to part-time work. In order to be comparable with the
results for the other margins, the $207 has already been scaled (see also above) so that the
change in labor supply on each of the three margins reflects the same impact on

30

aggregate hours.33 The $207 is historically unusual because a number of pre-ACA safety
net programs are designed to help primarily people without jobs whereas few (if any) are
designed to primarily help people with jobs at reduced hours.34 The employer shared
responsibility penalty can be avoided either by non-employment or reduced hours, but the
penalty is also unusual – and different from a flat-rate payroll tax – in that it can be
avoided with a lesser percentage reduction in hours than in employment.
The final two rows of Table 1 report the results of aggregating across labor supply
margins using the weights shown in the table reflecting the relative contribution of each
margin to the reduction in aggregate work hours during the recession of 2008-9
(Mulligan 2012).35 The ACA adds $204 per month to the overall statutory index.36 This
assistance is in addition to the cash flow assistance they already get from unemployment
insurance, food stamps, tax policy, and a host of other safety net programs.
$204 per month is 4.8 percent of the total compensation of a person of median
earnings potential who is working full-time. Thus, I conclude that the ACA adds 4.8
percentage points to the average marginal labor income tax rate in 2015. In 2014 and
2016, the percentage point additions (relative to the no-ACA baseline) are 3.6 and 4.9,
respectively.
Table 4 shows that 58 percent of household heads and spouses who would be
working without the ACA – the sum of the table entries without any color codes – are not
eligible for, or would not participate in, any of the subsidies or penalties that are created
33

E.g., reducing weekly hours by 20 (roughly half of full time) would be the same as reducing the
probability of employment during a week by one half. Another example: a new flat-rate payroll
tax would add the same dollar amount to the benefit index regardless of whether the labor margin
was unemployment, OLF, or reduced hours.
34
See also Mulligan (2012).
35
The data used to measure the three labor supply weights can also be used to quantify the
relative contributions to aggregate work hours changes of hours reductions by full-time
employees that changed their status to part-time and hours reductions that did not change their
status; this is the source of the 0.58 scaling factor used above to calculate benefit indices for the
reduced hours margin.
36
The $204 per month result is not sensitive to the labor supply margin weights because the
margin specific totals have a pretty tight range: $202 to $209. The $204 also excludes the ACA’s
Additional Medicare Tax of 0.9 percent of earnings above a threshold (approximately $200,000
per year), beginning in 2013, because a median earner does not earn enough to be subject to this
tax (U.S. Internal Revenue Service 2013b). Among all non-elderly heads and spouses, about one
percent will pay the tax in 2014, which makes its contribution to average marginal tax rates about
0.01 percentage points: at least two orders of magnitude less than the rest of the ACA.

31

by the ACA, except perhaps the Medicaid expansions. Thus, about half of the household
heads and spouses who would be working without the ACA have their marginal tax rate
unchanged by the ACA and the remainder have their marginal tax rate increased by an
average of 11 percentage points.
Taking into account both the benefit amounts and the participation weights,
Figure 2 shows that the three largest components of the $204 per month disincentive are,
in order: (a) the premium assistance that becomes available when a person transitions
from ESI employment to non-employment (and is withheld when transitioning back), (b)
the premium assistance that is enhanced when a worker with premium assistance works a
lesser fraction of the year, and (c) the employer penalties.
Figure 3 displays the overall marginal tax rate for non-elderly household heads
and spouses with near median earnings potential, including the safety net programs that
pre-dated the ACA. The series through December 2011 is from Mulligan (2012). I
updated that series through December 2016 by (i) adding the ACA components (3.6, 4.8,
and 4.9 percentage points in 2014, 2015, and 2016, respectively), (ii) accounting for the
reduction of the maximum duration of unemployment benefits through mid-2013, (iii)
accounting for the erosion of real food stamp benefits by inflation through October 2013,
(iv) accounting for the November 2013 expiration of the ARRA enhancement of food
stamp benefit amounts and assuming that future farm bills and inflation adjustments will
increase nominal benefits so that, on average, they are the same as in November 2013, (v)
accounting for the December 2012 expiration of the payroll tax cut, and (vi) assuming
that the work disincentives of mortgage modification erode at 3.5 percent per year after
December 2011. In addition, I assume two alternative scenarios for the duration of UI
benefits: (i) they remain unchanged after November 2013 and (ii) Emergency
Unemployment Compensation (EUC) ends in December 2013 and benefit duration
remains at 26 weeks thereafter.
The tax rate series in Figure 3 do not include sales taxes. If the series are to be
used to examine labor supply by multiplying them by an inflation-adjusted wage rate,
then the series should not be adjusted for sales tax hikes to the extent that sales tax hikes
are part of the inflation adjustment. If instead the series are used to quantify labor market

32

distortions, sales tax hikes (of about 0.2 percentage points on Figure 3’s scale, since
2007) need to be added.
The 2009-10 peak for marginal tax rates comes from various provisions of the
“stimulus” law and the 99 week duration of unemployment benefits in several states. At
the end of 2012, the marginal tax rate index reached its lowest value since 2008: less than
44 percent. One year later (January 2014), the solid index is close to 50 percent due to
the combination of the full payroll tax and all of the provisions shown in Table 1, except
for the employer penalties. The employer penalty adds more than a percentage point in
2015, while other ACA provisions strengthen their disincentives for the various reasons
cited above.
By 2016, the solid index exceeds 50%, which is 10 percentage points greater than
it was in early 2007. Over that time frame, the marginal after-tax share falls from 60
percent to 50 percent, which means that at a given marginal productivity of labor the
reward to working fell 17 percent.
As of the time of writing, EUC is scheduled to expire at the end of 2013, but the
solid series in Figure 3 assumes that Congress will extend the expiration date, as it has
several times in the recent past. If EUC really does expire as currently scheduled, then
the marginal tax rate series is the dashed series in Figure 3 and marginal tax rates in 2014
are hardly different than they were in 2013 because the EUC expiration offsets much of
the marginal tax rate hike associated with the ACA’s subsidies.

Nevertheless, the

employer penalty will add again to marginal tax rates in 2015 so that, by 2016, marginal
tax rates exceed 47 percent: about a percentage point away from their 2009-10 peak.
As noted above, the resulting time series for my statutory benefit index (1) is
necessarily a summary of a rich multidimensional distribution of labor market wedges
created by taxes and subsidies. Although the same methodology can be used to examine
the evolution of other parts of the wedge distribution (Mulligan 2013a), I follow Barro
and Sahasakul (1983), Gruber and Wise (1999) and many others and begin the analysis
with a scalar index summary of the distribution across persons and types of supply
decisions. 37 Below I discuss the fraction of people experiencing something like the
37

For the purposes of examining aggregate labor supply, one might be interested in the average
log after-marginal-tax share rather than average marginal tax rate, but Table 2 demonstrates that

33

incentives represented by the summary index, and how incentives changes differ among
the various margins of labor supply.

Conclusions
The possible labor market effects of the ACA's employer penalties have already
attracted much discussion.

But economists have long recognized that penalizing

employees for working, or subsidizing people for not working, has essentially the same
substitution effects on the quantity and productivity of labor as penalizing employers on
the basis of their payrolls. The ACA’s employer penalties by themselves are historically
significant but nonetheless smaller than two of the law’s other implicit tax provisions.
A number of the ACA’s implicit taxes are linked in one way or another to its
income-based healthcare payment schedules, which create several types of work
disincentives for persons in households with income in or near the 100-400 percent FPL
range. First, in order of aggregate importance, a household head or spouse is denied
access to the payment schedule as long as he or she holds a job that offers health
insurance, and likely granted access when not employed. Second, working fewer weeks
per year or hours per week enhances the exchange subsidies for persons in a job not
offering health insurance while purchasing insurance on the exchanges. Third, a
household head or spouse can be granted access as a consequence of moving from fulltime employment to part-time employment if that move results in a loss of opportunity
for ESI. Another implicit tax comes from the hardship exemption for the penalties on
uninsured individuals.
The ACA’s implicit taxes will be experienced primarily by persons above the
poverty line. Close to half of non-elderly household heads and spouses with weekly
earnings near the median (and employed sometime during the calendar year) will have

the average log share is minus infinity because a non-trivial fraction of the population will get no
reward from increasing their labor supply. Even if marginal tax rates were never as high as 100
percent, the measured average log after-marginal-tax share could nonetheless be infinite because
tax rate measurement errors sometimes put the micro-level measured rate over 100 percent. The
100 percent tax rate examples also raise the questions of whether workers have accurate estimates
of their marginal tax rates and whether worker decisions are made in a group context, but even in
these cases the evolution of the average marginal tax rate can be informative about aggregate
behavior.

34

their marginal labor income tax rate hiked by the ACA.

42 percent of sometime-

employed household heads and spouses generally (without regard for weekly earnings)
will experience a rate hike, without including others with work incentives reduced by the
Medicaid expansion.
Among the near-median heads and spouses with marginal tax rate hikes, the hike
as of 2015 will average about 11 percentage points of total compensation, on top of all of
the marginal tax rates that were present before the ACA. Their new tax wedge will, on
average, be similar to doubling their employer and employee payroll taxes. As Table 3
illustrates, some middle-class workers will find that they can work substantially less
without losing any disposable income. The average marginal tax rate hike among all
sometime-employed non-elderly near-median household heads and spouses – including
in the average those with no hike – is five percentage points.
Five percentage points is large by historical standards. While it lasted, the payroll
tax cut of 2011 was one third of the magnitude of the ACA’s tax rate hike.38 Several
SNAP (formerly food stamp program) expansions in combination were a quarter of the
ACA’s magnitude. In terms of its impact on average marginal tax rates, the ACA hike is
almost double the effect of permanently increasing unemployment benefit payments to 99
weeks from a baseline of 26 weeks (Mulligan 2012).
Cutler (2011) argues that the ACA will increase employment because it will cut
(or slow the growth of) employer health costs without commensurate reductions in the
amount employees value their health benefits. He draws on the work of Baicker and
Chandra (2006), who treat a specific type of health sector waste as a tax effect, thereby
suggesting that cutting health sector waste could be included in my Table 1 that itemizes
the ACA’s incentive-related provisions. I am not sure about Cutler’s approach, because
unlike the tax effects in Table 1, reducing health sector waste is not a pure redistribution:
health sector wastes are real resources that have an adverse wealth effect on labor supply.
More important, Cutler’s cost effect is trivial on the scale of Table 1, and could be in
either direction.39
38

As shown in Figure 3, the ACA hike comes a year or two after the hike associated with the
expiration of the payroll tax cut.
39
Other economists believe that the ACA will increase employer health costs without a
commensurate increase in the value of health benefits to employees by, for example, requiring

35

The ACA has not been introduced into a tax-free economy, so its marginal tax
rate hikes add to marginal tax rates already in effect. I estimate that, by 2015, the average
marginal after-tax share among household heads and spouses with near-median weekly
earnings will have fallen to 0.50 from 0.60 in 2007, largely from the ACA but also from
other expansions in safety net programs. That is a massive 17 percent reduction in the
reward to working – akin to erasing a decade of labor productivity growth without the
wealth effect – that would be expected to significantly depress the amounts of labor and
consumer spending in the economy even if the wage elasticity of labor supply were small
(but not literally zero).40 The large tax rate increases shown in Figure 3 are the primary
reason why it is unlikely that labor market activity will return even near to its prerecession levels as long as the ACA’s work disincentives remain in place.
The labor market has much experience with (implicit and explicit) taxes on
earnings and employment. A novel part of the ACA is that it taxes weekly work hours
directly: that is, the new law requires employers to report the amount of time that
employees work, and bases taxes and subsidies on that report. This new type of taxation
should create new types of avoidance behaviors, and may also change society’s
willingness to use earnings and employment taxes.
By significantly taxing weekly work hours, it might seem that the ACA would
encourage employers to hire in order to compensate for the shorter workweek of the
average employee (Congressional Budget Office 2011, 8-9). However, Table 1 shows
that the ACA encourages unemployment and labor force exits about as much as it
encourages reduced hours, so it would be surprising if the indirect effect on employment
through weekly hours would dominate the direct effects of ACA employment taxes.
Table 1 does suggest that the reduction in aggregate hours to be created by the ACA will
be more intensive in weekly hours and less unemployment intensive than was the
recession of 2008-9 because the marginal tax rate hikes during the recession were

employers to include medical benefits that they would have excluded without the ACA (Cannon
2009) (Kessler 2013). Mulligan (2013b) shows how even Cutler’s estimate (the ACA reduces
health premiums by 5 percent as of 2015) and approach imply that the cost channel is something
like a 0.3-0.6 percentage point reduction in marginal labor income tax rates: health waste
amounting to 5 percent of health expenses is 0.3-0.6 percent of the total reward to employment.
40
If Emergency Unemployment Compensation expires on schedule, then the after-tax share falls
from 0.60 to 0.53, which is a 12 percent reduction.

36

primarily taxing weeks worked per year rather than hours worked per week (Mulligan
2012). If the end of Emergency Unemployment Compensation, which is not part of the
ACA, were coincident with the beginning of ACA subsidies in 2014, then the ACA’s
additions to implicit employment taxes may be largely offset by a subtraction via the
unemployment insurance program, leaving the combined 2014 marginal tax rate hike
primarily on weekly work hours rather than employment. If, in addition, the employer
mandate were repealed, then combined employment taxes might never far exceed the
taxes we have now.
This paper assumes that the employer penalty will not be further delayed, or
eliminated. As shown by the difference between marginal tax rates for 2014 and 2015,
the magnitude of the ACA’s impact on marginal tax rates would be significantly less, but
far from zero, in any year without employer penalties. Appendix V contains sensitivity
analysis with respect to various other policy parameters and population estimates,
showing that another important assumption is that families will (gross of out-of-pocket
costs) value the benefits from a family health plan obtained on the exchanges at about
$19,000 per year. The valuation assumption is also related to my assumption that 48
percent of persons leaving ESI jobs will actually purchase health plans from the
exchanges. Altering the valuation assumptions puts the ACA’s addition to the 2016
marginal tax rate in a range of 4.1 to 6.0 percentage points.
The Obama Administration and other advocates of the ACA have dismissed
concerns that the law might be trading off labor market activity for more redistribution,
citing the absence of a Massachusetts-specific labor market contraction when that state
passed its law mandating health insurance coverage.41 As Jonathan Gruber (2011, 27:02)
put it, “we’ve actually run this experiment, folks: we ran it in Massachusetts.” However,
this argument assumes that the Massachusetts reform increased marginal tax rates in
Massachusetts by roughly the same magnitude that the ACA will increase them in the
United States. This assumption is no longer necessary, because the methodology used in
this paper can be applied to Massachusetts as well. Table 5, reproduced from Mulligan
(2013c) is the Massachusetts analogue to Table 1, referring to the effect of the
41

Cutler (2013). See also the Department of Health and Human Services statement that “The
experience in Massachusetts … suggest[s] that the health care law will improve the affordability
and accessibility of health care without significantly affecting the labor market.” (Contorno 2013)

37

Massachusetts reform on marginal tax rates in that state as of 2010. Not surprisingly,
Massachusetts marginal tax rates were elevated by its health reform. However, the
average increase in Massachusetts was only 0.3 percentage points, as compared to the
ACA’s 4.8 percentage point impact on nationwide marginal tax rates. The obvious
conclusion from these data is to expect the ACA to depress labor markets by at least an
order of magnitude more than the Massachusetts reform did.

Appendix I: ACA Marginal Tax Rate Components for 2014 and 2016
Table 6 reproduces Table 1 using the law’s parameters for calendar year 2014.
Table 7 shows the results for calendar year 2016.

Appendix II: Details about the Sliding Scale Exchange Subsidies
Table 8 displays the sliding scale parameters. Each row is a household income
interval relative to the federal poverty line beginning at the income amount indicated in
the first column. The second column shows the premium charge for a family with
income at the bottom end of the interval, expressed as a percentage of household
income. 42 The premium percentage increases smoothly within the interval and as it
crosses the next income threshold, with the exceptions (noted in the last column) of: (a)
the 1 – 1.33 interval where the percentage is constant at 2 percent and jumps discretely to
3 percent and (b) the 4+ interval where there is no premium cap (the premium jumps
from 9.5 percent of income to the full premium).
Plan participants pay their designated premium and then receive benefits that are
expected to be less than (typically 70 percent of) total medical expenses, with the
remainder charged to plan participants as various out-of-pocket costs such as co42

The premium charge is for the second-cheapest silver plan, which is expected to pay 70 percent
of medical bills. Participants can choose a more expensive plan at their own expense, or choose a
less expensive plan in order to reduce the premium they pay.

38

payments, coinsurance rates, etc. The third column of the table shows the “cost-sharing”
discount families receive as a function of their household income. This discount is a step
function of income, jumping from 80 to 57 percent at 1.5 FPL, to 10 percent at 2 FPL,
and then to zero at 2.5 FPL. For example, someone at 1.4 FPL on a silver plan can
expect (in the actuarial sense) to have their premiums cover 70 percent of medical
expenses. Of the remaining 30 percent, 6 percentage points would be paid by the
participant and the remaining 24 percentage points paid by taxpayers in the form of a
cost-sharing subsidy for the plan participant.
Over the income range 1-4 FPL, Table 8 alone has all of the parameters needed to
graph household income versus premium (both expressed as a ratio to FPL). The slope of
this graph is the rate at which the premium subsidy is phased out with household income,
and is less than 100 percent except at the jumps at 1.33 and 4 FPL. Note that Table 1
does not indicate the absolute amount of the premium subsidy, because the absolute
amount is the difference between the full cost of the second cheapest silver plan and the
premium cap and the plan full cost will vary by year, family size and composition, and
state and is not yet known at the time of writing this paper.
Solely for the purpose of preparing Figure 1, I calculated a dollar range of
participant cost-sharing by assuming that plans’ EMPs (full premium plus full out-ofpocket costs) ranges from $7,000 to $19,000 per year and using the discount percentages
noted in Table 8.43 In order to get a FPL range for the cost-sharing amount, I assumed
that the $7,000 EMP applied to a family of one and the $19,000 EMP applied to a family
of three.44 These participant cost-sharing amounts (one for each end of the $9,000 $19,000 EMP range) are added to the premiums implied by Table 8 and shown in Figure
1 in the main text of the paper.
The means-tested discounts noted above are delivered to health insurers before
the end of the coverage year but at the same time are based on the insured’s income that
cannot be fully documented before the year end. In principle, calendar year income
43

The quantitative results in the rest of the paper do not depend on the numerical results
presented in Figure 1.
44
For the purposes of putting an upper bound on participant cost sharing, my assumption does not
rule out the possibility that families of four or more would have an EMP of $20,000, because
their EMP is less in FPL units than a family of three with a $20,000 EMP because the dollar
amount of the FPL increases with family size.

39

would be accurately estimated when enrolling in coverage, and end-of-year
documentation would just be a formality. In this case, Figure 1’s income (horizontal
axis) and payments (vertical axis) would be measured in the same year.
In practice, the means-tested discounts a family receives during the calendar year
(hereafter, “coverage year” t) will often derive from the income they reported on
historical tax returns (usually the return from the second year prior, t - 2). Its cost-sharing
subsidies are never reconciled, which means that cost-sharing rules create disincentives
for earning in t – 2, or during whatever other accounting period that is examined at the
time of enrolling for year t coverage. The advance premium credits will be reconciled
with its actual income at the conclusion of the coverage year.45 In order to understand
how reconciliation itself adds to marginal tax rates, assume that advance premiums for
year t are set based on year t – 2 tax returns. Let F(y) denote the premium credit schedule
(the middle column of Table 8) and G(x,y) be the repayment schedule, where y denotes
income and x the excess credit. The total premium credit St for calendar year t is,
ignoring interest between the calendar year and the time of tax filing:

St  F ( yt 2 )  G  F ( yt 2 )  F ( yt ), yt 

(7)

The ACA places a cap on the repayments of excess credits, which means that the
advanced credits are repaid in full (algebraically, G(x,y) = x) if and only if the full excess
F(yt-2) - F(yt) is less than the cap, which depends on yt.46
Figure 4’s solid step functions – one for individuals and another for families of
three – display the actual reconciliation caps as a function of yt, expressed as a ratio to the
federal poverty line. The step functions have “notches” or “cliffs” in which marginal tax
rates are infinite over an infinitesimal income interval, but (as I did with the sliding scales
shown in Figure 1) I abstract from the notches and cliffs by approximating the step
functions with dashed linear schedules whose slopes are equal to the weighted-average
45

Households have the option of forgoing advance credits and receiving their entire premium
credit at the end of the year. For the reasons explained below, advanced premium credits will
eventually be understood to be more valuable than end-of-year credits because only the former
creates an opportunity for an excess credit.
46
Aside from the unlimited cap for families above 400 percent FPL, the caps are six dollar
amounts according to three income/FPL intervals ((0,2), (2,3), and (3,4)) crossed with two family
types (individual and family) (U.S. Government Printing Office, 77 FR 30394).

40

slope of the corresponding step function with the weights determined by the width of the
income interval over which the slope applies. The weighted-average slopes are 4.1
percent and 4.9 percent for individuals and families of three, respectively, which I
summarize as a 4.5 percent slope.
Notice from equation (7) that the year t subsidies potentially create disincentives
to report income in both years t – 2 and t. To examine this more precisely, consider
smooth approximations to F and G so that their derivatives are finite and add the
derivatives of (7) with respect to yt and yt-2:

 S t  St

 F ( yt  2 )  Gx  F ( yt 2 )  F ( yt ), yt   F ( yt )  F ( yt 2 ) 
 yt  2  yt

(8)

G y  F ( yt  2 )  F ( yt ), yt 

The top line of equation (8) is a weighted average of F(yt-2) and F(yt), which means that
Gy is an extra disincentive to the extent that it differs from zero. For households above
400 percent of the poverty line, households with yt < yt-2, and households with F(yt-2) F(yt) less than the cap (that is, their income rose less than 5 percent or so between t – 2
and t), Gy is zero because their premium credits are fully reconciled.47 For the rest, Gy is
approximately the slope shown in Figure 4: 4.5 percent.
I assume that half of tax units receiving premium assistance for the entire calendar
year have an income for that year that ultimately exceeds their two-years-ago income by
5 percent or more, which makes the program weight for “Reconcile advance premium
credits” 0.04: half of the program weight for “HI subsidies for persons w/o ESI at work.”
Year-round ESI workers who consider, by working less, jumping onto the income
scale for exchange subsidies must also consider that they would face the means-tested
reconciliation caps at the end of the calendar year. However, I do not include them in the
program weight for “Reconcile advance premium credits” because (a) they would be
enrolling in an exchange plan during the calendar year when their income might be more

47

A tax unit whose annual income increased from $50,000 to $52,500 between years t – 2 and t
would have an excess credit of about $600 (recall that the typical slope in Figure 1 is about 24%),
which is at or above the reconciliation cap for any family less than 400 percent FPL.

41

accurately estimated (e.g., from an unemployment benefit pay stub) and (b) their income
might, by spending part of the year out of work, be less than it was two years prior.

Appendix III: Health Insurance Values
The Congressional Budget Office (2010) estimated that 2016 bronze plan annual
premiums would be about $12,250 ($4,750) for family (single) coverage, respectively.
By definition, bronze plan premiums cover 60% of expected medical expenses, which
would be $20,417 ($7,917).
For my purposes, I need to know how people value the insurance they get, rather
than the actuarial cost. These two are related because people demand insurance from
their employers, and ultimately receive less cash by the amount of the actuarial value: in
effect employees are spending their own cash on the ESI. However, it is conceivable that
cost of administration, bureaucracy, and other loadings mean that exchange plans will
need to have greater expenses in order to deliver the same benefits as ESI. In this case,
the actuarial value of ESI may be a better measure of the value of exchange plans to their
participants.
The Kaiser Foundation’s survey of employer plans for 2012 found that average
annual premiums were $15,745 ($5,615) for family (single) coverage, respectively
(Claxton, et al. 2012, Exhibit 1.1). Employer plans tend to have premiums equal to about
83% of participant costs, with the other 17% covered by various forms of out-of-pocket
payments (Gabel, et al. 2012). Thus, the Kaiser results suggest that annual medical
payments (premiums plus out-of-pocket expenses) averaged about $18,970 ($6,765) for
family (single) coverage by employer plans, respectively, in 2012. With 4 percent annual
cost growth (the rate of growth measured between the 2011 and 2012 Kaiser surveys),
these amounts may be $20,518 ($7,317) by 2014, respectively, and $22,192 ($7,914) by
2016.
Based on these various estimates, my benchmark calculations use a conservative
$19,000 ($7,000) expected medical payments for family (single) coverage, respectively,
in 2014. Employee plus one coverage value is taken as the average of the two.

42

As a sensitivity analysis, I assigned an expected medical payment value to each
household member on the basis of his or her age and household composition, based on
the Kaiser Foundation’s silver plan premium calculator (hereafter, “KFF calculator”) for
calendar year 2014, and then summed across household members. I convert silver plan
premiums to expected medical payments (EMP) by dividing by 0.7. Each non-elderly
household head or spouse in the CPS is assigned the EMP associated with his or her age.
For the purpose of calculating the household sum associated with a married head or
spouse, the other spouse is assumed to be of the same age. Per the KFF calculator,
children under 18 are each assigned an EMP of $2,737 (2014 dollars), except that the
total EMP for a household’s children under 18 is capped at $8,211. Adults other than the
head or spouse, as well as heads or spouses less than age 21, are assigned the EMP for a
21-year-old, regardless of their actual age. As shown in Appendix V, the KFF calculator
delivers a slightly larger marginal tax rate.

Appendix IV: Using the ARRA’s COBRA Subsidy to Forecast
Participation in the ACA’s Premium Assistance
Since the 1980s, federal and state laws give employees leaving ESI jobs the
option of continuing their health coverage for up to 18 months (United States Department
of Labor 2013). Family ESI coverage can also be continued. The former employees
reimburse their former employer for the full cost of the coverage with after-tax dollars,
plus a small administration fee. The continuation coverage is usually referred to as
“COBRA coverage;” COBRA is the acronym for one of the statutes regulating such
coverage.
Under the March 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (hereafter
ARRA), 65 percent of the employee cost of COBRA coverage was paid by the federal
government to the former employer on behalf of the former employee if the former
employee was involuntarily terminated after September 1, 2008 and was not eligible for
another group health plan or for Medicare. Subsidy recipients were required to pay 35
percent of the coverage. Upon filing for personal taxes for the year in which the subsidy

43

was received, the subsidy was clawed back for filers with AGI exceeded $125,000
($250,000 married filing jointly).
The ARRA subsidy has a lot in common with the exchange subsidies created by
the ACA. Both subsidies become available to an ESI employee only when he leaves the
payroll, and then only if they have no other group plan option such as spousal coverage.
The ARRA subsidy was more restrictive in that it excluded voluntary terminations such
as quits or retirements, and did not subsidize out-of-pocket health expenses.

Both

subsidies were paid directly to the insurer (the employer in the case of ESI and an
insurance company in the case of the exchange subsidy).48 In both cases, the subsidized
household was paying some of the health insurance premiums with their own after-tax
dollars. Both programs could have imperfect take-up among the unemployed because,
among other things, people might be unaware of the program, or might choose to forego
health insurance. Under the ACA, however, former ESI employees will have to change
health plans – leave their former employer plan and join an exchange plan – in order to
obtain the subsidy.49 The ARRA COBRA subsidy was enacted as a temporary subsidy,
and was in fact terminated after less than two years. The ACA subsidies were enacted
permanently, although of course a future Congress could modify or terminate them.
In order to estimate the fraction of ESI job terminations among non-elderly
household heads and spouses in families satisfying the ACA’s income criteria that will
result in exchange subsidies, including the fact that some eligible families will elect not
to participate, I estimate the fraction of non-elderly ESI employees involuntarily
terminated during 2009 who received COBRA subsidies as household head or spouse.
To measure the numerator, I have the U.S. Treasury’s report that 1.05 million households
received the COBRA subsidy during the fourth quarter of 2009, although they noted that
they would receive additional 2009 subsidy claims after their report went to press.
Ideally the denominator would be the number of non-elderly household heads and
spouses who were involuntarily terminated from ESI jobs after September 1, 2008 and
48

The former employers received the ARRA subsidy by taking a credit on their payroll tax
deposits.
49
Given that members of Congress and their staffs also have to obtain health coverage in the
ACA exchanges, it is possible that the exchange plans will be perceived by consumers to be good
quality plans. Moreover, employer plans are converging with exchange plans, for example, as a
number of employers are enrolling employees via “private insurance exchanges.”

44

were still unemployed as of the fourth quarter of 2009, which is approximately a 12
month window of terminations. I use the March 2010 CPS to make an approximation to
the denominator to a slightly different window of terminations: calendar year 2009.
Using the non-elderly household heads and spouses employed at the time of the
March 2010 CPS interview and working at least one week in 2009, I estimate the
probability of having ESI at the time of the interview as a linear function of a cubic in
age, and a full set of interactions between gender, marital status, presence of children, and
(most important) full-time work status in 2009.

I project the probability to the

unemployed in the sample who had worked at least one week in 2009 and were
unemployed at least one week in 2009, and predict that 58 percent of those 3.8 million
would be in ESI jobs if they were working.
Mulligan (2012) estimated that 68 percent of non-elderly household heads and
spouses receive UI during at least part of their unemployment spell.

Because

unemployment benefits (hereafter, UI) also have involuntary termination as an eligibility
criterion, I also use the 68 percent as an estimate of the fraction of unemployed household
heads and spouses who were terminated involuntarily.
Finally, some of those unemployed at the end of 2009 returned to work or left the
labor force before the March CPS interview. I therefore rescale by a factor of 1.44,
which is the ratio of the number of non-elderly household heads and spouses in
December 2009 unemployed 1-49 weeks to the number of non-elderly household heads
and spouses in March 2010 unemployed 14-62 weeks.
Assuming that UI eligibility and ESI eligibility are uncorrelated, the denominator
of my subsidy incidence rate estimate would be 2.18 million = 1.44*0.68*0.58*3.8
million. The corresponding subsidy incidence rate estimate is 48 percent.
The ACA is said to have a “family glitch”: the unemployed (among others) are
obligated to obtain coverage from their spouse’s employer (regardless of the cost of that
coverage) rather than obtaining subsidized coverage on the ACA’s exchanges. The
ARRA’s COBRA subsidy had the same glitch because persons with available spousal
coverage (among others) were ineligible for the subsidy.

As an estimate of the

propensity to get ACA subsidies upon termination of ESI employment, my 48 percent
estimate therefore accounts for the family glitch, at least if the spousal coverage
45

obligation will be enforced under the ACA in the same way it was enforced (or not)
under the ARRA. The fact that the ACA spousal coverage provision has been described
as a glitch suggests that it may not be fully enforced or may be modified with new
legislation. I expect the incidence of ACA subsidies among married persons leaving ESI
jobs to be greater the less that the spousal coverage provision is enforced.
Also note that the demand for health insurance among household heads and
spouses leaving ESI jobs is significant, even when they have to pay full price for that
coverage. Using the same approach as above, I estimate that 59 and 56 percent of the
non-elderly unemployed household heads and spouses in the March 2009 and March
2011 CPS, respectively, working at least one week in the prior calendar year would have
ESI when working. 34 and 29 percent of them (including those who did not leave ESI
jobs), respectively, had coverage from a former employer at the time of the interview –
while they were unemployed. In other words, more than half of non-elderly unemployed
household heads of spouses retain employer coverage when they transition from
employment to unemployment, even when they pay the full cost of that coverage with
after-tax dollars.
The COBRA experiences suggest that more than half of household heads and
spouses leaving ESI jobs under the ACA, and living in households between 100 and 400
percent of the poverty line, would buy subsidized coverage on the exchanges, at least if
they viewed the coverage to be as valuable as their former employer coverage. On the
other hand, exchange coverage will not be identical to employer coverage. I therefore
take 48 percent as my benchmark value for the incidence of exchange coverage among
household heads and spouses leaving ESI employment, and living in households between
100 and 400 percent of the poverty line. My sensitivity analysis considers alternative
values of 30 percent and 70 percent.

Appendix V: Sensitivity Analysis
Table 9 shows how the 2014-16 results change with changes in various
assumptions about group sizes and policy parameters. The entries are ACA impacts on
work disincentives, expressed as a percentage of compensation of the median worker
46

(defined in the main text). The top row is the benchmark specification: namely, the
bottom line from each of Tables 6, 1, and 7, respectively. The next rows show the results
from subtracting or adding one percentage point to the assumed 1.6%/year growth of
health care costs. Worker valuation of participation in exchange health plans is explored
in the next three rows. After that, results are shown from assuming 30 percent or 70
percent participation in exchange subsidies among persons leaving ESI employment,
rather than the benchmark assumption of 48 percent participation.
The next four rows show results of alternative assumptions about the effect of the
ACA on insurance status. The row labeled “50% take-up of hardship exemption” shows
the result of assuming that only half of those leaving ESI to be uninsured and
unemployed are eligible for a hardship exemption from the individual mandate. The final
two rows of the table show the results of putting alternative weights on each of the three
labor supply margins.

47

Table 1: ACA and Related Components of the Statutory Marginal Tax Rate Index
Calendar year 2015, average among household heads and spouses with median earnings potential
Benefit Index Amounts (constant 2014 dollars per month): benefits accruing as a consequence of working less.
Margins for Reducing Labor Supply
Program
Unemployed
OLF Reduced hours
Employer shared responsibility penalty
192
192
220
Individual mandate relief
103
0
0
HI subsidies for persons w/o ESI at work
832
832
832
Reconcile advance premium credits
154
154
154
HI subsidies for persons w/ ESI at work
508
508
582
HI subsidies stop at the poverty line
-212
-212
-212
198
198
198
Medicaid expansions for the poor
Implicit taxation of unemployment benefits
-301
0
0
Move off implicit uncompensated care tax
-201
-201
-201

growth rate after 2014
starts at 192 in 2015,then grows at wages +1.6%/yr
grows with inflation after 2016

grows 1.6%/year more than wages
grows 1.6%/year more than wages
grows with wages
grows with wages

Program Participation Weights (fractions)
Program
Unemployed
Employer shared responsibility penalty
0.23
Individual mandate relief
0.09
HI subsidies for persons w/o ESI at work
0.09
Reconcile advance premium credits
0.04
HI subsidies for persons w/ ESI at work
0.16
HI subsidies stop at the poverty line
0.03
Medicaid expansions for the poor
0.07
Implicit taxation of unemployment benefits
0.06
Move off implicit uncompensated care tax
0.03
Statutory index, all ACA programs
LFS weights
Statutory index, all ACA programs
& all supply margins

202
0.583

OLF Reduced hours
0.23
0.23
0
0
0.09
0.09
0.04
0.04
0.16
0.13
0.03
0.03
0.07
0.07
0
0
0.03
0.03

209
0.089
$204/month
= 4.8% of employer cost

207
0.328

growth rate after 2014

all program participation
weights are constant by
definition

Table 2. Long-duration Employment Decisions Crossing Eligibility Thresholds
Among non-elderly household heads and spouses, calendar year 2014

Working with ESI
lower threshold crossed
percentage of workers affected
forgone ACA subsidy value, per worker
forgone ACA subsidy value, Table 1 extrapolated
upper threshold crossed
percentage of workers affected
forgone ACA subsidy value, per worker
forgone ACA subsidy value, Table 1 extrapolated
Working without ESI
lower threshold crossed
percentage of workers affected
forgone ACA subsidy value, per worker
forgone ACA subsidy value, Table 1 extrapolated
upper threshold crossed
percentage of workers affected
forgone ACA subsidy value, per worker
forgone ACA subsidy value, Table 1 extrapolated
Both groups combined
Threshold crossers as share of all workers
forgone ACA subsidy value, per worker
forgone ACA subsidy value, Table 1 extrapolated
Compensation at stake
ACA impact on the overall MTR, percentage points
with threshold crossings
without threshold crossings (rest of Table 1)
threshold crossing contribution

Duration of work decision in months
3
4
5
6

1

2

0.0%
-8,394
1,641

0.2%
-2,183
2,945

0.3%
-1,708
4,351

0.6%
-1,253
5,665

0.9%
-1,095
6,794

0.9%
216
0

1.6%
543
0

2.1%
907
0

2.7%
1,318
0

3.2%
1,750
0

9

12

1.3%
-920
7,567

4.5%
-323
6,821

6.5%
-229
8,690

3.7%
2,207
0

5.0%
3,788
0

5.7%
5,711
0

0.0%
0.1%
0.3%
0.4%
0.7%
0.9%
2.4%
3.3%
-15,897 -14,911 -13,269 -13,692 -12,882 -12,781 -10,240 -10,120
712
1,424
2,136
2,848
3,560
4,272
6,408
8,544
0.2%
3,461
0

0.5%
3,107
0

1.2%
227
42
4,225

2.3%
3.3%
4.6%
5.8%
6.9% 13.2% 16.8%
-23
-39
-123
-184
-151
-113
214
293
597
1,055
1,503
1,989
3,498
5,063
8,451 12,676 16,902 21,127 25,352 38,029 50,705

3.9
3.8
0.1

3.7
3.8
-0.1

0.7%
3,121
0

3.6
3.8
-0.2

0.8%
3,336
0

3.5
3.8
-0.3

0.9%
3,609
0

3.3
3.8
-0.5

1.0%
3,816
0

3.2
3.8
-0.6

1.2%
4,533
0

2.6
3.8
-1.3

1.2%
5,065
0

2.2
3.8
-1.6

Table 3. The ACA's Implicit Tax on Full-time Work: An Example
beginning in 2014, for employers offering health insurance to full-time employees.
All dollar amounts are annualized unless noted otherwise.
Subsidies are calculated for a family of four with one earner.

Health insurance source
Employee costs
weekly hours worked
weekly work expense

full-time position
ESI

part-time position
ACA exchange

40
100

29
75

$

$

(1)
(2)

Employer costs
hourly basis
annual
employer payroll taxes

26
52,000
2,679

26
37,700
2,679

(3)
(4) = 50*(3)*(1)
(5) = 50*[(4)-(6)-(7)]*0.0765/1.0765

Health insurance premiums
employer
employee, excluded from tax base
employee, included in tax base
ACA

11,154
3,146
0
0

0
0
1,304
10,806

(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

3,000
0

1,038
4,152

35,021
1.45
27,021

35,021
1.45
28,929

out-of-pocket health expenses
employee
ACA
Employee income subject to tax
total
ratio to FPL
after health & work expenses, annual

Notes: Both types of employees work 50 weeks per year. The ACA exchange plan is
assumed to be a silver plan (70% actuarial value).

= 78% of total premium (ESI only)
= 22% of total premium (ESI only)
= 3.7% of (12)
= 70% of total health expenses - (8)

(10) = 17% (6%) of total ESI (exch.) expenses
(11) = (3/7)*[(8)+(9)]-(10)

(12) = (4) - (5) - (6) - (7)
(13) = (12)/24100
(14) = (12) - (8) - (10) - 50*(2)

Table 4. Building Blocks of the Program Participation Weights

The table entries are averages of ACA and no-ACA values.
Type of Employer
HI offer to FT?
yes
yes
yes
HI offer to PT?
no
HI holder FPL interval Supply margin

own

1-4

family NGI 1-4

none

1+

all others

sum of weights

no
no

FT-PT

0.028

0.131

0.056

FT-not employed

0.028

0.131

0.056

PT-not employed

0.005

0.011

0.002

FT-PT

0.000

0.000

0.002

FT-not employed

0.000

0.000

0.002

PT-not employed

0.000

0.002

0.000

FT-PT

0.000

0.000

0.078

FT-not employed

0.000

0.000

0.078

PT-not employed

0.000

0.012

0.002

FT-PT

0.089

0.415

0.095

FT-not employed

0.089

0.415

0.095

PT-not employed

0.008

0.039

0.023

reduced hours
not employed

0.117
0.130

0.547
0.611

0.231
0.259

Count as both "slide down" and "jump onto":

0.012

Legend for ACA-related labor wedges
slide down scale for exchange payments
jump onto scale for exchange payments
hardship relief from individual mandate
turn off employer penality
none
Abbreviations: HI=health insurance, FPL=federal poverty line, FT=full time, PT=part time,
NGI=non-group insurance

Table 5: Romneycare and Related Components of the Statutory Marginal Tax Rate Index
Calendar year 2010, average among MA household heads and spouses with median earnings potential
Benefit Index Amounts (constant 2014 dollars per month)
Margins for Reducing Labor Supply
Program
Unemployed
OLF Reduced hours
Employer shared responsibility penalty
25
25
25
Individual mandate relief: sliding scale
147
147
147
Individual mandate relief: hardship exemption
95
0
0
400
400
400
HI subsidies for persons w/o ESI at work
HI subsidies for persons w/ ESI at work
0
262
301
Medicaid/CHIP expansion for children
389
389
389
-155
0
0
Implicit taxation of unemployment benefits
-233
-233
-233
Move off implicit uncompensated care tax
Program Participation Weights (fractions)
Program
Unemployed
Employer shared responsibility penalty
0.17
Individual mandate relief: sliding scale
0.03
Individual mandate relief: hardship exemption
0.02
HI subsidies for persons w/o ESI at work
0.03
HI subsidies for persons w/ ESI at work
0
Medicaid/CHIP expansion for children
0.01
Implicit taxation of unemployment benefits
0.02
Move off implicit uncompensated care tax
0.03

Statutory index, all Romneycare programs
LFS weights
Statutory index, all Romneycare programs
& all LFS

14
0.583

OLF Reduced hours
0.17
0.17
0.03
0.03
0
0
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0
0
0.03
0.03

20
0.089
$16/month
= 0.3% of employer cost

19
0.328

Table 6: ACA and Related Components of the Statutory Marginal Tax Rate Index
Calendar year 2014, average among household heads and spouses with median earnings potential
Benefit Index Amounts (constant 2014 dollars per month): benefits accruing as a consequence of working less.
Margins for Reducing Labor Supply
Program
Unemployed
OLF Reduced hours
Employer shared responsibility penalty
0
0
0
Individual mandate relief
51
0
0
HI subsidies for persons w/o ESI at work
832
832
832
Reconcile advance premium credits
154
154
154
HI subsidies for persons w/ ESI at work
500
500
573
HI subsidies stop at the poverty line
-212
-212
-212
195
195
195
Medicaid expansions for the poor
Implicit taxation of unemployment benefits
-301
0
0
Move off implicit uncompensated care tax
-201
-201
-201

growth rate after 2014
starts at 192 in 2015,then grows at wages +1.6%/yr
grows with inflation after 2016

grows 1.6%/year more than wages
grows 1.6%/year more than wages
grows with wages
grows with wages

Program Participation Weights (fractions)
Program
Unemployed
Employer shared responsibility penalty
0.23
Individual mandate relief
0.09
HI subsidies for persons w/o ESI at work
0.09
Reconcile advance premium credits
0.04
HI subsidies for persons w/ ESI at work
0.16
HI subsidies stop at the poverty line
0.03
Medicaid expansions for the poor
0.07
Implicit taxation of unemployment benefits
0.06
Move off implicit uncompensated care tax
0.03
Statutory index, all ACA programs
LFS weights
Statutory index, all ACA programs
& all supply margins

152
0.583

OLF Reduced hours
0.23
0.23
0
0
0.09
0.09
0.04
0.04
0.16
0.13
0.03
0.03
0.07
0.07
0
0
0.03
0.03

163
0.089
$154/month
= 3.6% of employer cost

155
0.328

growth rate after 2014

all program participation
weights are constant by
definition

Table 7: ACA and Related Components of the Statutory Marginal Tax Rate Index
Calendar year 2016, average among household heads and spouses with median earnings potential
Benefit Index Amounts (constant 2014 dollars per month): benefits accruing as a consequence of working less.
Margins for Reducing Labor Supply
Program
Unemployed
OLF Reduced hours
Employer shared responsibility penalty
195
195
223
Individual mandate relief
128
0
0
HI subsidies for persons w/o ESI at work
832
832
832
Reconcile advance premium credits
154
154
154
HI subsidies for persons w/ ESI at work
516
516
592
HI subsidies stop at the poverty line
-212
-212
-212
201
201
201
Medicaid expansions for the poor
Implicit taxation of unemployment benefits
-301
0
0
Move off implicit uncompensated care tax
-201
-201
-201

growth rate after 2014
starts at 192 in 2015,then grows at wages +1.6%/yr
grows with inflation after 2016

grows 1.6%/year more than wages
grows 1.6%/year more than wages
grows with wages
grows with wages

Program Participation Weights (fractions)
Program
Unemployed
Employer shared responsibility penalty
0.23
Individual mandate relief
0.09
HI subsidies for persons w/o ESI at work
0.09
Reconcile advance premium credits
0.04
HI subsidies for persons w/ ESI at work
0.16
HI subsidies stop at the poverty line
0.03
Medicaid expansions for the poor
0.07
Implicit taxation of unemployment benefits
0.06
Move off implicit uncompensated care tax
0.03
Statutory index, all ACA programs
LFS weights
Statutory index, all ACA programs
& all supply margins

207
0.583

OLF Reduced hours
0.23
0.23
0
0
0.09
0.09
0.04
0.04
0.16
0.13
0.03
0.03
0.07
0.07
0
0
0.03
0.03

211
0.089
$208/month
= 4.9% of employer cost

209
0.328

growth rate after 2014

all program participation
weights are constant by
definition

Table 8. Sliding Scale Exchange Subsidies
as a function of household income for the calendar year
Income as a Percentage of income
Discount on out-of-pocket cost
ratio to FPL
owed as premium (jumps when crossing thresholds)
1
2%
80%
1.33
3%
80%
1.5
4%
57%
2
6.3%
10%
2.5
8.05%
0%
3
9.5%
0%
4
9.5%
0%
4+
full premium
0%

Notes on interval
premium percentage is constant on this interval, jumping at 1.33

premium percentage is constant on this interval
premium jumps here because the premium cap is eliminated

Notes: (a) the first column indicates the bottom threshold of the income interval
(b) income percentages change continuously between thresholds unless otherwise noted.
(c) FPL = federal poverty line.

Table 9. Sensitivity Analysis
Marginal Tax Rate Impact, percentage points
2014
2015
2016
Benchmark
Health care cost growth, annual rate
-1 pct point
+1 pct point
Health plan values
-10 pct
KFF calculator
+10 pct
Exchange participation when leaving ESI jobs
30 pct
70 pct
Percentage of uninsured getting coverage
-15 pct points
+15 pct points
Percentage of ESI moving to exchanges
none
+10 pct points
50% take-up of hardship exemption
Labor force weights
Move 10 pct points from UE to OLF
Move 10 pct points from UE to
underemployment

3.6

4.8

4.9

3.6
3.6

4.8
4.9

4.9
5.0

3.1
3.7
4.1

4.3
4.9
5.3

4.4
5.0
5.4

2.8
4.6

4.0
5.9

4.1
6.0

3.5
3.7

4.8
4.9

4.8
5.0

3.4
3.9
3.6

4.6
5.1
4.8

4.7
5.2
4.8

3.7

4.9

4.9

3.6

4.8

4.9

Figure 1. 2014 Health Payments as a Function of Household Income
and Policy Type

Payments by subsidy-eligible participants, ratio to FPL

1.2

1

max AV/FPL, actual
max AV/FPL, 30% approx.
min AV/FPL, actual
min AV/FPL, 18% approx.

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

Household income, ratio to FPL

4

4.5

5

Figure 2. ACA Provisions Changing Marginal Tax Rates
Provisions sum to the 4.8 percentage point overall impact

HI subsidies for persons w/ ESI at work
HI subsidies for persons w/o ESI at work
(includes the non-employed absent from ESI jobs)

Employer shared responsibility penalty
Medicaid expansions for the poor
Reconcile advance premium credits
Individual mandate penalty
Implicit taxation of unemployment benefits
HI subsidies stop at the poverty line
Move off implicit uncompensated care tax
-0.5

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Percentage points added to Overall MTR in 2015

2.5

Figure 3. Statutory Marginal Labor Income Tax Rates over Time

52%

avg. among non-elderly heads and spouses with median earnings potential. includes subsidies

Percentage of compensation

50%

48%

46%

44%

EUC continues beyond 2013
EUC ends Dec 2013

42%

40%
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Figure 4. Reconciliation Caps as a Function of Household Income
and Policy Type

Payments by subsidy-eligible participants, ratio to FPL

0.2
0.18

family of three, actual
family of three, 4.9% approx.
single, actual
single, 4.1% approx.

0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
1

1.5

2

2.5

Household income, ratio to FPL

3

3.5

Bibliography
Baicker, Katherine, and Amitabh Chandra. "The Labor Market Effects of Rising Health
Premiums." Journal of Labor Economics 24, no. 3 (2006): 609-34.
Barro, Robert J., and Chaipat Sahasakul. "Measuring the Average Marginal Tax Rate
from the Individual Income Tax." Journal of Business 56, no. 4 (October 1983):
419-52.
Cannon, Michael F. "Massachusetts’ Obama-like Reforms Increase Health Costs, Wait
Times." cato.org. August 27, 2009.
http://www.cato.org/publications/commentary/massachusetts-obama-reformsincrease-health-costs-wait-times (accessed July 30, 2013).
Carroll, William A., and G. Edward Miller. Health Insurance Status of Full-Time
Workers by Demographic and Employer Characteristics, 2008. Statistical Brief,
Washington, DC: HHS, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2011.
Claxton, Gary, et al. "Employer Health Benefits 2012." kff.org. September 2012.
http://kff.org/report-section/ehbs-2012-section-1/ (accessed June 10, 2013).
Congressional Budget Office. CBO's Analysis of the Major Health Care Legislation
Enacted in March 2010. Testimony before the Subcommittee on Health,
Washington, DC: Congressional Budget Office, 2011.
Congressional Budget Office. "CBO's Health Insurance Simulation Model: A Technical
Description." CBO Background Paper, October 2007.
—. "Estimate of the Effects of the Affordable Care Act on Health Insurance Coverage."
Congressional Budget Office. February 2013.
http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/43900_ACAInsurance
CoverageEffects.pdf (accessed July 24, 2013).
—. "January 11, 2010 letter to Olympia Snowe." Congressional Budget Office. January
11, 2010.
http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/ftpdocs/108xx/doc10884/01-11premiums_for_bronze_plan.pdf (accessed July 24, 2013).
—. "Payments of Penalties for Being Uninsured under the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act." Congressional Budget Office. April 22, 2010.
http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/ftpdocs/113xx/doc11379/individua
l_mandate_penalties-04-22.pdf (accessed July 24, 2013).
Contorno, Steve. "Localities split on providing health benefits for part-time workers."
The Washington Examiner. February 14, 2013.
http://washingtonexaminer.com/localities-split-on-providing-health-benefits-forpart-time-workers/article/2521655 (accessed August 8, 2013).
Cutler, David M. Testimony of David M. Cutler. Testimony, Washington, DC:
Committee on Energy and Commerce, U.S. House of Representatives, 2011.
—. "The Economics of the Affordable Care Act." nytimes.com. August 7, 2013.
http://http://economix.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/08/07/the-economics-of-theaffordable-care-act/ (accessed August 7, 2013).

48

Cutler, David M., and Neeraj Sood. New Jobs through Better Health Care. Washington,
DC: Center for American Progress, 2010.
Gabel, Jon R., et al. "More Than Half Of Individual Health Plans Offer Coverage That
Falls Short Of What Can Be Sold Through Exchanges As Of 2014." Health
Affairs 31, no. 6 (June 2012): 1-12.
Goolsbee, Austan. Testimony at the Hearing on the Health Care Law's Impact on Jobs,
Employers, and the Economy. Washington, DC: Committee on Ways and Means,
U.S. House of Representatives, 2011.
Gruber, Jonathan. "2011 Hewitt Health Care Lecture: The Budgetary Impact of Federal
Health Care Reform." vimeo.com. March 2011.
http://vimeo.com/21114715#t=27m2s (accessed August 8, 2013).
—. "Will the Affordable Care Act Kill Jobs?" The New Replublic, July 9, 2012.
Gruber, Jonathan, and David A. Wise. Social Security and Retirement around the World.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press (for NBER), 1999.
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. "Income Eligibility Limits for Children's Regular
Medicaid and Children's CHIP-funded Medicaid Expansions as a Percent of
Federal Poverty Level, January 2012." kff.org. 2012.
http://www.statehealthfacts.org/comparereport.jsp?rep=76&cat=4 (accessed
October 2012).
Holahan, John, and Irene Headen. Medicaid Coverage and Spending in Health Reform.
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, 2010.
Hopkins, Nicole. "ObamaCare Forced Mom into Medicaid." Wall Street Journal,
November 20, 2013: online version.
Janicki, Hubert. Employment-Based Health Insurance: 2010. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Commerce, 2013.
Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured. Covering the Uninsured in 2008:
Key Facts about Current Costs, Sources of Payment, and Incremental Costs.
Menlo Park, CA: The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, 2008.
Kessler, Daniel P. "Obamacare is Raising Insurance Costs." Wall Street Journal, June 4,
2013: A13.
Kolstad, Jonathan T., and Amanda E. Kowalski. "Mandate-Based Health Reform and the
Labor Market: Evidence from the Massachusetts Reform." NBER working paper,
no. 17933 (March 2012).
Mulligan, Casey B. "Health Care Inflation and the Arithmetic of Labor Taxes."
nytimes.com. August 7, 2013b.
http://economix.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/07/24/the-new-economics-of-part-timeemployment-continued/ (accessed August 7, 2013).
Mulligan, Casey B. "Is the Affordable Care Act Different from Romneycare? A Labor
Economics Perspective." NBER working paper, no. 19366 (November 2013c).
Mulligan, Casey B. "Recent Marginal Labor Income Tax Changes by Skill and Marital
Status." Tax Policy and the Economy, 2013a.
—. The Redistribution Recession. New York: Oxford University Press
(redistributionrecession.com), 2012.
Sonier, Julie, Michael H. Boudreaux, and Lynn A. Blewett. "Medicaid `Welcome-Mat'
Effect of Affordable Care Act Implementation Could be Substantial." Health
Affairs 32, no. 7 (June 2013).
49

Summers, Lawrence H. "Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits." American
Economic Review 79, no. 2 (May 1989): 177-83.
U.S. Government Printing Office. Federal Register. various issues.
U.S. Internal Revenue Service. "Notice of Rulemaking: Shared Responsibility Payment
for Not Maintaining Minimum Essential Coverage." irs.gov. February 1, 2013a.
http://www.irs.gov/PUP/newsroom/REG-148500-12%20FR.pdf (accessed August
14, 2013).
—. "Questions and Answers for the Additional Medicare Tax." irs.gov. July 25, 2013b.
http://www.irs.gov/Businesses/Small-Businesses-&-Self-Employed/Questionsand-Answers-for-the-Additional-Medicare-Tax (accessed August 16, 2013).
United States Department of Labor. "FAQs about COBRA Continuation Health
Coverage." Employee Benefits Security Administration. 2013.
http://www.dol.gov/ebsa/faqs/faq-consumer-cobra.html (accessed November 20,
2013).
United States Department of Treasury. "COBRA Premium Assistance." Interim Report to
Congress, 2010.

50

