NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INNOVATION AND THE FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE
Ramana Nanda
Matthew Rhodes-Kropf
Working Paper 19379
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19379

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

We thank Gustavo Manso, Josh Lerner, Thomas Hellmann, Michael Ewens, Bill Kerr, Serguey Braguinsky,
Antoinette Schoar, Bob Gibbons and Marcus Opp as well as seminar participants at CMU and MIT
for fruitful discussion and comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Ramana Nanda and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Innovation and the Financial Guillotine
Ramana Nanda and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf
NBER Working Paper No. 19379
August 2013
JEL No. G24,G39,O31
ABSTRACT
Our paper demonstrates that while failure tolerance by investors may encourage potential entrepreneurs
to innovate, financiers with investment strategies that tolerate early failure endogenously choose to
fund less radical innovations. Failure tolerance as an equilibrium price that increases in the level of
experimentation. More experimental projects that don't generate enough to pay the price cannot be
started. In equilibrium all competing financiers may choose to offer failure tolerant contracts to attract
entrepreneurs, leaving no capital to fund the most radical, experimental projects. The tradeoff between
failure tolerance and a sharp guillotine helps explain when and where radical innovation occurs.

Ramana Nanda
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 317
Boston
MA 02163
rnanda@hbs.edu
Matthew Rhodes-Kropf
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 313
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mrhodeskropf@hbs.edu

Innovation and the Financial Guillotine
Investors, corporations and even governments who fund innovation must decide which
projects to finance and when to withdraw their funding in order to create the most value.
A key insight from recent work is that a tolerance for failure may be extremely important
for innovation as it makes agents more willing to take risks and to undertake exploratory
projects that lead to innovation Holmstrom (1989), Aghion and Tirole (1994) and Manso
(2011). Agents penalized for early failure are less willing to experiment. Similarly Stein
(1989) argues that managers must be protected from short term financial reactions in
order to encourage them to make long-run investments.1
The optimal level of failure tolerance, of course, varies from project to project. Yet, in
many instances, a project-by-project optimization is not feasible. For example, a government looking to stimulate innovation may pass laws making it harder to fire employees.
This level of ‘failure tolerance’ will apply to all employees, regardless of the projects they
are working on. Similarly, a CEO with a long-term, ‘failure tolerant’ employment contract
may take on many different types of projects. In fact, organizational structure, organizational culture, or a desire by investors to build a consistent reputation as entrepreneur
friendly all result in firm-level policies towards failure tolerance. Put differently, the principal often has an ‘innovation strategy’ that is set ex ante—one that is a blanket policy
that covers all projects in the principal’s portfolio—and hence may not be optimal for
every one of the projects. How does this financing strategy impact innovation? This is an
important question because the answer inverts how we think about the impact of failure
tolerance.
In this paper we depart from the prior literature that has looked at the optimal solu1 A number of empirical papers consider the impact of policies that reduce managerial myopia and allow managers
to focus on long-run innovation (Burkart, Gromb and Panunzi (1997), Myers (2000), Acharya and Subramanian
(2009) , Ferreira, Manso and Silva (2011), Aghion, Reenen and Zingales (2009)).

2

JULY 2013

tion for individual projects, and instead consider the ex ante strategic choice of a firm,
investor or government looking to maximize profits or promote innovation. We examine
how different strategies impact the types of projects that an investor is willing to finance,
and how this may impact the nature of innovation that will be undertaken across different
types of firms and regions.
In particular, we highlight a central trade-off faced by principals when they pick their
innovation strategy. A strategy that is more failure tolerant may encourage the agent to
innovate, but simultaneously destroys the value of the real option to abandon the project.
In the real options literature (Gompers (1995), Bergemann and Hege (2005), Bergemann,
Hege and Peng (2008)), innovation is achieved through experimentation – several novel
ideas can be tried and only those that continue to produce positive information should
continue to receive funding. This idea has motivated the current thrust by several venture
capital investors to fund the creation of a “minimum viable product” in order to test new
entrepreneurial ideas as quickly and cheaply as possible, to ‘kill fast and cheap’, and only
commit greater resources to improve the product after seeing early success.2
Thus, a failure tolerant policy has two effects: it stimulates innovation which creates
value but destroys the value of the abandonment option. Put differently, a failure tolerant
strategy increases the entrepreneur’s willingness to experiment but decreases the investors
willingness to fund experimentation.
We show that financiers who are more tolerant of early failure endogenously choose to
fund less radical innovations, or ones where the value of abandonment options is low. This
is because although entrepreneurs prefer a failure tolerant investor, in equilibrium, failure
2 Venture capital investors seem to have sharp ready guillotines - Sahlman (1990), Hellmann (1998); Gompers
and Lerner (2004) document the myriad control rights negotiated in standard venture capital contracts that allow
investors to fire management and/or abandon the project. In fact, Hall and Woodward (2010) document that about
50% of the venture-capital backed startups in their sample had zero-value exits. Hellmann and Puri (2002) and
Kaplan, Sensoy and Stromberg (2009) show that of the firms that are ‘successful’, many end up with CEOs who
are different from the founders.

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

3

tolerance has a price. The most radical projects cannot afford to pay the price. Thus,
the most radical innovations are either not funded at all, or are endogenously funded by
financiers who have a sharp financial guillotine.3 In fact, we show that principals have
to be careful, since a strategy of being failure tolerant to promote innovation may have
exactly the opposite effect than the one desired, leading to the funding of less radical
innovation.
We also demonstrate that an equilibrium can arise in which all competing financiers
choose to be failure tolerant in the attempt to attract entrepreneurs and thus no capital
is available to fund the most radical innovations, even if there are entrepreneurs who want
to find financing for such projects. This equilibrium becomes more likely to form when
entrepreneurs on average have a greater desire for failure tolerance such as is thought to
occur, for example, in parts of Europe and Japan (see Landier (2002)4 ). Moreover, the
equilibrium with all failure tolerant investors may be self-fulfilling if the act of shutting
down more projects reduces the stigma attached to failure.
Our model therefore highlights that the type of innovation undertaken in an economy
may depend critically on the institutions that either facilitate or hinder the ability to
terminate projects at an intermediate stage, as well as cultural or institutional factors that
determine the outside options for entrepreneurs. The institutional funding environment
for innovation is an endogenous equilibrium outcome that may result in places or times
with no investors able to fund radical innovation.
This paper is related to prior work examining the role of principal agent relationships in
the innovation process (e.g. Holmstrom (1989), Aghion and Tirole (1994), Hellmann and
Thiele (2011) and Manso (2011)) as well as how the principle agent problem influences
3 Our model also demonstrates that some radical innovations can only be commercialized by investors who are
not concerned with making NPV positive investments, such as for example, government funded initiates like the
manhattan project or the lunar landing.
4 In Landier (2002) the stigma of failure prevents entrepreneurs from abandoning bad projects.

4

JULY 2013

the decision to stop funding projects (e.g. Bergemann and Hege (2005), Cornelli and
Yosha (2003) and Hellmann (1998)). We build on this work by considering the type of
project an investor is willing to fund given their strategy (due to ability or willingness) to
end the project at an intermediate stage. Our work is also related to research examining
how incentives stemming from organizational structure can drive innovation (e.g. Qian
and Xu (1998), Gromb and Scharfstein (2002), Fulghieri and Sevilir (2009)) and how
the “soft budget constraint” problem drives the selection of projects (e.g. Roberts and
Weitzman (1981) and Dewatripont and Maskin (1995)). We look specifically at innovation
as an outcome and examine how these factors impact the degree to which investors choose
to fund radical innovation. Finally, a recent group of empirical papers have looked for
and found a positive effect of failure tolerance on the margin (e.g. Lerner and Wulf
(2007), Azoulay, Zivin and Manso (2011), Acharya and Subramanian (2009), Ferreira,
Manso and Silva (2011), Aghion, Reenen and Zingales (2009), Tian and Wang (2012),
Chemmanur, Loutskina and Tian (2012)). Our ideas are consistent with these findings,
although different from past theoretical work, as our point is that strategies that reduce
short term accountability and thus encourage innovation on the intensive margin may
simultaneously alter what financial backers are willing to fund and thus reduce innovation
at the extensive margin. Examining this latter effect seems to be a fruitful avenue for
further empirical research.5
The tradeoff we explore also has implications for a wider array of situations than just
R&D. In the context of a board choosing a CEO, the intuition presented here suggests
that boards that provide long term contracts with more tolerance for failure may find that
they then choose a more experienced CEO who is a more known commodity. A board
5 Recent work by Ewens and Fons-Rosen (2013) and Cerqueiro et al. (2013) have found initial support for the
the idea that failure tolerance may encourage innovation at the intensive margin but discourage it at the extensive
margin.

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

5

that makes it easy to fire the CEO is more likely to experiment by hiring a younger, less
experienced CEO whose quality is less certain but whose potential may be great. Thus, the
same result occurs in this context - the desire to alter the intensive margin for innovation
alters the extensive margin in the willingness to select a more radical leader.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I develops a model of
investing in innovative projects from both the financier’s and entrepreneur’s point of view.
Section II solves for the deal between the financier and entrepreneur for different types of
projects and levels of commitment. Section III determines the choices of the entrepreneur
and investor given their level of commitment and desire for a committed investor. Section
IV endogenizes the choice of failure tolerance by the investor and determines the potential
equilibria and how they depend on the the view of early failure in the labor market and
by the entrepreneur. Section V discusses the key implications and extensions of our model
and Section VI concludes.

I.

A Model of Investment

We model the creation of new projects that need an investor and an entrepreneur in
each of two periods. Both the investor and entrepreneur must choose whether or not to
start a project and then, at an interim point, whether to continue the project.
This basic set up is a two-armed bandit problem. There has been a great deal of
work modeling innovation that has used some from of the two armed bandit problem.
From the classic works of Weitzman (1979), Roberts and Weitzman (1981), Jensen (1981),
Battacharya, Chatterjee and Samuelson (1986) to more recent works such as Moscarini
and Smith (2001), Manso (2011) and Akcigit and Liu (2011).6 We build on this work by
altering features of the problem to explore an important dimension in the decision to fund
6 See

Bergemann and Valimaki (2006) for a review of the economics literature on bandit problems.

6

JULY 2013

innovation.

A.

Investor View

We model investment under uncertainty. A penniless entrepreneur seeks funding from
investors for a risky project that requires capital for two periods or stages. The first stage
of the project reveals information about the probability of success in the second stage.7
The probability of ‘success’ (positive information) in the first stage is p1 and reveals the
information S, while ‘failure’ reveals F . Success in the second stage yields a payoff of VS
or VF depending on what happened in the first stage, but occurs with a probability that
is unknown and whose expectation depends on the information revealed by the first stage.
Failure in the second stage yields a payoff of zero.
Let E[p2 ] denote the unconditional expectation about the second stage success. The
investor updates their expectation about the second stage probability depending on the
outcome of the first stage. Let E[p2 |S] denote the expectation of p2 conditional on success
in the first stage, while E[p2 |F ] denotes the expectation of p2 conditional on failure in the
first stage.8
The project requires capital X to complete the first stage of the project and Y to
complete the second stage. The entrepreneur is assumed to have no capital while the
investor has enough to fund the project for both periods. An investor who chooses not
to invest at either stage can instead earn a safe return of r per period (investor outside
option) on either X, Y or both. We assume project opportunities are time sensitive, so if
the project is not funded at either the 1st or 2nd stage then it is worth nothing.
7 This

might be the building of a prototype or the FDA regulated Phase I trials on the path of a new drug. Etc.
particular functional form that is sometimes used with this set up is to assume that the first and second
stage have the same underlying probability of success, p. In this case p1 can be thought of as the unconditional
expectation of p, and E[p2 |S] and E[p2 |F ] just follow Bayes’ rule. We use a more general setup to express the idea
that the probability of success of the first stage experiment is potentially independent of the amount of information
revealed by the experiment. For example, there could be a project for which a first stage experiment would work
with a 20% chance but if it works the second stage is almost certain to work (99% probability of success).
8 One

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

7

In order to focus on the interesting cases we assume that if the project ‘fails’ in the first
period then it is NPV negative in the second period, i.e., E[p2 |F ] ∗ VF < Y (1 + r). And
if the project ‘succeeds’ in the first period then it is NPV positive in the second period,
i.e., E[p2 |S] ∗ VS > Y (1 + r). We will consider how variation in the probabilities alters the
decision to fund the project.
We assume that principals/investors cannot commit to a long-term contract with the
agent/entrepreneur at the beginning of the project. Prior work has assumed an idealized
investor who can write long-term contracts allowing them to commit to some projects
and not to others. Our departure from this work allows us to compare investors who
can never commit to committed investors introduced in the next section. With limited
commitment, the principal and the agent may agree on and bind themselves to short-term
(one period) contracts, but cannot commit themselves to any future contracts. Investors
in new projects are often unable to commit to fund the project in the future even if they
desire to make such a commitment. For example, corporations cannot write contracts
with themselves and thus always retain the right to terminate a project. Venture capital
investors have strong control provisions for many standard incomplete contracting reasons
and are unable to give up the power to shut down the firm and return any remaining
money if they wish to do so in the future. Thus, even a project that receives full funding
(both X and Y) in the first period, may be shut down and Y returned to investors in
period two.
We will demonstrate that the equilibrium fraction owned by the investor in the final
period, assuming an agreement can be reached for investment in both periods, depends on
the outcome of the first period. Let αS represent the final fraction owned by the investors
if the first period was a success, and let αF represent the final fraction owned by the
investors if the first period was a failure.

8

JULY 2013

The extensive form of the game played by the investor (assuming the entrepreneur is
willing to start and continue the project) is shown in figure 1. Remember that by choosing
not to invest in the project in either period the investor earns a return of r per period on
the money he does not invest in the risky project. We assume investors make all decisions
to maximize net present value (which is equivalent to maximizing end of second period
wealth).
E[p2 | S]
Success, S
Invest $Y?

Yes

No
P1
Invest $X?

Yes

Success, Payoff
VS*αS

1 – E[p2 | S]

Failure, Payoff
0

E[p2 | F]

Success, Payoff
VF*αF

Y (1+r)

No
1 – p1
2

X (1+r) + Y (1+r)

Failure, F
Invest $Y?

Yes

No
1 – E[p2 |F]

Failure, Payoff
0

Y (1+r)

Figure 1. Extensive Form Representation of the Investor’s Game Tree

B.

Entrepreneur’s View

Potential entrepreneurs are endowed with a project in period one with a given p1 , p2 ,
E[p2 |S], E[p2 |F ], VS , VF , X and Y . Assuming that an investor chooses to fund the first
period of required investment, the potential entrepreneur must choose whether or not to
become an entrepreneur or take an outside employment option. If the investor is willing to
fund the project in the second period then the entrepreneur must choose whether or not to
continue as an entrepreneur. If the potential entrepreneur chooses entrepreneurship and
stays an entrepreneur in period 2 they generate utility of uE in both periods. Alternatively,
if they choose not to become an entrepreneur in the first period then we assume that no
entrepreneurial opportunity arises in the second period so they generate utility of uO in

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

9

both periods.9
If the investor chooses not to fund the project in the second period, or the entrepreneur
chooses not to continue as an entrepreneur, i.e., the entrepreneur cannot reach an agreement with an investor in period 2, then the project fails and the entrepreneur generates
utility uF from their outside option in the second period. We assume ∆uF = uF − uE < 0,
which represents the disutility felt by a failed entrepreneur. The more negative ∆uF is,
the worse entrepreneurial experience in a failed project is perceived.10
Given success or failure in the first period the entrepreneur updates their expectation
about the probability the project is a success just as the investor does. The extensive form
of the game played by the entrepreneur (assuming funding is available) is shown in figure
2. We assume entrepreneurs make all decisions to maximize the sum of total utility.

E[p2 | S]
Success, S
Continue?

Yes

No

Failure, Payoff 2 uE
1 – E[p2 | S]

P1
Start Firm?

Yes

uE + uF

No
1 – p1
2uO

Success, Payoff
VS*(1-αS) +2 uE

E[p2 | F]
Failure, F
Continue?

Success, Payoff
VF*(1-αF) + 2 uE

Yes

No
1 – E[p2 |F]

Failure, Payoff 2 uE

uE + uF

Figure 2. Extensive Form Representation of the Entrepreneur’s Game Tree

9 The entrepreneur could also receive side payments from the investor. This changes no results and so is suppressed.
10 Entrepreneurs seem to have a strong preference for continuation regardless of present-value considerations, be
it because they are (over)confident or because they rationally try to prolong the search. Cornelli and Yosha (2003)
suggest that entrepreneurs use their discretion to (mis)represent the progress that has been made in order to secure
further funding.

10

JULY 2013

II.

The Deal Between the Entrepreneur and Investor

In this section we determine when the entrepreneur and investors will be able to find an
acceptable deal. We do so by determining the minimum share both the entrepreneur and
investor must own in order to choose to start the project.
The final fraction owned by investors after success or failure in the first period, αj where
j ∈ {S, F }, is determined by the amount the investors purchased in the first period, α1 ,
and the second period α2j , which may depend on the outcome in the first stage. Since the
first period fraction gets diluted by the second period investment, αj = α2j + α1 (1 − α2j ).

A.

No Commitment

Using backward induction we start with the second period. Conditional on a given α1
the investor will invest in the second period as long as

Vj αj E[p2 | j] − Y (1 + r) > 0

where j ∈ {S, F }

This condition does not hold after failure even if αF = 1, therefore the investor will only
invest after success in the first period. The minimum fraction the investor is willing to
accept for an investment of Y in the second period after success in the first period is

α2S =

Y (1 + r)
.
VS E[p2 | S]

The entrepreneur, on the other hand, will continue with the business in the second
period as long as,

Vj (1 − αj )E[p2 | j] + uE > uF

where j ∈ {S, F }.

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

11

The entrepreneur will want to continue if the expected value from continuing is greater
than the utility after failure, because the utility after failure is the outside option of the
entrepreneur if she does not continue. The maximum fraction the entrepreneur will give
up in the second period after success in the first period is

α2S = 1 −

uF − uE
.
VS E[p2 | S]

Given both the minimum fraction the investor will accept, α2S , as well as the maximum
fraction the entrepreneur will give up, α2S , an agreement may not be reached. An investor
and entrepreneur are able to reach an agreement in the second period as long as

1 ≥ α2S ≤ α2S ≥ 0

Agreement Conditions, 2nd period

The middle inequality requirement is that there are gains from trade. However, those
gains must also occur in a region that is feasible, i.e. the investor requires less than 100%
ownership to be willing to invest, 1 ≥ α2S , and the entrepreneur requires less than 100%
ownership to be willing to continue, α2S ≥ 0. If not, the entrepreneur, for example, might
be willing to give up 110% of the final payoff and the investor might be willing to invest
to get this payoff, but it is clearly not economically feasible. For the same reason, even
when there are gains from trade in the reasonable range, the resulting negotiation must
yield a fraction such that 0 ≤ α2j ≤ 1 otherwise it is bounded by 0 or 1.
We could find the maximum fraction the entrepreneur would be willing to give up after
failure (α2F ), however, we already determined that the investor would require a share
(α2F ) greater than 100% to invest in the second period, which is not economically viable.
So no deal will be done after failure.

12

JULY 2013

If an agreement cannot be reached even after success then clearly the deal will never
be funded. However, even those projects for which an agreement could be reached after
success may not be funded in the first period if the probability of success in the first period
is too low. The following proposition determines the conditions for a potential agreement
to be reached to fund the project in the first period. Given that the investor can forecast
the second period dilution these conditions can be written in terms of the final fraction of
the business the investor or entrepreneur needs to own in the successful state in order to
be willing to start.

PROPOSITION 1: The minimum total fraction the investor must receive is

αSN =

p1 Y (1 + r) + X(1 + r)2
p1 VS E[p2 | S]

and the maximum total fraction the entrepreneur is willing to give up is

α SN = 1 −

(1 + p1 )(uO − uE ) + (1 − p1 )(uO − uF )
p1 VS E[p2 | S]

where the N subscript represents the fact that no agreement will be reached after failure.

See appendix A.ii for proof. We use the N subscript because in the next section we consider
the situation when reputation concerns or bureaucracy result in an agreement to continue
even after first period failure (A subscript for Agreement rather than N for No-agreement).
Then we will compare the deals funded in each case. Given the second period fractions
found above, the minimum and maximum total fractions imply minimum and maximum
first period fractions (found in the appendix for the interested reader).

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

B.

13

Commitment

With the assumption of incomplete contracts there is potential value to an investor of
a reputation as ‘entrepreneurial friendly’ or ‘committed’, who might then find it costly
to shut down a project in the second period. Or alternatively, there might be value in
a bureaucratic institution that has a limited ability to shut down a project once started.
In this subsection we examine committed investors with an assumed (reputation) cost of
early shutdown of c. Then in section IV we allow investors to choose whether or not to
have a committed reputation.
We define a committed investor as follows.

DEFINITION 1: A committed investor has a c > c∗ = Y (1 + r) − VF E[p2 | F ]

That is, the cost of shutdown is greater than the expected loses from the project after
failure in the first period.
The following proposition solves for the minimum fraction the committed investor will
accept in the second period and the maximum fraction the entrepreneur will give up in
the second period. These will be used to determine if a deal can be reached.

PROPOSITION 2: The minimum fraction the committed investor is willing to accept for
an investment of Y in the second period after success in the first period is

α2S =

Y (1 + r)
.
VS E[p2 | S]

However, after failure in the first period the minimum fraction the committed investor is
willing to accept is
α2F =

Y (1 + r) − c
α1
−
.
VF E[p2 | F ](1 − α1 ) 1 − α1

14

JULY 2013

The maximum fraction the entrepreneur will give up in the second period after success
in the first period is
α2S = 1 −

uF − uE
.
VS E[p2 | S]

After failure in the first period the maximum fraction the entrepreneur is willing to give
up is
α2F = 1 −

uF − uE
.
VF E[p2 | F ](1 − α1 )

The proof is in appendix A.i. Both the investor and the entrepreneur must keep a large
enough fraction in the second period to be willing to do a deal rather than choose their
outside option. These fractions of course depend on whether or not the first period experiment worked.
After success in the first period the agreement conditions are always met. However, after
failure in the first period the agreement conditions may or may not be met depending on
the parameters of the investment, the investor and the entrepreneur.
LEMMA 1: An agreement can be reached in the second period after failure in the first iff
the investor is committed.
PROOF:
A second period deal after failure can be reached if α2F − α2F ≥ 0.

α2F − α2F = 1 −

uF − uE
Y (1 + r) − c
α1
−
−
.
VF E[p2 | F ](1 − α1 ) VF E[p2 | F ](1 − α1 ) 1 − α1

α2F − α2F is positive iff VF E[p2 | F ] − uF + uE − Y (1 + r) + c ≥ 0. However, since
the utility of the entrepreneur cannot be transferred to the investor, it must also be the
case that VF E[p2 | F ] − Y (1 + r) + c ≥ 0. But if VF E[p2 | F ] − Y (1 + r) + c ≥ 0 then
VF E[p2 | F ] − uF + uE − Y (1 + r) + c ≥ 0 because uF − uE < 0. QED

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

15

This lemma makes it clear that only a ‘committed’ investor will continue to fund the
company after failure because VF E[p2 | F ] − Y (1 + r) < 0.11
We have now solved for both the minimum second period fraction the committed investor
will accept, α2j , as well as the maximum second period fraction the entrepreneur will give
up, α2j , and the conditions under which a second period deal will be done. If either party
yields more than these fractions, then they would be better off accepting their outside,
low-risk, opportunity rather than continuing the project in the second period.
Stepping back to the first period, a committed investor will invest and an entrepreneur
will start the project with a committed investor only if they expect to end up with a large
enough fraction after both first and second period negotiations.
PROPOSITION 3: The minimum total fraction the investor is willing to accept is

αSA =

Y (1 + r) + X(1 + r)2 − (1 − p1 )VF αF E[p2 | F ]
,
p1 VS E[p2 | S]

and the maximum fraction the entrepreneur is willing to give up is

αSA = 1 −

2∆w1 − (1 − p1 )E[p2 | F ]VF (1 − αF )
p1 VS E[p2 | S]

where the subscript A signifies that an agreement will be reached after first period failure.
And where





Y (1 + r) − c
∆uF
αF = γ
+ (1 − γ) 1 −
VF E[p2 | F ]
VF E[p2 | F ]
The proof is in A.ii, however, these are the relatively intuitive outcomes in each situation
because each player must expect to make in the good state an amount that at least equals
their expected cost plus their expected loss in the bad state.
11 Furthermore, at c = Y (1 + r), the committed investor will continue to fund after failure since V E[p | F ] > 0.
2
F
Thus, there is some c such that the investor is committed.

16

JULY 2013

Given the minimum and maximum fractions, we know the project will be started if

1 ≥ αSi ≤ αSi ≥ 0

Agreement Conditions, 1st period,

either with our without a second period agreement after failure (i ∈ [A, N ]).
We have now calculated the minimum and maximum required by investors and entrepreneurs. With these fractions we can determine what kinds of deals will be done by the
different types of player.
III.

The Desires of the Entrepreneur and Investor

It is informative to start by considering only the desires of the entrepreneur. The
entrepreneur is deciding whether to start the company or take the safe outside option.
We have calculated above the fraction of equity the entrepreneur will give up with and
without commitment from the investor, αSA and αSN . Our next simple proposition uses
these to determine when an entrepreneur would want a committed or failure tolerant
investor. Remember that above we defined a ‘failure tolerant’ or ‘committed’ investor
as one who would still be willing to invest after failure in the first period, i.e., VF E[p2 |
F ] − Y (1 + r) + c ≥ 0.
PROPOSITION 4: The entrepreneur is willing to give up a larger fraction of the new
venture with a committed investor.
PROOF:
The entrepreneur is willing to give a larger fraction of the new venture to a failure
tolerant investor if

αSA − αSN =

(1 − p1 )γ [VF E[p2 | F ] − Y (1 + r) + c − ∆uF ]
> 0.
p1 VS E[p2 | S]

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

17

The investor is only failure tolerant, i.e., willing to invest after failure if VF E[p2 | F ] −
Y (1 + r) + c ≥ 0. Given that ∆uF < 0, i.e. the entrepreneur finds early failure painful,
αSA − αSN is positive if the investor is failure tolerant. Furthermore, lemma 1 implies that
a deal will always be done after early failure when this is true. QED
uF represents the cost of early failure to the entrepreneur. It is intuitive that if early
failure is costly to the entrepreneur then they prefer a failure tolerant investor and are
more willing to start a new innovative venture with a failure tolerant investor.
This proposition supports the intuition behind failure tolerance. Greater failure tolerance by the investor increases the willingness of the entrepreneur to choose the risky,
innovative path. This idea is correct but as the following proposition shows, there is a
force coming from the investor that works against this effect.

PROPOSITION 5: The investor is willing to accept a smaller fraction of the new venture
if the investor is uncommitted.
For the proof see Appendix A.iv.
Both proposition 4 and 5 are partial equilibrium results that demonstrate common
intuition about the two sides of the innovation problem when we consider them separately.
The entrepreneur is more willing to start an innovative project for a given offer from the
investor if the project will not be shut down after early failure. In this sense failure
tolerance encourages innovation.
At the same time proposition 5 demonstrates that the investor is more willing to fund
the project if they retain the option to shut down the project after early failure, i.e. real
options have value. But this elucidates the clear tension - the investor is more likely to
fund the project if he can kill it but the entrepreneur is more likely to start the project if
it wont get killed.

18

JULY 2013

To understand the interaction we must solve for the general equilibrium considering
both the entrepreneur and the investor.

A.

Commitment or the Guillotine

A deal can be done to begin the project if αSA ≤ αSA , assuming an agreement will
be reached to continue the project after early failure. Alternatively, a deal can be done
to begin the project if αSN ≤ αSN , assuming the project will be shut down after early
failure. That is, a deal can get done if the lowest fraction the investor will accept, αSi is
less than the highest fraction the entrepreneur with give up, αSi . Therefore, given that a
second period agreement after failure will or will not be reached, a project can be started
if αSA − αSA ≥ 0, i.e., if

p1 VS E[p2 | S] + (1 − p1 )VF E[p2 | F ] − 2(uO − uE ) − Y (1 + r) − X(1 + r)2 ≥ 0,

(1)

or if αSN − αSN ≥ 0, i.e., if

p1 VS E[p2 | S] − 2(uO − uE ) + (1 − p1 )∆uF − p1 Y (1 + r) − X(1 + r)2 ≥ 0.

(2)

We can use the above inequalities to determine what types of projects actually can be
started and the effects of failure tolerance and a sharp guillotine.

PROPOSITION 6: For any given project there are four possibilities
1) the project can only be started if the investor is committed,
2) the project can only be started if the investor has a sharp guillotine (is uncommitted),
3) the project can be started with either a committed or uncommitted investor,

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

19

4) the project cannot be started.
The proof is left to Appendix A.v. Proposition 6 demonstrates the potential for a tradeoff
between failure tolerance and the launching of a new venture. While the entrepreneur
would like a committed investor the commitment comes at a price. For some projects and
entrepreneurs that price is so high that they would rather not do the deal. For others they
would rather do the deal, but just not with a committed investor. Thus when we include
the equilibrium cost of failure tolerance we see that it has the potential to both increase
the probability that an entrepreneur chooses the innovative path and decrease it.
Essentially the utility of the entrepreneur can be enhanced by moving some of the payout
in the success state to the early failure state. This is accomplished by giving a more failure
tolerant VC a larger initial fraction in exchange for the commitment to fund the project
in the bad state. If the entrepreneur is willing to pay enough in the good state to the
investor to make that trade worth it to the investor then the deal can be done. However,
there are deals for which this is true and deals for which this is not true. If the committed
investor requires too much in order to be failure tolerant in the bad state, then the deal
may be more likely to be done by a VC with a sharp guillotine.
B.

Who Funds Experimentation?

The question is then – which projects are more likely to be done by a committed or
uncommitted investor? We can see that projects with higher payoffs, VS or VF , or lower
costs, Y and X, are more likely to be done, but when considering the difference between a
committed and an uncommitted investor we must look at the value of the early experiment.
In our model the first stage is an experiment that provides information about the probability of success in the second stage. In an extreme one might have an experiment that
demonstrated nothing, i.e., VS E[p2 | S] = VF E[p2 | F ]. That is, whether the first stage

20

JULY 2013

experiment succeeded or failed the updated expected value in the second stage was the
same. Alternatively, the experiment might provide a great deal of information. In this
case VS E[p2 | S] would be much larger than VF E[p2 | F ]. Thus, VS E[p2 | S] − VF E[p2 | F ]
is the amount or quality of the information revealed by the experiment.
We define a project as more experimental if the first stage reveals more information.
This definition is logical since VS E[p2 | S]−VF E[p2 | F ] is larger if the experiment revealed
more about what might happen in the future. In the one extreme the experiment revealed
nothing so VS E[p2 | S] − VF E[p2 | F ] = 0. At the other extreme the experiment could
reveal whether or not the project is worthless (VS E[p2 | S] − VF E[p2 | F ] = VS E[p2 | S]).
One special case are martingale beliefs with prior expected probability p for both stage
1 and stage 2 and E[p2 | j] follows Bayes Rule. In this case projects with weaker priors
would be classified as more experimental.
While this is a logical definition of increased experimentation, increasing VS E[p2 | S] −
VF E[p2 | F ] might simultaneously increase or decrease the total expected value of the
project. When we look at the effects from greater experimentation we want to make sure
that we hold constant any change in expected value. Therefore, we define a project as
more experimental in a mean preserving way as follows.
DEFINITION 2: A project is more experimental in a mean preserving way if VS E[p2 |
S] − VF E[p2 | F ] is larger for a given p1 , and expected payoff, p1 VS E[p2 | S] + (1 −
p1 )VF E[p2 | F ].
We use this definition because it changes the level of experimentation without simultaneously altering the probability of first stage success or the expected value of the project.
Certainly a project may be more experimental if VS E[p2 | S] − VF E[p2 | F ] is larger and
the expected value is larger.12 However, this kind of difference would create two effects 12 For

example, if E[p2 | F ] is always zero, then the only way to increase VS E[p2 | S] − VF E[p2 | F ] is to increase

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

21

one that came from greater experimentation and one that came from increased expected
value. Since we know the effects of increased expected value (everyone is more likely to
fund a better project) we use a definition that isolates the effect of information.
Note that the notion of increasing experimentation has a relation to, but is not the same
as, increasing risk. For example, we could increase risk while holding the experimentation
constant by decreasing both E[p2 | S] and E[p2 | F ] and increasing VS and VF . This
increase in risk would increase the overall risk of the project but would not impact the
importance of the first stage experiment.
With this definition we can establish the following proposition
PROPOSITION 7: A more experimental project is more likely to be funded by an uncommitted investor. A more experimental project can potentially only be funded by an
uncommitted investor.
PROOF:
See Appendix A.vi
Proposition 7 makes it clear that the more valuable the information learned from the
experiment the more important it is to be able to act on it. A committed investor cannot
act on the information and must fund the project anyway while an uncommitted investor
can use the information to terminate the project. Therefore, an increase in failure tolerance
decreases an investors willingness to fund projects with greater experimentation.
Figure 3 demonstrates the ideas in propositions 6 and 7. Projects with a given expected
payoff after success in the first period (Y-axis) or failure in the first period (X-axis) fall into
different regions or groups. We only examine projects above the 45◦ line because it is not
economically reasonable for the expected value after failure to be greater than the expected
VS E[p2 | S]. In this case the project will have a higher expected value and be more experimental. We are not ruling
this possibilities out, rather we are just isolating the effect of experimentation.

22

JULY 2013

value after success. In the upper left diagram the small dashed lines that run parallel to
Iso Expected Payoff lines

E[p2 |S] VS

E[p2 |S] VS

A

33°

A’
K
C
p1 = 0.4

N
45°

45°

E[p2 |F] VF

E[p2 |F] VF

A
E[p2 |S] VS

E[p2 |S] VS

A

C

A’

A’

K
N
N
45°

45°

E[p2 |F] VF

E[p2 |F] VF

Figure 3. Investor regions: N = No Investors, C = Only Committed Investors, K = Only Killer Investors, A = All Investors, A’ = All Invest, Neither Kills

the 45◦ line are Iso Experimentation lines, i.e., along these lines VS E[p2 | S] − VF E[p2 | F ]
is constant. These projects can be thought of as equally experimental. Moving northeast
along an Iso Experimentation line increases the project’s value without changing the degree
to which it is experimental.
The large dashed lines are Iso Expected Payoff lines. These projects have the same ex
ante expected payoff, p1 VS E[p2 | S]+(1−p1 )VF E[p2 | F ]. They have a negative slope that
is defined by the probability of success in the first period p1 .13 Projects to the northwest
13 In the example shown p = 0.4 so the slope of the Iso Expected Payoff Lines is −1.5 resulting in a angle to the
1
Y-axis of approximately 33 degrees.

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

23

along an Iso Expected Payoff line are more experimental, but have the same expected
value.
The diagram also reinforces that risk is distinct from our notion of experimentation.
Each point in the diagram could represent a more or less risky project. A project with a
higher VS and VF but lower E[p2 | S] and E[p2 | F ] would be much more risky but could
have the same VS E[p2 | S] and VF E[p2 | F ] as an alternative less risky project. Thus,
these two different projects would be on the same Iso Experimentation and Iso Expected
Payoff line with very different risk.
In the remaining three diagrams in Figure 3 we see the regions discussed in proposition
6. The large dashed line is defined by equation (1). Above this line αSA − αSA ≥ 0, so the
entrepreneur can reach an agreement with a committed investor. Committed investors
will not invest in projects below the large dashed line and can invest in all projects above
this line. This line has the same slope as an Iso Expected Payoff Line because with
commitment the project generates the full ex ante expected value. However, with an
uncommitted, or killer, investor the project is stopped after failure in the first period.
Thus, the killer investor’s expected payoff is independent of VF E[p2 | F ]. Therefore,
uncommitted investors will invest in all projects above the horizontal dotted line. This
line is defined by equation (2) because a killer and an entrepreneur can reach an agreement
as long as αSN − αSN ≥ 0. The vertical line with both a dot and dash is the line where
VF E[p2 | F ] = Y (1 + r). Projects to the right of this line (region A’) have a high enough
expected value after failure in the first period that no investor would ever kill the project,
so we focus our attention to the left of this line.14
Where, or whether the dotted and dashed lines cross depends on the other parameters
in the problem (c, uO , uE , uF , r, X, Y ) that are held constant in each diagram. If the lines
14 We have assumed throughout the paper that V E[p | F ] < Y (1 + r) to focus on the interesting cases where
2
F
killing and commitment matter.

24

JULY 2013

cross, as in the upper right diagram, we see five regions. Entrepreneurs with projects with
high enough expected values can reach agreements with either type of investor (region
A) and those with low enough expected values cannot find investors (region N). However,
projects with mid level expected values may only be able to reach an agreement with
one of the two types of investors. This displays the intuition of proposition 7. We see
that projects with a given level of expected payoff are more likely to be funded only by
a killer (region K) if they are more experimental and more likely to be funded only by a
committed investor (region C) if they are less experimental.
The following corollary follows directly from proposition 7 and the intuition in the
diagrams. If the entrepreneur has a greater dislike of early failure, uF is lower, then the
dotted line is higher and the C region expands and the K region shrinks. In the lower left
and right diagrams in Figure 3 we see it is possible, depending on the magnitude of uF
for region C or K to disappear. Formally,

COROLLARY 1: Entrepreneurs with a greater dislike of early failure, (smaller uF ), are
more likely to have a project such that they can only reach an agreement with a committed
investor.

This key result and corollary seem contrary to the notion that failure tolerance increases
innovation (Holmstrom (1989), Aghion and Tirole (1994) and Manso (2011)), but actually
fits both with this intuition and with the many real world examples. The source of many of
the great innovations of our time come both from academia or government labs, places with
great failure tolerance but with no criteria for NPV-positive innovation, and from venture
capitalist investments, a group that cares a lot about the NPV of their investments, but is
often reviled by entrepreneurs for their quickness to shut down a firm. On the other hand,
many have argued that large corporations, that also need to worry about the NPV of their

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

25

investments, engage in more incremental innovation and are slow to kill projects.15
Our model helps explain this by highlighting that having a strategy of a sharp guillotine
allows investors to back the most experimental projects, or those associated with the most
radical innovation. Proposition 7 tells us that corporate investors, whose bureaucracy may
make them slow to kill projects, will tend to fund projects that are ex ante less experimental
(and so wont need to kill them). While VCs, who are generally faster with the financial
guillotine, will, on average, fund things with greater learning from early experiments and
kill those that don’t work out.16 Thus, even though corporations will have encouraged
more innovation they will only have funded the less experimental projects. And the VCs
will have discouraged entrepreneurs from starting projects ex ante. However, ex post they
will have funded the most experimental projects and thus will produce the more radical
innovations! On the other hand, failure tolerance can induce entrepreneurs to engage in
experimentation, but the price of being a failure tolerant investor who cares about NPV
may be too high - so that institutions such as academia and the government may also be
places that end up financing a lot of radical experimentation, just not in an NPV positive
way.17
Our model also suggests that employees will likely complain about the stifling environment of the corporation that does not let them innovate (because the corporation won’t
fund very experimental projects) – leading to spinoffs due to frustration and disagreements
about what projects to push forward (see Gompers, Lerner and Scharfstein (2005) and
15 For example, systematic studies of R&D practices in the U.S. report that large companies tend to focus R&D
on less uncertain, less novel projects more likely to focus on cost reductions or product improvement than new
product ideas (e.g. Henderson (1993), Henderson and Clark (1990), Scherer (1991), Scherer (1992), Jewkes, Sawers
and Stillerman (1969) and Nelson, Peck and Kalachek (1967)).
16 Hall and Woodward (2010) report that about 50% of the venture-capital backed startups in their sample had
zero-value exits
17 Recent work, Chemmanur, Loutskina and Tian (2012), has reported that corporate venture capitalists seem to
be more failure tolerant than regular venture capitals. Interestingly, corporate venture capitalists do not seem to
have had adequate financial performance but Dushnitsky and Lenox (2006) has shown that corporations benefit in
non-pecuniary ways (see theory by Fulghieri and Sevilir (2009)). Our theory suggests that as the need for financial
return diminishes, investors can become more failure tolerant and promote innovation.

26

JULY 2013

Klepper and Sleeper (2005)). Corporations that want to retain and fund more radical
innovations likely need to become less failure tolerant.18 In so doing they will become
more willing to fund very experimental projects.
Remember that the notion of increasing experimentation is not the same as increasing
risk. Thus, our point is not that more failure tolerant investors, such as corporations, will
not do risky projects. Rather they will be less likely to take on projects with a great deal
of experimentation and incremental steps where in a great deal of the project value comes
from the ability to kill it.

IV.

Investors choice of commitment level

In this section we endogenize the choice by the investor to become committed or not.
This allows us to demonstrate the potential for different investing equilibrium environments.

A.

The Search for Investments and Investors

We model the process of the match between investors and entrepreneurs using a simplified version of the classic search model of Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides (for examples
see Diamond (1993) and Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) and for a review see Petrongolo
and Pissarides (2001)).19 This allows the profits of the investors to vary depending on
how many others have chosen to be committed or quick with the guillotine.
We assume that there are a measure of of investors, MI , who must choose between
having a sharp guillotine, c = 0, (type K for ‘killer’) or committing to fund the next
round (type C for committed). Simultaneously we assume that there are a measure of
18 Interestingly, Seru (2011) reports that mergers reduce innovation. This may be because the larger the corporation the more failure tolerant it becomes and thus endogenously the less willing it becomes to fund innovation.
19 For a complete development of the model see Pissarides (1990). A search and Nash bargaining combination
was recently used by Inderst and Müller (2004) in examining venture investing.

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

27

entrepreneurs, Me , with one of two types of projects, type A and B. Type A projects
occur with probability φ, while the type B projects occur with probability 1 − φ. As is
standard in search models, we define θ ≡ MI /Me . This ratio is important because the
relative availability of each type will determine the probability of deal opportunities and
therefore influence each firms bargaining ability and choice of what type of investor to
become.
Given the availability of investors and entrepreneurs, the number of negotiations to do
a deal each period is given by the matching function ψ(MI , Me ). This function is assumed
to be increasing in both arguments, concave, and homogenous of degree one. This last
assumption ensures that the probability of deal opportunities depends only on the relative
scarcity of the investors to entrepreneurs, θ, which in turn means that the overall size of the
market does not impact investors or entrepreneurs in a different manner. Each individual
investor experiences the same probability of finding an entrepreneur each period, and vice
versa. Thus we define the probability that an investor finds an entrepreneur in any period
as
ψ(MI , Me )/MI = ψ(1,

Me
) ≡ qI (θ),
MI

(3)

By the properties of the matching function, qI0 (θ) ≤ 0, the elasticity of qI (θ) is between
zero and unity, and qI satisfies standard Inada conditions. Thus, an Investor is more
likely to meet an entrepreneur if the ratio of investors to entrepreneurs is low. From an
entrepreneurs point of view the probability of finding an investor is θqI (θ) ≡ qe (θ). This
differs from the viewpoint of investors because of the difference in their relative scarcity.
qe0 (θ) ≥ 0, thus entrepreneurs are more likely to meet investors if the ratio of investors to
entrepreneurs is high.
We assume that the measure of each type of investor and project is unchanging. There-

28

JULY 2013

fore, the expected profit from searching is the same at any point in time. Formally, this
stationarity requires the simultaneous creation of more investors to replace those out of
money and more entrepreneurs to replace those who found funding.20 We can think of
these as new funds, new entrepreneurial ideas or old projects returning for more money.21
When an investor and an entrepreneur find each other they must negotiate over any
surplus created and settle on an αS . The surplus created if the investor is committed is,

ξ C (p1 , VS , VF , E[p2 | S], E[p2 | F ], X, Y, r, uO , uE , uL )
= p1 VS E[p2 | S] + (1 − p1 )VF E[p2 | F ] − 2(uO − uE ) − Y (1 + r) − X(1 + r)2 . (4)

While the surplus created if the investor is not committed is

ξ K (p1 , VS , VF , E[p2 | S], E[p2 | F ], X, Y, r, uO , uE , uL )
= p1 VS E[p2 | S] − 2(uO − uE ) + (1 − p1 )∆uF − p1 Y (1 + r) − X(1 + r)2 . (5)

With an abuse of notation we will refer to the surplus created by investments in type
A projects as either ξ CA or ξ KA depending on whether the investor is committed or a
killer, and the surplus in type B projects as either ξ CB or ξ KB . The difference between
type A and B projects is ξ CA > ξ KA while ξ KB > ξ CB . That is, type A projects generate
more surplus if they receive investment from a committed investor, while type B projects
generate more total surplus if they receive investment from a uncommitted investor.22
20 Let m denote the rate of creation of new type j players (investors or entrepreneurs). Stationarity requires the
j
inflows to equal the outflows. Therefore, mj = qj (θ)Mj .
21 In the context of a labor search model, this assumption would be odd, since labor models are focused on the
rate of unemployment. There is no analog in venture capital investing, since we are not interested in the ‘rate’ that
deals stay undone.
22 This assumption is the first that is unusual in the context of search and matching models. Typically these
model assume some form of supermodularity (i.e., ξ CA + ξ KB > ξ KA + ξ CB ). However, in our model we allow
investors to choose their type so one type should not be assumed to be superior ex-ante.

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

29

The set of possible agreements is Π = {(π gf , π f g ) : 0 ≤ π gf ≤ ξ gf and π f g = ξ gf − π gf },
where π gf is the share of the expected surplus of the project earned by the investor and
π f g is the share of the expected surplus of the project earned by the entrepreneur, where
g ∈ [K, C] and f ∈ [A, B].
In equilibrium, if an investor and entrepreneur find each other it is possible to strike a
deal as long as the utility from a deal is greater than the outside opportunity for either. If
an investor or entrepreneur rejects a deal then they return to searching for another partner
which has an expected value of π K , π C , π A , or π B depending on the player.
This matching model will demonstrate the potential for different venture capital industry
outcomes. Although we have reduced the project space down to two projects, this variation
is enough to demonstrate the insight.
To determine how firms share the surplus generated by the project we use the Nash
bargaining solution, which in this case is just the solution to

max
(π gf ,π f g )∈Π

(π gf − π g )(π f g − π f ).

(6)

The well known solution to the bargaining problem is presented in the following Lemma.23

LEMMA 2: In equilibrium the resulting share of the surplus for an investor of type g ∈
[K, C] investing in a project of type f ∈ [A, B] is

1
π gf = (ξ gf − π f + π g ),
2

(7)

while the resulting share of the surplus for the entrepreneur is π f g = ξ gf − π gf where the
π g , π f are the disagreement expected values and ξ gf is defined by equations (4) and (5).
23 The

generalized Nash bargaining solution is a simple extension but adds no insight and is omitted.

30

JULY 2013

Given the above assumptions we can write the expected profits both types of investors
and the entrepreneurs, with either type of project, expect to receive if they search for the
other.
πg =

qI (θ) [φ max (π gA , π g ) + (1 − φ) max (π gB , π g )] 1 − qI (θ)
+
πg
1+r
1+r

(8)

If we postulate that ω fraction of investors choose to be killers, then

πf =

qe (θ) [ω max (π f K , π f ) + (1 − ω) max (π f C , π f )] 1 − qe (θ)
+
πf ,
1+r
1+r

(9)

where g ∈ [K, C] and f ∈ [A, B]. These profit functions are also the disagreement utility
of each type during a deal negotiation. With these equations we now have enough to solve
the model.
We present the solution to the matching model in the following proposition.

PROPOSITION 8: If search costs are low relative to the value created by joining B
projects with a killer
2r
φqI (θ)+(1−ω)qe (θ)

<

2r
(1−φ)qI (θ)+ωqe (θ)

ξ CA −ξ KA
,
ξ KA

<

ξ KB −ξ CB
ξ CB

and A projects with a committed investor

then at the equilibrium ω, 1 > ω∗ > 0, there is assortative

matching and committed investors invest in A type projects and killer investors invest in
B type projects. Furthermore, the equilibrium profits of investors who commit (C) or kill
(K) are
πK =

(1 − φ)qI (θ)
ξ
2r + (1 − φ)qI (θ) + ωqe (θ) KB

(10)

πC =

φqI (θ)
ξ
2r + φqI (θ) + (1 − ω)qe (θ) CA

(11)

And the profits of the entrepreneurs with type A or B projects are

πA =

(1 − ω)qe (θ)
ξ
2r + φqI (θ) + (1 − ω)qe (θ) CA

(12)

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

πB =

ωqe (θ)
ξ
2r + (1 − φ)qI (θ) + ωqe (θ) KB

31

(13)

We leave the proof to the appendix (A.vii). The point of this set up is to have an
equilibrium in which the level of competition from other investors determines the profits
from being a committed or uncommitted investor. In our simple search and matching
model the fraction each investor or entrepreneur gets is endogenously determined by each
players ability to find another investor or investment. The result is an intuitive equilibrium
in which each player gets a fraction of the total surplus created in a deal, ξ pf , that depends
on their ability to locate someone else with which to do a deal.
It is interesting to note that even though entrepreneurs would prefer a committed investor, and investors would prefer to be able to kill a project, since commitment is priced
in equilibrium, there may be a role for both types of investors.
In order for some investors to choose to be killers while others choose to be committed
the expected profits from choosing either type must be the same. If not, investors will
switch from one type to the other, raising profits for one type and lowering them for the
other, until either there are no investors of one type or until the profits equate. Therefore,
the equilibrium ω is the ω = ω ∗ such that the profits from either choice are equivalent.
COROLLARY 2: The equilibrium fraction of investors who choose to be killers is 0 ≤
ω∗ ≤ 1 where

ω∗ =

(2r + φqI (θ) + qe (θ))(1 − φ)qI (θ)ξ KB − (2r + (1 − φ)qI (θ))φqI (θ)ξ CA
qe (θ)(1 − φ)qI (θ)ξ KB + qe (θ)φqI (θ)ξ CA

(14)

This corollary elucidates the important insight that there are many parameter realization
that would result in equilibria in which some investors choose endogenously to be killers
while others simultaneously choose to be committed investors. It is not that one choice is
superior. Investors are after profits not innovation and thus prices and levels of competition

32

JULY 2013

adjust so that in many cases it can be equally profitable to be a committed investor
who attracts entrepreneurs, but must require a higher fraction of the company, or an
uncommitted investor who is less desirable to entrepreneurs but who asks for a smaller
fraction of the company. Thus, each type of entrepreneur completes a deal with a different
type of investor.
However, it is also interesting to note that there are some equilibria in which no investor
chooses to be a killer. The following corollary, points out that whether or not it is profitable
to be a killer depends on the level of entrepreneurial aversion to early failure.

COROLLARY 3: The equilibrium fraction of of killer investors, ω ∗ , is a decreasing function of the average entrepreneurial aversion to early failure. Furthermore, for high enough
average entrepreneurial aversion to early failure the equilibrium fraction of investors who
choose to be killers, ω ∗ , may be zero even though there is a positive measure of projects
that create more value with a killer (Me (1 − φ) > 0).

The formal proof left to appendix A.viii but the intuition is as follows. As the fear, or
stigma, of early failure increases the surplus created with an uncommitted investor falls.
This lowers the profits to being uncommitted so investors exit and become committed
investors until the profits from either choice are again equivalent. However, there comes a
point where even if an uncommitted investor gets all the surplus from a deal, they would
rather be a committed investor even if all other investors are committed (competitive
forces are not as bad for profits as no commitment). At this point no investor will choose
to be a killer.
Thus, economies with high aversion to early entrepreneurial failure may endogenously
contain no investor willing to fund the type of investments that create more surplus with an
uncommitted investor. Note that this equilibrium can occur even if there are entrepreneurs

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

33

looking for funding that create more total surplus if funded by a killer. It may be the
case, however, that with high general aversion to early failure all investors find it more
profitable to form a reputation as committed to attract entrepreneurs and thus look for
projects that create more surplus with a committed investor.
The type of project that wont get funded in this economy are those such that ξ K > ξ C .
This is true if equation (4) > equation (5), or

VF E[p2 | F ] − Y (1 + r) < ∆uF

(15)

As we can see, the projects that wont get funded are those with very low NPV after failure
in the first period. These are the projects for which experimentation mattered greatly.
Note that it is NOT the high risk projects that do not get funded - the probability of
success in the first period p1 does not affect the funding condition. Rather, it is those
projects that are NPV positive before the experiment but are significantly NPV negative
if the early experiment failed. These type of experimental projects cannot receive funding.
This result can help explain the amazing dearth of radical innovations emerging from
countries in Europe and Japan. Many believe that the stigma of failure is much higher
in these cultures, but it would seem that at least some entrepreneurs would be willing to
take the risk. However, what our equilibrium implies is that even those entrepreneurs that
are willing to start very experimental projects may find no investor willing to fund that
level of experimentation. This is a key insight – the institutional funding environment
for innovation is an endogenous equilibrium outcome that may result in places or times
with no investors able to fund radical innovation. In equilibrium, all investors choose to
be committed investors to attract the large mass of entrepreneurs who are willing to pay
for commitment (those with less experimental projects). Thus, when a project arrives

34

JULY 2013

that needs an investor with a sharp guillotine to fund it (or it is NPV negative) there
is no investor able to do it! In this equilibrium, financial intermediaries, such as venture
capitalists, can only fund projects that are less experimental.
Anecdotal evidence is consistent with the evidence from this model. For example, much
of the ‘venture capital’ investing outside the US does not go to truly novel radical innovations, but rather to ‘me-too’ projects and firms that although small, already have
customers and products not very different from products sold in many parts of the world,
like a chain of eyeglass stores. Martin Varsavsky, one of Europe’s leading technology entrepreneurs recently said in an interview with Fortune magazine that “Europeans must accept
that success in the tech startup world comes through trial and error. European [investors]
prefer great plans that don’t fail.”24 Furthermore, European entrepreneurs, and even those
in parts of the United States, complain that they must go to the U.S. or specifically to
Silicon Valley to get their ideas funded. In fact Skype, a huge venture backed success,
was started by European entrepreneurs Niklas Zennstrm and Janus Friis and based in
Luxembourg but received its early funding from US venture capitalists (Bessemer Venture
partners and Draper Fisher Jurvetson). Thus, the problem is two-sided; venture capitalists look for less experimental projects to form reputations as failure tolerant because
most entrepreneurs want a more failure tolerant backer.
From a social planners or government perspective, the conclusion from this is to both
attempt to lower the stigma from early entrepreneurial failure and also to increase the
profitability of investing in a set of projects that include some failures. For example,
allowing the enhanced use of losses from early stage investments to offset taxes. Potentially
every dollar of loss could offset two dollars of gain. This would make it more profitable to
be an aggressive investor who actively shut down projects.
24 http://tech.fortune.cnn.com/2012/08/14/europe-vc/

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

V.

35

Extensions and Implications

The tradeoff faced by the investors in our model is one that is more widely applicable.
For example, the manifesto of the venture capital firm called ‘The Founder’s Fund’ outlines that they have “never removed a single founder.” The intuition from our model would
suggest that this would clearly attract entrepreneurs and encourage them to start experimental businesses. However, it should simultaneously change the type of entrepreneur the
fund is willing to back. If an investor can’t replace the CEO then it would push them
to back an entrepreneur who has much more entrepreneurial experience, such as a serial
entrepreneur with a proven track record of successes. Such a fund should be less willing
to back a young college student with no prior background if they cannot remove him on
the chance that he turns out not to be good at running the company.
As another example, consider the Ph.D. programs of Chicago and MIT. Both are excellent programs, but Chicago has a reputation for cutting a large portion of the incoming
class after the general exams, while MIT tends to graduate most of the students it admits.
Our model does not tell us which produces ‘better‘ professors on average (competition
might suggest they were equal on average), but our point is that Chicago’s choice should
cause them to take more radical or unconventional students, allowing them to enter and
prove themselves in the program, while MIT will tend to admit students who are more
conventionally strong. Students who were admitted to both but chose MIT over Chicago
likely did so in part because they put a greater cost on the possibility of being cut from
the PhD program after the general exams.
In general our ideas apply to any relationship where in there is the need for exploration,
but also the potential to learn from early experiments. In the subsections below, we
briefly discuss implications the model has for portfolio decisions of investors as well as

36

JULY 2013

their decision to spend money to acquire information.

A.

Endogenous Fear of Failure

The idea that the stigma of failure is worse in some parts of the world is generally discussed as a cultural factor. However, Landier (2002) and Gromb and Scharfstein (2002)
show how the stigma of failure may be endogenous. In Landier’s model, there are multiple
equilibria that stem from the following intuition: A low cost of capital encourages entrepreneurs to only continue with the best projects. Thus the pool of ‘failed’ entrepreneurs
has a higher average quality since they are discarding bad projects in the hope of getting
better ones, which in turn makes the low cost of capital rational. Gromb and Scharfstein
(2002) have a similar combination of labor market and organizational form in their model
but with differences in the explicit costs and benefits. In this extension we build on this
work and add a similar notion into our model to show it can magnify the likelihood of
extreme equilibria with no financiers willing to fund radial experimentation.
We assume that the average aversion to early failure depends on the number of other
entrepreneurs that are starting highly experimental projects and being quickly killed. If
there are a larger number of entrepreneurs starting and failing then the stigma to having
done so decreases. Specifically we assume that ∆uF = uF (ω) − uE , and ∂uF (ω)/∂ω > 0.
Thus the more investors who choose to be killers, the more surplus is created by an
uncommitted investment. The intuitive effects of this extension are discussed below with
supporting math in appendix A.ix.
A particularly interesting case could result in which this effect pushed investors toward
extremes. As fewer investors chose to be killers, the profits from being a killer investor
could in fact fall (even though there would be less competition) because it led entrepreneurs’ stigma of failure to rise sufficiently that it outweighed the higher rents available to

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

37

killers from the lower competition for uncommitted investments. Investors would then
have even less incentive to be a killer, so even fewer would choose to do so, which would
lower profits further. This positive feedback could potentially result in an equilibrium
with no killers. However, if a large enough group of investors chose to be killers, then
the profits from being a killer could be high enough to sustain an equilibrium with killers.
Moreover, if adding even more killer investors caused the profits from being a killer to rise
by more than those of committers (who now have less competition) then it could be a Nash
equilibrium for all investors to choose to be a killer. When all (or many) investors are
killers then the competition for projects is stronger but the surplus created is also larger
because the stigma to being killed has fallen. If the increase in surplus is large enough to
offset the increase in competition and the profits from being a committed investor are not
rising by more than the profits from being a killer then it is profitable for all investors to
choose to be a killer.
Thus, what we see in Europe and Japan or even from one city to the next may be an
equilibrium in which there are few or no killer investors so the stigma of failure is quite
high. Thus, the logic from Landier (2002) extends to the financial side of the market.
The financial institutions may be a part of the equilibrium that has little entrepreneurial
failure and in fact make it hard for even those few entrepreneurs willing to overcome the
stigma because they cannot find funding.

B.

Portfolios

In this subsection we extend the ideas from above to a simple portfolio problem. We
examine two specific VCs, one of whom who has chosen to be a killer and the other who is
a committed investor. They each have $Z to invest. As in a typical venture capital fund,
we assume all returns from investing must be returned to the investors so that the VCs

38

JULY 2013

only have Z to support their projects.
A committed or uncommitted investor who finds an investment must invest X, however,
they have a different expectations about the need to invest Y . The committed investor
must invest Y if the first stage experiment fails (because the market will not), and they
can choose to invest Y if the first stage succeeds. The uncommitted investor can choose
to invest Y if the first stage succeeds and will not invest if the first stage fails. Therefore,
a committed investor with Z to invest can expect to make at most Z/(X + (1 − p1 )Y )
investments and at least Z/(X + Y ) investments. While the uncommitted investor will
make at most Z/X investments and expect to make at least Z/((X + p1 Y ) investments.
Therefore, we would expect on average for committed investors to take on a smaller
number of less experimental projects while the uncommitted investors take on a larger
number of more experimental projects. Note that both strategies still expect to be equally
profitable. The committed investors own a larger fraction of fewer projects that are more
likely to succeed but have to invest more in them. While uncommitted investors own a
smaller fraction of more projects and only invest more when it is profitable to do so.
Although the different strategies may be equally profitable there is no question that the
committed investor will complete more projects, and the uncommitted investor will have
completed more radical projects. Note, however that this assumes that the entrepreneur is
willing to receive funding for the more radical innovations from an uncommitted investor.
It may be the case that in equilibrium entrepreneurs with very experimental ideas choose
to stay as wage earners and all investors choose to fund less experimental projects. Thus,
it is not clear ex-ante whether killing or committing will fund more innovation, but conditional on the equilibrium containing both, the killing strategy will fund the more radical
experiments.

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

C.

39

Spending on Information

One could imagine that spending money in an amount greater than X during the first
stage of the project might increase the information gathered from the experiment. That is,
extra spending might increase VS E[p2 | S] − VF E[p2 | F ]. If so, committed investors gain
nothing by increasing the information learned from the experiment because they cannot
act on it. On the other hand, uncommitted investors gain significantly from increasing
VS E[p2 | S] − VF E[p2 | F ] because there is more to bargain over after success in the
first period and they don’t have to invest after failure. Thus, even if increasing VS E[p2 |
S] − VF E[p2 | F ] simultaneously lowers the probability of success in the first period it is
still potentially beneficial to uncommitted investors. This leads to two insights.
First, it implies that a committed investor will spend less on information gathering to
determine if the project is a good idea. This may be a negative if spending money to
determine whether to go ahead changes a project from negative NPV to positive (see
Roberts and Weitzman (1981)). On the other hand, it may be a good thing if the money
spent by the uncommitted investor is a waste of resources that does not change whether
the project goes forward but just changes the share earned by the investor.
Second, uncommitted investors have an incentive to change the project into one that is
more ‘all or nothing’. The uncommitted investor must reward the entrepreneur for the
expected costs of early termination, but does not pay the ex post costs and thus has an
incentive to increase the probability of early failure (and radical success) after the deal is
done. This may result in an inefficient amount of early termination risk. Furthermore, one
might imagine that entrepreneurs that did not recognize the incentive of the killer VCs to
do this might be surprised to find their VC pushing them to take greater early risk.

40

JULY 2013

VI.

Conclusion

While past work has examined optimal amount of failure tolerance at the individual
project level, this idealized planer who adjusts the level of failure tolerance on a projectby-project basis may not occur in many situations. Our contribution is to instead consider
the ex ante strategic choice of a firm, investor or government aiming to promote innovation
or generate profits. We show that a financial strategy of failure tolerance adopted in the
attempt to promote innovation encourages agents to start projects but simultaneously
reduces the principals willingness to fund experimental projects. Ultimately an increase
in failure tolerance could even reduce total innovation.
We show that in equilibrium, failure tolerance has a price that is increasing with the
level of experimentation in the project. This implies two possible sources of market failure.
First, projects that cannot pay the price cannot be started in equilibrium and must be
funded by the government or else the potential innovation will be lost. These will tend
to be radical innovations, since projects that are less experimental can pay the price to
get a failure tolerant investor. Second, entrepreneurs’ aversion to early failure can affect
the equilibrium. Specifically, if a sufficient number of entrepreneurs face a high stigma
of early failure, an equilibrium can arise where all investors choose to be failure tolerant
and hence only incremental innovations are commercialized in the economy– even if some
entrepreneurs are looking for investors to commercialize radical innovations.

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

41

REFERENCES

Acharya, Viral, and K. Subramanian. 2009. “Bankruptcy Codes and Innovation.”
Review of Financial Studies, 22: 4949 – 4988.
Aghion, Philippe, and Jean Tirole. 1994. “The Management of Innovation.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 1185–1209.
Aghion, Philippe, John Van Reenen, and Luigi Zingales. 2009. “Innovation and
Institutional Ownership.” Harvard University working paper.
Akcigit, Ufuk, and Qingmin Liu. 2011. “The Role of information in competitive
experimentation.” NBER working paper 17602.
Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua S. Graff Zivin, and Gustavo Manso. 2011. “Incentives and
Creativity: Evidence from the Academic Life Sciences.” RAND Journal of Economics,
42(3): 527–554.
Battacharya, S., K. Chatterjee, and L. Samuelson. 1986. “Sequential Research and
the Adoption of Innovations.” Oxford Economic Papers, 38: 219–243.
Bergemann, Dirk, and J. Valimaki. 2006. Bandit Problems. Vol. The New Palgrave
Dictionary of Economics, Basingstoke:Macmillan Press.
Bergemann, Dirk, and Ulrich Hege. 2005. “The Financing of Innovation: Learning
and Stopping.” RAND Journal of Economics, 36: 719–752.
Bergemann, Dirk, Ulrich Hege, and Liang Peng. 2008. “Venture Capital and Sequential Investments.” Working Paper.
Burkart, M., D. Gromb, and F. Panunzi. 1997. “Large Shareholders, Monitoring,
and the Value of the Firm.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112: 693 – 728.

42

JULY 2013

Cerqueiro, Geraldo, Deepak Hegde, Mara Fabiana Penas, and Robert Seamans. 2013. “Personal Bankruptcy Law and Innovation.” NYU working paper.
Chemmanur, Thomas J., Elena Loutskina, and Xuan Tian. 2012. “Corporate
Venture Capital, Value Creation, and Innovation.” Boston College working paper.
Cornelli, Franchesca, and O. Yosha. 2003. “Stage Financing and the Role of Convertible Securities.” Review of Economic Studies, 70: 1–32.
Dewatripont, M., and E. Maskin. 1995. “Credit and Efficiency in Centralized and
Decentralized Economies.” Review of Economic Studies, 62: 541–555.
Diamond, Peter A. 1993. “Search, sticky prices, and inflation.” Review of Economic
Studies, 60: 53–68.
Dushnitsky, Gary, and Michael J. Lenox. 2006. “When does corporate venture capital investment create firm value?” Journal of Business Venturing, 21: 753–772.
Ewens, Michael, and Christian Fons-Rosen. 2013. “The Consequences of Entrepreneurial Firm Founding on Innovation.” CMU working paper.
Ferreira, Daniel, Gustavo Manso, and Andre Silva. 2011. “Incentives to Innovate
and The Decision to Go Public or Private.” London School of Economics working paper.
Fulghieri, Paolo, and Merih Sevilir. 2009. “Organization and Financing of Innovation, and the Choice between Corporate and Independent Venture Capital.” Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 44: 1291–1321.
Gompers, Paul. 1995. “Optimal Investment, Monitoring, and the Staging of Venture
Capital.” Journal of Finance, 50: 1461–1489.

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

43

Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner. 2004. The Venture Capital Cycle. Cambridge, MA
and London:MIT Press.
Gompers, Paul, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein. 2005. “Entrepreneurial
Spawning: Public Corporations and the Genesis of New Ventures, 1986-1999.” Journal of Finance, 60: 577–614.
Gromb, Denis, and David Scharfstein. 2002. “Entrepreneurship in Equilibrium.”
NBER Working paper number 9001.
Hall, Robert E., and Susan E. Woodward. 2010. “The Burden of the Nondiversifiable
Risk of Entrepreneurship.” American Economic Review, 100: 1163 – 1194.
Hellmann, Thomas. 1998. “The Allocation of Control Rights in Venture Capital Contracts.” RAND Journal of Economics, 29: 57–76.
Hellmann, Thomas, and Manju Puri. 2002. “Venture Capital and the Professionalization of Start-Up Firms: Empirical Evidence.” Journal of Finance, 57(1): 169–197.
Hellmann, Thomas, and Veikko Thiele. 2011. “Incentives and Innovation : A Multitasking Approach.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 3: 78–128.
Henderson, Rebecca M. 1993. “Underinvestment and Incompetence as Responses to
Radical Innovation: Evidence from the Photolithographic Alignment Equipment Industry.” The RAND Journal of Economics, 24(2): 248–270.
Henderson, Rebecca M., and Kim B. Clark. 1990. “Architectural Innovation: The
Reconfiguration of Existing Product Technologies and the Failure of Established Firms.”
Administrative Science Quarterly, 35(1): 9–30.
Holmstrom, Bengt. 1989. “Agency Costs and Innovation.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 12: 305–327.

44

JULY 2013

Inderst, Roman, and Holger M. Müller. 2004. “The effect of capital market characteristics on the value of start-up firms.” Journal of Financial Economics, 72: 319–356.
Jensen, R. 1981. “Adoption and Diffusion of an Innovation of Uncertain Probability.”
Journal of Economic Theory, 27: 182–193.
Jewkes, J., D. Sawers, and R. Stillerman. 1969. The Sources of Invention. London:Macmillan.
Kaplan, Steven, Berk Sensoy, and Per Stromberg. 2009. “Should Investors Bet on
the Jockey or the Horse? Evidence from the Evolution of Firms from Early Business
Plans to Public Companies.” Journal of Finance, 64(1): 75 – 115.
Klepper, Steven, and Sally Sleeper. 2005. “Entry by Spinoffs.” Management Science,
51(8): 1291 – 1306.
Landier, Augustin. 2002. “Entrepreneurship and the Stigma of Failure.” MIT working
paper.
Lerner, Josh, and Julie Wulf. 2007. “Innovation and Incentives: Evidence from Corporate R&D.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89: 634 – 644.
Manso, Gustavo. 2011. “Motivating Innovation.” Journal of Finance, 66(5): 1823 –
1860.
Mortensen, Dale T., and Christopher A. Pissarides. 1994. “Job creation and job
destruction in the theory of unemployment.” Review of Economic Studies, 61: 397–415.
Moscarini, G., and L. Smith. 2001. “The Optimal Level of Experimentation.” Econometrica, 69: 1629–1644.
Myers, Stewart. 2000. “Outside Equity.” Journal of Finance, 55: 1005 – 1037.

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

45

Nelson, R. R., M. J. Peck, and E. D. Kalachek. 1967. Technology, Economic Growth
and Public Policy. Washington:Brookings Institution.
Petrongolo, Barbara, and Christopher A. Pissarides. 2001. “Looking into the black
box: A survey of the matching function.” Journal of Economic Literature, 38: 390 – 431.
Pissarides, Christopher A. 1990. Equilibrium Unemployment Theory. Cambridge:Basil
Blackwell.
Qian, Y., and C. Xu. 1998. “Innovation and Bureaucracy under Soft and Hard Budget
Constraints.” Review of Economic Studies, 151–164.
Roberts, Kevin, and Martin L. Weitzman. 1981. “Funding Criteria for Research,
Development, and Exploration Projects.” Economictrica, 49: 12611288.
Sahlman, William A. 1990. “The Structure and Governance of Venture-Capital Organizations.” Journal of Financial Economics, 27: 473–521.
Scherer, F. M. 1991. Innovation and Technological Change. New York:Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Scherer, F. M. 1992. “Schumpeter and Plausible Capitalism.” Journal of Economic
Literature, 30: 1416–1433.
Seru, Amit. 2011. “Firm Boundaries Matter: Evidence from Conglomerates and R&D
Activity.” Univeristy of Chicago working paper.
Stein, Jeremy. 1989. “Efficient capital markets, inefficient firms: A model of myopic
corporate behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104: 655669.
Tian, Xuan, and Tracy Yue Wang. 2012. “Tolerance for Failure and Corporate Innovation.” Forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.

46

JULY 2013

Weitzman, Martin L. 1979. “Optimal Search for the Best Alternative.” Economictrica,
47: 641–654.

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

A.
i.

47

Appendix

Proof of Proposition 2

Conditional on a given α1 the investor will invest in the second period as long as
Vj αj E[p2 | j] − Y (1 + r) > −c

where j ∈ {S, F }

As noted above, c, is the cost faced by the investor when he stops funding a project and
it dies. Thus, the minimum fraction the investor will accept in the second period is
α2j =

Y (1 + r) − c
α1
.
−
Vj E[p2 | j](1 − α1 ) 1 − α1

Thus, an investor will not invest in the second period unless the project is NPV positive
accounting for the cost of shutdown. This suggests that an investor who already owned a
fraction of the business, α1 , from the first period would be willing to take a lower minimum
fraction in the second period than a new investor, and potentially accept even a negative
fraction. However, there is a fraction η such that the investor is better off letting an outside
investor invest (as long as an outside investor is willing to invest) rather that accept a
smaller fraction. If Vj E[p2 | j] > Y (1 + r) (which is true for j = S) then an outside
(1+r)
investor would invest for a fraction greater than or equal to VYS E[p
. The fraction η that
2 |S]
makes the investor indifferent between investing or not is the η such that
α1 (1 − η)VS E[p2 | S]) = (η + α1 (1 − η))VS E[p2 | S] − Y (1 + r)
The left hand side is what the first period investor expects if a new investor purchases η
in the second period. While the right hand side is the amount the first period investor
expects if he purchases η in the second period. The η that makes this equality hold is
(1+r)
. Note that η does not depend on c because the project continues either
η = VYS E[p
2 |S]
way. Thus, after success, an old investor is better off letting a new investor invest than
(1+r) 25
accepting a fraction less than VYS E[p
. Thus, the correct minimum fraction that the
2 |S]
investor will accept for an investment of Y in the second period after success in the first
period is
Y (1 + r)
.
α2S =
VS E[p2 | S]
However, after failure in the first period then VF E[p2 | F ] < Y (1 + r) and no new investor
will invest. Potentially an old (committed) investor would still invest (to avoid paying c)
and the minimum fraction he would accept is
α2F =

Y (1 + r) − c
α1
−
.
VF E[p2 | F ](1 − α1 ) 1 − α1

The entrepreneur, on the other hand, will continue with the business in the second
25 This assumes perfect capital markets that would allow a ‘switching’ of investors if entrepreneurs tried to extract
too much. No results depend on this assumption but it makes the math easier and more intuitive, and we don’t
want to drive any results off of financial market frictions.

48

JULY 2013

period as long as,
Vj (1 − αj )E[p2 | j] + uE > uF

where j ∈ {S, F }.

Since αj = α2j + α1 (1 − α2j ), for a given α1 the maximum fraction the entrepreneur will
give to the investor in the second period is
α2j = 1 −

uF − uE
Vj E[p2 | j](1 − α1 )

∀ j ∈ {S, F }.

Similarly to the investor, after success in the first period, there is a point at which the
entrepreneur who already owns a fraction 1 − α1 should quit and let the investors hire
a new manager rather than take a smaller fraction. Thus, there is a η that makes the
entrepreneur indifferent between staying and leaving:
(1 − α1 )ηVS E[p2 | S] + uF = ((1 − η) + (1 − α1 )η)VS E[p2 | S] + uE
Thus, the correct maximum fraction the entrepreneur will give up in the second period
after success in the first period is26
α2S = 1 −

uF − uE
VS E[p2 | S]

However, after failure in the first period the maximum that the entrepreneur is willing to
give up to keep the business alive is
α2F = 1 −

uF − uE
VF E[p2 | F ](1 − α1 )

The entrepreneur cannot credibly threaten to leave after failure unless he must give up
more than α2F , as his departure will just cause the business to be shut down.
ii.

Proof of Propositions 1 and 3

Bargaining will result in a fraction in the second period of α2j = γα2j + (1 − γ)α2j . For
example, if the entrepreneur has all the bargaining power, γ = 1, then the investor must
accept his minimum fraction, α2j = α2j , while if the investor has all the bargaining power,
γ = 0, then the entrepreneur must give up the maximum, α2j = α2j . While if each has
some bargaining power then they share the surplus created by the opportunity.
Given this, we can substitute into αj = α2j + α1 (1 − α2j ) and solve for the final fractions
the investor and entrepreneur will obtain depending on success or failure at the first stage.
Substituting we find αj = γα2j + (1 − γ)α2j + α1 (1 − (γα2j + (1 − γ)α2j )). This can be
rewritten as αj = [γα2j + (1 − γ)α2j ](1 − α1 ) + α1 . Substituting in for α2j and α2j we find
that



Y (1 + r)
uF − uE
αS = γ
+ (1 − γ) 1 −
(1 − α1 ) + α1
(A-1)
VS E[p2 | S]
VS E[p2 | S]
26 This requires the assumption of perfect labor markets that would allow a ‘switching’ of CEOs among entrepreneurial firms if investors tried to extract too much. No results depend on this assumption but it makes the math
easier and more intuitive, and we don’t want to drive any results off of labor market frictions.

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

49

and αF reduces to



uF − uE
Y (1 + r) − c
+ (1 − γ) 1 −
αF = γ
VF E[p2 | F ]
VF E[p2 | F ]


(A-2)

Of course, in both cases negotiations must result in a fraction between zero and one.27
Note that αF does not depend on the negotiations in the first period because after failure,
renegotiation determines the final fractions.28 Of course, investors and entrepreneurs will
account for this in the first period when they decide whether or not to participate.29 We
solve for the first period fractions in appendix A.iii but these are not necessary for the
proof.
The solution αF is only correct assuming a deal can be reached between the investor
and the entrepreneur in the second period (otherwise the company is shut down after
early failure). Interesting outcomes will emerge both when an agreement can and cannot
be reached as this will affect both the price of, and the willingness to begin, a project.
Stepping back to the first period, an investor will invest as long as
p1 [VS αS E[p2 | S] − Y (1 + r)] − X(1 + r)2
+ (1 − p1 )[VF αF E[p2 | F ] − Y (1 + r)] ≥ 0 (A-3)
if the 2nd period agreement conditions are met after failure. Or,
p1 [VS αS E[p2 | S] − Y (1 + r)] − X(1 + r)2 − (1 − p1 )c ≥ 0

(A-4)

if they are not.
The entrepreneur will choose to innovate and start the project if
p1 [VS (1 − αS )E[p2 | S] + uE ] + uE
+ (1 − p1 )[VF (1 − αF )E[p2 | F ] + uE ] ≥ 2uO (A-5)
if the 2nd period agreement conditions are met after failure. Or,
p1 [VS (1 − αS )E[p2 | S] + uE ] + uE + (1 − p1 )uF ≥ 2uO

(A-6)

if they are not.
The four above equations can be used to solve for the minimum fractions needed by
the investor and entrepreneur both when a deal after failure can be reached and when
it cannot. If the agreement conditions in the 2nd period after failure are met, then the
minimum fraction the investor is willing to receive in the successful state and still choose
to invest in the project is found by solving equation (A-3) for the minimum αS such that
27 Since negotiations must result in a fraction between zero and one, then if a deal can be done then if γ <
(uF −uE )/(Y (1+r)−c−VF E[p2 | F ]+uF −uE ) then αF = 1, or if γ < −(uF −uE )/(Y (1+r)−VS E[p2 | S]+uF −uE )
then αS = 1. Since c ≤ Y (1 + r) the negotiations will never result in a fraction less than zero.
28 In actual venture capital deals so called ‘down rounds’ that occur after poor outcomes often result in a complete
rearrangement of ownership fractions between the first round, second round and entrepreneur.
29 Alternatively we could assume that investors and entrepreneurs predetermine a split for for every first stage
outcome. This would require complete contracts and verifiable states so seems less realistic but would not change
the intuition or implications of our results.

50

JULY 2013

the inequality holds:
α SA =

Y (1 + r) + X(1 + r)2 − (1 − p1 )VF αF E[p2 | F ]
p1 VS E[p2 | S]

where the subscript A signifies that an agreement can be reached after first period failure.
The maximum fraction the entrepreneur can give up in the successful state and still be
willing to choose the entrepreneurial project is found by solving equation (A-5) for the
maximum αS such that the inequality holds:
αSA = 1 −

2(uO − uE ) − (1 − p1 )E[p2 | F ]VF (1 − αF )
p1 VS E[p2 | S]

where αF is defined in equation (A-2) in both αSA and αSA . Both αSA and αSA depend
on the negotiations in the failed state, αF , because the minimum share the players need
to receive in the the good state to make them willing to choose the project depends on
how badly they do in the bad state.
If a second period agreement after failure cannot be reached then the minimum fraction of the investor and the maximum fraction of the entrepreneur are found by solving
equations (A-4) and (A-6) respectively, to find
αSN =

p1 Y (1 + r) + X(1 + r)2
p1 VS E[p2 | S]

and

(1 + p1 )(uO − uE ) + (1 − p1 )(uO − uF )
p1 VS E[p2 | S]
where the N subscript represents the fact that no agreement can be reached after failure.
α SN = 1 −

iii.

Derivation of first period fractions

The maximum and minimum required shares after first period success, αSi and αSi ,
directly imply first period minimum an maximum fractions, α1i and α1i (i ∈ [A, N ]),
because we already know from above, equation (A-1), that


Y (1 + r)
uF − uE
αS = γ
+ (1 − γ)(1 −
) (1 − α1 ) + α1
VS E[p2 | S]
VS E[p2 | S]
Thus, we can solve for the α1 that just gives the investor his minimum αS . Let Z equal
the term in brackets in the equation above and we can solve for α1 as a function of αS .
α1 =

αS − Z
1−Z

(A-7)

Plugging in αSA for αS yields the minimum required investor fraction α1A :

α1A =

Y (1+r)+X(1+r)2 −(1−p1 )VF αF E[p2 |F ]
p1 VS E[p2 |S]

1−Z

−Z

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

51

as a function of αF . And substituting in for αF from equation (A-2) and Z from above
yields,
α1A = 1 −

p1 VS E[p2 | S] − p1 Y (1 + r) − X(1 + r)2 − (1 − p1 )γc
p1 (γVS E[p2 | S] − γY (1 + r) + (1 − γ)(uF − uE ))
(1 − p1 )(1 − γ)(VF E[p2 | F ] − Y (1 + r) − (uF − uE ))
−
p1 (γVS E[p2 | S] − γY (1 + r) + (1 − γ)(uF − uE ))

This is the minimum fraction required by the investor assuming that a deal can be achieved
in the second period after failure in the first period.30 In equilibrium the investor’s minimum depends on the entrepreneur’s gains and costs because they must negotiate and
participate.
If instead, an agreement cannot be reached after failure in the first period then the
project is stopped. In this case the minimum fraction required by the investor can be
found by plugging αSN into equation (A-7) for αS , where αSN is the minimum when no
second period deal can be reached. In this case the minimum required investor fraction
α1N is
α1N =

p1 Y (1+r)+X(1+r)2
p1 VS E[p2 |S]

−Z

1−Z

or,
α 1N = 1 −

p1 VS E[p2 | S] − p1 Y (1 + r) − X(1 + r)2
p1 (γVS E[p2 | S] − γY (1 + r) + (1 − γ)(uF − uE ))

We can similarly calculate the maximum fraction the entrepreneur is willing to give up
in the first period. The maximum fraction can be found by plugging αSi into equation (A7) for αSi , where αSi (i ∈ [A, N ]) is the maximum when either a second period agreement
after failure can (A) or cannot (N) be reached. When a second period agreement can be
reached α1A is
α1A = 1 −

2(uO − uE ) − (1 − p1 )E[p2 | F ]VF (1 − αF )
p1 (γVS E[p2 | S] − γY (1 + r) + (1 − γ)(uF − uE ))

And when a second period deal after failure cannot be reached α1N is
α 1N = 1 −

(1 + p1 )(uO − uE ) + (1 − p1 )(uO − uF )
p1 (γVS E[p2 | S] − γY (1 + r) + (1 − γ)(uF − uE ))

30 Technical note: with extreme values it is possible that α
F would be greater than 1 or less than zero. In these
cases αF is bound by either zero or 1. This would cause the α1 to increase or decrease. This dampens some of
the effects in extreme cases but alters no results. To simplify the exposition we assume that parameters are in the
reasonable range such that the investor and entrepreneur would not be willing to agree to a share greater than 1 or
less than zero.

52

JULY 2013

iv.

Proof of Proposition 5:

For a moment assume that the uncommitted investor has an explicit cost of early termination of c (where c is zero). In which case
αSA − αSN =

(1 − p1 )(Y (1 + r) − VF αF E[p2 | F ] − c)
>0
p1 VS E[p2 | S]

for any 0 ≤ αF ≤ 1. If we increase c to ĉ to make the investor failure tolerant, then just
at the point where VF E[p2 | F ] − Y (1 + r) + ĉ = 0 it is still the case that αSA ≥ αSN ,
because αF ≤ 1. Therefore, since ∂αSN /∂c > 0, αSN (ĉ) > αSN (c). Therefore, since
∂αSA /∂c > 0∀c we know that αSA (c ≥ ĉ) > αSN (ĉ) > αSN (c). Thus, the minimum a
committed investor is willing to accept is always greater than the minimum of an investor
who is uncommitted i.e., αSA (c ≥ ĉ) > αSN (c). And equation (A-7) demonstrates that a
smaller αSi results in a smaller α1 . Furthermore, Lemma 1 implies that an uncommitted
investor cannot do a deal after early failure. QED
v.

Proof of Proposition 6:

It is clearly possible that both αSA − αSA < 0 and αSN − αSN < 0. For example, a
project with a low enough VS and/or VF (or high X) could have both differences less than
zero for any positive c (i.e., independent of the failure tolerance of the investor). Similarly,
for a high enough VS and/or VF (or low X) both αSA − αSA > 0 and αSN − αSN > 0,
even for c equal to the maximum c of Y (1 + r). Thus, extremely bad projects will not be
started and extremely good projects will be started by any type of investor.
Committed investors, who will reach an agreement after early failure, will start the
project if αSA − αSA ≥ 0. Uncommitted investors, who will kill the project after early
failure, will start the project if αSN − αSN ≥ 0. The difference between αSA − αSA and
αSN − αSN is
(1 − p1 )VF E[p2 | F ] − (1 − p1 )∆uF − (1 − p1 )Y (1 + r)
p1 VS E[p2 | S]

(A-8)

For an uncommitted investor, equation (A-8) may be positive or negative depending on
the relative magnitudes of VF E[p2 | F ], ∆uF , and Y (1 + r). If it is positive, then for some
parameters αSA − αSA ≥ 0 while αSN − αSN < 0. In these cases the project can only be
funded by a committed investor. If the difference in equation (A-8) is negative then for
some parameters αSA − αSA < 0 while αSN − αSN ≥ 0. In these cases the project can only
be funded by an uncommitted investor. QED
vi.

Proof of Proposition 7:

A project can be funded by a committed investor if αSA − αSA ≥ 0. For two projects
with the same expected payout, αSA − αSA has the same sign, i.e., both projects either
can or cannot be funded and changing VS E[p2 | S] − VF E[p2 | F ] does not change that.
This can be seen by noting that the numerator of equation (1) is unaffected by changes in
VS E[p2 | S] − VF E[p2 | F ] as long as p1 VS E[p2 | S] + (1 − p1 )VF E[p2 | F ] does not change.

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

53

A project can be funded by an uncommitted investor if αSN − αSN ≥ 0. If VS E[p2 | S] −
VF E[p2 | F ] increases but p1 , and the expected payout, p1 VS E[p2 | S]+(1−p1 )VF E[p2 | F ],
stay the same, then VS E[p2 | S] must have increased and VF E[p2 | F ] must have decreased.
In which case αSN −αSN increased (see equation (2)) and the difference between αSA −αSA
and αSN − αSN (equation (A-8)) decreased. Therefore, there are a larger set of parameters
such that αSA − αSA < 0 while αSN − αSN ≥ 0, i.e., the project can only be funded by an
uncommitted investor. QED
vii.

Proof of Proposition 8:

Let g ∈ [K, C] represent the investor type investing in a project of type f ∈ [A, B],
and let ω represent the fraction of investors that choose to be killers (K) rather than
committed (C). Also, let π g and π f represent the expected profits of the investor and
entrepreneur respectively before they find a partner, while π gf and π f g represent their
respective expected profits conditional on doing a deal with a partner of type f or g
respectively.
We begin with equation (8) and assume that π C < π CA , π C > π CB , π K < π KB ,
π K > π KA , which we later verify in equilibrium. Thus,
πK =

qI (θ) [φπ K + (1 − φ)π KB ] 1 − qI (θ)
+
πK
1+r
1+r

(A-9)

qI (θ) [φπ CA + (1 − φ)π C ] 1 − qI (θ)
+
πC
(A-10)
1+r
1+r
Next we use equation (9) and assume that π A < π AC , π A > π BC , π B < π BK , π B > π BC ,
which we also verify in equilibrium.
πC =

πA =

qe (θ) [ωπ A + (1 − ω)π AC ] 1 − qe (θ)
+
πA
1+r
1+r

qe (θ) [ωπ BK + (1 − ω)π B ] 1 − qe (θ)
+
πB
1+r
1+r
Using Lemma 2 and solving we find
πB =

πK =

(A-12)

(1 − φ)qI (θ)
[ξ
− πB ]
2r + (1 − φ)qI (θ) KB

(A-13)

φqI (θ)
[ξ
− πA]
2r + φqI (θ) CA

(A-14)

(1 − ω)qe (θ)
[ξ
− πC ]
2r + (1 − ω)qe (θ) CA

(A-15)

πC =
πA =

(A-11)

ωqe (θ)
[ξ
− πK ]
(A-16)
2r + ωqe (θ) KB
Therefore, with 4 equations and 4 unknowns we can solve for π K , π C , π A , and π B .
πB =

πK =

(1 − φ)qI (θ)
ξ
2r + (1 − φ)qI (θ) + ωqe (θ) KB

(A-17)

54

JULY 2013

πC =

φqI (θ)
ξ
2r + φqI (θ) + (1 − ω)qe (θ) CA

(A-18)

πA =

(1 − ω)qe (θ)
ξ
2r + φqI (θ) + (1 − ω)qe (θ) CA

(A-19)

ωqe (θ)
ξ
(A-20)
2r + (1 − φ)qI (θ) + ωqe (θ) KB
These are the equilibrium profits, but we must confirm that π CB < π C < π CA and
π KA < π K < π KB as well as π AK < π A < π AC and π BC < π B < π BK .
Lemma 2 tells us that π gf = 21 (ξ gf − π f + π g ) and π f g = ξ gf − π gf . Thus checking all
the inequalities just above reduces to checking that ξ CB − π B < π C < ξ CA − π A and that
ξ KA − π A < π K < ξ KB − π B . Substituting for π K , π C , π A , and π B from above we see
that it is always the case that π C < ξ CA − π A and π K < ξ KB − π B as long as ξ KB and
ξ CA are positive (i.e. a deal creates value). Furthermore, since at the equilibrium ω = ω ∗
it must be the cast that π C = π K , therefore, ξ CB − π B < π C as long as
πB =

− ξ CB
ξ
2r
< KB
(1 − φ)qI (θ) + ωqe (θ)
ξ CB

(A-21)

and ξ KA − π A < π K as long as
2r
ξ
− ξ KA
< CA
φqI (θ) + (1 − ω)qe (θ)
ξ KA
viii.

(A-22)

Proof of Corollary 3:

Since ∂π K /∂ω < 0 and ∂π C /∂ω > 0, single crossing is insured and ω ∗ is determined the
point at which π K = π C using the results from proposition 8. As corollary 2 notes this
results in
ω∗ =

(2r + φqI (θ) + qe (θ))(1 − φ)qI (θ)ξ KB − (2r + (1 − φ)qI (θ))φqI (θ)ξ CA
qe (θ)(1 − φ)qI (θ)ξ KB + qe (θ)φqI (θ)ξ CA

(A-23)

Or, ω ∗ = 1 if π K (1) > π C (1) or ω ∗ = 0 if π K (0) > π C (0).
As the fear or stigma of early failure decreases, ∆uF increases. Using equations (4) and
∂ξ Cf
∂ξ Kf
(5) we find that ∂∆u
= 0 and ∂∆u
= (1 − p1 ) > 0. Therefor,
F
F
∂ξ KB
(qe (θ)(1 − φ)qI (θ)ξ KB )(2r + φqI (θ) + qe (θ))(1 − φ)qI (θ) ∂∆u
∂ω ∗
F
=
∂∆uF
(qe (θ)(1 − φ)qI (θ)ξ KB + qe (θ)φqI (θ)ξ CA )2

+
−

∂ξ KB
(qe (θ)φqI (θ)ξ CA )(2r + φqI (θ) + qe (θ))(1 − φ)qI (θ) ∂∆u
F

(qe (θ)(1 − φ)qI (θ)ξ KB + qe (θ)φqI (θ)ξ CA )2

∂ξ KB
[(2r + φqI (θ) + qe (θ))(1 − φ)qI (θ)ξ KB ]qe (θ)(1 − φ)qI (θ) ∂∆u
F

(qe (θ)(1 − φ)qI (θ)ξ KB + qe (θ)φqI (θ)ξ CA )2
+

∂ξ KB
[(2r + (1 − φ)qI (θ))φqI (θ)ξ CA ]qe (θ)(1 − φ)qI (θ) ∂∆u
F

(qe (θ)(1 − φ)qI (θ)ξ KB + qe (θ)φqI (θ)ξ CA )2

(A-24)

FINANCIAL GUILLOTINE

55

And since the first and third terms are the same but with opposite sign this reduces to
∂ξ KB
(qe (θ)φqI (θ)ξ CA )(2r + φqI (θ) + qe (θ))(1 − φ)qI (θ) ∂∆u
∂ω ∗
F
=
∂∆uF
(qe (θ)(1 − φ)qI (θ)ξ KB + qe (θ)φqI (θ)ξ CA )2

+

∂ξ KB
[(2r + (1 − φ)qI (θ))φqI (θ)ξ CA ]qe (θ)(1 − φ)qI (θ) ∂∆u
F

(qe (θ)(1 − φ)qI (θ)ξ KB + qe (θ)φqI (θ)ξ CA )2

(A-25)

which is positive since both terms are positive. The proves the first part of the corollary.
No investor chooses to be a killer if
(2r + φqI (θ) + qe (θ))(1 − φ)qI (θ)ξ KB ≤ (2r + (1 − φ)qI (θ))φqI (θ)ξ CA

(A-26)

∗

∂ω
Since the above solved for ∂∆u
> 0 it is easy to see that ∆uF is not in the numerator of
F
∗
∂ω
∗
∂∆uF and therefore the second derivative of ω with respect to ∆uF is negative everywhere.
Therefore, for small enough ∆uF condition (A-26) holds and no investor chooses to be a
killer. Note that condition (A-26) can hold even though ξ KB > 0 and even though φ < 1
so there are projects that create more surplus with a killer as an investor.

ix.

Support for extension V.A:

The extension assumes that ∆uF = uF (ω) − uE , and ∂uF (ω)/∂ω > 0. Therefore, the
sign of ∂π K /∂ω is no longer deterministic because ξ KB now depends on ω and thus the
profits from being a killer are affected in two ways by an increase in ω.
πK =

(1 − φ)qI (θ)
ξ (ω)
2r + (1 − φ)qI (θ) + ωqe (θ) KB

(A-27)

In the numerator ξ KB (ω) increases with ω (i.e., total surplus increases) but the denominator also increase (i.e. competition increases).
However, ∂π C /∂ω > 0. That is, the profits from being committed always increase if
more investors choose to be killers. This is because
πC =

φqI (θ)
ξ
2r + φqI (θ) + (1 − ω)qe (θ) CA

(A-28)

only has ω in the denominator (with a negative sign) because ξ CA is not effected by ω
(see equation (4)).
Therefore, the Nash equilibria, which we will refer to as the set Ω∗ , includes all the ω ∗
such that π K (ω ∗ ) = π C (ω ∗ ) and ∂π K /∂ω ∗ ≤ ∂π C /∂ω ∗ . That is, as long as increasing the
fraction of killers increases killer profits, but committer profits increase by the same or
more, then no investor will want to change on the margin.
Furthermore, the end points (ω ∗ = 1 or ω ∗ = 0) if π K (1) > π C (1) or π K (0) > π C (0).
Note first that it is possible that both π K (1) > π C (1) or π K (0) > π C (0) and thus
that both ω ∗ = 1 and ω ∗ = 0 are equilibria. This would occur for example if the profits
from being a killer are less than a committer, if all investors are committers, but killer
profits always increase as more investors become killers ∂π K /∂ω > 0 until it is above the
profit from being committed when all investors are killers. In this case both extremes are

56

JULY 2013

equilibria and no other point is an equilibria.
It is also possible that there are many points that are Nash equilibria. All that is required
is an ω such that a change in the fraction of investors on the margin is not beneficial to
the changing investor. We can find all points π K (ω ∗ ) = π C (ω ∗ )
(1 − φ)qI (θ)
φqI (θ)
ξ KB (ω) =
ξ
2r + (1 − φ)qI (θ) + ωqe (θ)
2r + φqI (θ) + (1 − ω)qe (θ) CA

(A-29)

and
−

∂ξ KB (ω)
(1 − φ)qI (θ)
(1 − φ)qI (θ)qe (θ)
ξ KB (ω) +
2
(2r + (1 − φ)qI (θ) + ωqe (θ))
2r + (1 − φ)qI (θ) + ωqe (θ)
∂ω
φqI (θ)qe (θ)
≤
ξ
(A-30)
(2r + φqI (θ) + (1 − ω)qe (θ))2 CA

Remember that
ξ KB = p1 VS E[p2 | S] − 2(uO − uE ) + (1 − p1 )∆uF − p1 Y (1 + r) − X(1 + r)2 .
So

∂uF (ω)
∂ξ KB
= (1 − p1 )
.
∂ω
∂ω

(A-31)

(A-32)

Thus,
−

(1 − φ)qI (θ)
(1 − φ)qI (θ)qe (θ)
∂uF (ω)
ξ KB (ω) +
(1 − p1 )
2
(2r + (1 − φ)qI (θ) + ωqe (θ))
2r + (1 − φ)qI (θ) + ωqe (θ)
∂ω
φqI (θ)qe (θ)
≤
ξ
(A-33)
(2r + φqI (θ) + (1 − ω)qe (θ))2 CA

F (ω)
And we can see that the inequality is true when ∂u∂ω
is small, but may not hold at all
∗
∗
points where π K (ω ) = π C (ω ). Essentially the only equilibria are points where π K (ω ∗ )
crosses π C (ω ∗ ) from above or is tangent from below.

