NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COMMODITY TRADE AND THE CARRY TRADE:
A TALE OF TWO COUNTRIES
Robert Ready
Nikolai Roussanov
Colin Ward
Working Paper 19371
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19371

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

We benefited from comments by Andy Abel, Rui Albuquerque, Dave Backus, Gurdip Bakshi, John
Campbell, Mike Chernov, Ric Colacito, Max Croce, Darrell Duffie, Xavier Gabaix, Jeremy Graveline,
Robin Greenwood, Tarek Hassan, Burton Hollifield, Urban Jermann, Karen Lewis, Debbie Lucas,
Don Keim, Brent Neiman, Jose Scheinkman, Ivan Shaliastovich, Rob Stambaugh, Andreas Stathopoulos,
Sheridan Titman, Adrien Verdelhan, Jessica Wachter, Amir Yaron, Stan Zin, and audiences at the
CEPR ESSFM Gerzensee, Minnesota Asset Pricing conference, Oxford-MAN Currency Trading conference,
NBER SI, NBIM, SECOR, Texas Finance Festival, SED, WFA, and Wharton. Roussanov acknowledges
financial support from the Iwanowski Family Research Fellowship and Wharton Global Research
Initiative. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19371.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Robert Ready, Nikolai Roussanov, and Colin Ward. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Commodity Trade and the Carry Trade: a Tale of Two Countries
Robert Ready, Nikolai Roussanov, and Colin Ward
NBER Working Paper No. 19371
August 2013
JEL No. F31,G12,G15
ABSTRACT
Persistent differences in interest rates across countries account for much of the profitability of currency
carry trade strategies. "Commodity currencies'' tend to have high interest rates while low interest rate
currencies belong to exporters of finished goods. This pattern arises in a complete-markets model with
trade specialization and limited shipping capacity, whereby commodity-producing countries are
insulatedfrom global productivity shocks, which are absorbed by the final goods producers. Empirically,
a commodity-basedstrategy explains a substantial portion of the carry-trade risk premia, and all of
their pro-cyclical predictabilitywith commodity prices and shipping costs, as predicted by the model.

Robert Ready
University of Rochester
533 University Ave #3
Rochester, NY, 14607
robert.ready@simon.rochester.edu
Nikolai Roussanov
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School, Finance Department
2400 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
nroussan@wharton.upenn.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19371

Colin Ward
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School
Finance Department
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
wardcol@wharton.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

A currency carry trade is a strategy that goes long high interest rate currencies and short low
interest rate currencies. A typical carry trade involves buying the Australian dollar, which
for much of the last three decades earned a high interest rate, and funding the position with
borrowing in the Japanese yen, thus paying an extremely low rate on the short leg. Such
a strategy earns positive expected returns on average, and despite substantial volatility and
a risk of large losses, such as ones incurred during the global ﬁnancial crisis, exhibits high
Sharpe ratios. In the absence of arbitrage this implies that the marginal utility of an investor
whose consumption basket is denominated in yen is more volatile than that of an Australian
consumer. Are there fundamental economic diﬀerences between countries that could give rise
to such a heterogeneity in risk?
One source of diﬀerences across countries is the composition of their trade. Countries
that specialize in exporting basic commodities, such as Australia or New Zealand, tend to
have high interest rates. Conversely, countries that import most of the basic input goods
and export ﬁnished consumption goods, such as Japan or Switzerland, have low interest
rates on average. These diﬀerences in interest rates do not translate into the depreciation of
“commodity currencies” on average; rather, they constitute positive average returns, giving
rise to a carry trade-type strategy. In this paper we develop a theoretical model of this
phenomenon, document that this empirical pattern is systematic and robust over the recent
time period, and provide additional evidence in support of the model’s predictions for the
dynamics of carry trade strategies.
The fact that carry trade strategies typically earn positive average returns is a manifestation of the failure of the Uncovered Interest Parity (UIP) hypothesis, which is one of the major
longstanding puzzles in international ﬁnance. It is commonly recognized that time-varying
risk premia are a major driver of carry trade proﬁts. In fact, a longstanding consensus in the
international ﬁnance literature attributed all of the carry trade average returns to conditional
risk premia, with no evidence of non-zero unconditional risk premia on individual currencies
throughout most of the twentieth century (e.g. see Lewis (1995)). Consequently, much of
the literature has focused on explaining the conditional currency risk premia by ruling out

2

asymmetries (e.g., Verdelhan (2010), Bansal and Shaliastovich (2012), Colacito and Croce
(2012)). However, Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011) show that unconditional currency risk premia are in fact substantial; indeed, they account for between a third and a half
of the proﬁtability of carry trade strategies.1 Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011) argue
that these returns are compensation for global risk, and the presence of unconditional risk
premia implies that there is persistent heterogeneity across countries’ exposures to common
shocks. In this paper we uncover a potential source of such heterogeneity.2
We show that the diﬀerences in average interest rates and risk exposures between countries that are net importers of basic commodities and commodity-exporting countries can
be explained by appealing to a natural economic mechanism: trade costs.3 We model trade
costs by considering a simple model of the shipping industry. At any time the cost of transporting a unit of good from one country to the other depends on the aggregate shipping
capacity available. While the capacity of the shipping sector adjusts over time to match the
demand for transporting goods between countries, it does so slowly, due to gestation lags
in the shipbuilding industry. In order to capture this intuition we assume marginal costs of
shipping an extra unit of good is increasing - i.e., trade costs in our model are convex. Convex shipping costs imply that the sensitivity of the commodity country to world productivity
shocks is lower than that of the country that specializes in producing the ﬁnal consumption
good, simply because it is costlier to deliver an extra unit of the consumption good to the
commodity country in good times, but cheaper in bad times. Therefore, under complete
ﬁnancial markets, the commodity country’s consumption is smoother than it would be in the
1

See also Bakshi, Carr, and Wu (2008), Campbell, Medeiros, and Viceira (2010), Koijen, Pedersen,
Moskowitz, and Vrugt (2012), and Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2013) for additional empirical evidence. Theoretical models of Hassan (2010) and Martin (2011) relate currency risk premia to country size.
Stathopoulos, Vedolin, and Mueller (2012) assume an exogenous source of heterogeneity in a multi-country
model with habit formation.
2
A number of patterns of heterogeneous risk exposures have been documented empirically. In a pioneering
study, Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) show that carry trade risk premia line up with loadings on the U.S.
aggregate consumption growth; Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011) and Menkhoﬀ, Sarno, Schmeling,
and Schrimpf (2012) link these risk premia to covariances with the global stock market and foreign exchange
rate volatility shocks, respectively, while Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2013) show that high average return
strategies in currency and commodity (as well as equity) markets perform particularly poorly during large
U.S. stock market declines.
3
Trade costs have a long tradition in international ﬁnance: e.g., Dumas (1992), Holliﬁeld and Uppal
(1997). Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2001) argue that trade costs hold the key to resolving several major puzzles in
international economics.

3

absence of trade frictions, and, conversely, the commodity importer’s consumption is riskier.
Since the commodity country faces less consumption risk, it has a lower precautionary saving
demand and, consequently, a higher interest rate on average, compared to the country producing manufactured goods. Since the commodity currency is risky - it depreciates in bad
times - it commands a risk premium. Therefore, the interest rate diﬀerential is not oﬀset on
average by exchange rate movements, giving rise to a carry trade.
We show empirically that sorting currencies into portfolios based on net exports of ﬁnished
(manufactured) goods or basic commodities generates a substantial spread in average excess
returns, which subsumes the unconditional (but not conditional) carry trade documented by
Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011). Further, we show that aggregate consumption
of commodity countries is less risky than that of ﬁnished goods producers, as our model
predicts.
The model makes a number of additional predictions that are consistent with salient
features of the data. Commodity-currency carry trade returns are positively correlated with
commodity price changes, both in the model and in the data (we provide evidence using
an aggregate commodity index, which complements the result obtained by Ferraro, Rossi,
and Rogoﬀ (2011) who use individual currency and commodity price data). Moreover, the
model predicts that conditional expected returns on the commodity-currency carry trade
are especially high when global goods markets are most segmented, i.e. when trade costs
are particularly high. We show that a popular measure of shipping costs known as the
Baltic Dry Index (BDI) forecasts unconditional carry trade returns (but not their conditional
component). Our model also rationalizes the evidence of carry trade predictability with a
commodity price index documented by Bakshi and Panayotov (2012), since commodity prices
are typically high in the model during booms, when trade costs are also high.
In order to evaluate the model’s ability to generate quantitatively reasonable magnitudes
of currency risk premia and interest rates we calibrate it by allowing for the possibility of very
large jumps in productivity - i.e., rare disasters, as in the literature on the equity premium
puzzle (e.g., Longstaﬀ and Piazzesi (2004), Barro (2006), Gabaix (2012), Wachter (2013)).
The calibrated model is able to account for the observed interest rate diﬀerentials and average
returns on the commodity currency carry trade strategies without overstating consumption
4

growth volatility or implying an unreasonably high probability of a major disaster.

2

Model

2.1

Setup

There are two countries, each populated by a representative consumer endowed with CRRA
preferences over the same consumption good, with identical coeﬃcients of relative risk aversion γ and rates of time preference ρ. The countries diﬀer in their production technologies,
each specializing in the production of a single good. The “commodity” country produces a
basic input good using a simple production technology
yc = zc lcα ;
assuming one unit of commodity country’s non-traded input lc (e.g., labor, land, etc.) is supplied inelastically, so that this is equivalent to an exogenous endowment of basic commodity
equal to the productivity shock zc (yc = zc ).
The “producer” country only produces a ﬁnal consumption good using basic commodity
input b and labor:
yp = zp b1−β lpβ ,
which is subject to a productivity shock zp , with one unit of producer country’s non-traded
input also supplied inelastically.
The countries are spatially separated so that transporting goods from one country to the
other incurs shipping costs. Our model of shipping costs extends the variable iceberg cost
of Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1992), where each unit of good shipped in either direction
loses a fraction
τ i (x, zk ) = κi0 + κi1

x
,
zk

which depends on the total amount of goods shipped in the same direction, x, and the shipping
capacity available at time t, zk . For simplicity we assume that this shipping capacity (or,
equivalently, shipping sector productivity) is exogenous (although a model with investment
5

in shipping capacity yields similar implications). Since the costs of shipping raw commodities
and manufactured goods are likely to be diﬀerent, we allow two sets of parameters (i ∈ c, f ).
Since the commodity country has no alternative use for the basic good it produces, in
equilibrium all of its supply is shipped to the producer country. Total output of the ﬁnal
consumption good is therefore
yp = zp [zc (1 − τ c (zc , zk ))]1−β lpβ .
In the producer country, the representative competitive ﬁrm solves
max π p = zp (zc (1 − τ c (zc , zk )))1−β lpβ − wp lp − P zc (1 − τ c (zc , zk )),

lp ∈[0,1]

where wp is the wage paid to labor and P is the price of one unit of basic commodity. From
the ﬁrst-order conditions and zero proﬁts, the price of the basic commodity is given by
P =

(1 − β)yp
= (1 − β)zp [zc (1 − τ c (zc , zk ))]−β .
(1 − τ c (zc , zk ))yc

Consumption allocations for the commodity country and the producer country, cc and
cp , are determined by the output of the producer country yp and the amount X of ﬁnal
consumption good exported to the commodity country. We will consider complete ﬁnancial
markets as our benchmark case, so that equilibrium consumption allocations to the two
countries over time and across states of nature will be determined as a result of a risksharing arrangement, and the real exchange rate is pinned down by the absence of arbitrage
in the ﬁnancial markets (as well as the markets for the consumption good). In contrast,
in (ﬁnancial) autarky, whereby trade is balanced in every period since trade in ﬁnancial
claims is impossible, the producer country consumption equals to its share of output equal
to βzp [zc (1 − τ c (zc , zk ))]1−β (if labor is the only non-traded factor, this quantity represents
the total wage bill in the competitive equilibrium), while the remainder of the output is
exported to the commodity country in the form of payment for the basic commodity (Xaut =
(1 − β)zp [zc (1 − τ c (zc , zk ))]1−β ), which implies that after trade cost the commodity country
6

income/consumption would equal Xaut (1 − τ f (Xaut , zk )). The real exchange rate in this case
is determined by the terms of trade (i.e., the relative price of the basic commodity).
The production economy outlined here is very simple (e.g., it is essentially static, as there
are no capital or other inter-temporal investment margins), intended to highlight the main
mechanism based on the interplay of specialization and trade costs. Gourio, Siemer, and
Verdelhan (2013) and Colacito, Croce, Ho, and Howard (2013) study currency risk premia
in fully dynamic production economies that could potentially be generalized to incorporate
the type of heterogeneity we consider.

2.2

Dynamics

We assume that the shocks to productivity experienced by the ﬁnal good producer are permanent, so that its evolution (in logs) follows a jump-diﬀusion process:
d log zpt = (µ − µZ η) dt + σ p dBpt + dQt .
Let N (t) be a Poisson process with intensity η, and let −Z1 , −Z2 , . . . be a sequence of identically distributed random variables drawn from a truncated Pareto distribution with minimum
jump Zmin , maximum jump Zmax , and shape parameter α. Denote this distribution’s mean
as µZ . Deﬁne the compound Poisson process:

Q(t) =

N (t)
∑

∫

t

Zs dNs , t ≥ 0.

Zj =
0

j=1

⇒ dQ(t) = ZN (t) dNt ,
so that µ is the uncompensated drift of the jump-diﬀusion, and the growth rate of the
productivity shock process can be written as
dzpt
=
zpt−

(

)
1 2
µ − µZ η + σ p dt + σ p dBpt + (eZN (t) − 1)dNt
2

$ µp dt + σ p dBpt + (eZN (t) − 1)dNt ,
where zpt− = lims↑t zps is the process’s left-limit, a convention used throughout.
7

In order to ensure stationarity of the model economy, we further assume that commodity
country productivity shock are cointegrated with the producer country shocks. Speciﬁcally,
we assume that their cointegrating residual
qt = log zpt − β log zct
is stationary, following a mean-reverting jump-diﬀusion process
dqt = [(1 − β)(µ − µZ η) − βψqt ] dt + σ p dBpt − βσ c dBct + dQt ,
so that the commodity country productivity shock process (in logs) follows
d log zct = (µ + ψqt )dt + σ c dBct ,
and therefore we can write
dzct
=
zct−

)
(
1 2
µ + ψqt + σ c dt + σ c dBct
2

$ µct dt + σ c dBct .
This cointegrated relationship can be interpreted as a reduced form representation of an
economy where supply of the commodity is inelastic in the short run (based on the currently
explored oil ﬁelds, say) but adjusts in the long run to meet the demand by the ﬁnal good
producers (e.g., as new ﬁelds are explored more aggressively when oil prices are high).
Similarly, we assume that shipping sector productivity is cointegrated with the commodity
supply, with the cointegrating residual deﬁned
qkt = log zct − log zkt ,
which follows a mean-reverting process
dqkt = (ψqt − ψ k qkt )dt + σ c dBct − σ k dBkt

8

so that the shipping shock process follows
d log zkt = (µ + ψ k qkt )dt + σ k dBkt
(
)
dzkt
1 2
⇒
= µ + ψqkt + σ k dt + σ k dBkt
zkt−
2
$ µkt dt + σ k dBkt ,
where the Brownian motions Bpt , Bct , and Bkt are independent. The latter assumption
captures the idea that shipping capacity cannot be adjusted quickly in response to shocks,
which can lead to substantial volatility in costs of shipping over time, and therefore shipping
costs that are very sensitive to demand shocks in the short run (e.g., Kalouptsidi (2011),
Greenwood and Hanson (2013)). Our modeling of cointegrated jump-diﬀusion processes is
similar to the model of cointegrated consumption and dividend dynamics in Longstaﬀ and
Piazzesi (2004). We can solve for output and commodity price dynamics by application of
Ito’s lemma (see Appendix).

2.3

Complete markets and consumption risk sharing

In order to emphasize that our mechanism does not rely on any ﬁnancial market imperfections, we consider consumption allocations under complete markets. This is a standard
benchmark in international ﬁnance, and is reasonable at least when applied to developed
countries.4 Under complete markets, the equilibrium allocation is identical to that chosen by
a central planner for a suitable choice of a (relative) Pareto weight λ.
The planner’s problem is therefore
[∫
V (zct , zpt , zkt ) = max E
{Xt }

(

∞

e

−ρ(s−t)

t

c1−γ
c1−γ
ps − 1
cs − 1
+λ
1−γ
1−γ

)

]
ds Ft ,

where Xs is exports of ﬁnal good to the commodity country, the commodity country consumption is ccs = Xs (1−τ f (Xs , zk )), and the producer country consumption is cps = yps −Xs .
4

For example, Fitzgerald (2012) estimates that risk-sharing via ﬁnancial markets among developed countries is nearly optimal, while goods markets trade frictions are sizeable.

9

The ﬁrst-order condition implies that
[
]−γ (
)
f
f Xt
f
f Xt
g(Xt , zct , zpt , zkt ) ≡ Xt (1 − κ0 − κ1 )
1 − κ0 − 2κ1
− λ(ypt − Xt )−γ = 0
zkt
zkt

(1)

must hold state by state for all t. In general, this nonlinear equation must be solved numerically, except for the special case of log utility (γ = 1).
Since the trade costs are increasing in the amount of goods shipped (holding shipping
capacity ﬁxed), the cost of transporting an extra unit of the ﬁnal consumption good is
increasing in total output ypt . When output is high, the social planner allocates greater
amounts of the good to the commodity country while shipping becomes increasingly costly.5
The eﬀects of individual state variables on the ﬁnal good trade cost τ f are displayed in
Figure 1 as functions one shock while holding all other shocks constant at a value of 1.3.
These eﬀects are intuitive: greater shipping capacity decreases the cost of shipping, while
higher productivity of the ﬁnal goods producer increases trade costs by raising output and,
consequently, the amount of goods shipped to the commodity country (higher productivity
in the commodity country has a similar eﬀect, as it feeds into ﬁnal good output).

2.4

Exchange rates

The spot exchange rate in the absence of arbitrage is proportional to the ratio of the marginal
utilities of the two representative agents,
St

( )γ
(
)γ
cct
Xt (1 − τ f (Xt , zkt ))
π pt
= λ
=λ
=λ
π ct
cpt
ypt − Xt
(
)γ (
)
1 − τ f (Xt , zkt )
f
f Xt
= λ
= 1 − κ0 − 2κ1
1 − xt
zkt

(2)
(3)

where the last equality follows from (1), implying that the real exchange rate is proportional
to the marginal value to the commodity country consumer of a unit of the consumption good
shipped from the country where it is produced (e.g., see Dumas (1992), Holliﬁeld and Uppal
5

The share of ﬁnal good output that is exported can be increasing or decreasing in output, depending
on the curvature of the utility function and the steepness of the trade cost proﬁle: if the utility function
is suﬃciently concave, the planner compensates the increasing losses due to rising trade costs by increasing
export share in good times (the empirically relevant case); otherwise, the share declines to reduce the deadweight loss.

10

Figure 1: Eﬀect of Shocks on Shipping Costs
0.36

z

p

0.34

z

c

z

0.32

k

0.3

τf

0.28
0.26
0.24
0.22
0.2
0.18
0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

(1997), Verdelhan (2010)).
The real exchange rate is monotonic in the ratio of the two countries’ consumption levels,
is linear in the quantity of ﬁnal good output exported to the commodity country, Xt , and
is therefore closely related to the trade costs. Following good productivity shocks in either
ﬁnal good or commodity producing countries, total output yp and exports X both increase,
and therefore the producer country exchange rate depreciates. This is due to the fact that
shipping costs lower the value of a marginal unit of the consumption good exported by
its producer to the commodity country consumer, and more so when more of the good is
shipped. Consequently, as (2) shows, both consumption and its marginal utility declines
more slowly for the commodity country consumer than for the producer country consumer in
good times, and also rises more slowly in bad times.6 Positive shocks to the shipping capacity
zk reduce the cost of shipping and therefore act in the opposite direction, increasing the value
6

In autarky, the commodity currency appreciates following good shocks to the ﬁnal good production
technology as its good becomes more highly demanded - this is the terms-of-trade eﬀect, which is present
even in the absence of complete ﬁnancial markets, as emphasized by Cole and Obstfeld (1991). The eﬀects of
the commodity country productivity diﬀer, however: terms of trade logic implies that commodity currency
appreciates when the commodity becomes scarce following a bad supply shock. This is not generally true in
our complete markets setup, as a decline in commodity supply leads to lower output of the ﬁnal good, and
higher value for the producer country currency.

11

Figure 2: Shocks and Exchange Rates
0.65

z

p

z

0.6

c

z

k

0.55

S

0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

of the unit of X to the commodity country and therefore lowering its exchange rate (X will
increase endogenously in response to higher shipping capacity, however, partially oﬀsetting
the inﬂuence of shipping cost shocks on the exchange rate.). These eﬀects are displayed in
Figure 2, which plots the exchange rate S (in units of commodity currency per one unit of
ﬁnal good producer currency), as a function of the three shocks, holding the other shock
constant at a value of 1.3.

2.5

Asset pricing

Stochastic discount factors for the two countries are given by

π pt = e−ρt c−γ
pt
}
{
(
)
1
dπ pt
T
= − ρ + γµcpt − γ(1 + γ)σ cpt σ cpt dt − γσ Tcpt dBt + e−γJp − 1 dNt
⇒
π pt−
2

12

for the ﬁnal good producer and
π ct = e−ρt c−γ
ct
}
{
(
)
dπ ct
1
T
⇒
= − ρ + γµcct − γ(1 + γ)σ cct σ cct dt − γσ Tcct dBt + e−γJc − 1 dNt
π ct−
2
for the commodity producer, where Jp and Jc are log changes in the marginal utilities induced
by jumps.
Risk-free rates are the (negative) drifts of the stochastic discount factors:
[
]
1
f
rpt
= ρ + γµcpt − γ(1 + γ)σ Tcpt σ cpt − ηEZ e−γJp − 1
2
and

[
]
1
f
rct
= ρ + γµcct − γ(1 + γ)σ Tcct σ cct − ηEZ e−γJc − 1 ,
2

for the ﬁnal goods and commodity producer, respectively. The terms EZ denote expectations
taken over the distribution of jump sizes conditional on a jump occurring. The ﬁrst two
terms of the interest rate expressions above are equal between the two countries on average,
as long-run consumption growth rates are equalized by the social planner. However, the last
terms – the precautionary saving demands – diﬀer. Since the ﬁnal goods producer absorbs
the bulk of productivity shocks to output, consuming a greater share in good times and
a lower share in bad times, it experiences greater consumption volatility. Consequently, it
has a greater precautionary demand and a lower interest rate on average. Similarly, the
conditional expectation of marginal utility growth upon a jump is greater for the producer
country consumer due to the same eﬀect.
Since trade costs are persistent as long as shipping capacity adjusts slowly in response
to demand, the interest rate variation is driven in part by the expected convergence in
consumption due to cointegration (captured by the drift terms) and by the dispersion in
conditional risk exposures of the pricing kernels (captured by the precautionary and jump
terms). In particular, when output outstrips shipping capacity, the dispersion between the
risk terms in the two countries is high, where as when shipping capacity is abundant relative to
output this dispersion is lower. Figure 3 illustrates this eﬀect for the case of logarithmic utility

13

Figure 3: Trade Costs and Endogenous Segmentation in Risk
−5

x 10
7
6

||σcp||2 − ||σcc||2

5
4
3
2
1
0
0.18

0.2

0.22

0.24

0.26
τ

0.28

0.3

0.32

0.34

f

and no jumps: the diﬀerence between conditional consumption volatilities increases following
good productivity shocks (or bad shipping sector shocks), which increase trade costs and
consequently the degree of goods markets segmentation, reducing risk-sharing opportunities.

2.6

Expected excess returns: the carry trade

We can deﬁne the instantaneous excess return process for the currency trading strategy that
is long the commodity currency (and short the producer currency) as
f
f
dRett = (rct
− rpt
)dt −

dSt
.
St −

This return can be earned by a ﬁnal-good producing country investor directly, by shipping a
f
unit of consumption good (borrowed at rate rpt
) and purchasing St units of the commodityf
country risk free bonds, earning interest rct
on these bonds, and converting it back into its

own consumption good by shipping fewer units of the consumption good to the commodity
country. It can also be obtained indirectly, by trading a state-contingent claim that replicates
the payoﬀ on this strategy, given complete ﬁnancial markets. A commodity country investor

14

can obtain a similar return, adjusted for the exchange rate.
The conditional expected excess return on this strategy (i.e., the currency risk premium)
is given by the covariance of the exchange rate with the producer country pricing kernel (e.g.,
Bakshi and Chen (1997)):
[

]
dSt dπ pt
E [dRett |Ft ] = E
|Ft ,
St− π pt−
since the returns are expressed in the producer country numeraire (an equivalent statement
holds for the commodity country pricing kernel if the returns are expressed in the commodity
currency units). In general, this risk premium is not equal to zero, so that the uncovered
[
]
f
f
dSt
interest parity relation E S − |Ft = (rct
− rpt
)dt need not hold.
t

In fact, this commodity currency trading strategy is proﬁtable, on average, since the
commodity currency is risky: it tends to appreciate in good times (when ﬁnal good output
]
[
dSt dπ pt
is high) and depreciate in bad times, so that E [dRett ] = E S − π − > 0. As long as
t

pt

exchange rates are persistent and close to random walks, the bulk of average carry excess
return comes from the interest rate diﬀerentials. These eﬀects are demonstrated in Figure 4,
which plots sample paths of the key variables simulated from the model. While both interest
rates ﬂuctuate, with the commodity country interest rate being more volatile, and sometimes
falling below that of the ﬁnal good producer, on average the latter is lower. Therefore, a
long position in the commodity currency and a short position in the “safe haven” currency
of the ﬁnal good producer is indeed a carry trade strategy, at least unconditionally. This
strategy is a form of unconditional carry-trade strategy insofar as the commodity currency
interest rate is on average higher than the producer country interest rate, i.e. as long as the
precautionary terms are large enough.
Consistent with intuition, commodity currency exchange rate comoves with the commodity price P as well as realized shipping costs measured by τ f (X, zk ) (for S the relationship
is inverse). Interestingly, while carry trade returns are positively correlated with these variables, so are expected returns on the carry trade. This is due to the fact that the degree of
dispersion between the conditional expected marginal utilities (and therefore the risk premium) is pro-cyclical, as trade costs are high in good times (especially if shipping capacity is

15

Figure 4: Model Dynamics: Example

index
1.02

1.1

Pt
τ

ft

S

1

1.05

t

S

t

P,τ

ft

t

0.98

0.96

1

0

20

40

60

80

100

0.95
120

lagging behind). The qualitative eﬀect of trade costs on conditional volatilities of consumption growth, which drive the risk premium in the absence of jumps, is displayed in Figure 3
above. We explore this mechanism quantitatively using the fully-speciﬁed model in Section
4 below.

2.7

Summary of implications

The model makes a set of predictions for the risk and return properties of exchange rates.
1. The ﬁnal good-producing country bears more aggregate consumption risk. Therefore,
it has a larger precautionary demand and lower interest rates, on average, than the
commodity-producing country.
2. The commodity country currency is risky, as it appreciates in good times and depreciates in bad times. Therefore, it earns a risk premium, giving rise to a carry trade.
16

3. The commodity currency exchange rate (and therefore the carry trade) is positively
correlated with the commodity price as well as the realized shipping costs, since they
both increase in good times.
4. As high shipping costs imply lower degree of international risk sharing and therefore
greater dispersion between conditional volatilities in consumption, conditional expected
carry trade returns are positively correlated with trade costs.

Our model of exchange rate determination is deliberately simple and meant to highlight
the mechanism leading to a carry trade: specialization combined with non-linear shipping
costs. The model nevertheless makes a rich set of qualitative predictions, which we evaluate
empirically before proceeding to analyzing its quantitative implications.

3

Empirical evidence

3.1

Data

Following Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011) we use forward and spot exchange rates
to construct forward discounts (approximately equal to the interest rate diﬀerentials by the
covered interest parity relation) and excess returns on currencies. We use the same set of
currencies. Data is provided by Barclays and Reuters and is available via Datastream. We
use monthly series from January 1988 to December 2012.7
We use two samples in our analysis. The sample of all 35 developed and emerging countries includes: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Euro area,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kuwait,
7

While Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011) start their sample in 1983, very few currencies have
forward discounts available in the ﬁrst few years of the sample, as a number of countries, including Australia
and New Zealand, undergo transition from ﬁxed to ﬂoating exchange rates during this period. The latter
countries have forward discounts available starting in 1985, but these display patterns suggesting episodes
of extreme illiquidity, such as large bid-ask spreads and violations of covered interest parity relation (CIP)
before 1988. Finally, the Plaza Accord of September 22, 1985 led to a large but gradual appreciation
of the Deutschmark, the French Franc, and the Japanese Yen over the course of 1986 and 1987. Since
these movements were largely predictable by investors it appears natural to consider unconditional strategies
including these currencies starting in 1988.

17

Malaysia, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, United
Kingdom. The sub-sample of 21 developed-country currencies includes: Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Euro, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom.
Table 1 shows U.S. dollar average returns and forward discounts on the nine most actively
traded currencies, collectively known as the G10 countries (the tenth currency being the U.S.
dollar itself), over our sample period. The German Deutschmark forward discount and
the excess return to investing in Deutschmark forward contracts prior to 1999 are spliced
with the euro variables post-1999. The table is sorted from low average returns to high
average returns. What is immediately apparent is that the high return countries tended to
have unconditionally high forward discounts, consistent with the unconditional carry trade
strategy documented in Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011).
Table 1: G10 Currency Average FX Returns and Discounts
Country Excess Return Forward Discount
Japan
-1.97
-2.70
Switzerland
-0.32
-1.53
Germany/Euro
0.11
-0.15
Sweden
0.80
1.37
United Kingdom
0.92
1.81
Canada
Norway
Australia
New Zealand

1.66
1.99
4.02
4.06

0.65
1.81
2.71
3.08

Average annualized forward discounts and excess returns (without accounting for transaction costs) for the
”G-10” currencies from the perspective of a U.S. dollar investor. Germany/Euro is calculated based on the
German Deutschmark prior to 1999 and the Euro post 1999. Data are monthly futures from 1988 to 2012
taken from Datastream.

Interestingly, this relation between average forward discounts and excess returns is not a
perfectly monotonic one, in that some low return countries have high discounts. This is not
necessarily surprising since factors other than expected returns (e.g. expected inﬂation) can

18

have an eﬀect on nominal interest rates, and therefore forward discounts.8 It is clear, however, that the countries with low returns tend to be countries with advanced manufacturing
economies which are also relatively resource poor. Indeed, the entire top half of the table:
Germany, Japan, Sweden, Switzerland, and the UK all ﬁt this description to some degree. In
contrast, the high return countries on the bottom half of the table tend to be large exporters
of either oil (Canada and Norway) or other base agricultural or mineral commodities (New
Zealand and Australia). This simple observation suggests a potential unconditional carry
trade strategy based on the trade characteristics of each country.
In order to classify countries based on their exports we utilize the U.N. COMTRADE
database of international trade ﬂows. We use the NBER extract version of this data, available
for years 1980-2000, we augment it with the original COMTRADE data for years 2001-2012
following the same methodology. The two goods in the model are a basic good, which is
used as an input in production, and a ﬁnal good, which is used in consumption. While
this suggests a potential classiﬁcation of goods as either “input” or “ﬁnal” goods, there are
many goods for which this classiﬁcation struggles to conform to the intuition of the model.
The important mechanism in the model hinges on the extra trade costs associated with
shipping complex produced goods back to the commodity exporter rather than the speciﬁc
use of the goods as consumption or input. For instance, New Zealand is a large exporter of
many agricultural commodities, some of which (such as butter) are in their ﬁnal consumable
form. Likewise, New Zealand imports a large amount of sophisticated construction equipment
which is produced using basic commodities (e.g., metals, energy) as an input. However, in
the context of the model, a complex piece of construction equipment seems more closely
related to the ﬁnal good rather than the basic good, while butter is a better representation
of the basic good. Therefore to be consistent with the model mechanism we classify goods as
a basic good (i.e. a commodity) or a complex good based on their 4-digit SITC codes. The
classiﬁcations at the 2-digit level are in the appendix (Table A-2), and the full classiﬁcation
is available upon request.
8
Pairwise average currency returns are only marginally statistically diﬀerent from zero due to the substantial noise in bilateral exchange rate movements, consistent with evidence in Bakshi and Panayotov (2012);
however, aggregating currencies into portfolios (e.g., long bottom four, short top four) reduces idiosyncratic
noise and ensures robustly statistically signiﬁcant average returns (as detailed in Data Appendix Table A-1).

19

Using this classiﬁcation of goods we create two diﬀerent country-speciﬁc measures, the
ﬁrst is the ratio of each countries’ net exports in basic goods to its total trade in basic goods
in each year of the formation period, and the second is the ratio of net imports in complex
goods to its total trade in complex goods. Both of these measures by construction take a
value between −1 and 1. The ﬁrst sort captures the extent to which a country specializes in
the production of basic commodities, and the second variable captures the extent to which a
country imports complex goods. Intuitively, for a given country a high ratio of commodity
exports tends to be accompanied by a high ratio of complex imports.

3.2

Currency portfolios sorted on Import/Export data

The main prediction of the model is that countries exporting basic goods and importing
complex goods should have lower exposure to global productivity shocks, and therefore their
currencies should have higher average discounts and earn higher returns. Figure 5 plots the
average forward discounts on individual currencies over the time period following the creation
of the euro (post-1999) against the average ratio of the ﬁnal good imports plus basic good
exports to total trade over the whole sample (1988 to 2012). The two variables appear to line
up well, with higher levels of the import ratio typically corresponding to high average forward
discounts (e.g., this includes the so-called “commodity countries” - Australia, New Zealand,
Norway, and South Africa), where as low values of ﬁnal good import ratio correspond to
low average forward discounts (Japan is the most salient extreme case). The exceptions to
the pattern tend be countries experiencing high inﬂation over the sample period (Mexico,
Hungary, and Philippines).
Figure 5 also displays a cross-sectional regression line that relates our import/export
composition variable to the mean forward discounts. As indicated by the R2 of this regression,
our trade-based variable explains a third of the cross-sectional variation in the average interest
rate diﬀerentials across countries. This variation is clearly not driven entirely by country size
as suggested by Hassan (2010), since the U.S. as well as the U.K. are in the middle of the
distribution of the import/export variable (as well as of the average forward discount, which
equals zero for the U.S. by construction)9 These distributions are consistent with evidence
9

Hassan (2010) shows a relation between country size and and currency risk premia using panel regressions

20

in Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2013) who estimate that the U.S. as well as the U.K.
pricing kernels have approximately average loadings on the global factor that gives rise to
the unconditional currency risk premia (among developed countries), where as Japan and
Australia are at the opposite ends of the spectrum.
In order to examine the patterns of average excess returns predicted by the model, we sort
all of the countries in our sample into 6 portfolios (5 for the subsample of developed countries)
using the rolling ﬁve-year average of the export ratio of input goods. We then repeat this
strategy using the import ratio of complex goods. We compute the average forward discounts
and average log excess returns for each of the portfolios.
Average forward discounts and average returns are computed from 1988-2012.10 The
construction of these portfolios represents an implementable trading strategy, relying only
on trade data from available at the time of portfolio formation. Furthermore, since the
composition of countries’ imports and exports is generally stable over time, the strategy is
essentially an unconditional carry-trade strategy, similar to the unconditional interest rate
strategy described by Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011).
We work with one-month forward and spot exchange rates in units of foreign currency
per U.S. dollar, denoted by Ft and St , respectively. Using the individual currency one-month
forward discounts ft − st (lower case letters representing logarithms) and log excess returns
approximated as
rxt+1 = ft − st+1 ,
we compute the log currency excess return rxjt+1 for each portfolio j = 1, 2 . . . , 6 by averaging
over Nj currencies in the portfolio:
rxjt+1 =

1 ∑ i
rxt+1 .
Nj i∈N

(4)

j

of returns and forward discounts on GDP. We perform similar regressions and ﬁnd that both trade ratios
and GDP have signiﬁcant explanatory power for expected returns and forward discounts, with the eﬀects
being slightly stronger for import ratios, particularly in the latter half of the sample (See Table A-4 in the
Data Appendix). However, neither variable completely drives out the other, so we view the mechanisms as
complementary.
10
Currency forward data is available starting from 1983, but only for a few currencies, and from 1985 for
most of the developed country currencies in our sample. In order to construct the portion of the standard
currency carry-trade unrelated to the commodity-currency carry-trade constructed using import and exports
we rely on three year rolling regressions, resulting in a post 1988 sample period. Details are in Section 3.3.

21

Figure 5: Average Forward Discounts and Import Ratios

ϭϰ

Dy
ϭϮ

ǀĞƌĂŐĞŶŶƵĂůŝǌĞĚ&y&ŽƌǁĂƌĚŝƐĐŽƵŶƚ;йͿ
ͲϬ͘ϴ

,hE

ϭϬ

ϴ

W,>

&
d,


ϲ

ZϸсϬ͘ϭϳϬϳ
E>

ϰ

h^

WK>
EKZ

'Z
Ϯ

E

dtE

^t
hZ
^'W

h^E<

Ϭ

ͲϬ͘ϲ

:WE

ͲϬ͘ϰ

ͲϬ͘Ϯ

Dz^

Ϭ

Ϭ͘Ϯ

Ϭ͘ϰ

Ϭ͘ϲ

Ϭ͘ϴ

,
ͲϮ

Ͳϰ

ǀĞƌĂŐĞZĂƚŝŽŽĨEĞƚ/ŵƉŽƌƚƐŽĨŽŵƉůĞǆ'ŽŽĚƐƉůƵƐEĞƚǆƉŽƌƚƐŽĨĂƐŝĐ'ŽŽĚƐƚŽdŽƚĂůdƌĂĚĞ

This ﬁgure plots average forward discounts from 1988 to 2012 against a combined measure of the extent to
which a country exports basic goods and imports complex goods. The measure is constructed by adding the
net imports of complex goods plus net exports of basic goods and then dividing by total trade in all goods.
This ratio is calculated in each year and averaged over the 1988 to 2012 sample for each each country. The
FX discount for the German Deutschmark and the Euro are treated a single observation and are plotted
against the import ratio for the Eurozone. Trade data are annual, from UN Comtrade (available via NBER
extracts from 1980 through 2000), while spot and forward exchange rate data are monthly, from Barclays
and Reuters (available via Datastream).

22

Similarly, currency portfolio excess returns (in levels) RX j are computed by averaging indii
vidual currency excess returns in levels, RX i = (Fti − St+1
)/Sti analogously to (4). We do

not take into account bid/ask spreads in the construction of these portfolios at the monthly
frequency. Since our portfolios require very little rebalancing, transaction costs are likely to
be small (returns based on long-horizon, e.g. one-year, forward contracts are typically similar to those obtained by rolling over shorter-horizon contracts; we report the results using
one-year forward contracts with bid-ask spreads in the Data Appendix.).11
The results are reported in Tables 2 and 3. The results using both sorts are very similar:
portfolios representing high complex good export ratios and those with high basic good export
ratios have low average forward discounts, suggesting that they capture countries whose
interest rates are typically low relative to the U.S. Conversely, portfolios with high values
of the commodity exports ratio and low values of ﬁnal good exports exhibit high average
forward discount, indicating high average interest rates. The pattern is virtually monotonic
across portfolios for both sorts, especially for developed countries subsample, with diﬀerences
between the highest and the lowest portfolios’ average forward discounts of around 4% per
annum for the basic good sort over 5% per annum for the complex good sort.
Importantly, portfolio average excess returns follow the pattern of the average forward
discounts, being negative for the low portfolios and positive for the high portfolios, with the
spreads in average returns between extreme portfolios close to 4% per year for both the basic
good sort and the complex good sort. Thus, the diﬀerences in the average forward discounts
translate almost fully into average excess returns, contrary to the UIP hypothesis. Since
the sorting variables are very persistent, these diﬀerences are likely to capture unconditional
rather than conditional risk premia.

3.3

Comparison with traditional carry trade strategies

To facilitate comparison with traditional carry-trade strategies, we sort countries based on a
measure of the extent to which the country both exports basic goods and imports complex
goods, constructed as the sum of net exports of basic goods and net imports of complex goods,
11

The portfolio is rebalanced to handle the introduction of the Euro. Prior to 1999 breakpoints are
calculated including the component countries of the Euro as separate entities. Post 1999 the breakpoints are
recalculated counting the Eurozone as a single country.

23

Table 2: Currency Portfolios Sorted on Final Good Exports

Portfolio

1

Mean
Std

2
3
4
5
6
Panel I: All Countries
Forward Discount: f j − sj
-0.79 1.43
2.15 1.66 2.52 2.76
0.60 0.70
0.95 0.53 0.60 0.52

Mean
Std
SR

Excess Return: RX j
1.90
3.73 2.24 2.29
8.65 10.19 7.57 8.38
0.22
0.37 0.30 0.27

0.10
7.90
0.01

4.67
9.68
0.48

1
2
3
4
5
Panel 2: Developed Countries
f j − sj
-1.04
0.23 0.54 1.32
2.89
0.64
0.77 0.73 0.61
0.50

0.56
8.99
0.06

RX j
1.74 2.47
10.58 9.07
0.16 0.27

1.84
8.66
0.21

5.55
10.62
0.52

This table reports average forward discounts and average log excess returns on currency portfolios
sorted on the ratio of the countries’ net exports of ﬁnished goods relative to total trade in such
goods, in descending order. Each year’s ranking is computed using the average ratio for the prior
four years. Trade data are annual, from UN Comtrade (available via NBER extracts). Forward and
spot exchange rate data are monthly, from Barclays and Reuters (available via Datastream). The
returns do not take into account bid-ask spreads. The sample period is 1/1988 to 12/2012.

Table 3: Currency Portfolios Sorted on Basic Good Exports

Portfolio

1

Mean
Std

2
3
4
5
6
Panel I: All Countries
Forward Discount: f j − sj
-0.37 0.53 0.94 3.89 2.78 2.01
0.66 0.62 0.61 0.86 0.56 0.48

1
2
3
4
5
Panel 2: Developed Countries
f j − sj
-0.95 0.29
0.90 1.63 2.16
0.73 0.58
0.74 0.61 0.58

Mean
Std
SR

Excess Return: rxj
2.22 1.69 4.43 2.68
9.16 8.71 9.14 7.83
0.24 0.19 0.48 0.34

rxj
2.21
10.51
0.21

0.12
7.89
0.02

3.76
8.81
0.43

0.65
9.01
0.07

0.93
9.57
0.10

4.22
8.97
0.47

4.04
9.33
0.43

This table reports average forward discounts and average log excess returns on currency portfolios
sorted on the ratio of the countries’ net exports of basic input goods relative to total trade in such
goods, in ascending order. Each year’s ranking is computed using the average ratio for the prior
four years. Trade data are annual, from UN Comtrade (available via NBER extracts). Forward and
spot exchange rate data are monthly, from Barclays and Reuters (available via Datastream). The
returns do not take into account bid-ask spreads. The sample period is 1/1988 to 12/2012.

24

Table 4: Currency Portfolios Sorted on Combined Imports/Exports Measure

Mean
Std

2
3
4
5
6
Panel I: All Countries
Forward Discount: f j − sj
-0.39 0.84 1.70 2.01 2.91 2.78
0.64 0.68 0.63 0.69 0.61 0.49

Mean
Std
SR

Excess Return: rxj
2.15 3.38 2.19 2.44
9.06 9.66 7.08 8.75
0.24 0.35 0.31 0.28

Portfolio

1

-0.01
7.93
0.00

4.96
9.65
0.51

1
2
3
4
5
Panel 2: Developed Countries
f j − sj
-0.68 -0.08 0.91 1.48 2.44
0.68
0.73 0.58 0.65 0.54

-0.12
8.98
-0.01

rxj
1.01 0.99
10.66 9.26
0.09 0.11

3.48
8.89
0.39

3.86
9.63
0.40

This table reports average forward discounts and average log excess returns on currency portfolios
sorted on a ratio designed to capture the extent to which each country exports basic goods and
imports ﬁnished goods. The ratio is constructed by adding the level of net exports in basic goods to
the level of net imports in ﬁnished goods, and then dividing by the level of total trade in all goods.
Each year’s ranking is computed using the average ratio for the prior four years. Trade data are
annual, from UN Comtrade (available via NBER extracts). Forward and spot exchange rate data
are monthly, from Barclays and Reuters (available via Datastream). The returns do not take into
account bid-ask spreads. The sample period is 1/1988 to 12/2012.

divided by the total trade in all goods. Average forward discounts and excess returns for these
portfolios are shown in Table 4. We then consider returns on a portfolio which is long the
portfolio with the highest ratio and short the lowest among all countries over the prior four
years. We refer to this strategy as IM X (Importers minus eXporters of ﬁnished goods). We
then construct two additional carry-trade strategies. The ﬁrst uses the traditional method
of sorting currencies based on the interest rate. Following Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan
(2011) we follow a strategy forming portfolios based on the current interest rate in each
month, and label this strategy HM LF X . In addition, in order to construct a strategy which is
related to the part of the standard carry trade not related to the IM X strategy, we construct
a tradeable strategy that is long HM LF X and short a number of units of IM X equal to its
contribution to HM LF X . This strategy (which we refer to as CHM LF X ) is calculated as
L,IM X
L,IM X
CHM LF X,t+1 = HM LF X,t+1 − β HM
IM Xt+1 , where β HM
is estimated using a
t
t

3-year rolling regression up to time t.
Table 5 reports the returns and standard deviations of the portfolios for each of these
25

Table 5: Carry-Trade Strategies
Strategy

Mean

St. Dev.

SR

Skewness

Correlation Matrix

IM X

4.97
(1.82)

9.18
(0.53)

0.54
(0.22)

-0.53
(0.28)

HM LF X

9.63
(1.87)

9.44
(0.48)

1.02
(0.21)

-0.36
(0.19)

0.26
(0.07)

CHM LF X

8.20
(1.77)

9.01
(0.43)

0.91
(0.16)

0.13
(0.21)

-0.06
(0.07)

0.86
(0.03)

Summary characteristics of returns on diﬀerent carry-trade strategies. IM X is the return on a
strategy long the currencies of complex good importers and short exporters, based on the combined
imports/exports measure. Imports and exports are the average over a rolling window of the three
prior years. HM LF X is the return on a strategy which is long high-interest rate countries and
short low interest rate countries which is rebalanced each month. CHM LF X is the return of a
strategy which is long HM LF X and short a proportional amount of IM X where the proportion is
determined using a 3-year rolling regression of HM LF X on IM X. The returns do not take into
account bid-ask spreads. Bootstrap standard errors are in the parentheses.

strategies. By construction CHM LF X and IM X have very low correlation, while both strategies are positively correlated with HM LF X . While the import-based strategy underperforms
the traditional carry trade strategy, it does have a signiﬁcantly positively return. Brunnermeier, Nagel, and Pedersen (2008) suggest that crash-risk is important for understanding
carry-trade risk, interestingly this table shows that the portion of the traditional carry-trade
related to IM X seems to account for nearly all of the negative skewness in traditional carry
trade strategy.

3.4

Explaining the carry trade with IMX factor

While the high return of CHM LF X shows that the IM X factor does not completely subsume
the traditional carry trade, there appears to be a portion of carry-trade returns that is
related to the characteristics of countries’ trade, which are very stable over time. Again
the magnitude of the return diﬀerential is similar to the unconditional interest rate carrytrade in Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011), who show that roughly half of the carry-

26

trade premium can be explained as an unconditional premium on countries with a high
average interest rate compared to those with a low average interest rate. To test if the
import/export sort is capturing the same eﬀects, we follow Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan
(2011) and construct an unconditional sort based on the average interest rates of countries
over a preformation period from 1984 - 1995, and then examine portfolio returns over a period
from 1995 to 2012. We term the return to this strategy U HM LF X . We then test whether
the IM X factor can explain the positive returns to the traditional interest rate carry trade
strategies, U HM LF X and HM LF X .
Table 6 reports regressions of the form
RXtj = αj + β j IM Xt + ϵjt ,
where test assets i in the regression are the component portfolios (rebalanced according to
interest rate each period) of both the standard HM LF X factor as well as the component
portfolios (sorted based on the average interest rate over the pre-1995 formation period)
of the U HM LF X strategy, in addition to the long-short strategies HM LF X and U HM LF X .
The results show that the IM X strategy fully explains the returns to the U HM LF X strategy,
with monotonically increasing betas, insigniﬁcant alphas, and high R2 , while explaining only
some of the returns to the traditional HM LF X . These results emphasize that the mechanism
in this model is most useful in understanding the returns to the unconditional portion of the
carry trade, due the fact that the composition of traded goods for each country is highly stable
through time. This is consistent with the evidence in Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan
(2013) who show that two separate global factors are needed to explain the unconditional
and the conditional currency risk premia. It is not surprising that the IM X can explain the
unconditional component of the currency carry trade, but not the conditional component,
since there is much greater persistence in the countries import-export patterns than in their
risk-free rates. The traditional carry trade captured by the HM LF X factor captures both
the conditional and the unconditional risk premia, where as IM X only captures the latter,
as predicted by the theory.12
12

Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011) show that accounting for transaction costs (in the form of bid
ask spreads) can reduce the proﬁtability of the traditional carry strategies. While our excess return deﬁnition

27

To further shed light on the underlying mechanism, we now turn to the relation between
carry-trade strategies and the salient variables of the model.

3.5

Diﬀerences in risk exposure across countries

The model’s key prediction is that commodity country consumption is less risky than that of
the ﬁnal good-producing country. While our two-country model is too stylized to be taken to
the data directly, we provide evidence by grouping countries that more closely resemble the
two types. We form two baskets of G10 currency countries, the four ”commodity countries”
of Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and Norway, and the four ”producer countries” of Japan,
Eurozone / Germany, Sweden and Switzlerland. Table 7 displays the standard deviation of
quarterly consumption growth rates for the two baskets over the period 1993-2012. As the
model predicts, aggregate consumption growth of ﬁnal goods producers is more volatile than
that of commodity producers (1.25% per annum vs. 0.88%).
The model predicts that producer country consumption is more sensitive to the global
productivity shocks that are transmitted into the carry trade, rising faster in good times
(when carry strategy does well) and declining in bad times (when carry trade does poorly).
We can evaluate this prediction by computing the consumption betas for the commoditycurrency carry trade factor IM X using both baskets. As indicated in Table 7, producer
country consumption is almost twice as sensitive to the carry returns, compared to the
commodity-country consumption, with IM X betas of 0.033 for the producer basket and
0.013 for commodity countries. The short sample makes for imprecise estimates, and the high
volatility of the IMX factor relative to changes in consumption growth makes for low absolute
magnitudes of the betas, but the ﬁnal goods producers’ consumption beta is signiﬁcant at the
10% level using OLS standard errors (though not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the commodity
countries betas).
Another important test of the mechanism in the model is the exposure of diﬀerent coundoes not account for transaction costs, the latter are unlikely to have a major impact on the proﬁtability of
our IMX strategy or the unconditional carry trade strategy, since it requires much less frequent rebalancing.
We verify this by constructing annually rebalanced strategies with excess returns based on 12-month forward
contracts using bid and ask quotes published by Reuters, which imply a Sharpe ratio for the IMX strategy
of 0.42, as reported in the Data Appendix Table A-3.

28

tries’ marginal utility to shocks to global productivity. The model predicts that wealth of
commodity exporting (and complex good importing) countries should have lower exposure to
global economic shocks and hence IMX. While we do not observe aggregate wealth holdings,
we can attempt to approximate them using equity market wealth. To this end we collect
country speciﬁc MSCI equity indices for 19 developed countries. For each country we perform
a regression of the return to the equity index on the return to IM X.

e
Rj,t
= αej + β ej IM Xt + ej,t

(5)

Figure 6 shows a graph of the β j for each country as a function of the import-ratio of
complex goods. The graph shows, that withe the notable exception of Norway, β j tends to
be a decreasing function of the import ratio. In other words, stock returns in countries which
tend to be importers of these goods have less exposure to the innovations to IM X, again
consistent with the predictions of the model.

3.6

Currency carry-trades, commodity prices, and shipping costs

In this section we examine the contemporaneous relation between the diﬀerent carry-trade
strategies and two of the important variables in our model: commodity prices and shipping
costs. According to the model, if the returns to IM X are compensation for exposure to global
economic activity, we should expect returns to this strategy to be positively correlated with
changes in commodity prices. Since convex shipping costs in the model are the key drivers
of the carry trade excess returns, we also expect that positive shocks to global productivity
should increase trade costs while also generating a positive return to IM X. Therefore, we
expect realizations of IM X to be positively correlated with changes in trade costs. To test
the ﬁrst hypothesis we use the Commodity Research Bureau’s all commodity spot index. In
order to proxy for levels of trade cost we use the Baltic Dry Index (BDI).
Table 8 reports contemporaneous regressions of the three currency carry-trade strategies
on innovations to the logs of the CRB commodity index and the BDI over the whole sample.
The IM X strategy loads heavily on these two variables, with contemporaneous R2 near
15%. The traditional carry-trade loads on them as well, but the relationship is much weaker,

29

Figure 6: Stock Market Betas and Import Ratios
ϭ

NOR

Ϭ͘ϵ

ĞƚĂŽĨŽƵŶƚƌǇ^ƚŽĐŬ/ŶĚĞǆŽŶ/DyZĞƚƵƌŶ

AUT
Ϭ͘ϴ

TWN
FIN
Ϭ͘ϳ

SWE
FRA
ITA

JPN

NLD

ESP

Ϭ͘ϲ

DEU
IRL

ZϸсϬ͘ϬϰϮϯ

Ϭ͘ϱ

CAN

GBR

AUS

USA
CHE

Ϭ͘ϰ

DNK
NZL

Ϭ͘ϯ

ͲϬ͘ϲ

ͲϬ͘ϰ

Ϭ͘Ϯ

ͲϬ͘Ϯ

Ϭ

Ϭ͘Ϯ

Ϭ͘ϰ

Ϭ͘ϲ

Ϭ͘ϴ

ǀĞƌĂŐĞZĂƚŝŽŽĨEĞƚ/ŵƉŽƌƚƐŽĨŽŵƉůĞǆ'ŽŽĚƐƉůƵƐEĞƚǆƉŽƌƚƐŽĨĂƐŝĐ'ŽŽĚƐƚŽdŽƚĂůdƌĂĚĞ

This ﬁgure plots the betas from the regression
e
Rj,t
= αej + β ej IM Xt + ej,t

where Rj,t is the return to the market equity index for each developed country j. Betas are plotted against
each country’s combined import/export ratio measure as described in Table 4. Equity returns are from global
ﬁnancial data. Data is monthly from 1988 to 2012, from Datastream.

30

and the residual component CHM LF X has very little relation with these two variables with
negligible R2 .
This is again consistent with the mechanism in the model. Since the composition of
exports for a given country is very stable through time, we would expect the predictions of
the model to explain an unconditional carry trade strategy but to be less likely to explain a
strategy relying upon a continuous rebalancing of portfolios. We interpret the fact that these
predictions of the model are only present in the unconditional portion of the carry trade
strategy as evidence for this explanation.
Though the model does not distinguish between diﬀerent types of commodities, it is
interesting to see which commodities have the strongest correlation with the constructed
IM X factor. Table 9 reports betas of diﬀerent commodity sector indices from the CRB, as
well as an index of energy commodities and several metals not included in the CRB indices.
Commodities which are inputs into production, namely energy commodities, raw industrials,
and industrial metals, tend to have the highest loadings on the IM X factor, again broadly
consistent with the model’s intuition.

3.7

Case study: the global ﬁnancial crisis

As a further illustration of the model mechanisms in the data, we examine the behavior of
model variables during the global ﬁnancial crisis, which coincided with a dramatic decline
in output, especially among ﬁnal good producer countries, such as Japan, and a collapse
in international trade volume (e.g. see Eaton, Kortum, Neiman, and Romalis (2011)). As
Figure 7 shows, the data lines up nicely with the model predictions over this period. Panel
A shows that the commodity currencies tended to depreciate relative to ﬁnal good producer
currencies during the crisis. Panel B illustrates that this is reﬂected in a large negative return
on the IMX strategy, and that this return is accompanied by large negative changes in the
CRB Commodity Spot Index and the Baltic Dry Index. Perhaps most importantly, even
though commodity prices were dropping during this period, Panel C shows household consumption growth of the commodity countries did not fall as severely as that of the producer
countries. The outliers are two of the smaller countries, New Zealand and Switzerland. Panel
D shows that a GDP-weighted basket of commodity countries’ consumption growth greatly
31

outperforms that of ﬁnal goods producers during the crisis.

3.8

Predicting carry-trade returns

In addition to contemporaneous correlations between carry returns, commodity prices, and
the Baltic Dry Index, another important implication of the convex adjustment costs in the
model is that the diﬀerence in exposure to the aggregate shock of the two countries is more
severe during times when it is costly to ship goods, this leads a predictive relation between
the level of shipping costs and expected return on the carry trade. Since shipping costs tend
to be high in good times, when output and commodity prices are also high, this expected
return is pro-cyclical.
This mechanism is consistent with recent evidence of carry trade return predictability
with pro-cyclical variables, such as commodity prices, documented by Bakshi and Panayotov
(2012). Similarly, Bakshi, Panayotov, and Skoulakis (2010) show that high levels of the BDI
predict high returns in many diﬀerent asset classes, including commodities. We document
a similar predictive relation between the BDI and the traditional currency carry trade, but
ﬁnd that all of the predictability is concentrated in the unconditional portion of the strategy,
as captured by IM X. We also conﬁrm the predictability of the traditional carry-trade in the
G10 currencies Bakshi and Panayotov (2012) using lagged innovations in commodity spot
indices, and again ﬁnd that the predictability is concentrated in the portion of the trade
related to our trade sorts.
To test for predictability we perform univariate predictive regressions analogous to Bakshi,
Panayotov, and Skoulakis (2010)

rxi,t = ai + bi ∆bdit−4,t−1 + ϵ̃i,t

(6)

Where i represents the four carry trade strategies, rx is log excess return over horizons
i ∈ {1, 3, 6, 12} months, and the predictive variable, ∆bdit−4,t−1 , is the change in the log
of the BDI over the prior three months. Table 10 shows the results. We ﬁnd a strong
predictive relation in IM X, with R2 of 4%. This relation is still signiﬁcant but with lower
R2 for the standard carry-trade HM LF X factor. Most interestingly, the relation completely

32

Figure 7: Currencies, Commodities, Trade Costs, and Consumption During the Crisis

Panel A: G-10 Currencies

Panel B: Commodities, Trade Costs, and IMX

1.5

1.2

1.3

12000

1.1

9000

0.9

6000

0.7

3000

BDI

1

15000

IMX
CRB Spot Commodity Index
Baltic Dry Index

0.8
AUD
NOK
EUR
SWE

0.6
Dec-07
1.1

1.08

1.06

Jun-08

Dec-08

Jun-09

Dec-09

CAN
NZD
JPY
CHE

Jun-10

Dec-10

0.5
Dec-07

Panel C: G-10 Household Consumption

1.1

CAN
AUS

Australia
Canada
New Zealand
Norway
Euro Area
Japan
Switzerland
Sweden

0
Jun-08

Dec-08

Jun-09

Dec-09

Jun-10

Dec-10

Panel D: G-10 GDP-Weighted Consumption
Commodity Countries

NOR

1.08
Producer Countries

CHE

1.06
SWE

1.04

1.04
NZL

1.02

JPN
EUR

1

0.98
2007

1.02

2008

2009

2010

2011

1
0.98
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Currency and economic variables during the global ﬁnancial crisis. Panel A shows monthly
cumulative currency returns on the four G10 ”commodity countries” (Australia, Canada, New
Zealand, and Norway) and the four G10 ”producer countries” (Europe, Japan, Switzerland,
and Sweden). Panel B shows the monthly performance of the IMX strategy as well as monthly
changes in the Commodity Research Bureau All Commodity spot index and the Baltic Dry
Index (BDI). Panel C shows household consumption of the eight countries, and Panel D
shows the consumption growth of GDP-weighted baskets of the two country groups. All
exchange rate, commodity price, and consumption variables normalized to one in December
2007. Data from Datastream and the OECD.

33

disappears when considering CHM LF X , which captures the portion of HM LF X that is
orthogonal to IM X. Following Bakshi and Panayotov (2012), we repeat this exercise using
innovations to the CRB Industrial Metals index and carry-trade strategies constructed in
the G10 currencies, and see the same result (Table 11). To the extent there is predictability
in the HM LF X carry trade return, it is primarily due to the predictability of the IM X
portfolio. Again, the predictions of the model match nicely with the observed behavior of
the unconditional strategy.

4

Quantitative analysis

So far we have only explored the qualitative implications of our model. We now turn to
quantitative analysis. Ideally, we would like to calibrate the model parameters to closely
match empirical moments. The fact that the model features only two countries (each completely specialized in producing one kind of good) makes such a moment-matching exercise
challenging. In order to circumvent this challenge we make an assumptions that countries
that are ranked at the top of the ﬁnal good exporter measure as a group are representative
of a ﬁnal-good producer country in the model, while countries that rank at the bottom (i.e.,
the ﬁnal good importers) are representative of the commodity country. Our empirical results above appear to corroborate this distinction, even though the diﬀerence between the
two types of countries is much less stark in reality than our model assumes. We form two
baskets using the set of G10 countries: one of the countries with the four highest import ratios (commodity countries) and the other of the four lowest (ﬁnal good producer countries).
We average macroeconomic and ﬁnancial variables across countries within each basket and
compare their properties to those implied by the model. Table 12 summarizes these moments
while Table 13 lists the parameter values used in the calibration.
We present the summary statistics from the model-generated simulated data in three ways:
we simulate the model 10,000 times, each time generating sample periods of approximately
the same length as those in our data (30 years). Besides reporting both mean and median
statistics across the simulations we also report means conditional on no “disasters” occurring
in the sample (i.e. jumps that imply an annual consumption drop in the ﬁnal good producer

34

country that is greater than 5%). This deﬁnition is conservative, as Barro (2006) deﬁnes
disasters as consumption drops of 10% and greater. We calibrate the distribution of jump
sizes so that its tail approximately corresponds to the distribution of empirically observed
consumption disasters compiled by Barro and Ursua (2008) (the largest disaster in their
sample corresponds to a consumption drop of 70%, which is approximately the same as the
upper bound of our jump distribution Zmax = 1.2). Disasters - large jumps that cause a 5%
or greater drop in consumption - occur at least once over a 30-year period with probability
of 16% in the simulated samples given that the jump intensity η is such that a jump occurs
on average every 25 years, the smallest jump size is 2%, and the power law distribution of
jump sizes has a tail exponent of 1.1.13 Since the probability of such jumps is suﬃciently
small, these conditional statistics capture the sense in which rare disasters contribute to
the observed risk premia. There is some debate in the literature about the extent to which
rare disasters and peso problems contribute to currency risk premia14 . While the economic
mechanism of our model does not rely on rare disasters, the simulation results reveal that
the possibility of such disasters that may occur but are not observed in sample substantially
improves the model’s ability to quantitatively account for the carry trade risk premium that
is generated by the spread between the higher-order moments of the marginal utilities in the
two countries.
The modest degree of relative risk aversion γ = 5 ensures that the model does not
overshoot the exchange rate volatility observed in the data too much in the absence of
disasters, with the levels of the risk-free rates matching closely to the interest rates in the
data (with the caveat that the empirical interest rates are nominal rather than real), and
matching the spread between the rates closely at about 2% per annum. Consequently, the
Sharpe ratio is roughly as high as in the data on average (around 0.4 on average in no disaster
samples and just under 0.3 overall). However, the model does not completely rely on the
peso-problem explanation of the carry trade proﬁtability, as even in the samples including
13

Backus, Chernov, and Martin (2011) argue that equity option prices imply lower probabilities of consumption disasters than the magnitude required to match the equity premium.
14
Models such as Farhi and Gabaix (2008) and Gourio, Siemer, and Verdelhan (2013) rely on rare disasters
for explanations of the forward premium puzzle. Empirical evidence in Farhi, Fraiberger, Gabaix, Ranciere,
and Verdelhan (2009), Jurek (2009), Burnside, Eichenbaum, Kleshchelski, and Rebelo (2008), and Chernov,
Graveline, and Zviadadze (2012) points to the importance of crash risk in explaining jointly the carry trade
risk premia and prices of currency options.

35

disasters the average carry trade return is essentially of the same magnitude. The volatility
of exchange rates (and therefore currency carry strategy returns) in the model averaged over
no disaster samples matches closely to the empirical volatility of the IMX returns for G10
currencies, at just over 7% per annum. This is below the unconditional mean and median
over the simulated samples of 10.5% but slightly above the full sample median. Similarly,
volatilities of consumption and output growth in the no disaster samples on average match
those in the data, and are roughly between the means and the medians of the unconditional
distributions. Thus, the model’s ability to match unconditional currency risk premia does
not rely on an unreasonably large magnitude (and probability) of a rare disaster.
The trade cost coeﬃcients combined with the shipping sector dynamics imply that the
fraction of total exports of the ﬁnal good that is lost to transportation frictions is substantial,
at close to 40% (but much smaller, around 11%, for commodities). These costs appear large
but are in fact well within the range of values estimated by Anderson and van Wincoop
(2004). The dynamics of the trade costs produced by the model are much less volatile than
those observed in the data (we use the Baltic Dry Shipping index as our empirical proxy)15 .
The calibrated model does feature predictability of carry trade returns with trade costs,
as well as commodity prices, as described qualitatively in section 2.5.16 We report average
coeﬃcients from predictive regressions analogous to those estimated in section 3.8, with
standard errors constructed as standard deviations of point estimates across the simulated
samples, in Table 14. As in the data, there is statistically signiﬁcant relation between future
currency returns and lagged changes in trade costs and commodity prices at short horizons
(1- to 3-month returns), which fades away at longer horizons. Thus, the model appears to be
able to rationalize the initially puzzling evidence of pro-cyclical predictability of carry trade
strategies.
15

The parameters governing mean reversion of the commodity production and shipping prices are chosen so
that the commodity production reverts more quickly than the shipping capital. This is broadly consistent with
the behavior of commodity prices and shipping costs after the crisis, and also consistent with Bessembinder,
Coughenor, Seguin, and Smoller (1995) who document relatively rapid mean reversion in commodity prices,
and Kalouptsidi (2011) who emphasizes the long production lags in the shipping industry.
16
The direct prediction of our model is that the level of trade costs comoves with the currency risk premium,
and should therefore should forecast carry trade returns. We use changes in trade costs and commodity prices
in order to avoid spurious predictability due to the small sample bias (e.g., Bekaert, Hodrick, and Marshall
(1997), Stambaugh (1999)), since both variables are highly persistent, while their growth rates are only
moderately autocorrelated.

36

5

Conclusion

We present new evidence on the relation of the currency carry trade proﬁts to the patterns in
international trade: countries that specialize in exporting basic goods such as raw commodities tend to exhibit high interest rates where as countries primarily exporting ﬁnished goods
have lower interest rates on average. These interest rate diﬀerences translate almost entirely
into average returns on currency carry trade strategies. We propose a novel mechanism that
helps rationalize these ﬁndings: convex shipping costs combined with time-varying capacity
of the shipping industry. Nonlinearity of the shipping costs implies that the consumption and therefore the SDF - of the country producing the consumption good is more sensitive
to productivity shocks, and is thus riskier. Our model’s empirical predictions are strongly
supported in the data, while the quantitative analysis suggests that our mechanism may
provide a fruitful direction for understanding the interaction between currency risk premia
and the macroeconomy.

37

Table 6: Carry Trade Alphas and IMX
Trade-sorted Portfolios
3
4
5

1

2

6

βj

-0.32**
(0.06)

-0.07
(0.08)

-0.00
(0.09)

0.12
(0.08)

0.26**
(0.09)

0.68**
(0.06)

αj

1.58
(1.51)

2.51
(1.86)

3.38
(2.01)

1.59
(1.51)

1.17
(1.82)

1.58
(1.51)

R2

0.14

0.01

0.00

0.02

0.07

0.42

IM X

1.00

Portfolios sorted on Current Forward Discounts
1
2
3
4
5
6
HM LF X
βj

-0.09
(0.06)

0.05
(0.06)

0.08
(0.07)

0.05
(0.08)

0.15
(0.09)

0.17
(0.11)

0.26**
(0.08)

αj

-2.02
(1.43)

-0.72
(1.35)

0.72
(1.45)

3.77*
(1.61)

1.81
(1.84)

6.31**
(2.26)

8.33**
(1.92)

R2

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.00

0.02

0.02

0.07

Portfolios sorted on Past Mean Forward Discounts
1
2
3
4
5
6 U HM LF X
βj

-0.12*
(0.06)

0.47**
(0.08)

0.44**
(0.06)

0.54**
(0.07)

0.87**
(0.07)

0.91**
(0.08)

1.03**
(0.06)

αj

-0.15
(1.80)

-2.52
(2.41)

-0.97
(1.54)

-2.11
(1.84)

-0.60
(1.86)

-0.43
(2.48)

-0.28
(1.95)

R2

0.02

0.15

0.26

0.28

0.49

0.39

0.55

This table reports regressions of the form
RXtj = αj + β j IM Xt + ϵjt
where portfolios j are the six component portfolios of IM X (trade-based sort), HM LF X (conditional interest
rate sort), and U HM LF X (sort on an unconditional average forward discount over the period 1984 - 1995).
Returns are monthly from 1988-2012 for the IM X and HM LF X sorts, and monthly 1995 − 2012 for the
U HM LF X sorts. Standard errors are White (1980).

38

Table 7: Riskiness of aggregate consumption baskets, data
Portfolio
Commodity Producers
Final Goods Producers

σ
β IM X
0.92
0.013
(0.09) (0.009)
1.40
0.033
(0.18) (0.014)

This table reports summary statistics from consumption portfolios formed on a country’s
commodity-making or ﬁnal-good-producing status. The data are quarterly and taken from
the OECD. The countries for which data for consumption and forward contracts are available
are ranked according to the average import export measure used in constructing IMX. The
commodity and ﬁnal goods producers are the top and bottom third respectively. Consumption growth is calculated as the average growth rate of consumption weighted by the GDP
of each country. Annualized standard deviations are estimated using quarterly growth rates
for the time period from ﬁrst-quarter 1988 until fourth-quarter 2012. Consumption betas are
with respect to the quarterly IMX return. Standard errors are bootstrapped for the standard
deviations and OLS for the IM X Betas.

39

Table 8: Carry Trade Contemporaneous Relations

∆bdit
∆CRBt
Cons.

Obs
R2

Panel I: Import Ratio Sort (IM X)
(1)
(2)
(3)
IM X
IM X
IM X
0.030**
0.019*
(0.014)
(0.010)
0.345**
0.323**
(0.070)
(0.063)
4.415**
4.039**
3.799**
(1.836)
(1.737)
(1.710)
304
0.034

304
0.133

304
0.146

Panel II: Conditional Interest Rate Sort (HM LF X )
(1)
(2)
(3)
HM LF X
HM LF X
HM LF X
∆bdit
0.022*
0.017*
(0.012)
(0.010)
∆CRBt
0.172*
0.152*
(0.090)
(0.083)
Cons.
8.645**
8.564**
8.354**
(1.904)
(1.908)
(1.908)
Obs
304
304
304
R2
0.017
0.031
0.041
Panel III: HM LF X net of position in IMX (CHM LF X )
(1)
(2)
(3)
CHM LF X CHM LF X
CHM LF X
∆bdit
0.003
0.004
(0.008)
(0.009)
∆CRBt
-0.010
-0.015
(0.057)
(0.058)
Cons.
7.554**
7.628**
7.582**
(1.788)
(1.804)
(1.809)
Obs
R2

304
0.000

304
0.000

304
0.001

Regressions of currency carry-trade strategy returns on contemporaneous innovations in the Baltic Dry Index (BDI) and contemporaneous changes of the CRB All Commodity spot index. IM X, HM LF X , and
CHM LF X are as deﬁned in Table 5. ∆CRB t is the change in the long of the CRB index and ∆bdit is
the change in the log of the BDI. All data is monthly from 1/1988 to 12/2012. Standard errors are White
(1980).

40

Table 9: IMX and Commodity Prices

Index

IMX Beta

CRB Textile Index

0.156
(0.062)

Gold

0.314
(0.145)

CRB Foodstuﬀ Index

0.338
(0.105)

CRB Livestock Index

0.376
(0.156)

CRB Spot Commodity Index

0.386
(0.125)

CRB Fats and Oils Index

0.406
(0.198)

CRB Raw Industrials Index

0.413
(0.149)

Platinum

0.558
(0.174)

Silver

0.692
(0.207)

CRB Industrial Metals Index

0.775
(0.281)

Energy Goods

0.953
(0.245)

This table reports β i from regressions of the form
Pti
= αci + β ci IM Xt + εit
i
Pt−1
where i are diﬀerent commodity price indices and selected individual commodities. Seven of the indices are
from the Commodity Research Board and represent changes in spot prices of diﬀerent classes of commodities.
In addition, an index of energy commodities is constructed using data from the CRB on the spot prices of
Propane, Heating Oil, Natural Gas, and Crude Oil. Finally, percentage changes of three metals: platinum,
silver, and gold, are included individually. Regressions are monthly from from 1988 - 2012. Standard errors
are White (1980).

41

Table 10: Predicting the Carry-Trade with the BDI
Panel I: Import Ratio Sort (IM X)
(1)
(2)
(3)
IM X
IM X
IM X
Horizon:
1-month
3-month
6-month

(4)
IM X
12-month

∆bdit−4,t−1

0.152**
(0.058)

0.093**
(0.034)

0.007
(0.029)

-0.017
(0.021)

Observations
R2

304
0.041

302
0.016

299
0.006

293
0.004

Panel II: Conditional Interest Rate Sort (HM LF X )
(1)
(2)
(3)
HM LF X
HM LF X
HM LF X
Horizon:
1-month
3-month
6-month

(4)
HM LF X
12-month

∆bdit−4,t−1

0.126*
(0.050)

0.077*
(0.031)

0.001
(0.026)

0.013
(0.024)

Observations
R2

304
0.027

302
0.016

299
0.001

293
0.000

Panel III: HM LF X net of position in IM X (CHM LF X )
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
CHM LF X CHM LF X CHM LF X CHM LF X
Horizon:
1-month
3-month
6-month
12-month
∆bdit−4,t−1

0.036
(0.035)

0.022
(0.025)

-0.000
(0.025)

0.030
(0.019)

Observations
R2

304
0.003

302
0.004

299
0.000

293
0.003

Regressions of currency carry-trade strategy returns on the lag of the innovation to the BDI. IM X, HM LF X ,
and CHM LF X are as deﬁned in Table 5. ∆bdit−4,t−1 is the change in the log of the BDI over the three
months prior to the current period. All data is monthly. Standard errors in the parentheses are Newey-West
with the number of lags equal to the horizon. For the 1 month horizon 3 lags are used.

42

Table 11: Predicting the G10 Carry-Trade with Commodity Prices
Panel I: Import Ratio Sort (IM X G10 )
(1)
(2)
(3)
G10
G10
IM X
IM X
IM X G10
Horizon:
1-month
3-month
6-month

(4)
IM X G10
12-month

∆CRBIMt−4,t−1

0.518**
(0.239)

0.396*
(0.228)

0.058
(0.107)

-0.038
(0.078)

Observations
R2

304
0.015

302
0.025

299
0.001

293
0.001

Panel II: Conditional Interest Rate Sort (HM LG10
FX )
(1)
(2)
(3)
G10
HM LG10
HM
L
HM
LG10
FX
FX
FX
Horizon:
1-month
3-month
6-month

(4)
HM LG10
FX
12-month

∆CRBIMt−4,t−1

0.249
(0.255)

0.421**
(0.186)

0.042
(0.168)

-0.073
(0.086)

Observations
R2

304
0.003

302
0.021

299
0.000

293
0.002

G10 (CHM LG10 )
Panel III: HM LG10
F X net of position in IM X
FX
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
G10
G10
G10
CHM LF X CHM LF X CHM LF X CHM LG10
FX
Horizon:
1-month
3-month
6-month
12-month

∆CRBIMt−4,t−1

-0.025
(0.221)

0.083
(0.122)

-0.007
(0.134)

-0.050
(0.106)

Observations
R2

304
0.000

302
0.001

299
0.000

293
0.001

Regressions of currency carry-trade strategy returns formed using the sample of G10 country currencies on
G10
the lagged growth rate in commodity prices. IM X G10 , HM LG10
F X , and CHM LF X are as deﬁned in Table 5.
∆CRBIMt−4,t−1 is the change in the logarithm of the CRB Industrial Metals spot commodity price index
over the three months prior to the current period. All data is monthly. Standard errors in the parentheses
are Newey-West with the number of lags equal to the horizon. For the 1 month horizon 3 lags are used.

43

Table 12: Calibration moments
This table reports summary statistics generated by the model and compares them to data
analogues from the G10 country set. The macroeconomic variables (consumption, output,
exports) are time-aggregated quarterly. All of the ﬁnancial variables (real interest rates,
commodity prices, exchange rates, currency returns) are sampled monthly (monthly carry
trade returns are based on continuously rolled-over positions in the model and one-month
forward contract returns in the data). Real interest rates are calculated using 1 year lags
of realized inﬂation to proxy for expected inﬂation. “AC” is the sample autocorrelation.
The commodity country set includes Australia, Canada, New Zealand and Norway. The
producer country set consists of Germany/Euro, Japan, Sweden, and Switzerland. All means
and standard deviations are annualized, in percentage points. The model moments are
averages across 10,000 simulated paths of 30 year length, reported as unconditional means and
medians, as well as means conditional on “no disasters” - i.e., no jumps generating producercountry annual consumption declines greater than 5% over the 30-year period (disasters of
such magnitude occur at least once in approximately 16% of simulated paths).

Medians
Mean Std AC
∆ypt 1.58 0.93 0.24
∆yct 1.56 0.70 0.60
∆cpt 1.58 0.91 0.24
∆cct 1.70 0.39 0.25
∆Xt 1.58 0.94 0.24
f
3.24 0.78 0.73
rpt
f
rct
6.64 0.28 0.82
dRett 2.74 6.95 0.09
dSt 0.66 6.71 -0.01
dPt -0.28 2.48 0.02
dτ f (Xt , zkt ) -0.54 3.01 0.23

Mean
1.38
1.34
1.40
1.57
1.37
3.27
6.49
2.37
0.89
-0.39
-0.81

Means
Std
2.34
1.72
2.23
1.27
2.43
1.20
0.58
10.56
10.62
5.19
6.17

Data
Means, no disasters
Mean Std
AC Mean Std
AC
AC
1.23
0.25 1.53 1.32
0.25
1.83 0.31
2.84
0.58 1.50 0.98
0.56
0.97 0.43
0.25 1.53 1.28
0.25
1.41 -0.20
1.40
0.25 1.67 0.62
0.25
0.92 0.31
2.92
3.21 10.21 0.02
0.25 1.52 1.35
0.25
2.44
0.73 3.23 0.89
0.74
0.71 0.92
0.82 6.60 0.36
0.83
0.58 0.94
4.65
2.86
0.09 2.70 7.49
0.09
7.62 0.04
-0.01 0.67 7.16
-0.01
-0.38 7.58 0.04
0.03 -0.29 2.89
0.03
1.36 10.91 0.21
6.15 56.25 0.33
0.23 -0.57 3.46
0.24

44

Table 13: Parameter values
Value
Parameter
λ
1
β
0.9
γ
5
ρ
0.001
κc0
0.01
κc1
0.55
f
κ0
0.001
f
κ1
0.75
σp
0.0025
σk
0.0001
σc
0.0015
µ
0.018
ψ
0.01
ψk
0.00001
η 1 per 25 years
α
1.1
Zmin
2%
Zmax
120%

Description
Relative Pareto weight
Cobb-Douglas producer-country labor share
Relative risk aversion
Rate of time preference (annualized)
Fixed commodity trade cost
Variable commodity trade cost
Fixed ﬁnal trade cost
Variable ﬁnal trade cost
Productivity shock volatility (annualized)
Shipping shock volatility (annualized)
Commodity shock volatility (annualized)
Uncompensated TFP growth rate (annualized)
Mean reversion of commodity supply (zc to zp )
Mean reversion of shipping capacity (zk to zc )
jump frequency
Power tail of jump
Minimum jump size
Maximum jump size

45

Table 14: Model predictive regressions
This table reports regression statistics generated by the model. All regressions include an
intercept (not reported) and are run on monthly simulated data (we report the mean across
all simulations). All quantities and prices are in annualized units. The return horizon
lengths denote cumulative horizon returns: dRet(t, t + x), for example, denotes the x-month
cumulative return. The regressors are three-month log diﬀerences in commodity prices and
trade costs. Standard errors in the parentheses are estimated as standard deviations of point
estimates across simulated samples.

Horizon:

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
dRett
dRett
dRett
dRett
1-month 3-month 6-month 12-month

∆ log Pt

1.88**
( 0.87)

1.43*
( 0.78)

0.99
( 0.66)

0.55
( 0.56)

R2

0.01

0.02

0.02

0.01

∆τ f

1.95**
( 0.95)

1.49*
( 0.83)

1.04
( 0.68)

0.58
( 0.57)

R2

0.01

0.02

0.02

0.01

46

References
Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop, 2004, Trade costs, Journal of Economic Literature 42, 691–751.
Backus, David, Mikhail Chernov, and Ian Martin, 2011, Disasters implied by equity index
options, Journal of Finance 66, 1969–2012.
Backus, David, Patrick Kehoe, and Finn Kydland, 1992, International real business cycles,
Journal of Political Economy 100, 745–75.
Bakshi, Gurdip, Peter Carr, and Liuren Wu, 2008, Stochastic risk premiums, stochastic
skewness in currency options, and stochastic discount factors in international economies,
Journal of Financial Economics 87, 132–156.
Bakshi, Gurdip, and George Panayotov, 2012, Predictability of currency carry trades and
asset pricing implications, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Bakshi, Gurdip S, and Zhiwu Chen, 1997, Equilibrium valuation of foreign exchange claims,
Journal of Finance 52, 799–826.
Bakshi, Gurdip S., George Panayotov, and Georgios Skoulakis, 2010, The baltic dry index
as a predictor of global stock returns, commodity returns, and global economic activity,
SSRN eLibrary.
Bansal, Ravi, and Ivan Shaliastovich, 2012, A long-run risks explanation of predictability
puzzles in bond and currency markets, Review of Financial Studies.
Barro, Robert, 2006, Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 121, 823–866.
Barro, Robert J., and Jose F. Ursua, 2008, Macroeconomic crises since 1870, Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 39, 255–350.
Bekaert, Geert, Robert J. Hodrick, and David A. Marshall, 1997, On biases in tests of
the expectations hypothesis of the term structure of interest rates, Journal of Financial
Economics 44(3), 30948.
47

Bessembinder, Hendrik, Jay F. Coughenor, Paul J. Seguin, and Margaret Monroe Smoller,
1995, Mean reversion in equilibrium asset prices: Evidence from the futures term structure,
The Journal of Finance 50, 361–375.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., Stefan Nagel, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2008, Carry trades and
currency crashes, in Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoﬀ, and Michael Woodford, ed.: NBER
Macroeconomics Annual (University of Chicago Press).
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, Isaac Kleshchelski, and Sergio Rebelo, 2008, Can peso
problems explain the returns to the carry trade?, NBER Working Paper 14054.
Campbell, John Y., Karine Serfaty De Medeiros, and Luis M. Viceira, 2010, Global currency
hedging, Journal of Finance 65, 87–121.
Chernov, Mikhail, Jeremy Graveline, and Irina Zviadadze, 2012, Crash risk in currency
returns, working paper.
Colacito, R., and M. Croce, 2012, International asset pricing with recursive preferences,
Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Colacito, Riccardo, Mariano Massimiliano Croce, Steven Ho, and Philip Howard, 2013, BKK
the EZ Way: An international production economy with recursive preferences, Working
Paper, University of North Carolina.
Cole, Harold L., and Maurice Obstfeld, 1991, Commodity trade and international risk sharing
: How much do ﬁnancial markets matter?, Journal of Monetary Economics 28, 3–24.
Dumas, Bernard, 1992, Dynamic equilibrium and the real exchange rate in a spatially separated world, Review of Financial Studies 5, 153–80.
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, Brent Neiman, and John Romalis, 2011, Trade and the
global recession, Working Paper 16666 National Bureau of Economic Research.
Farhi, Emmanuel, Samuel P. Fraiberger, Xavier Gabaix, Romain Ranciere, and Adrien
Verdelhan, 2009, Crash risk in currency markets, Working Paper.

48

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Xavier Gabaix, 2008, Rare disasters and exchange rates: A theory of
the forward premium puzzle, Working Paper Harvard University.
Ferraro, Domenico, Barbara Rossi, and Kenneth S. Rogoﬀ, 2011, Can Oil Prices Forecast
Exchange Rates?, Duke University Working Paper.
Fitzgerald, Doireann, 2012, Trade costs, asset market frictions, and risk sharing, American
Economic Review 102, 2700–2733.
Gabaix, Xavier, 2012, Variable rare disasters: An exactly solved framework for ten puzzles
in macro-ﬁnance, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 645–700.
Gourio, Francois, Michael Siemer, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2013, International risk cycles,
Journal of International Economics 89, 471 – 484.
Greenwood, Robin, and Samuel Hanson, 2013, Waves in ship prices and investment, working
paper, Harvard Business School.
Hassan, Tarek A., 2010, Country Size, Currency Unions, and International Asset Returns,
SSRN eLibrary.
Holliﬁeld, Burton, and Raman Uppal, 1997, An examination of uncovered interest rate parity
in segmented international commodity markets, Journal of Finance 52, 2145–2170.
Jurek, Jakub W., 2009, Crash-Neutral Currency Carry Trades, Working paper.
Kalouptsidi, Myrto, 2011, Time to build and shipping prices, Yale University working paper.
Koijen, Ralph S.J., Lasse Heje Pedersen, Tobias J. Moskowitz, and Evert B. Vrugt, 2012,
Carry, Chicago Booth working paper.
Lettau, Martin, Matteo Maggiori, and Michael Weber, 2013, Conditional risk premia in currency markets and other asset classes, Working Paper 18844 National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Lewis, Karen K., 1995, Puzzles in international ﬁnancial markets, in G. Grossman, and K.
Rogoﬀ, ed.: Handbook of International Economics, Vol.III (Elsevier: Amsterdam).
49

Longstaﬀ, Francis A., and Monika Piazzesi, 2004, Corporate earnings and the equity premium, Journal of Financial Economics 74, 401–421.
Lustig, Hanno, Nikolai Roussanov, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2011, Common risk factors in
currency returns, Review of Financial Studies 24, 3731–3777.
, 2013, Countercyclical currency risk premia, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Lustig, Hanno, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2007, The cross-section of foreign currency risk premia
and consumption growth risk, American Economic Review 97, 89–117.
Lyons, Richard K., 2001, The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates (MIT Press).
Martin, Ian, 2011, The Forward Premium Puzzle in a Two-Country World, NBER Working
Paper no. 17564.
Menkhoﬀ, Lukas, Lucio Sarno, Maik Schmeling, and Andreas Schrimpf, 2012, Carry trades
and global foreign exchange rate volatility, Journal of Finance 67 (2), 681–718.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, 2001, The six major puzzles in international macroeconomics: is there a common cause?, in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Volume 15
. pp. 339–412 (MIT press).
Stambaugh, Robert F., 1999, Predictive regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 54,
375–421.
Stathopoulos, Andreas, Andrea Vedolin, and Philippe Mueller, 2012, International correlation
risk, working paper.
Verdelhan, Adrien, 2010, A habit-based explanation of the exchange rate risk premium,
Journal of Finance 65, 123–145.
Wachter, Jessica, 2013, Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate stock market
volatility?, The Journal of Finance 68, 987–1035.

50

White, Halbert, 1980, A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance estimator and direct test
for heteroskedasticity, Econometrica 48, 817–838.

51

Appendix
5.1

Output

Commodity output yct equals the level of zct , so that the ﬁnal good output dynamics are
given by
ypt = zpt [zct (1 − τ c (zct , zkt ))]1−β
= zpt I(zct , zkt )1−β
c 1−β
dypt = dzpt
It

)
(
1
c
c
c
+ zpt (1 − β)It−β Ic dzct
+ zpt (1 − β) It−β Icc − βIt−β−1 Ic2 dzct
dzct
2
(
)
1
−β
c
c
c
+ zpt (1 − β)It Ik dzkt + zpt (1 − β) It−β Ikk − βIt−β−1 Ik2 dzkt
dzkt
2
(
)
∑
+d
(yps − yps− )
0<s≤t

= zpt µp It1−β dt + zpt σ p It1−β dBpt
)
(
)
(
1
−β−1 2
−β
−β
2 2
Ic zct σ c dt
+ zpt (1 − β)It Ic zct µct + zpt (1 − β) It Icc − βIt
2
)
(
)
(
1
−β
−β−1 2
−β
2 2
+ zpt (1 − β)It Ik zkt µkt + zpt (1 − β) It Ikk − βIt
Ik zkt σ k dt
2
+ zpt (1 − β)It−β Ic zct σ c dBct + zpt (1 − β)It−β Ik zkt σ k dBkt + zpt It1−β (eZN (t) − 1)dNt
⇒

dypt
= µp dt + σ p dBpt
ypt−
[
(
)
]
Ic
1 Icc
Ic2
Ic
2 2
zct µct +
− β 2 zct σ c dt + (1 − β) zct σ c dBct
+ (1 − β)
It
2 It
It
It
[
(
)
]
Ik
1 Ikk
I2
Ik
2 2
+ (1 − β)
zkt µkt +
− β k2 zkt
σ k dt + (1 − β) zkt σ k dBkt
It
2 It
It
It
( Z
)
+ e N (t) − 1 dNt
$ µyt dt + σ Tyt dBt + (eZN (t) − 1)dNt ,

52

where I(zct , zkt ) and its derivatives are deﬁned as follows:
It = I(zct , zkt ) = zct (1 − τ c (zct , zkt ))
zct
Ic = (1 − κc0 ) − 2κc1
zkt
Icc = −2κc1 /zkt
Ik =

2
c zct
κ1 2
zkt

Ikk = −2κc1

2
zct
3
zkt

Commodity price dynamics are given by
Pt = (1 − β)zpt [zct (1 − τ c (zct , zkt ))]−β
=

5.2

(1 − β)ypt
(1 − τ c (zct , zkt ))zct

Exports of ﬁnal consumption good

Since in the general case the export function must be found numerically, it is convenient to
restate equation (1) as
[
]−γ (
)
[
]−γ
ξ t (1 − κf0 − κf1 ξ t )
1 − κf0 − 2κf1 ξ t −λ exp (qt + qkt ) (1 − κc0 − κc1 exp (qkt ))1−β − ξ t
=0
where ξ t =

Xt
zkt

$ ξ (qt , qkt ) is exports of ﬁnal good per unit of shipping capacity as a function

of the two stationary state variables. Then the numerical solution for ξ t can be interpolated
for use in simulations.
In the special case of log utility (γ = 1) equation (1) simpliﬁes to
κf1 (2 + λ)Xt2 − [zkt (1 − κf0 )(1 + λ) + 2κf1 ypt ]Xt + (1 − κf0 )ypt zkt = 0.

53

Solving this equation yields

Xt =

zkt (1 − κf0 )(1 + λ) + 2κf1 ypt −

√

[zkt (1 − κf0 )(1 + λ) + 2κf1 ypt ]2 − 4(1 − κf0 )ypt zkt κf1 (2 + λ)
2κ1 (2 + λ)

which is the only root that allows positive producer-country consumption. We can write
√
h(zct , zpt , zkt ) − g(zct , zpt , zkt )
Xt =
,
2κ1 (2 + λ)
where
h(zct , zpt , zkt ) = zkt (1 − κ0 )(1 + λ) + 2κ1 zpt It1−β ,
g(zct , zpt , zkt ) = h(zct , zpt , zkt )2 − 4(1 − κ0 )κ1 (2 + λ)zpt It1−β zkt .
The derivatives of the export function and its components follow:
hi − 21 g −1/2 gi
, ∀ i = {c, p, k}
2κ1 (2 + λ)
hii + 41 g −3/2 gi2 − 12 g −1/2 gii
.
Xii =
2κ1 (2 + λ)
Xi =

In the general CRRA case the derivatives of the export function can be found by implicit
diﬀerentiation:

gz
dX
= − i for i ∈ c, p, k
dzi
gX
)
(
)
 (
dX
dX
2
g
g
+
g
−
g
g
+
g
X
zi ,X dzi
zi ,zi
zi
X,X dzi
X,zi
dX


=
−
(dzi )2
(gX )2

54

By normalizing each partial diﬀerential by Xt and by Ito’s lemma,
c
c
c
dXt (zct , zpt , zkt ) = Xct Xt dzct
+ Xpt Xt dzpt
+ Xkt Xt dzkt

1
1
1
c
c
c
c
c
c
+ Xppt Xt dzpt
+ Xkkt Xt dzkt
dzct
dzpt
+ Xcct Xt dzct
dzkt
2(
2)
2
∑
+d
(Xs − Xs− )
0<s≤t

}
1
1
1
2 2
2 2
2 2
Xc µct zct + Xpt µp zpt + Xkt µkt zkt + Xcct σ c zct + Xppt σ p zpt + Xkkt σ k zkt dt
2
2
2
(
)
∑ Xs − Xs−
+ Xct σ c zct dBct + Xpt σ p zpt dBpt + Xkt σ k zkt dBkt + d
Xt−
0<s≤t
(
)
$ µXt dt + σ TXt dBt + eJX − 1 dNt ,

dXt
⇒
=
Xt−

{

(
)
where JX = log ξ(qt− + ZN (t) , qkt− ) − log (ξ(qt− , qkt− )), the log change in ﬁnal goods exported.

5.3

Consumption

For the consumption allocations we have
cpt = ypt − Xt
⇒ dcpt =

c
dypt

−

dXtc

(
+d

∑

)
(cps − cps− )

0<s≤t

)
)
1 (
1 ( T
dcpt
=
µyt − µXt dt +
σ yt − σ TXt dBt + d
⇒
cpt−
cpt−
cpt−
(
)
$ µcpt dt + σ Tcpt dBt + eJp − 1 dNt

55

(

∑ cps − cps−
cpt−
0<s≤t

)

for the ﬁnal good producer, and
(
)
f
f Xt
cct = Xt 1 − κ0 − κ1
zkt
(
)
( 2 c)
∑
(X
)
t
dcct = (1 − κf0 )dXtc − κf1 d
+d
(ccs − ccs− )
c
zkt
0<s≤t
[
{
]}
dcct
1
1
Xt2
f
f
T
2
2
⇒
(2Xt µXt + σ Xt σ Xt ) −
(µ − σ k ) − 2Xt Xkt σ k
=
µXt (1 − κ0 ) − κ1
dt
cct−
cct−
zkt
zkt kt
1
1 f 2Xt T
1 f Xt2
σ Xt dBt −
σ k dBkt
+
(1 − κf0 )σ TXt dBt −
κ1
κ
cct−
cct−
zkt
cct− 1 zkt
(
)
∑ ccs − ccs−
+d
cct−
0<s≤t
(
)
$ µcct dt + σ Tcct dBt + eJc − 1 dNt
for the commodity producer.

5.4

Risk-free rates

In order to compute risk-free rates the expected growth rate of marginal utility conditional
on a jump occurring must be computed as a function of the state variables. Let
[
]
EZ e−γJc = EZ

(

ξ (qt− + Z, qkt− ) (1 − κf0 − κf1 ξ (qt− + Z, qkt− ))

)−γ

ξ (qt− , qkt− ) (1 − κf0 − κf1 ξ (qt− , qkt− ))

$ ζ c (qt− , qkt− ) ,
since the distribution of jump sizes is time invariant. Similarly, let
[
]
EZ e−γJp = EZ

(

exp (qt− + Z + qkt− ) (1 − κc0 − κc1 exp (qkt− ))1−β − ξ (qt− + Z, qkt− )
exp (qt− + qkt− ) (1 − κc0 − κc1 exp (qkt− ))1−β − ξ (qt− , qkt− )
$ ζ p (qt− , qkt− ) .

)−γ

These functions can be evaluated by integrating over the distribution of jump sizes Z given
by the pdf φ (Z) =

α x−α−1
αZmin
Z
max

α

1−( Z min )

; this is done numerically using Gaussian quadrature.

56

5.5

Exchange rate

Since the spot exchange rate is deﬁned as
(
St = λ

cpt
cct

)−γ

(
)
f
f Xt
= 1 − κ0 − 2κ1
,
zkt

we can derive the dynamic evolution of exchange rate changes as
[(

(
)]
)
∑
X
1
1
Xt
t
dSt =
dXt −
(µ − σ 2k )dt −
σ k dBkt − Xkt σ 2k dt +
d
(Xs − Xs− )
zkt
zkt kt
zkt
zkt
0<s≤t
[
{
}
1
1
1
f Xt
2 2
2 2
2 2
= −2κ1
Xct µct zct + Xpt µp zpt + Xkt µkt zkt + Xcct σ c zct + Xppt σ p zpt + Xkkt σ k zkt dt
zkt
2
2
2
Xt
Xt
Xt
Xt
−
(µkt − σ 2k )dt − Xt Xkt σ 2k dt +
Xct σ c zct dBct +
Xpt σ p zpt dBpt +
(Xkt − 1) σ k dBkt
zkt
zkt
zkt
zkt
( (
)
)
]
+ ξ qt− + ZN (t) , qkt− − ξ (qt− , qkt− ) dN (t)
)
(
dSt
$ µSt dt + σ TSt dBt + eJS − 1 dN (t),
⇒
St −
−2κf1

(
(
)
(
))
where JS = log 1 − κf0 − 2κf1 ξ qt− + ZN (t) , qkt− − log 1 − κf0 − 2κf1 ξ (qt− , qkt− )

5.6
Let

Expected Returns
]
dSt dπ pt
|Ft $ µFt X dt,
E [dRett |Ft ] = E
St− π pt−
[

where µFt X is the instantaneous conditional currency risk premium, which can be calculated
as
µFt X = −γσ TSt σ cpt + ηEZ

[(

)(
)]
eJS − 1 e−γJp − 1 .

Figure 8 displays the ﬁnal good trade costs τ f and the conditional currency risk premium
µF X as functions of the two cointegrating residuals qt and qtk , evaluated at qt = 0, so that
a higher qtk due to large output of the ﬁnal good relative to the available shipping capacity
translates into high shipping costs and high expected excess returns.

57

Figure 8: Trade Costs and Currency Risk Premium

0.5

Final Good Trade Cost, τf (holding q = 0)

0.45

0.4

τf

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

−0.8

−0.6

−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
Productivity relative to shipping capacity, qk
FX

Currency Risk Premium, µ

1.4

0.4

0.6

0.4

0.6

(holding q = 0)

1.2

1

µFX

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
−0.8

−0.6

−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
Productivity relative to shipping capacity, qk

58

