NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

U.S. HIGH-SKILLED IMMIGRATION, INNOVATION, AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP:
EMPIRICAL APPROACHES AND EVIDENCE
William R. Kerr
Working Paper 19377
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19377

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

Comments are appreciated and can be sent to wkerr@hbs.edu. The original version of this paper was
prepared for the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) Experts Meeting on “Intellectual
Property, the International Mobility of Knowledge Workers and the Brain Drain” (April 2013, Geneva).
WIPO provided an honorarium for the preparation and presentation of this paper. I am grateful to Jinyoung
Kim, Christiane Kuptsch, Carsten Fink, Ernest Miguelez, and WIPO conference participants for their
comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by William R. Kerr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

U.S. High-Skilled Immigration, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship: Empirical Approaches
and Evidence
William R. Kerr
NBER Working Paper No. 19377
August 2013
JEL No. F15,F22,J15,J31,J44,L14,L26,O31,O32,O33
ABSTRACT
High-skilled immigrants are a very important component of U.S. innovation and entrepreneurship.
Immigrants account for roughly a quarter of U.S. workers in these fields, and they have a similar contribution
in terms of output measures like patents or firm starts. This contribution has been rapidly growing
over the last three decades. In terms of quality, the average skilled immigrant appears to be better trained
to work in these fields, but conditional on educational attainment of comparable quality to natives.
The exception to this is that immigrants have a disproportionate impact among the very highest achievers
(e.g., Nobel Prize winners). Studies regarding the impact of immigrants on natives tend to find limited
consequences in the short-run, while the results in the long-run are more varied and much less certain.
Immigrants in the United States aid business and technology exchanges with their home countries,
but the overall effect that the migration has on the home country remains unclear. We know very little
about return migration of workers engaged in innovation and entrepreneurship, except that it is rapidly
growing in importance.

William R. Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu

1. Introduction
The global migration of talented workers is a big topic, with lots of policy interest and a
growing number of academic studies providing insights into its economic consequences (e.g.,
Freeman 2006, Clemens 2011). But all things considered, the topic is vastly under-studied
compared to its economic importance. To give a sense of this gap, we review below fewer than
50 academic articles that touch upon the link of immigration and innovation in the United States,
even with very broad definitions, while noting that immigrants account for approximately a
quarter of U.S. inventors. This mismatch in importance is striking, and it leaves the field and
policy discussions anchored around policy briefs and opinion pieces from sources that frequently
have biased agendas. Consider also a comparison against venture capital (VC) investments. VC
investments impacted fewer patents than immigrant inventors over the last three decades, but the
academic literature regarding VC is orders of magnitude larger.
Moreover, a better and accurate understanding of these topics is of immediate policy
importance. The H-1B visa program, which is described in more detail in the appendix, is a
primary entry route for high-skilled immigrants to the United States for employment-based visas.
The U.S. government began receiving requests for H-1B visas for fiscal year 2014 on April 1,
2013, and the available quota for the full fiscal year was exceeded during the first week. Many
advocates of higher rates of high-skilled immigration use the phrase ―national suicide‖ to
describe this situation and the limited admissions of high-skilled workers compared to lowskilled immigrants. On the other hand, expansions of admissions are passionately opposed by
critics who believe that skilled immigration is already too high.
We review in this paper academic work regarding the effects of global migration on
innovation and entrepreneurship. Some studies draw directly upon these outcome variables—
such as patenting rates or firm starts—while others consider employment and wages in related
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields and occupations. This
review focuses exclusively on the United States’ experience. In large part, this focus simply
reflects where much of the work has been undertaken, and that the review attempts to cover
multiple aspects of this phenomenon in relatively limited space. But this choice also reflects the

2

comparative advantages of the author. The discussion attempts to highlight, at several points, the
extent to which we can expect the discussed U.S. results to generalize to other settings.1
The first set of work considers descriptive traits about the phenomena. An
uncontroversial fact from this discussion is that the ―quantity‖ aspect of immigration to the
United States with respect to innovation and entrepreneurship is substantial, especially in STEM
fields. More debate emerges about the ―quality‖ aspect. Studies take a range of perspectives, for
example noting the disproportionate share of immigrants among U.S. Nobel Prize winners to the
comparability of immigrants on patent citation counts. Recent work stresses the quality of
foreign students in U.S. universities for STEM fields. We conclude that most immigrants
engaged in STEM fields in the United States are better trained for this work than natives, but that
they are comparable to each other conditional on education choices, with some greater potential
for the long tail of superstars.
The second set of work considers the aggregate consequences of higher immigration to
the United States for innovation. As a required stepping stone, this work also considers the
employment consequences for native workers in STEM fields due to higher immigration. We
further discuss entrepreneurship, but this has been less studied, excepting some descriptive
statistics. The variation in research findings becomes even larger in this context compared to the
quality dimension discussed above. Looking across the studies, we conclude that immigration is
associated with higher levels of innovation for the United States and that the short-run
consequences for natives are minimal. We also conclude, however, that this aggregate
achievement involves some displacement of U.S. workers, and the long-run impact is less
understood. The more important thrust of this review is that we are just beginning to trace out
and quantify how the economy reacts to immigration. Most work thus far has followed a set of
empirical techniques developed for analyzing immigration more broadly, and recent work
emphasizes how the economics of high-skilled migration may be different. We describe
promising avenues currently being explored and the attractive paths that lie ahead.
1

Peri (2009) and Kuptsch and Pang (2006) discuss high-skilled immigration across a broader set of
countries, and Bosetti et al. (2013) and Ozgen et al. (2011) provide recent empirical evidence from Europe. Several
papers within this volume (e.g., Miguelez and Fink 2013, Özden and Parsons 2013, Lissoni 2013) discuss
measurements of high-skilled immigration flows globally.

3

The third set of work turns the focus outward, reviewing some basic work on how highskilled immigrants in the United States shape economic exchanges with their home countries.
This discussion is fairly brief given that others are discussing these issues in this volume. At this
point, it seems clear that high-skilled immigrants promote knowledge flows and foreign direct
investments to their home countries, but it is unclear whether this benefit fully compensates the
country for the potential negative consequences from the talent migration (e.g., Agrawal 2013).
We likewise discuss return migration, but this is a second area where we know far less than we
need to.
This line of work sits at the intersection of many fields. A large literature, surveyed by
Docquier and Rapoport (2012), explores the multi-faceted consequences of the global migration
of talented workers. Terms like ―brain drain,‖ ―brain gain,‖ etc., abound, and these net effects
require consideration of many issues such as the presence of role models, the incentive
consequences for human capital development, and similar. Innovation and entrepreneurship hold
a special place in these discussions for multiple reasons, including their important link to longrun economic growth, the plausible claim that frontier economies provide talented migrants the
best environment for their work (Kahn and MacGarvie 2013), and the attractiveness of these jobs
for the native workers in these countries. More research around these topics is essential.

2. Descriptive Traits
The immigration of skilled workers is of deep importance to the United States. We first
discuss the quantity dimension of this contribution—the share of workers engaged in
entrepreneurship and innovation that are of immigrant origin. We then review the work on the
―quality‖ dimension of these immigrants compared to natives.

Immigrant Contributions to US Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Quantity
It is often said that the United States is a land of immigrants. In the 2008 Current
Population Survey, immigrants represent 16% of the U.S. workforce with a bachelor's education.
Immigrants, moreover, account for 29% of the growth in this workforce during the 1995-2008
period. Exceeding these strong overall contributions, the role of immigrants within STEM fields
is even more pronounced. In occupations closely linked to innovation and technology
4

commercialization, the share of immigrants with bachelor’s educations is almost 25%. Moreover,
Kerr and Lincoln (2010) estimate that immigrants account for a majority of the net increase in
the U.S. STEM workforce since 1995.
Beyond these estimates of employments within STEM occupations that can be
determined from population surveys or economic censuses, recent efforts describe immigrant
shares in terms of patent counts or firm starts. A natural starting point is the United States Patent
and Trademark Office (USPTO) database (Hall et al. 2001), given its comprehensive coverage of
U.S. patent activity, but the USPTO unfortunately does not collect information on the
immigration or citizenship status of inventors. To make progress, Kerr (2007) and Kerr and
Lincoln (2010) develop estimates of ethnic inventor contributions (i.e., those of Chinese or
Indian ethnic heritage). This work uses ethnic name matching procedures (e.g., inventors with
the names Gupta or Desai are more likely to be of Indian ethnicity). This approach does not
isolate immigration status directly for multiple reasons,2 but it does provide a very intuitive
baseline. These papers emphasize the high degree of patenting contributions by ethnic inventors,
its increase over time, and its particular importance for advanced technology fields. While
Anglo-Saxon and European ethnic contributions account for 90% of total U.S. domestic patents
in 1975, they represent about 76% in 2004. This declining share is primarily due to the
exceptional growth over the 30 years of U.S. inventors of Chinese and Indian ethnicities, which
increase from under 2% to 9% and 6%, respectively.3
Immigrant contributions can also be estimated from the World Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO) database. This database has a narrower set of patents than the USPTO
data, containing only those filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty. The WIPO data record
whether an inventor is a non-U.S. citizen, which is a lower bound on immigrants due to the
2

Some important issues include the fact that names do not separate first- from later-generation immigrants,
that some Anglo-Saxon ethnic inventors are immigrants (e.g., from Canada or the United Kingdom), that names can
change with marriage, and that some key surnames like Lee can overlap with multiple ethnic groups. Nevertheless,
the cited studies show that there is a good correspondence of the ethnic name classification approach to the
decennial Census and similar quality assurance exercises.
3

Kerr (2010b) describes the strong spatial contribution of these ethnic inventors in cities like San Francisco
and Boston. Borjas (2001), Kerr (2010a), and Ruiz et al. (2012) describe how immigrants aid the reallocation of
economic activity across places, with the latter two studies being focused on high-skilled migration in particular.

5

naturalization process. Using WIPO data from 2006, Wadhwa et al. (2007a,b) find that non-U.S.
citizens account for at least one inventor on 24% of international patent applications from the
United States. This patent-level calculation includes inventions with multiple inventors so long
as one inventor is a non-citizen, so this estimate is an upper bound on the aggregate role of noncitizens. Using ethnic name techniques to identify inventors of Chinese and Indian ethnic
heritage, these authors also find strong contributions from these ethnic groups in particular.4
With respect to entrepreneurship, we know the contributions of immigrants are similarly
large, although exact estimates remain more elusive. Saxenian (1999) finds that 24% of ventures
in Silicon Valley during the 1980s and 1990s were run by Chinese or Indian bosses. In a followup piece, Wadhwa et al. (2007b) find that immigrants started 25% of new high-tech companies
with more than one million dollars in sales in 2006. Some of the survey methodologies in these
studies have been criticized, but their results should remain roughly correct. A more important
fact to bear in mind, similar to the above note for innovation, is that these figures are calculated
across companies where at least one immigrant played a key role. Thus, by definition, the total
contribution of immigrants is less than 25%. These contributions are particularly strong in hightech fields. In an advocacy piece, Anderson and Platzer (2006) similarly find that immigrants
represent 25% of founders of recent public venture-backed companies in the United States.
These studies shine the spotlight on high-growth entrepreneurship. For many, this focus
is appropriate given the policy concern around fostering these entrepreneurs in particular. An
example of this is the Start-Up Visa Act currently being discussed in the United States to provide
easier admissions to immigrant entrepreneurs who are starting companies with high growth
potential. The extensive sample selection for these studies, however, makes it harder to gauge the
overall contributions of immigrants. Fairlee (2008) considers a broader landscape by returning to
nationally representative survey databases like the Current Population Survey and the decennial
Census. Fairlee finds that immigrants are about 30% more likely to start a business than nonimmigrants, and their share of current business ownership is on par with their population shares
at 12%-13%. Equally important, Fairlee’s work describes the extensive range of immigrant

4

The exceptional growth in immigrants’ role discussed in this study are very difficult to interpret due to the
large number of missing data pieces regarding nationality in early years of WIPO records.

6

contributions. They play equally important roles in low- and high-skill sectors, reflective of the
great range of immigrants admitted to the United States.
To summarize, immigrants represent an important and growing part of the U.S.
workforce for innovation and entrepreneurship. We do not have every estimate that we would
like, and our available estimates all have some issues with them. Nonetheless, the various
approaches all speak to immigrants accounting for about a quarter of the general employment
and output in these sectors for the United States, or perhaps a little less, with this share growing
substantially since the 1970s. These contributions are heavily skewed towards certain technology
areas and regions of the United States.

Immigrant Contributions to US Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Quality
Beyond their quantity role, how do immigrants compare to natives on the quality
dimension? The answer to this question appears to be much more nuanced than the quantity
discussion, and we review the evidence in stages. We start with evidence on aggregate workforce
quality. We then move to more specialized aspects (e.g., Nobel Prize winners) and studies of
student quality.
In a series of papers, Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2010) and Hunt (2011, 2013) tackle
some basic questions about whether immigrants are more innovative and entrepreneurial than
natives as a whole, using a variety of representative data sources. A basic theme, most centrally
discussed in Hunt (2011), is that immigrants who come to the United States for employment or
study purposes have a large raw advantage over natives in terms of innovative outcomes (like
filing a patent) and starting new companies. Hunt (2011) demonstrates, however, that choices
around fields of study and educational attainment can explain most of these differences. This
finding would suggest that quality differences between immigrants and natives, conditional on
choosing to be involved in this area and pursuing it in school, are less important than the quantity
factors described above. That is, it is not that immigrants are simply better than natives in
STEM-related tasks in an absolute sense, but they do tend to make educational investments that
lead them to be more involved in these areas. Interestingly, however, immigrants appear to retain
some of their advantage for entrepreneurship, even conditional on education. In a subsequent
piece, Hunt (2013) finds a similar nuanced theme. She argues that immigrants working in
7

engineering occupations are performing better and obtaining higher wages than native
engineers—being the ―best and brightest‖— thanks to their higher average education level.
Among workers with an engineering degree, however, immigrants underperform natives, despite
somewhat higher education, as they often work in occupations not commensurate with their
education.5
As a second approach to estimating these quality levels, Kerr and Lincoln (2010)
compare the patents made by different ethnicities in terms of their quality as measured by patent
claims. They find very comparable qualities for Anglo-Saxon and non-Anglo-Saxon ethnic
inventors in the United States. Results contained in an early version of the Kerr et al. (2013)
paper suggests that this comparability extends across many metrics of patent quality (e.g.,
forward citations, originality indices, shifts in focus from prior work of the firm).
Turning from these broad averages, an older literature considers the long-tail of the
quality distribution. Stephan and Levin (2001) provide a well-known assessment in this regard,
asking whether immigrants are disproportionately represented among individuals making
exceptional STEM contributions. Across six indicators—for example, election to the National
Academy of Sciences, the 250 most-cited authors, and authors of very highly-cited papers—they
find very consistent evidence of immigrants being disproportionately represented. Wasmer et al.
(2007) shows a similar disproportionate representation among immigrants in U.S. Nobel Prize
winners.
Placing these first two themes together, it becomes clear that immigration acts in two
different ways for the United States. First, it provides the United States with a number of
exceptional superstars for STEM work. Second, immigration acts through the sheer quantity of
workers that it provides for STEM fields. These workers are often well trained for STEM roles,
5

A related descriptive fact is that immigrants account for almost half of the U.S. STEM workforce with
doctorate educations, compared to a quarter at the bachelor’s level. Other studies tend to find corroborating evidence
to the first half of the Hunt (2011) thesis about the greater qualifications of immigrants. For example, Lofstrom and
Hayes (2011) compare H-1B workers to native STEM workers in the United States, finding them to be younger and
more educated. See also Mithas and Lucas (2010). It is important to note that these studies compare one immigrant
group (H-1B workers) to all natives. This may be appropriate to the extent that we are contemplating an increase in
the H-1B program’s size. Hunt (2011) shows, however, that these types of immigrants are typically among the better
skilled of immigrants, and thus broader depictions of immigrants versus natives may find the qualification
differences weaker, similar to Fairlee’s work.

8

but, conditional on that education, the immigrants are of a similar quality level to U.S. natives.
The pieces are not at odds with each other, as amid a large STEM workforce of more than two
million workers, the exceptional tail does not move the averages of the groups very much. While
it is difficult to prove which of these channels is more important, we have the general feeling that
the quantity aspect of high-skilled immigration is the stronger factor in terms of its potential
impact for STEM work in the United States.
To close, we also note a parallel set of work that considers the quantity and quality of
immigrant student enrollments in STEM fields. This dimension is important as university and
graduate school admissions shape, in large part, the United States’ future STEM workforce.
Bound et al. (2009) and similar studies document how immigrants account for an exceptional
share of STEM students, especially among graduate students, in levels that exceed those noted
for the workforce above. Grogger and Hanson (2013) describe the selectivity of foreign-born
STEM Ph.D. students in the United States. Studies evaluating the production of innovation
within universities also tend to find a special role for immigrant students (e.g., Chellaraj et al.
2008, Stephan 2010, Gurmu et al. 2010, Stuen et al. 2012, Gaule and Piacentini 2012).6

3. Impact for U.S. Employment, Wages, and Innovation
We next discuss studies regarding the impact of high-skilled immigrants on employment,
wages, and innovation in receiving countries. In comparison to the descriptive pieces in the prior
section, these studies attempt to incorporate into the analysis the net impact of migration for host
countries inclusive of native responses. These latter impacts are often termed crowding-in or
crowding-out effects, depending upon whether native employment increases or declines as a
consequence of the immigration. While the overall theme of this review is innovation and
entrepreneurship outcomes, these responses are intimately tied up with employment and wages.
Absent exceptional quality differences for immigrants—which appear bounded by the
descriptive elements outlined above—the increase or decrease of aggregate innovation due to
immigration depends in large part on how immigrants affect the employment of natives.
6

Weinberg (2011) and Hunter et al. (2009) provide recent evidence on the nature of outflows from
countries (i.e., who sends). Docquier and Rapoport (2012) provide an extended discussion and review data sources
regarding sending countries.

9

Traditional Approaches to Defining Labor Markets
Traditionally, economists have evaluated these impacts using the conceptual lens of
competitive labor markets (i.e., standard supply and demand curves for the services of workers).
Immigration is modeled as an adjustment in the potential supply of labor to a market, shifting the
labor supply curve outward, ceteris paribus. Reminiscent of an introductory economics course,
the subsequent relative movements of the supply and demand curves determine the changes in
the overall quantity of labor employed and the equilibrium wage rate. If the demand curve is
fixed, the expansion in labor supply would be expected to increase employment and lower the
equilibrium wage. These simple predictions do not hold under cases where labor demand adjusts
in response to immigration, which in large part depends upon how quickly complementary inputs
such as capital and other labor resources adjust. Likewise, other questions exist like whether
natives move out of the labor markets in response to immigration, thereby dampening the supply
increase and shifting the labor supply curve back towards its original position. Dustmann et al.
(2008) and Lewis (2013) provide concise depictions and some recent evidence.
Researchers in high-skilled immigration have taken two main approaches for defining the
labor market for such an analysis. A first approach, most closely following Card (2001), defines
a labor market as a local area like a city or state. With this lens, immigrants to Chicago are
thought to most directly impact the opportunities of natives currently living in Chicago. In the
low-skilled immigration setting, this analysis is often done independent of occupation, with an
explicit or implicit assumption that workers can move across occupations relatively easily. In the
high-skilled immigration setting, especially related to innovation, occupations are more often
seen as broadly fixed. Thus, often implicitly, the idea is to analyze the impact on native STEM
workers in Chicago from STEM immigration to Chicago.7
Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2010) apply this framework to high-skilled immigration by
using state-decadal variation for the United States. These authors find very large crowding-in
7

These studies do not capture well, if at all, the migration of workers out of the broad STEM occupation
area. Some recent work with respect to trade and outsourcing suggest that the most hurt natives are those who must
change occupations (e.g., Ebenstein et al. 2013). Using employer-employee data, Kerr and Kerr (2013) provide an
initial study that describes the more difficult career transitions of native STEM workers leaving their jobs during
periods of high rates of immigrant hiring into their former employers.

10

effects, with big increases in innovation following upon immigration. Kerr and Lincoln (2010)
consider city-level variations using annual changes in the H-1B visa program. This study finds
more modest effects, with increases in immigration yielding increases in innovation mainly
through the immigrants themselves. Kerr and Lincoln (2010) find very limited evidence of
crowding-in or crowding-out effects. The differences in magnitude between these studies can be
traced to several factors (e.g., quite different time frames, methodological choices), but they
nonetheless point in the same direction, overall, on the impact—immigration increases aggregate
US innovation, with stable or rising native employment and wages. Peri et al. (2013) further find
city-level productivity increases following from H-1B program expansions in local areas that
extensively rely on the program.
A second approach considers labor markets to be specialized fields of study or expertise
(e.g., Friedberg 2001). This approach relaxes the geographic definition of the labor market and
instead focuses on narrower fields of work. Two examples of this work with respect to highskilled immigration include Borjas and Doran’s (2012) study of the migration of Russian
mathematicians following the Soviet Union’s collapse and Moser et al.’s (2012) study of Jewish
scientist expellees from Nazi Germany. These studies analyze the impacts of variations in
immigrant inflows to the United States within sub-fields of mathematics and chemistry,
respectively, with the assumption of national labor markets within each sub-field. Despite
conceptually similar designs, these studies find different outcomes. Borjas and Doran (2012) find
that native mathematicians were crowded out by the Soviet influx, while Moser et al. (2012) find
substantial long-run patenting growth, indicative of strong crowding-in effects after the Jewish
influx. Both of these studies have credible experimental designs, and so this difference in
direction of results is disconcerting even allowing for natural differences across fields of study
and time periods. One part may be that the Borjas and Doran (2012) study is set in an
institutional environment with limited room for overall growth. In this setting, crowd-out effects
are more likely to exist (the labor demand curve becomes almost vertical). The chemistry fields
and longer time horizons analyzed by Moser et al. (2012) may allow for a greater response, but
this observation is very speculative and it is hoped that greater reconciliation is made going
forward.

11

A related approach to this sub-field analysis considers native choices of majors within
schools, at either the undergraduate or graduate school levels. STEM occupations require
extensive training and non-trivial switching costs, which may make forward-looking native
students sensitive to immigrant inflows into fields of study. Freeman (1971) and Ryoo and Rosen
(2004) describe the STEM labor market in greater detail. Borjas (2005, 2006) and Orrenius and
Zavodny (2013) empirically examine the impact of immigrant students on native choices with
respect to STEM fields, with the latter paper providing more extensive references. Lowell and
Salzman (2007) and related work also considers the extent to which STEM-degree holders work
in the STEM-related fields after schooling. Of the empirical approaches taken for estimating the
consequences of immigration for natives, these studies of academic major choices appear to be
the most likely to find natives leaving STEM fields as a response to immigration. We are not
aware of studies with respect to schooling that find crowding-in type effects, with the existing
studies either finding no effects or some measure of crowding-out.
Finally, Bound et al. (2013) provide a conceptually similar analysis by analyzing the
employment and wage adjustments of computer scientists across two tech booms. The authors
utilize a calibrated model instead of the empirical analysis that most studies employ in this field.
Their results suggest that the substantial increase in immigration during the tech boom of the late
1990s, which was much larger in magnitude compared to the 1980s boom, led to less wage
growth than what would otherwise have occurred. This study provides one of the first integrated
models to consider the impact of high-skilled immigration on the economy. As the results of
these types of calibrated frameworks depend significantly upon the specified structure of the
model, others may naturally want to adjust some ingredients of the Bound et al. (2013)
framework. We hope that other researchers build upon this analysis and continue to pursue
integrated frameworks, as more research on this dimension is sorely needed.
Of these two main approaches for studying high-skilled immigration, it is hard to say
whether one is more or less appropriate in terms of depicting the likely national response to
higher immigration levels. Both types of studies conceptually rely on strict boundaries—
geographies or specialties—and there are plenty of reasons why both sets of assumptions may be
weaker than researchers hope. With the massive improvements in data, however, these

12

assumptions may become more empirically quantifiable (e.g., Borjas and Doran 2013), which
would be an aid in appropriate research design.
While this literature is quite small, studies using geographic areas appear to be more
likely to find positive effects for natives from high-skilled immigration. While most discussions
of the validity of local area studies for low-skilled immigration worry about the out-migration of
natives, the opposite concern might exist for high-skilled migration. Since Alfred Marshall,
economists have studied the clustering of firms that employ specialized workers or engage in
knowledge-intensive activities. It is conceivable that high-skilled immigration to a city or state
could engender greater native inflows due to agglomeration economies than what would be
viable at a national level. Future research needs to evaluate whether relevant agglomeration
economies are stronger or weaker at the national level. While it may initially seem clear that
local agglomeration economies are larger, much of the current concerns over high rates of
returnee STEM migration from the United States to countries like India and China center on a
potential loss of U.S. technology leadership. The fear is less about losing individual scientists
than losing a critical mass of frontier scientists, a process that would depend upon significant
country-level agglomeration economies. Thus, we should not be too quick to assume a rank order
of the spatial differences.8
A related conceptual issue pertains to applying these results to locations outside of the
United States. Many European countries have one or a few leading cities (e.g., Helsinki, Finland)
that are at least partially engaged in the European labor markets for STEM talent. In these cases,
the impact of high-skilled immigration may draw elements from both the economics of
individual cities, similar to the local area studies in the U.S. case, and the economics of national
responses. An important avenue for future research is to consider these two dimensions
simultaneously.
Predicting an empirical response to high-skilled immigration outside of the United States
is also complicated by the fact that we do not know very much about the non-linear nature of the
8

Recent work on historical transitions in scientific leadership, such as Waldinger (2010, 2013), may help
shed light on these important issues. Papers from the agglomeration literature on the spatial dimension of knowledge
flows include Audretsch and Feldman (1996), Rosenthal and Strange (2003), Arzaghi and Henderson (2008), and
Ellison et al. (2010).

13

returns-to-scale in these local technology clusters. Kerr and Lincoln (2010), for example,
estimate that the patenting response to H-1B reforms in the top quintile of U.S. cities, in terms of
program dependency, is about twice as strong as the second most dependent quintile. It may be
more appropriate to benchmark potential experiences elsewhere off the second group of cities. In
a similar manner, the estimates of Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2010) that drop California may be
a better measure for the potential experiences outside of the United States.9

New Research Frontiers on the Labor Market Definitions
We now consider several approaches to defining the labor market that show strong
promise for future work (recognizing that most of the work and techniques reviewed to this point
are very recent and will remain active research frontiers as well for years to come). A wellknown approach for studying the effects of general immigration, most closely associated with
Borjas (2003), describes a national labor market among workers with similar education and
age/experience profiles. With this lens, a 25-year-old immigrant with a bachelor's education in
San Francisco may affect the opportunities of a 25-year-old native graduating from college in
Chicago. Moreover, this effect may be larger than the effects of competition from older
immigrants of a similar level of education who also live in Chicago. This approach has not been
used for analyzing high-skilled immigration to date, in large part due to the fact that the highest
education group in these frameworks is typically a bachelor's education or greater—a level
which is usually taken as the starting point for defining skilled immigration. Most of the action
and intense research inquiries have instead focused on dimensions like the substitution between
high-school educated workers and those with some college education.
Recent research builds more ―nesting‖ into these models. In the original study, Borjas
(2003) allows for a single degree of substitutability across education-experience cells, with the
implication being that a 30-year-old, college-educated worker is as distinct from a 20-year-old,
college-educated worker as he or she is from a 50-year-old worker with a high-school diploma.
With this assumption, the potential substitution between immigrants and natives can be analyzed

9

A bigger focus in Europe has been on the role of ethnic diversity for innovation (e.g., Nathan 2012,
Parrotta et al. 2013).

14

within each cell. Recent approaches relax this assumption by describing levels of substitution
(e.g., Ottaviano and Peri 2012, Borjas et al. 2012). For example, a researcher can specify that the
first and highest level of substitution is across educational attainments of workers, the second
level is by worker age/experience, and the third level is by immigration status. With this
approach, empirical work can allow the 20- and 30-year-old workers with college educations to
more closely substitute for each other in the example above. The nesting structure that is
imposed on the data is very important and must be determined by the researcher, ideally with a
good dose of sensitivity analysis.
While the nesting models are new, they may come to play an important role in the future
study of high-skilled immigration. The nesting structure approach allows for richer analyses
within the skilled worker groups themselves. Moreover, an attractive benefit of using this
approach is that it requires researchers to better specify the economics of the interactions that
they have in mind, even if they do not build a formal model. As an early example, Kerr et al.
(2013) consider the degree of substitution that exists across age groups. Prominent advocates
against the H-1B visa program claim that tech firms use the program to keep their workforces
younger, in part to lower wage bills.10 This claim is impossible to evaluate in the frameworks
described earlier. While advocates against immigration cite the Borjas (2003) crowd-out results,
this paper’s framework does not incorporate the types of substitution proposed to be the most
important by many H-1B critics.
To analyze this feature, Kerr et al. (2013) conceptually lay out a nesting scenario,
exclusively among skilled workers with college degrees or higher, where the top-level is
occupations, the second level is worker age/experience, and the third level is immigration status.
The study then estimates the elasticity of substitution across age groups within each occupation
using the Current Population Survey from 1995-2008. These estimates reveal that the elasticity
of substitution across age groups is substantially higher in STEM-related fields than among other
workers. STEM fields account for three of the four highest elasticities among occupations, and
10

Matloff (2003) proposes that the H-1B program offers firms two types of potential savings. One type of
savings centers on the fact that a 25-year-old Indian H-1B programmer might be paid less than a 25-year-old
American programmer. He argues that this emphasis is entirely misplaced and that the real savings to the firm come
instead from displacing a 50-year-old American programmer whose salary has grown with time.

15

are greater than those in fields like law or accounting. Higher elasticities of substitution by age
for STEM occupations give one indication as to why older natives may experience displacement
from young immigrants in STEM fields. In the nesting format, the results say that the age
boundary between young immigrants and older natives may be more porous among STEM fields
than in other occupations where a very low elasticity across age groups means that young
immigrants effectively have the most impact on young natives in the same occupation.
A second line of work considers movements of high-skilled natives across fields in
response to immigration. Peri and Sparber (2011) consider the potential shift of native educated
workers across occupations in response to immigration inflows. The authors find that immigrants
with graduate degrees specialize in occupations demanding quantitative and analytical skills,
while the native workers move into occupations requiring interactive and communication skills.
When the foreign-born proportion of highly educated employment within an occupation rises,
native employees with graduate degrees choose new occupations with less analytical and more
communicative content. In a quite different context, Borjas et al. (2013) also consider native
mobility across mathematical sub-fields in response to the Soviet influx. They demonstrate how
native mathematicians shifted into fields where the Soviet mathematicians were less active
before the influx, especially those mathematicians that were not superstars.
These studies do not fit directly within the empirical frameworks depicted above, as they
describe mobility across occupations or fields that the other studies typically assume is not
happening. Nonetheless, they and the nesting structure work share a common motivation to
advance our depictions of these impacts beyond strictly-defined labor markets. This is extremely
important and represents the first steps of the economics of high-skilled immigration in
establishing its own frameworks beyond those traditionally used to study broad consequences of
immigration. For many reasons, such as the required educational and training investments for
STEM work, high-skilled immigration research needs to continue to define its own approaches
and techniques in order to achieve a full characterization of this phenomenon. Theoretical
frameworks that guide these steps are in high demand.
These new results and approaches can also be challenging to interpret. For example, the
Peri and Sparber (2011) results can be viewed in a positive manner by describing complementary
skills of immigrants and natives. Others, however, could interpret the results as demonstrating
16

crowd-out effects from the technical fields, even if there are not adverse employment or wage
consequences for the natives that have chosen different career paths. Developing a better
conceptual framework to interpret these patterns may be as important as the additional empirical
evidence. A starting point might be the literature on ―scientists paying to be scientists‖ following
Stern (2004). It also appears that economists studying high-skilled immigration will increasingly
encounter normative questions that go beyond measurement: for example, if the native worker
obtains the same or higher salary moving to another field due to expanding immigration, do we
consider this to be a crowding-out phenomenon? What if the native preferred the original field
holding money constant?

The Role of the Firm
Kerr et al. (2013) argue that the study of high-skilled immigration needs to consider more
deeply the role of the firm. A focus on firms represents a substantial departure from the
conceptual lens of a competitive labor market described above, where immigration is framed as
an exogenous potential outward shift of the labor supply curve and representative firms have
some underlying demand for workers. From an empirical perspective as well, firms and other
institutions that employ the immigrants are also rarely mentioned.
This is quite striking since U.S. firms play a central role in the immigration process for
high-skilled workers. A prime example is the H-1B visa, which is the largest program for
temporary skilled immigration to the United States. To begin, the H-1B is a firm-sponsored visa,
meaning that a company first identifies the worker that it wants to hire. The firm then applies to
the U.S. government to obtain a visa and pays the associated fees on behalf of that specific
worker. This worker can come from anywhere in the world, and while the application procedure
does have requirements with respect to the local area in which the employee will work in the
United States, these conditions are primarily non-equilibrium in nature. The visa has a regulated
supply that lacks a pricing mechanism and is sometimes allocated by lottery. Finally, once the
work has started, the immigrant is effectively tied to the firm until obtaining permanent
residency or obtaining another temporary visa. The firm can potentially sponsor the employee for
a green card, a process that takes six years or longer for some nationalities, during which time
the employee is even more closely tied to the firm.
17

This depiction highlights the strong role that firms play in these admissions. The structure
of the high-skilled immigration program is designed in part to allow firms to select the workers
that they want to hire, rather than having employment-based immigrants to the United States be
selected by the U.S. government. Moreover, most of the arguments in the public debate about the
impact of skilled immigration in the United States are firm-level statements.11 Given this policy
framework, it seems particularly valuable to understand exactly how the visas are used within the
sponsoring firms. (It also makes a lot of sense for us to spend more time researching the
universities that are a key source of initial immigration inflows into the economy, with the work
noted earlier about university innovation as an important starting point.)
The recent availability of large employer-employee datasets allows researchers to
consider these views in greater detail, and Kerr et al. (2013) analyzes the U.S. experience using
the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics database. The study finds that the increased
employment of young skilled immigrants raises the overall employment of high-skilled workers
in the firm, increases the immigrant share of these workers, and reduces the older worker share
of skilled employees. The latter effect is evident even among natives only and connects to the
nesting framework of age elasticities described above. The study finds that the expansion of
young high-skilled immigrant employment does not result in significant growth of employment
for older high-skilled workers, but the evidence also suggests that absolute declines in
employment of this group are not likely. These estimates suggest that age is an important
dimension on which firms make decisions and that there may be lower complementarity between
young high-skilled immigrants and older domestic workers.
The development of new employer-employee data offers great promise for expanding our
understanding of the high-skilled immigration process from both empirical and theoretical
perspectives. The literature on international trade, for example, has benefited tremendously over
the last decade from greater consideration of the role of the firm and the heterogeneities across
firms. It is likely that studies of high-skilled immigration can undergo a similar transformation.
11

For example, Bill Gates has stated in congressional testimony that Microsoft hires four additional
employees to support each H-1B worker hired. On the other hand, Matloff (2003) and Hira (2010) criticize specific
displacement that is occuring within firms due to the hiring of H-1B workers. Kerr et al. (2011) consider firm-level
lobbying on behalf of high-skilled immigration.

18

This is also an area where work outside of the United States is feasible and to be encouraged. For
example, Nokia has played an enormous role in skilled immigration to Finland, and many other
countries have similar experiences.

4. Turning the Attention Outward
We close this review with some broader thoughts about the global connections of these
migrants. Given the other conference reports on these dimensions, this discussion is less
comprehensive that the analyses so far, but the U.S.-specific studies help complete a perspective
on the global migrations to the United States.

The Importance of Place
In the introduction, we briefly mentioned the plausible claim that frontier economies
provide STEM immigrants the best environment for their work. This is important to the extent
that technologies that immigrants produce in the United States can be shared throughout the
world. Placing aside difficult questions about diffusion lags and intellectual property protection
rights (e.g., Naghavi 2013, Kaboré 2013), allowing the migration of skilled talent to places
where those skills can be best utilized provides a foundation for greater prosperity for all. This is
true within countries, with great entrepreneurial talent flowing to Silicon Valley from many parts
of the United States, and the same gains can happen across countries. Two recent studies provide
an interesting perspective on these issues.
Kahn and MacGarvie (2013) compare foreign-born U.S.-educated scientists that must
relocate outside of the United States after their doctoral studies due to exogenous reasons related
to their student visa restrictions, compared to their foreign-born peer students that are allowed to
stay in the United States. In terms of publications and citation counts, Kahn and MacGarvie
(2013) find that graduates forced to re-locate outside of the U.S. perform much worse if they
must locate to a place with low income per capita. However, the authors also find a scientist
exogenously located in a country at the top of the income distribution can expect to be as
productive in research as he or she would be in the United States. These patterns accord with the
much higher stay rates that we observe for foreign students from low income countries compared
to places like Western Europe.
19

Clemens (2013) considers international differences in workers’ wages and productivity.
He exploits the randomized processing of U.S. H-1B visas for a group of Indian workers who
produce software within a single multinational firm. When applications for U.S. H-1B visas
exceed the annual cap set by the government within the first week (similar to fiscal year 2014), a
lottery is conducted over the applications to award the limited positions. Clemens’ personnel
records contain the winners and losers in the lottery for the multinational firm. Clemens finds
that the winners’ salary increases six-fold upon relocating to the United States with the visa.
Given the randomization of the lottery and the fact that the winning and denied applicants are
doing the same kind of work for the multinational firm, Clemens argues that country-of-work by
itself is responsible—in this industry—for roughly three-quarters of the gap in productivity
between workers in India and workers in the richest countries.

Connections to Home Countries
These findings that immigrants are more productive in advanced economies provide
support for beneficial effects of migration, but they stop short of saying that overseas populations
aid their home countries. Several studies suggest home countries receive some economic benefits
from having STEM workers in the United States. (In turn, these studies stop short of saying that
these economic benefits offset potential negative consequences of the out-migration of talent—
this review will skip such a complicated adding-up exercise given the vastly incomplete evidence
accumulated to date, much less our ignorance about how to weight the various factors involved.)
Saxenian et al. (2002) provide a well-known survey of immigrant scientists and engineers
living in Silicon Valley. These surveys, while very unrepresentative for all immigrants, offer
some sense of the relative forms of these contributions. Saxenian documents that 82% of Chinese
and Indian immigrant STEM workers report exchanging technical information with their
respective nations, roughly 50% of immigrants report aiding the development of contracts or
business relationships between the United States and their home countries, and 18% report
investing in overseas business partnerships. Saxenian’s estimates clearly overstate the homecountry exchanges of all immigrants, given the specialized nature of her sample, but the key
question is by how much.

20

Beginning with knowledge flows, more systematic studies with patent citation data
suggest that immigrant STEM workers in the United States can aid technology transfer to their
home countries (e.g., Kerr 2008, Agrawal et al. 2011, Oettl and Agrawal 2008). Kerr (2008)
emphasizes that these ethnic transmission channels are particularly powerful in the first five to
seven years after a new technology is developed. Agrawal et al. (2011) find that the Indian
diaspora in the United States aids its home country the most with the development of big, highlycited inventions, but that the diaspora is not as helpful in the production of average inventions as
a larger domestic base of inventors. Agrawal (2013) picks up and expands upon these themes.
Turning to other forms of business exchanges, a long literature considers the role of
ethnic networks in trade patterns (e.g., Rauch and Trindade 2002), and Rauch (2001) and Keller
(2004) provide important reviews of related literatures. We are not aware of any studies that have
validated this for the United States in particular, similar to the firm-level documentation in
Europe (e.g., Hatzigeorgiou and Lodefalk 2011), but it is reasonable to suspect it exists. A
similarly long literature documents the link between ethnic networks and foreign direct
investments (FDI) across countries (e.g., Kugler and Rapoport 2007, 2011; Kim and Park 2013).
Foley and Kerr (2013) document this pattern with respect to ethnic inventors using firm-level
data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Their analysis in particular emphasizes the role of
ethnic inventors in the United States for helping their employers develop R&D-based work
abroad and enter into foreign countries without the support of local joint venture partners,
perhaps due to better knowledge of the home country. Foley and Kerr (2013) also provide a more
extensive literature set on both the trade and FDI channels.
Beyond trade and FDI, additional work considers the role of immigrants in the
outsourcing of work. One way that diasporas are thought to connect with their home country is
by facilitating the outsourcing of work (with special emphasis often given to India). It is felt, for
example, that the U.S.-based members of an ethnic group can provide knowledge about
opportunities to their home countries, serve as reputational intermediaries, facilitate contracts,
and similar. Hira (2010) argues that this relationship is true (in a negative way), and moreover
that the H-1B visa is particularly used as a vehicle for outsourcing by bringing immigrants to the
United States for training in the jobs to be conducted overseas. There certainly appears to be
truth to this claim, as the top three H-1B applicants in 2013 for H-1B visas were Indian
21

outsourcing firms, with Infosys (#1) applying for three times more visas than Microsoft (#6).
Beyond this high-profile approach of dedicated outsourcing firms, the relationship becomes less
clear. Using data from oDesk, the world’s largest on-line platform for outsourcing, Ghani et al.
(2013) find evidence of ethnic Indians being more likely to send to work to India when
outsourcing jobs. These authors also suggest, however, that the Indian diaspora’s role was likely
modest in the overall rise of India as the top outsourcing destination on oDesk.12
To summarize, studies of the United States find a fair amount of evidence that
immigrants continue to interact with their home countries after coming to the United States.
These exchanges by themselves are insufficient to conclude that a ―brain gain‖ exists, but they
are likely a necessary element. More research and modeling (e.g., Agrawal et al. 2011, Docquier
and Rapoport 2012) is necessary to add this up, which will of course be specific to each country
and circumstance.

Return Migration
We close by noting an area where we really wish we knew more: return migration.
Immigration has always been a temporary step for many, and recent case studies and surveys
describe the important migration of skilled workers back to home countries (e.g., Saxenian 2006,
Wadhwa et al. 2009).13 At this point, we know that this return migration from the United States
is happening for a variety of reasons, most notably the increased attractiveness of foreign
locations on personal and professional levels. Restrictive U.S. immigration policy plays a role,
but this role is likely secondary to the attractive opportunities seen for many in returning home.
Given the exceptional importance of immigrants for work in U.S. STEM fields, this trend could
challenge the United States’ role in technology leadership. Alas, while countries measure inflows
of people reasonably well, outflows of people are measured very poorly, it at all. For the United
States, clever data work to further quantify these features would be most welcome.
12

Ottaviano et al. (2013) consider the interactions between low-skilled immigration and outsourcing using
a trade-in-tasks model. Further work with these types of models and high-skilled immigration would be very useful.
13

Related work includes Nanda and Khanna (2010) and Hovhannisyan and Keller (2010). Return migration
among immigrants more broadly is better studied (e.g., Dustmann (1996) and later work) than the high-skilled group
on which this review focuses.

22

5. Conclusions
The global migration of STEM talent is exceptionally important—and sadly understudied compared to this importance. This review, while not intended in this way, has mostly
progressed from things we have a relatively good handle on for the United States (e.g., the
quantity and quality of immigrants) to pieces that we have very little insight on (e.g., return
migration). We hope that future research helps fill-in this portrait and provides us a sharper
platform for policy advice. We overall conclude, as many others have, that immigration has been
essential for the United States’ leadership in innovation and entrepreneurship. We also generally
find evidence of positive impacts of high-skilled diasporas for home countries, recognizing that
the ledger that can be measured in the United States is incomplete.

Appendix: H-1B Visa Program
This is an abbreviated description from Kerr and Lincoln (2010): The H-1B visa is a temporary
immigration category that allows U.S. employers to seek short-term help from skilled foreigners in
―specialty occupations.‖ These occupations are defined as those requiring theoretical and practical
application of specialized knowledge like engineering or accounting; virtually all successful H-1B
applicants have a bachelor's education or higher. The visa is used especially for STEM-related
occupations, which account for roughly 60% of successful applications. Approximately 40% and 10% of
H-1B recipients over 2000-2005 came from India and China, respectively. Shares for other countries are
less than 5%.
The sponsoring firm files the H-1B application and must specify an individual candidate. The employeremployee match must therefore be made in advance. Workers are tied to their sponsoring firm, although
some recent changes have increased visa portability. Firms can petition for permanent residency (i.e., a
green card) on behalf of the worker. If permanent residency is not obtained, the H-1B worker must leave
the United States at the end of the visa period for one year before applying again. Firms are also required
to pay the visa holder the higher of (1) the prevailing wage in the firm for the position or (2) the
prevailing wage for the occupation in the area of employment. These restrictions were designed to prevent
H-1B employers from abusing their relationships with foreign workers and to protect domestic workers.
Since the Immigration Act of 1990, there has been an annual cap on the number of H-1B visas that can be
issued. The cap governs new H-1B visa issuances only; renewals for the second three-year term are
exempt, and the maximum length of stay on an H-1B visa is thus six years. While most aspects of the H1B program have remained constant since its inception, the cap has fluctuated significantly and is the
source of extensive controversy. The original 65,000 cap was not binding in the early 1990s but became
so by the middle of the decade. Legislation in 1998 and 2000 sharply increased the cap over the next five
years to 195,000 visas. These short-term increases were allowed to expire during the United States’ hightech downturn, when visa demand fell short of the cap. The cap returned to the 65,000 level in 2004 and
became binding again, despite being subsequently raised by 20,000 through an ―advanced degree‖
exemption. This 65,000+20,000 structure remains today.

23

References
Agrawal, Ajay, ―Diaspora Networks, Knowledge Flows, and Brain Drain‖, WIPO Chapter (2013).
Agrawal, Ajay, Devesh Kapur, John McHale, and Alexander Oettl, ―Brain Drain or Brain Bank? The
Impact of Skilled Emigration on Poor-Country Innovation‖, Journal of Urban Economics 69
(2011), 43-55.
Anderson, Stuart, and Machaela Platzer, ―American Made: The Impact of Immigrant Entrepreneurs and
Professionals on U.S. Competitiveness‖, National Venture Capital Associate Report (2006).
Arzaghi, Mohammad, and J. Vernon Henderson, ―Networking off Madison Avenue‖, Review of
Economic Studies 75:4 (2008), 1011-1038.
Audretsch, David, and Maryann Feldman, ―R&D Spillovers and the Geography of Innovation and
Production‖, American Economic Review 86 (1996), 630-640.
Borjas, George, ―Does Immigration Grease the Wheels of the Labor Market?‖, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 2001:1 (2001), 69-119.
Borjas, George, ―The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of
Immigration on the Labor Market‖, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118:4 (2003), 1335-1374.
Borjas, George, ―Do Foreign Students Crowd Out Native Students from Graduate Programs?‖, in Ronald
Ehrenberg and Paula Stephan (eds.), Science and the University (Madison, WI: University of
Wisconsin Press, 2005).
Borjas, George, ―Immigration in High-Skill Labor Markets: The Impact of Foreign Students on the
Earnings of Doctorates‖, NBER Working Paper 12085 (2006).
Borjas, George, and Kirk Doran, ―The Collapse of the Soviet Union and the Productivity of American
Mathematicians‖, Quarterly Journal of Economics 127:3 (2012), 1143-1203.
Borjas, George, and Kirk Doran, ―Intellectual Mobility: Native Responses to Supply Shocks in the Space
of Ideas‖, Journal of Labor Economics (2013), forthcoming.
Borjas, George, Jeffrey Grogger, and Gordon Hanson, ―Comment: On Estimating the Elasticities of
Substitution‖, Journal of the European Economic Association 10:1 (2012), 198-210.
Borjas, George, Jeffrey Grogger, and Gordon Hanson, ―Comment: On Estimating the Elasticities of
Substitution‖, Journal of the European Economic Association 10:1 (2012), 198-210.
Bosetti, Valentina, Cristina Cattaneo, and Elena Verdolini, ―Migration of Skilled Workers and
Innovation: A European Perspective‖, Working Paper (2013).
Bound, John, Breno Braga, and Joseph Golden, ―Recruitment of Foreigners in the Market for Computer
Scientists in the US‖, Working Paper (2013).
Card, David, ―Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of Higher
Immigration‖, Journal of Labor Economics 19:1 (2001), 22-64.
Chellaraj, Gnanaraj, Keith Maskus, and Aaditya Mattoo, ―The Contribution of Skilled Immigrations and
International Graduate Students to U.S. Innovation‖, Review of International Economics 16:3
(2008), 444-462.
Clemens, Michael, ―Economics and Emigration: Trillion-Dollar Bills on the Sidewalk?‖, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 25:3 (2011), 83-106.
Clemens, Michael, ―Why Do Programmers Earn More in Houston than Hyderabad? Evidence from
Randomized Processing of U.S. Visas‖, American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings
103:3 (2013), 198-202.
Docquier, Frederic, and Hillel Rapoport, ―Globalization, Brain Drain, and Development‖, Journal of
Economic Literature 50:3 (2012), 681-730.
Dustmann, Christian, ―Return Migration: The European Experience‖, Economic Policy 22 (1996), 215250.

24

Dustmann, Christian, Albrecht Glitz, and Tommaso Frattini, ―The Labour Market Impacts of
Immigration‖, Oxford Review of Economic Policy 24:3 (2008), 477-494.
Ebenstein, Avraham, Ann Harrison, Margaret McMillan, and Shannon Phillips, ―Why Are American
Workers Getting Poorer? Estimating the Impact of Trade and Offshoring Using the CPS‖,
Working Paper (2013).
Ellison, Glenn, Edward Glaeser, and William Kerr, ―What Causes Industry Agglomeration? Evidence
from Coagglomeration Patterns‖, American Economic Review 100 (2010), 1195-1213.
Fairlee, Robert, ―Estimating the Contribution of Immigrant Business Owners to the U.S. Economy‖,
Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy Report (2008).
Foley, Fritz, and William Kerr, ―Ethnic Innovation and U.S. Multinational Firm Activity‖, Management
Science 59:7 (2013), 1529-1544.
Freeman, Richard, The Market for College-Trained Manpower: A Study in the Economics of Career
Choice (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1971).
Freeman, Richard, ―People Flows in Globalization‖, Journal of Economic Perspectives 20:2 (2006), 145170.
Friedberg, Rachel, ―The Impact of Mass Migration on the Israeli Labor Market‖, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 116:4 (2001), 1373-1408.
Gaule, Patrick, and Mario Piacentini, ―Chinese Graduate Students and U.S. Scientific Productivity‖,
Review of Economics and Statistics (2012), forthcoming.
Ghani, Ejaz, William Kerr, and Christopher Stanton, ―Diasporas and Outsourcing: Evidence from oDesk
and India‖, Management Science (2013), forthcoming.
Grogger, Jeffrey, and Gordon Hanson, ―The Scale and Selectivity of Foreign Born Ph.D. Recipients in the
U.S.‖, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 103:3 (2013), 189-192.
Gurmu, Shiferaw, Grant Black, and Paula Stephan, ―The Knowledge Production Function for University
Patenting‖, Economic Inquiry 48:1 (2010), 192-213.
Hall, Bronwyn, Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, ―The NBER Patent Citation Data File: Lessons,
Insights and Methodological Tools‖, NBER Working Paper 8498 (2001).
Hatzigeorgiou, Andreas, and Magnus Lodefalk, ―Trade and Migration: Firm-Level Evidence‖, Working
Paper (2011).
Hira, Ron, ―The H-1B and L-1 Visa programs: Out of Control‖, EPI Policy Paper (2010).
Hovhannisyan, Nune, and Wolfgang Keller, ―International Business Travel: An Engine of Innovation?‖,
Working Paper (2010).
Hunt, Jennifer, ―Which Immigrants are Most Innovative and Entrepreneurial? Distinctions by Entry
Visa‖, Journal of Labor Economics 29:3 (2011), 417-457.
Hunt, Jennifer, ―Does the United States Admit the Best and Brightest Computer and Engineering
Workers‖, Working Paper (2013).
Hunt, Jennifer, and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle, ―How Much Does Immigration Boost Innovation?‖,
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2:2 (2010), 31-56.
Hunter, Rosalind, Andrew Oswald, and Bruce Charlton, ―The Elite Brain Drain‖, The Economic Journal
119 (2009), F231-F251.
Kaboré, François, ―Brain Drain, Intellectual Property Rights and Development in Africa‖, WIPO Chapter
(2013).
Kahn, Shulamit, and Megan MacGarvie, ―How Important is U.S. Location for Research in Science?‖,
Review of Economics and Statistics (2013), forthcoming.

25

Keller, Wolfgang, ―International Technology Diffusion‖, Journal of Economic Literature 42:3 (2004),
752-782.
Kerr, Sari Pekkala, and William Kerr, ―Immigration and Employer Transitions for STEM Workers‖,
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 103:3 (2013), 193-197.
Kerr, Sari Pekkala, William Kerr, and William Lincoln, ―Skilled Immigration and the Employment
Structures of U.S. Firms‖, Working Paper (2013).
Kerr, William, ―The Ethnic Composition of U.S. Inventors‖, Harvard Business School Working Paper
08–006 (2007).
Kerr, William, ―Ethnic Scientific Communities and International Technology Diffusion‖, Review of
Economics and Statistics 90:3 (2008), 518-537.
Kerr, William, ―Breakthrough Inventions and Migrating Clusters of Innovation‖, Journal of Urban
Economics 67:1 (2010a), 46-60.
Kerr, William, ―The Agglomeration of U.S. Ethnic Inventors‖, in Edward Glaeser (ed.) Agglomeration
Economics (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2010b), 237–276.
Kerr, William, and William Lincoln, ―The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa Reforms and U.S.
Ethnic Invention‖, Journal of Labor Economics 28:3 (2010), 473-508.
Kerr, William, William Lincoln, and Prachi Mishra, ―The Dynamics of Firm Lobbying‖, NBER Working
Paper 17577 (2011).
Kim, Jinyoung, and Jungsoo Park, ―Foreign Direct Investment and Country-Specific Human Capital,‖
Economic Inquiry 51:1 (2013), 198-210.
Kim, Jinyoung, Sangjoon Lee, and Gerald Marschke, ―Inventor Productivity and Firm Size: Evidence
from Panel Data on Inventors,‖ Pacific Economic Review 14:4 (2009), 516-531.
Kugler, Maurice, and Hillel Rapoport, ―International Labor and Capital Flows: Complements or
Substitutes?‖, Economics Letters 92:2 (2007), 155-162.
Kugler, Maurice, and Hillel Rapoport, ―Migration, FDI and the Margins of Trade‖, Working Paper
(2011).
Kuptsch, Christiane, and Eng Fong Pang, Competing for Global Talent, International Labour
Organization (International Institute for Labour Studies, 2006).
Lewis, Ethan, ―Immigration and Production Technology‖, Annual Review of Economics 5 (2013),
forthcoming.
Lissoni, Francesco, ―Inventor Data for Research on Migration and Innovation: A Survey and a Pilot‖,
WIPO Chapter (2013).
Lofstrom, Magnus, and Joseph Hayes, ―H-1Bs: How Do They Stack Up to US Born Workers‖, IZA
Working Paper 6259 (2011).
Lowell, B. Lindsay, and Hal Salzman, ―Into the Eye of the Storm: Assessing the Evidence on Science and
Engineering Education, Quality, and Workforce Demand‖, Working Paper (2007).
Matloff, Norman, ―On the Need for Reform of the H-1B Non-Immigrant Work Visa in Computer-Related
Occupations‖, University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform 36:4 (2003), 815-914.
Miguelez, Ernest, and Carsten Fink, ―Measuring the International Mobility of Inventors: A New
Database‖, WIPO Chapter (2013).
Mithas, Sunil, and Henry Lucas, ―Are Foreign IT Workers Cheaper? U.S. Visa Policies and
Compensation of Information Technology Professionals‖, Management Science 56 (2010), 745765.
Moser, Petra, Alessandra Voena, and Fabian Waldinger, ―German Jewish Émigrés and U.S. Invention‖,
Working Paper (2012).

26

Naghavi, Alireza, ―Intellectual Property Protection and the Brain Drain‖, WIPO Chapter (2013).
Nanda, Ramana, and Tarun Khanna, ―Diasporas and Domestic Entrepreneurs: Evidence from the Indian
Software Industry‖, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 19:4 (2010), 991-1012.
Nathan, Max, ―Ethnic Inventors, Diversity and Innovation in the UK: Evidence from Patents Microdata‖,
Working Paper (2012).
Oettl, Alexander, and Ajay Agrawal, ―International Labor Mobility and Knowledge Flow Externalities‖,
Journal of International Business Studies 39:8 (2008), 1242-1260.
Orrenius, Pia, and Madeline Zavodny, ―Does Immigration Affect whether U.S. Natives Major in a STEM
Field?‖, Working Paper (2013).
Ottaviano, Gianmarco, and Giovanni Peri, ―Rethinking the Effect of Immigration on Wages‖, Journal of
the European Economic Association 10:1 (2012), 152-197.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco, Giovanni Peri, and Greg Wright, ―Immigration, Offshoring, and American Jobs‖,
American Economic Review (2013), forthcoming.
Özden, Çaglar, and Christopher Parsons, ―International Mobility of Knowledge Workers and HighSkilled Migration‖, WIPO Chapter (2013).
Ozgen, Ceren, Peter Nijkamp, and Jacques Poot, ―Immigration and Innovation in European Regions‖,
IZA Working Paper 5676 (2011).
Parrotta, Pierpaolo, Dario Pozzoli, and Mariola Pytlikova, ―The Nexus between Labor Diversity and
Firm’s Innovation‖, Working Paper (2013).
Peri, Giovanni, ―The Determinants and Effects of Highly-Skilled Labor Movements: Evidence from
OECD Countries 1980-2005‖, CEPR Report (2009).
Peri, Giovanni, Kevin Shih, and Chad Sparber, ―STEM Workers, H-1B Visas and Productivity in US
Cities‖, Working Paper (2013).
Peri, Giovanni, and Chad Sparber, ―Highly-Educated Immigrants and Native Occupational Choice‖,
Industrial Relations 50:3 (2011), 385-411.
Rauch, James, ―Business and Social Networks in International Trade‖, Journal of Economic Literature
39:4 (2001), 1177-1203.
Rauch, James, and Vitor Trindade, ―Ethnic Chinese Networks in International Trade‖, Review of
Economics and Statistics 84:1 (2002), 116-130.
Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, ―Geography, Industrial Organization, and Agglomeration‖,
Review of Economics and Statistics 85:2 (2003), 377-393.
Ruiz, Neil, Jill Wilson, and Shyamali Choudhury, ―Geography of H-1B Workers: Demand for HighSkilled Foreign Labor in U.S. Metropolitan Areas‖, Brookings Report (2012).
Ryoo, Jaewoo, and Sherwin Rosen, ―The Engineering Labor Market‖, Journal of Political Economy 112:2
(2004), S110-S140.
Saxenian, AnnaLee, Silicon Valley's New Immigrant Entrepreneurs (San Francisco, CA: Public Policy
Institute of California, 1999).
Saxenian, AnnaLee, The New Argonauts (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2006).
Saxenian, AnnaLee, with Yasuyuki Motoyama and Xiaohong Quan, Local and Global Networks of
Immigrant Professionals in Silicon Valley (San Francisco, CA: Public Policy Institute of
California, 2002).
Stephan, Paula, ―The I's Have It: Immigration and Innovation, the Perspective from Academe‖, in Josh
Lerner and Scott Stern (eds.) Innovation Policy and the Economy (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2010).

27

Stephan, Paula, and Sharon Levin, ―Exceptional Contributions to US Science by the Foreign-Born and
Foreign-Educated‖, Population Research and Policy Review 20:1 (2001), 59-79.
Stern, Scott, ―Do Scientists Pay to be Scientists?‖, Management Science 50:6 (2004), 835-853.
Stuen, Eric, Ahmed Mobarak, and Keith Maskus, ―Skilled Immigration and Innovation: Evidence from
Enrollment Fluctuations in U.S. Doctoral Programs‖, Economic Journal 122:565 (2012), 11431176.
Wadhwa, Vivek, Guillermina Jasso, Ben Rissing, Gary Gereffi, and Richard Freeman, ―Intellectual
Property, the Immigration Backlog, and a Reverse Brain-Drain‖, Kauffman Foundation Report
(2007a).
Wadhwa, Vivek, AnnaLee Saxenian, Richard Freeman, and Gary Gereffi, ―America's Loss is the World's
Gain: America's New Immigrant Entrepreneurs, Part 4‖, Kauffman Foundation Report (2009).
Wadhwa, Vivek, AnnaLee Saxenian, Ben Rissing, and Gary Gereffi, ―America’s New Immigrant
Entrepreneurs‖, Kauffman Foundation Report (2007b).
Waldinger, Fabian, ―Quality Matters: The Expulsion of Professors and the Consequences for PhD
Students Outcomes in Nazi Germany‖, Journal of Political Economy 118:4 (2010), 787-831.
Waldinger, Fabian, ―Bombs, Brains, and Science: The Role of Human and Physical Capital for the
Creation of Scientific Knowledge‖, Working Paper (2013).
Wasmer, Etienne, Paul Fredriksson, Ana Lamo, Julian Messina, and Giovanni Peri, ―The
Macroeconomics of Education in Europe‖ in Brunello, Garibaldi, and Wasmer (eds.) Education
and Training in Europe (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007).
Weinberg, Bruce, ―Developing Science: Scientific Performance and Brain Drains in the Developing
World‖, Journal of Development Economics 95:1 (2011), 95-104.

28

