NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE RISE OF SERVICES:
THE ROLE OF SKILLS, SCALE, AND FEMALE LABOR SUPPLY
Francisco J. Buera
Joseph P. Kaboski
Min Qiang Zhao
Working Paper 19372
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19372

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

We thank Yong Wang for helpful comments, as well as participants at the AEA meetings in San Diego
and SED meetings in Seoul. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
or the Federal Reserve System.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19372.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Francisco J. Buera, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Min Qiang Zhao. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Rise of Services: the Role of Skills, Scale, and Female Labor Supply
Francisco J. Buera, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Min Qiang Zhao
NBER Working Paper No. 19372
August 2013
JEL No. J11,J22,O14,O33,O4
ABSTRACT
This paper quantifies the roles of increases in the demand for skill-intensive output, the efficient scale
of service production, and female labor supply in the growth of services. We extend the Buera and
Kaboski (2012a,b) model to a two-person household, incorporating a joint decision on home and market
production, and allow for skill and sectoral biased technology progress. The rising scale of services,
the rising demand for skill-intensive output, and skill-biased technical change all play dominant roles.
Furthermore, the extended model explains the majority of the increase in female labor supply, which
also plays a role in services growth.

Francisco J. Buera
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
8283 Bunche Hall Office 8357
Mail Stop: 147703
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
fjbuera@econ.ucla.edu
Joseph P. Kaboski
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
434 Flanner Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
jkaboski@nd.edu

Min Qiang Zhao
Room A201, Economics Building
Wang Yanan Institute for Studies in Economics
Xiamen University
Xiamen 361005
Fujian, P.R.China
kent_zhao@xmu.edu.cn

The Rise of Services: the Role of Skills, Scale, and
Female Labor Supply
Francisco J. Buera, Joseph P Kaboski, and Min Qiang Zhao

∗

August 21, 2013

Abstract
This paper quantiﬁes the roles of increases in the demand for skill-intensive
output, the eﬃcient scale of service production, and female labor supply in
the growth of services. We extend the Buera and Kaboski (2012a,b) model to
a two-person household, incorporating a joint decision on home and market
production, and allow for skill and sectoral biased technology progress. The
rising scale of services, the rising demand for skill-intensive output, and skillbiased technical change all play dominant roles. Furthermore, the extended
model explains the majority of the increase in female labor supply, which also
plays a role in services growth.

1

Introduction

Over the past 50 years, the U.S. economy has moved increasingly toward a servicebased economy, with the share of services rising roughly from 65 percent to 82 percent
∗

Aﬃliations and E-mail addresses: francisco.buera@chi.frb.org (F. J. Buera, Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago and UCLA), jkaboski@nd.edu (J. P. Kaboski, University of Notre Dame), and
kent zhao@xmu.edu.cn (M. Q. Zhao, Wang Yanan Institute for Studies in Economics, Xiamen
University).

1

from 1965 to 2010. Buera and Kaboski (2012a, 2012b) propose a model emphasizing two forces that contribute to the growth of services: an increase in the optimal
scale of service production and a shift in demand toward more skill-intensive output,
which lead to an increase in the proportion of services that are market-produced relative to home-produced. The theory is attractive in that it is qualitatively consistent
with several observations: growth in both the relative price and quantity of services,
changes in patterns of home production, and, most importantly, growth in the average scale of service establishments and the shift toward skill-intensive services.1 This
paper calibrates an extended version of their model to examine the extent to which
such an explanation is quantitatively plausible.
In the Buera-Kaboski (BK, hereafter) models, specialization plays a key role in
the growth of the service economy. Specialized human capital is utilized more efﬁciently in the market, where workers specialize in production of particular goods
or services. The increasing demand for skill-intensive services increases the returns
to specialized human capital, so that workers who become skilled earn increasingly
higher wages. As the opportunity cost of their time increases, they spend less time in
home production and demand increasingly more market services. In addition, specialized intermediate/capital goods give rise to more eﬃcient, larger scale production
of services in the market than at home. In this way, a rising eﬃcient scale of services
interacts with both labor supply and investment in specialized human capital.
A quantitative assessment of these forces requires combining the two theories and
extending the model along important dimensions. First, we add the possibility of
both sector- and skill-biased technical change to our benchmark model. Second, our
benchmark model moves beyond the representative household framework, introducing heterogeneity in the cost of acquiring skills. Finally, we add demographics to
an extended model that capture the diﬀerent patterns in the data and incentives
of married and single (male and female) households. In married households, one
spouse may specialize predominantly in home production, while the other specializes
in market production, and these decisions may be linked to decisions about human
1

The growth of the service economy actually begins around midcentury. Buera and Kaboski
(2012a) also focus on the late acceleration of the service economy.

2

capital investment as well. Indeed, at the beginning of the period in question, women
worked disproportionately in home production, while men worked disproportionately
in the market. Indeed, shifts in female labor supply, due to both changes in the labor
supply of married women and changes in marriage rates, are clearly linked to the
growth of the service economy (see, for example, Lee and Wolpin, 2006, and Ngai
and Petrongolo, 2012). As Figures 1 and 2 show, the growth in the service sector
quantitatively mirrors the growth in female labor in services (as a percentage of the
total labor force), while the decline of the goods sector matches the decline in male
labor in goods. All four are roughly linear changes of at least 17 percentage points
over the period in question, with the increase in female labor in services increasing
22 percentage points.2 These extensions enable us to more closely match important
features of the data, but also to assess the importance of female labor supply and
demographic changes in explaining the observed patterns of structural change.
We calibrate both the baseline model and the extended model to the U.S. experience. That is, we choose parameter values to target key facts of the U.S. economy in
1965, as well as the growth between 1965 and 2010 in output, schooling, the relative
wage of college-educated workers, and the relative price of services. We capture this
last feature by assuming a diﬀerent relative productivity in home production for men
and women. We then evaluate the model’s predictions for the growth in the service
share and female labor supply.
Remarkably, despite no free parameters, both versions of the calibrated model are
able essentially to fully explain the growth in the service sector. Counterfactual analyses allow us to highlight the quantitatively important channels in the models. In the
benchmark model, skill-biased technical change (SBTC) plays the most important
role, accounting alone for over half of the growth in services. Skill-biased technical
change increases the service share by increasing the relative wage and relative quantity of high-skilled workers. The higher relative wage increases the opportunity cost
of home production, thereby increasing the demand for market services from high2

In comparison, the relative size of the labor force that is female and working in the goods sector
decreased by just 4.2 percentage points, while that of males in the service sector dropped by just
1.6 percentage points.

3

skilled individuals. The increasing proportion of high-skilled workers magniﬁes these
eﬀects, leading to a further increase in the share of services. While these channels
were highlighted in BK (2012a), skill-biased technical change was not directly part
of their analysis, but its role in the growth of services comes out of the fact that, in
their model, skills are specialized and therefore only productive in the market.
Moreover, the channels that were emphasized by BK (2012a, 2012b), the rising
skill intensity of demand and the rising scale of services, are also quantitatively
important, together accounting for about as much growth in the service share as
skill-biased technical change. Rising skill-intensity of demand due to non-homothetic
preferences has a direct eﬀect on the demand for services, as well as the indirect
channels emphasized above for skill-biased technical change. The rising scale of
services increases the costs of home production. Alone, these forces account for up
to roughly one-third of the growth in services, and together they account for up to
two-thirds.
In contrast, sector-biased technical change – the faster productivity growth in
manufacturing – leads to a fall in the share of market services and a rise in home
produced services. This is a unique feature of the model, and it is driven by home
production being relatively more intense in manufactured goods. Standard biased
productivity explanations for the growth of services assume a low elasticity of substitution between goods and services, so that higher productivity growth in the goods
sector increases the growth of the service sector.3 These models predict a rising relative price of services, but a counterfactual decline in relative real quantities. In the
BK model, a unique implication is that biased productivity in manufacturing actually
reduces the growth of the service sector, since market services economize on intermediate goods/capital relative to home production. In contrast to biased productivity
models, which require counterfactually large biases, the BK calibration matches the
growth in the relative price of services with productivity growth in the service sector that is roughly 0.6 percentage points lower than in the goods sector, relatively
comparable to productivity measurements by Jorgensen and Stiroh (2000) over this
3

See for example, Ngai and Pissarides (2007) and Baumol (1967).

4

period.4 We do not want to overstate this ﬁnding, since the stark assumption in
our model may well overstate the true capital-intensity of home production relative
to market services. (We also likely overstate the traditional channel, however, by
eliminating any traditional substitution between goods and services in production,
and the BK channel still dominates.) We simply stress that this overlooked channel,
which does not exist in many other models, appears to be quantitatively important.
We therefore conclude that the channels emphasized in the benchmark model
are quantitatively important. The extended model conﬁrms the essential ﬁndings of
the benchmark model: fully explaining (actually slightly overexplaining) the rising
share of services, with SBTC, the rising scale of services, and the rising demand
for skill-intensive output still playing the leading roles. Accounting for multiperson households somewhat weakens the forces emphasized by BK, however, since it
allows for partial specialization. Notwithstanding this, the model yields important
additional insights. The extended model alone can explain only 58 percent of the
increase in the catch up of female (market) labor supply with male labor supply.
Demographics (i.e., the falling share of married couples) play a smaller but still signiﬁcant role in explaining service share growth, but they explain nearly half of the
increase in female labor supply in the model. Counterfactuals keeping female labor
supply ﬁxed show that the endogenous increase in female labor supply, particularly
married women, plays a role in the growth in the share of the service sector, but the
contribution is not overwhelming.
This paper contributes to several related literatures. First, there has been a
recent boom of research in the ﬁeld of structural change.5 A wave of papers focused
on simultaneously explaining structural change, including the growth of services, with
balanced growth (e.g., Acemoglu and Guerrieri, 2008, Kongsamut, Rebelo, and Xie,
2001, Ngai and Pissarides, 2007). Recent work has begun quantitatively evaluating
the standard channels in these theories (e.g., Buera and Kaboski, 2009, Echevarria,
1997, Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi, forthcoming, Restuccia and Duarte,
4

In Jorgensen and Stiroh (2000), the weighted average of labor productivity growth in the goods
sector is 2.07 percent vs. 1.41 percent in the service sector. The analogous TFP growth rates were
0.67 and 0.26 percent.
5
Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi, 2013, provide an excellent overview of this literature.

5

2010). Our paper contributes a quantitative examination of the role of skill, scale,
and female labor supply. Second, there is a micro literature linking skill and female
labor supply (e.g., Goldin, 2006, Goldin, Lawrence, and Kuziemko, 2006, Mulligan
and Rubinstein, 2008), and among these, Lee and Wolpin (2006) is most closely
related since it deals with the service sector directly. We complement their work
by focusing on the implications for aggregate output in the context of a general
equilibrium model. Finally, we contribute to recent work quantitatively examining
the interaction between long run patterns in female labor supply and transformations
in home production over development (e.g., Gollin, Parente, and Rogerson, 2002,
Greenwood, Seshadri, and Yorukoglu, 2005, Jones, Manuelli, and McGrattan, 2003).
Ngai and Pissarides (2008) and Ngai and Petrongolo (2012) are most closely related,
since they again address services directly. Again, our emphasis on skill and scale is
unique and complements this literature.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The benchmark model is
introduced in Section 2 and calibrated and evaluated in Section 3. Section 4 extends
the model to include multi-member households, and Section 5 provides a quantitative
analysis of the extended model. Section 6 concludes.

2

BK Model

This section integrates the theories developed in Buera and Kaboski (2012a, 2012b)
for the growth of the service economy. This presentation merely extends BK to allow
for sector-speciﬁc technical change, skill-biased technical change, and time-varying
eﬃcient scale of services. In order to more easily model demographic changes, we
also model heterogeneity across households in the cost of education/acquiring skills.

2.1

Production

There is a continuum of manufacturing goods and services, indexed by their complexity, z ∈ [0, ∞). Manufacturing goods are produced only in the market, but services
can be produced either in the market or at home. Manufacturing goods serve as inter6

mediate input for both home and market production of ﬁnal services. Technological
progress is assumed to be exogenous, sector-speciﬁc, and skilled-speciﬁc.

2.2

Technologies

Manufactured goods are produced using low- and/or high-skilled labor, LG and HG,
respectively:
(1)
G(z, t) = AG (t) [Al (z)LG (z) + φ(t)Ah (z)HG (z)] .
Here, AG (t) is a manufacturing good-speciﬁc time-varying productivity term, φ(t)
is a time-varying relative productivity between high-skilled and low-skilled workers,
and Al (z) and Ah (z) are time invariant but z-speciﬁc productivities of low- and
high-skilled labor, respectively. We choose the following functional forms:
AG (t) = eγG t
φ(t) = φ0 eγh t
1
Al (z) =
z
1
Ah (z) = λ ,
z
where γG captures the manufacturing speciﬁc productivity growth rate and γh captures any skill-bias in technological change, respectively. Since z represents complexity, productivities are decreasing in z, but we assume λ ∈ (0, 1), so that high-skilled
work has a comparative advantage in more complex output.
Manufactured goods are used as inputs into the production of services. In particular, the production of service z requires one unit of manufactured good z as an
intermediate input. Provided that a unit of the intermediate input is used, services
of type z are produced with constant labor productivity up to a maximum capacity.
A simple example would be a washing machine that can do a maximum number of
loads of laundry per day, with a certain amount of labor required for each load. Denoting the quantity of intermediate goods used as ks , the (time-varying) maximum
capacity as n(t), and the quantity of low- and high-skilled labor by LS and HS , the
7

production function is:

S(z, t) =

0
if kS < 1
min{n(t), AS (t)[Al (z)LS (z) + φ(t)Ah (z)HS (z)]} if kS ≥ 1.

The capacity n (t) will reﬂect the eﬃcient output scale of a productive unit at
which market services will be run, which we allow to change over time. In equilibrium, this parameter n (t) will also be strongly related to the number of workers
per productive unit. Note that the labor requirements for service z are symmetric
to those for manufactured good z, except for the sector-speciﬁc term AS (t) = eγS t ,
which grows at rate γS .6

2.3

Firm’s Problem

It is assumed that both manufacturing and service ﬁrms operate at the minimum
average cost curves due to free entry. Making low-skilled labor the numeraire, and
denoting the relative price of high-skilled workers as w(t), equilibrium prices of manufactured goods and services are:


1
w(t)
1
pG (z, t) =
min
,
AG (t)
Al (z) φ(t)Ah (z)


1
1
w(t)
pG (z, t)
+
min
,
.
pS (z, t) =
n (t)
AS (t)
Al (z) φ(t)Ah (z)

(2)
(3)

The competitive price of services includes two terms, the cost of intermediate
goods and the cost of services value-added. The n(t) in the denominator of the
6

The symmetry between the service and manufactured good production function can be strengthened by writing the manufacturing goods technology as:

0
if kG < 1
G (z, t) =
min {nG (t), AG (t)[Al (z)LG (z) + φ(t)Ah (z)HG (z)]} if kG ≥ 1.
Thus, (1) would arise as the limiting expression for large eﬃcient scale in manfuacturing, i.e., as
nG → ∞ .

8

ﬁrst term reﬂects the fact that intermediate goods are used at their eﬃcient scale in
market services.
The minimizations above reﬂect the choice between low- and high-skilled workers.
Given our comparative advantage assumption, they deﬁne a threshold, z(t):

z(t) =

w(t)
φ(t)

1
 1−λ

.

For z ≤ z(t), ﬁrms will hire low-skilled workers. Conversely, when z > z(t), ﬁrms
will hire high-skilled workers instead. The threshold z(t) is an increasing function of
w(t) and a decreasing function of the skill-biased productivity term φ (t).

2.4

Households

There is a continuum of inﬁnitesimally-lived households that have preferences over
the continuum of services. Households purchase market goods and services, provide
labor to market and household production, decide which services to home produce,
and whether or not to acquire specialized skills.

2.5

Preferences

Preferences over the continuum of discrete and satiable wants are indexed by the
service that satisﬁes them, z. Deﬁne the function C (z) : R+ → {0, 1}, which takes
the value of 1 if a particular want is satisﬁed and 0 otherwise. Households can
satisfy a particular want by procuring the service directly from the market or by
purchasing the required manufactured goods to home produce the service. Let the
function H (z) : R+ → {0, 1} indicate whether want z is home produced. Together
the consumption set is deﬁned by the set of indicator functions, C(z) and H(z),
mapping R+ into {0, 1}2 . The following utility function represent those preferences
over wants and the method of satisfying those wants, i.e., over indicator functions
C (z) and H (z):

9

ˆ

+∞

ũ (C, H) =
0

[H (z) + ν (1 − H (z))] C (z) dz,

(4)

where H (z) ≤ C (z). The parameter ν ∈ (0, 1) indicates that a home-produced
service yields a greater utility.
Given that a continuum of wants are satiated sequentially, and production costs,
as well as the additional costs of home production are increasing in z, the consumer’s
problem can be simpliﬁed by restricting to the consumption set consisting of step
functions:

1 if z ≤ z̄
C (z) =
0 if z > z̄


and
H (z) =

1 if z ≤ z
,
0 if z > z

where z̄ denotes the most complex want that is satisﬁed and z denotes the most
complex want that is home-produced.
The primitive preferences described by (4) can then be represented by preferences over the restricted consumption set expressed by the utility function over two
thresholds z and z̄:
u (z, z̄) = z (1 − ν) + ν z̄,

(5)

with 0 ≤ z ≤ z̄. On the margin, there are two ways for agents to increase utility: by
increasing z̄ to satisfy a new want or by increasing z to move a previously marketsatisﬁed want into home production.

2.6

Schooling

The schooling decision involves two choices: e ∈ {l, h}. l denotes low-skilled, and
h denotes high-skilled. In order to become specialized high-skilled workers, e =
h, agents must spend a fraction θ of their time endowment acquiring skills. The
population is heterogeneous in terms of the time required to acquire specialized
10

skills. More speciﬁcally, θ ∈ [0, 1] is distributed according to the c.d.f. F (θ).

2.7

Consumer’s Problem

An individual with skill e solves:

V e (θ; t) = max (1 − ν) z e + ν z̄e
0≤z e ≤z̄e

s.t.
ˆ ze

ˆ

z̄e

pG (z, t) dz +
pS (z, t) dz
0
ze


ˆ ze
1
= we 1 −
dz − θI (e) ,
AS (t)Al (z)
0

(6)

where I (e) is an indicator function that equals one if e = h and zero otherwise. The
left-hand side of the budget constraint includes expenditures on manufactured goods,
which are intermediate inputs into the home production of services, and expenditures
on market services. Note that home production of a single unit of service z ∈ [0, z e ]
requires paying for an entire manufactured input, pG (z, t), rather than the 1/n(t)
units required in market production. The right-hand side is income from market
labor, which is the unit time endowment net of home production and schooling time.
Note that, because high-skilled workers are specialized, all home production (except
for a measure zero) is done with the productivity of low-skilled workers.
At an interior optimum, z e and z̄e must satisfy the following ﬁrst order conditions:

μ

1
1−
n(t)



1
pG (z e , t) +
AS (t)



we
− min
Al (z e )



1
w
,
Al (z e ) φ(t)Ah (z e )


≥1−ν
(7)

and
μpS (z̄e , t) = ν,
where pS (z, t) has been substituted using (3), and μ denotes the marginal utility of
11

income.
Equation (7) is the marginal condition between home producing or market purchasing a service. The beneﬁt of market services (left-hand side) includes the goods
cost savings from the eﬃcient utilization of intermediate goods and the potential
labor cost savings from hiring either more productive high-skilled labor or low-wage,
low-skilled labor. The cost of market services (right-hand side) is the disutility of
market consumption. For any particular z, the goods cost saving will decrease as
the price of the manufactured good falls and increase as the eﬃcient scale of services
rises. The labor cost savings of market services are higher for high-skilled workers
(we = w). Thus, a shift toward high-skilled workers decreases home production time
in favor of market services. Moreover, the labor cost savings are increasing in the
relative wage of high-skilled workers w for high-skilled workers, but decreasing for
low-skilled workers (we = 1), so that increases in the relative wage aﬀect workers
diﬀerentially.
The schooling decision depends on the time cost and the relative wage. Being
high-skilled will allow workers to earn a higher wage (w > 1), but it will reduce
the time endowment to be 1 − θ, so the return to becoming high-skilled drops as θ

increases. There exists a threshold, θ(t),
that equalizes that value of being high- and
 = Vl (θ).
 For θ < θ (t), a household will be strictly better oﬀ being
low-skilled Vh (θ)
high-skilled, while for θ  θ (t), a household remains low-skilled.

2.8

Equilibrium

Given w(t), a household decides whether to be high-skilled and chooses the thresholds

the levels of z l (t) and
z and z. If a household decides to be low-skilled, θ  θ(t),

z l (t) are independent of θ. If a household decides to be high-skilled, θ < θ(t),
the
levels of z h (θ, t) and z h (θ, t) will increase as θ decreases. Given w(t), each ﬁrm sets
the prices pG (z, t) and pS (z, t) according to (2) and (3), respectively. Summing up,

a competitive equilibrium consists of allocations θ(t),
z l (t), z l (t), z h (θ, t), z h (θ, t),
z(t) that solve (6) given prices w(t), pG (z, t), and pS (z, t) and that are consistent
with market clearing for manufacturing goods, services, low and high skilled labor

12

markets.
The model can be solved in two steps recursively. Taking as given the wage w (t),
which determines the threshold ẑ (t) and the price functions pG (z, t) and pS (z, t),

the ﬁrst step is to solve for the schooling threshold (θ(t))
and consumption thresholds
(z l (t), z l (t), z h (θ, t), and z h (θ, t)). The price functions are determined by z(t) and
w(t). The second step is to solve for w(t) from a market-clearing condition given the
schooling threshold and consumption thresholds. Then, repeat the ﬁrst and second
steps until convergence.
It can be shown that the disaggregate model can be expressed as a more standard
model over aggregate consumption of manufactured goods and services, but the preferences vary with productivity. Moreover, productivity increases that are balanced,
in the sense that AG (t) = AS (t) and φ(t) = 1, yield growth in the service sector that
is qualitatively consistent with several features of the data (see BK, 2012a, 2012b).
First, the growth of services is delayed. At low levels of income, growth leads to
new services being consumed in the market but old market services moving to home
production as the cost of intermediates falls. This feature is least relevant for the
quantitative analysis, since our analysis only covers the period of rising services. Second, and more relevant, the growth of services is driven by the growth of high-skilled
services. As incomes continue to rise, demand shifts toward ever more complex output at which specialized high-skilled workers have an ever increasing comparative
advantage. Market services increase as these complex services are more diﬃcult to
move into home production. In turn, the demand for high-skilled workers increases,
and more agents decide to specialize. Given F (θ), the supply curve for skilled workers is upward sloping. As the relative wage increases, this increases the demand for
market services among high-skilled workers, who constitute an ever increasing share
of the economy. Third, since manufactured goods are produced in the market for
the full range of z consumed, while only high z services are consumed in the market,
market services are more intensive in high-skilled labor. Ceteris paribus, a rising
relative wage w leads to increases in the relative price of services. Finally, the share
of services is increasing in their eﬃcient scale of production n(t), which has trended
up. This growth in scale in turn decreases labor used in home production in favor of
13

market production, and thereby also increases the incentives for acquiring skill. The
following section calibrates the relevant features to quantify the relative importance
of these eﬀects.

3

Quantitative Analysis of the Benchmark Model

We calibrate the preferences and technological parameters of the model to match
key features of the 1965 U.S. economy and the observed changes between 1965 and
2010 in the market for skilled workers, the importance of home production, the
relative price of services relative to manufacturing, and overall GDP. Importantly,
in our calibration we do not target the change in the share of services in GDP. We
then use the calibrated model to quantify the fraction of the rise of services than
can be accounted for by the exogenous driving forces in our model and the relative
contribution of each of these forces.
We need to pin down ten parameters: one preference parameter ν that gives
the utility of market services relative to home-produced, one ﬁxed technological parameter λ that captures the comparative advantage of high-skilled workers in more
complex output, two parameters describing the distribution of the cost of acquiring
skills, a and b, the 1965 and 2010 values for the eﬃcient scale of market services
n(t) and the relative productivity of skill workers φ(t) = φ0 eγh t , and the productivity
growth of service and manufacturing production γS and γG . These parameters are
chosen to match ten moments from the U.S. data. Four of these moments are for the
initial period, 1965: the initial share of service in GDP, the initial share of intermediate manufacturing in service value added, the initial skill premium, and the initial
fraction of high-skilled working-age population. Six of these are growth moments
between 1965 and 2010: the increase in the fraction of high-skilled working-age population, the increase in the skill premium, the growth in the relative market work
hours of high- to low-skilled working-age population, the growth in real per-capita
GDP, the growth in the relative price of services to manufacturing, and the growth

14

in the average size of service establishments.7,8
Even though the mapping between some of the parameters of the model and
the moments is jointly determined and highly non-linear, it is useful to describe
heuristically the calibration by highlighting the moments that are primarily aﬀected
by each individual parameter. We start by discussing the parameters primarily
determining the demand and supply of skilled workers.
We follow BK (2012a) in viewing college education as the appropriate empirical
counterpart to high-skilled workers. The initial relative productivity of high-skilled
workers (in low complexity output), φ0 , can vary so that the relative wage in the
model matches the college skill premium in 1965 of 1.41. The skill premium data
are taken from weekly wage data from the Current Population Survey (CPS), using
male full-time workers between the ages of 21 and 65.
We assume that the distribution of θ, the cost of acquiring skills in the model, follows a Beta distribution, β(a, b), which supports θ between 0 and 1. This parametrization assures an interior solution for the fraction of workers acquiring specialized skills.
The calibrated distribution can be left-skewed or right-skewed as well as symmetric,
depending on the values of a and b. One of these parameters helps us target the fraction of working-age population (aged 21-65 in the CPS) that are college-educated
in 1965, 0.23. The other parameter in the beta distribution, together with the parameter λ which captures the comparative advantage of high-skilled workers in more
complex output and the skill-biased technical change parameter γh , can be varied to
match the increase between 1965 and 2010 in the fraction of high-skilled workers (36
percentage points), the increase in the skilled premium (41 percentage points), and
the growth in the relative market hours of high- to low-skilled workers (3 percent).
We target several other time trends over the 1965 and 2010 period as well. We
choose the rates of technical change in each sector, γS and γG , to match growth in
real GDP per capita (144 percent) and the change in the relative price of services
to manufacturing, which increased by 44 percent over the same period. Notice that
7

Details of data sources and calculations are available from the authors in an unpublished data
appendix.
8
In order not to confound our long-run focus with the impacts of the deep 2008 ﬁnancial crisis
and its aftermath, we use simple ﬁve-year averages for 2006-2010 as our endpoint targets

15

movement toward more complex and skilled intensive services also generates a rise in
the relative price of services to manufacturing. Thus, sector-speciﬁc technical change
is a complementary force aﬀecting this relative price.
The technology parameter n determines the ratio of intermediate manufacturing
inputs to value-added. We choose its initial value n0 to target this value, which from
input-output tables is 0.12 in 1965. Changes in n translate into changes in workers
per establishment in services. Given the initial eﬃcient scale value, n0 , the remaining
time series of n is constructed from data on the workers per service establishment.
The average service establishment has 1.56 times as many workers in 2010 as in 1965
based on County Business Patterns data.
Finally, given the other parameters, the utility of market services relative to
home-produced ν can be varied to pin down the initial share of services, which in
1965 was 0.65.
A summary of parameters and targets is given in Table 1. As shown in the second
column of Table 2, the benchmark model is able to hit all the data moments. The
calibrated θ distribution is right-skewed (with a larger mass on the smaller values
of θ). Although the rising skill premium itself leads to some growth in the relative
price of services, targeting the relative prices still requires slightly lower TFP growth
in the service sector of 0.0135, which is about two-thirds the TFP growth rate in
the manufacturing sector (0.0193). This is relatively comparable to productivity
measurements by Jorgensen and Stiroh (2000) over this period, which is allowed for
by the fact that the rising skill premium accounts for the balance of the growth in
the relative price of services. A more standard model of biased productivity growth
would need (counterfactually) larger bias sectoral productivities.
The skill-biased productivity growth adds roughly half a percentage point to
high-skilled workers productivity annually, which amounts to about 27 percentage
points by 2010. The relative wage is 41 percentage points higher in 2010 than in
1965, so the remainder comes from the movement toward more complex goods and
the comparative advantage parameter λ.

16

3.1

Accounting for the Rising Service Share

We now analyze the model’s predictions for the change in the service share over time.
Note that this is purely an out-of-sample test, since the change in the service share
was not targeted by our calibration. We will focus on the predictions for the long-run
change between 1965 and 2010. The higher frequency dynamics of this change are
not particularly interesting; the model itself is static, we do not account for business
cycle factors, and the calibration assumed linear productivity trends. We simply
note that the eﬀects occur fairly linearly with increased productivity, so the model
matches the relatively stable time trends in the data quite well in this regard, with
the exception of the skill premium, which declined in the 1970s before accelerating
in the 1980s.9
The model does quite well in reproducing this growth in the service share as
shown in Table 2. In 1965, the service share in the model matches that in the
data (0.650) by construction, i.e., because it is a target in our calibration. In 2010,
the model predicts a service share of 0.809, nearly identical to the 0.813 in the
data. This is our ﬁrst important ﬁnding: the model is able to fully explain the 16
percentage point increase in the share of services observed in the data. To put this
change in perspective, 16 percentage points currently exceeds the total size of the
manufacturing sector in 2012.
We now examine which factors are most important in accounting for this increase.
We have four exogenous factors that change over time, which we examine in turn.
We examine their role by running counterfactuals where either the factor in question
is held constant in the model (i.e., the factor is “turned oﬀ”) or where the factor in
question is the only factor not held constant in the model (i.e., the only factor “turned
on”). We turn factors oﬀ by keeping the relevant parameters at their calibrated 1965
levels and turn factors on by setting them at their calibrated 2010 levels.
The results are shown in Table 3. Since the calibration hits the 1965 service share
for every simulation, we focus on the overall service increase explained by diﬀerent
9

The literature has typically pointed to the importance of cohort eﬀects, speciﬁcally the Baby
Boom, in explaining this, while assuming a constant skill bias in technical change (e.g., Katz and
Murphy, 1992). These cohort eﬀects are clearly outside the model.

17

simulations and how it diﬀers from either the benchmark simulation, where we turn
oﬀ factors, or how it diﬀers from zero, where we turn on factors. Turning on factors
is giving the 2010 value to the 1965 economy, while turning oﬀ factors is eﬀectively
giving the 1965 value to the 2010 economy.
The ﬁrst factor is simply the increase in productivity, which pushes demand for
more skill-intensive services because λ < 1. We call this the income eﬀect. As
explained by BK (2012a), this has a direct eﬀect, since for these more complex
services, market services are cheaper than home production. It also has an indirect
eﬀect by increasing the demand for high-skilled workers. The share of services in
consumption is higher for high-skilled workers, since their opportunity cost of home
production is higher. Moreover, it is increasing in the skill premium, which captures
this opportunity cost. Hence, higher demand for skill leads to both a higher skill
premium and more high-skilled workers, both of which contribute to a higher share
of services. Quantitatively, Table 3 indicates that this eﬀect accounts for a 5.2
percentage point smaller increase in services when it is the only factor turned oﬀ and
a 3.8 percent increase when it is the only factor turned on. These eﬀects amount to
33 and 24 percent, respectively, of the total increase in the benchmark model.
The second factor is the factor emphasized by BK (2012b): the rising scale of
services, n (t). Larger scale services lead to a larger cost diﬀerential between home
and market services because the market economizes on the manufactured inputs,
which are a ﬁxed cost. Thus, larger scale services lead to more market services.
Quantitatively, this factor is also non-negligible, accounting for a 4.6 percentage
point smaller increase in services when it is the only factor turned oﬀ and a 6.3
percentage point increase when it is the only factor turned on. These amount to 29
and 40 percent of the total increase, respectively. The diﬀerence comes from the fact
that cost diﬀerences are driven by scale relatively more in 1965, but by skill relatively
more in 2010.
These ﬁrst two factors are unique to the BK model. To see how important these
two factors are, we turned them both on and oﬀ together. Turning both oﬀ together
leads to a 10.7 percentage points smaller increase in the service share, while turning
both on alone would lead to a 9.7 percentage point increase in the service share.
18

These constitute 67.1 and 61.2 percent of the total increase, respectively. Thus, it
appears that these two BK-speciﬁc factors play an important role individually, and
together they account for the bulk of the increase in the service share.
The third factor, skill-biased technical change, is also very important, however.
Skill-biased technical change is certainly part of other models that explain the trends
in the skill premium and the supply of skills, but our emphasis on specialized skills
being speciﬁc to market production implies that skill-biased technical change also
leads to the growth in services. The logic is the same as for the indirect channels
of the income eﬀect explained above, where the higher demand for skill leads to a
higher opportunity cost of home production for high-skilled workers and a higher
fraction of high-skilled workers. Skill-biased technical change accounts for a 12.6
percentage point smaller increase in services when it is the only factor turned oﬀ and
a 9.4 percentage point increase in services when it is the only factor turned on. Both
of these are larger than the combined impacts of the ﬁrst two factors. These amount
to 79.1 to 58.9 percent of the total increase in services, respectively.
Thus, if all factors were additive and positive, we would already have overaccounted for the increase in services.
However, the fourth factor, sector-biased technical change, works in the opposite
direction. In most biased productivity models (e.g., Ngai and Pissarides, 2007),
faster technical change in the manufacturing sector (coupled with an elasticity of
substitution between goods and services that is less than one) leads to a rising share
of the service sector. In the BK model, however, one of the beneﬁts of market services
is that they save on the cost of manufactured inputs by operating at the maximum
scale, n (t). Biased technical change in favor of manufacturing makes these inputs
become relatively cheap. As inputs become cheap, the cost savings from using market
services disappears. People substitute toward more manufactured goods for home
production and fewer market services. Admittedly, the starkness of our model may
somewhat overstate this channel, since we assume that home production is n (t)
times more capital-intensitive than market services for any speciﬁc service z, but
our extreme choice of no substitutability between goods and services within the
(Leontieﬀ) market or home production technologies, also maximizes the magnitude
19

of the more traditional channel. The fact that quantitatively the former dominates
the latter, suggests that the BK channel, which is an omitted channel in the broader
literature, could well be quantitatively important.
In order to quantitatively isolate the eﬀect of biased technical change from overall
technical change (i.e. the productivity/income eﬀect of the ﬁrst factor), we change
relative productivity across the sectors without changing absolute productivity. Table 3 indeed shows that this factor works to reduce the share of services, but the
strength of this factor depends strongly on the presence of others. When it is the
only factor turned oﬀ, i.e., it is turned oﬀ in 2010, it leads to only a 1.6 percentage
point greater increase in services. This is because the other factors make the cost
savings of market services in 2010 primarily skill-driven rather than goods-driven.
However, when it is the only factor turned on, i.e., if it is turned on in 1965 when
the goods cost savings coming from market services are substantially larger, it leads
to an 11.0 percentage point decrease in the service share.
The results indicate that the market for skill plays an important role in the rise of
services. Table 4 illustrates this more clearly by showing the role of the endogenous
increase in the skill premium and the endogenous increase in schooling attainment.
We do this by solving and aggregating households’ problems at the benchmark equilibrium prices, but keeping either the relative wage ﬁxed, schooling decisions ﬁxed,
or both ﬁxed at their 1965 values. (Eﬀectively, we model and aggregate a partial
equilibrium economy, where goods and labor markets need not clear). We learn two
things. First, when both are kept ﬁxed, the increase in the service share is only 4
percentage points, indicating that these labor market adjustments coming from the
increased demand for skill are critical. Second, we see that the increase in the skill
premium plays an important role in any case, but that the increase in schooling only
plays an important role when the skill premium also increases. This is because when
the skill premium is high, the share of services in high-skill consumption is much
higher than it is in low-skill consumption.
Table 5 examines the impact of these various factors on the other important
changes over time that we targeted when calibrating the model: the increase in the
fraction skilled, the increase in the skill premium, the growth of measured GDP
20

per capita, and the growth in the relative price of services. The increasing fraction
of high-skilled and the skill premium both reﬂect a rising demand for high-skilled
labor, and so the income eﬀect toward skill-intensive output and skill-biased technical
change play the leading roles. SBTC is over twice as important, but the income
eﬀect still plays a signiﬁcant role. For the growth in real GDP per capita, naturally
the income eﬀect almost exclusively drives things. However, the other factors still
play signiﬁcant roles by moving output between unmeasured home production and
measured market services. Finally, the growth in the relative price of services is
driven largely by sector-biased technical change, but scale eﬀects also play a role.
To summarize, the benchmark model has shown that forces of the BK model are
quantitatively important and can explain the observed increase in the service share.
Moreover, much of the action in the model comes through the rising opportunity
cost of home production, i.e., the rising skill premium. In evaluating the robustness
of these results, an important question is whether they hold up in a model with
multiple person households, where the opportunity cost of home production may not
be the skill premium because one worker can specialize in market production.

4

Extended Model

To this end, we extend the benchmark model by adding a gender-speciﬁc component
in home production, which generates a mechanism for household specialization. The
increase in female labor supply is integrated in the process of structural change, which
allows us to evaluate the model vis-à-vis its implications for female labor supply, and
to assess the role of changes in female labor supply on the growth of the service
sector.
It is empirically interesting to disaggregate labor by gender and marital status.
According to the Current Population Survey, in 1965 about 12 percent of the population aged 21 to 65 were single women (or widows). By 2010, single women constituted
21 percent of the population. In addition, the market work hours of single females
is about 80 percent of the market work hours of their male counterparts during the
same period, according to the American Time Use Survey. Moreover, during the
21

same period, the market work hours of married females relative to the market work
hours of their male counterparts increased from 0.29 to 0.63, which may be in part
explained by the increase in the fraction of married females with high school or college education. Hence, a greater proportion of single women and the increase in
skill intensity among married women could potentially explain a good portion of the
increase in the service economy. On the other hand, the existence of married households themselves may weaken the impact of a rising skill premium on the demand
for services, since households can specialize.
The production/technology side of the extended model is identical to the benchmark model presented in the previous section, so we only explain the household side
of the extended model.

4.1

Households

There are three types of households in the extended model: single women, single
men, and married couples.
As before, each type of household is inﬁnitesimally-lived and they diﬀer in their
cost of acquiring skills, θ ∈ [0, 1], where θ ∼ F (θ). We assume that the fractions of
each type of household in the overall population are exogenous. We implicitly assume
perfect assortative matching among spouses in married couples, which is clearly an
abstraction.
Single male and single female households are identical to households in the previous section, except that they diﬀer by gender-speciﬁc productivity of home production. Married couples decide schooling and labor supply decisions jointly and may
optimally choose diﬀerent schooling and labor allocations between home and market
production for the husband and wife. In particular, the member with a comparative
advantage in home production will spend relatively more time at home, while the
other member will supply relatively more labor to the market.

22

4.2

Preferences

As before, a single-person household requires one unit of services to satiate want z,
but married couple households now require 2 units. Formally:
ˆ

+∞

u(C, H) =
0

[H(z) + ν(1 − H(z))] · C(z) · Q · dz.

(8)

The additional parameter Q equals 1 if it is a single-person household’s preference
function and 2 if it is a married couple’s preference function.

4.3

Consumer’s Problem

A single household solves the following maximization problem by choosing z, z, and
e:

Ve,g (θ) =
ˆze

ˆze

s.t.

ˆze

pS (z, t)dz = we (1 −

pG (z, t)dz +
0

max (1 − ν)z e + νz e

z,z,e∈{l,h}

ze

0

1
dz − θI(e)).
AS (t)Al (z)Ag

The value function V is now indexed by g, which is the gender of the individual. All terms are identical to the benchmark model, with the exception of the
home production time, which now depends on the gender-speciﬁc productivity, Ag .
Thus, the productivity of home production is allowed to diﬀer from the productivity of low-skilled workers by a scalar, and this scalar diﬀers for men and women.
Quantitatively, Af is expected to be greater than Am , so that females have a comparative advantage in home production in order to match the gender-speciﬁc diﬀerences in home-production time.10 Given this diﬀerence, the threshold of the ability
10

In principle, one might want to allow market productivity to vary with gender as well, in order
to match observed diﬀerences in market wages.

23

level being indiﬀerent between becoming high-skilled and low-skilled, θg , will now be
gender-speciﬁc as well.
A married couple’s problem is similar to a single-person household’s problem, but
the consumption, schooling, market labor, and home production decisions are jointly
determined between a husband and wife. For simplicity, we deﬁne a threshold z̃ with
the innocuous assumption that the wife performs all home production below z̃, and
the husband performs all home production between z̃ and z.11 Using z̃, we deﬁne
tm and tf as the amount of time spent on home production, and we require that
these be bounded (weakly) above zero and below the available labor supply of each
individual. In addition, we allow the possibility for the home production of a married
couple to economize on intermediate goods relative to that of single households. We
introduce nc > 1 to parameterize this. The couple’s problem is therefore:
max

zee ≤z ee ≤z ee , em ,ef ∈{l,h}

2
nc

z ee
ˆ

z ee
ˆ

s.t.
pS (z, t)dz = wem (1 − tm − θI(em )) + wef (1 − tf − θI(ef ))

pG (z, t)dz + 2
0

V em ef (θ) = 2(1 − ν)z ee + 2νz ee

z ee

z ee
ˆ

tm = 2
zee
zee
ˆ

tf = 2
0

1
dz  0,
AS (t)Al (z)Am
1
dz  0
AS (t)Al (z)Af

1 − tm − θI(em )  0, 1 − tf − θI(ef )  0, z ee − zee  0.

(9)

We denote the individual education choices of the husband and wife as em and
ef , respectively. There are four schooling choices: 1) both husband and wife choose
to be high-skilled (hh); 2) both husband and wife choose to be low-skilled (ll); 3)
only the husband chooses to be high-skilled (hl); and 4) only the wife chooses to be
11

The formulation is equivalent if we deﬁne a threshold z̃ such that the husband performs all
home production below z̃, and the wife performs all home production between z̃ and z.

24

high-skilled (lh). If Af > Am , the schooling choice (lh) will never be optimal, as
stated in the following proposition.
Proposition 1 Given Am < Af , the schooling choice of lh (low-skilled husband,
high-skilled wife) will always be dominated by hl (high-skilled husband, low-skilled
wife).
Proof. See Appendix A.
Specialization in home production, characterized by z (see Appendix A for the
Kuhn-Tucker conditions), is driven by the comparative advantage in home production, which depends on the values of Af and Am . If Af > Am , the wife will have a
comparative advantage in home production, which leads to the following proposition.
Proposition 2 Given Af > Am and w > 1, at least one spouse will fully specialize.
If the husband works both at home and in the market, his wife will fully specialize in
home production. If the wife works both at home and in the market, her husband will
fully specialize in market production.
Proof. See Appendix A.
Without loss of generality, we assume Af > Am for the remaining discussion.
Given a married couple’s value function deﬁned in (9), both husband and wife choose
to be high-skilled if:
V hh (θ) ≥ max{V hl (θ), V ll }.
By the same token, only the husband chooses to be high-skilled if:
V hl (θ) ≥ max{V hh (θ), V ll }.
The value of the schooling choice (ll) is independent of θ, while the values of the
schooling choices (hh) and (hl) are strictly decreasing in θ. If the skill premium is
positive, V hh (0) > V hl (0) and V hl (0) > V ll . Moreover, when θ = 1, V ll > V hl (1) and
V hl (1) > V hh (1). Thus, there will exist two unique thresholds, (θ1 , θ2 ), such that

25

V hh (θ1 ) = V hl (θ1 )
V hl (θ2 ) = V ll .
For θ ∈ [0, θ1 ), both husband and wife choose to be high-skilled. For θ ∈ (θ1 , θ2 ],
only the husband chooses to be high-skilled. For θ ∈ (θ2 , 1], both will remain lowskilled. If the wife’s time constraint is not binding, θ2 is equal to 1 − 1/w, which
equalizes the net wages between a high-skilled husband and a low-skilled husband.

4.4

Equilibrium

A competitive equilibrium consists of w(t), θm , θf , θ1 , and θ2 , z(t), the price functions
pG (z, t) and pS (z, t), and the consumption thresholds (z l (t), z l (t), z h (θ, t), z h (θ, t),
z ll (t), z ll (t), z hl (θ, t), z hl (θ, t), z hh (θ, t), z hh (θ, t)). The model can be solved in two
steps recursively in a fashion very similar to in the benchmark model.

5

Calibration of the Extended Model

In this section, we describe the calibration of the extended model. We have three
additional parameters: the relative productivity of men and women in home production, Am and Af , respectively; and the number of manufactured goods required
per unit of services in married couples, nc . We calibrate the model using the same
approach as in the benchmark model, but adding the following three target moments
in 1965. We use Am and Af to match the initial relative market work hours of (1)
married women to married men and (2) single women to single men. We choose nc
to match the relative market supply of labor of married women to single women.
These targets require that men are roughly one-fourth as productive as women in
home production, but then women are still only two-third as productive at home
relative to their productivity in the market. Finally, we require only small returns to
scale coming from home production. The calibrated nc = 1.173 implies that married
26

couples purchase 1.7 manufactured goods to produce two units of services. They
therefore do not economize as well on manufactured goods as the market does.
In addition, we change the composition of household types (married, single) to
match the changes in their composition in the data. The proportion of people in married couples fell from 80 percent in 1965 to just 59 percent in 2010. Correspondingly,
the proportion of single households doubled from 20 to 41 percent.
Table 6 summarizes the calibration for the extended model. As with the benchmark case, we are able to hit all the data moments. Indeed, comparing Table 6 with
Table 1, the same patterns hold, with a rightward-skewed θ distribution and similar
productivity parameters.

5.1

Accounting for Service Growth and Female Labor Supply

We now examine the model’s predictions for the value-added share of the service
sector and the growth in female labor supply and quantify the roles of the diﬀerent
factors to explain these trends. We begin by examining whether our results for the
service share growth are robust to the extension to multiple-person households.
Table 7 shows these results. The model now predicts an increase of 18.7 percentage points in the service share, which actually overpredicts the growth in services
by 2.4 percentage points. Clearly, the large quantitative magnitude of the channels
holds up to introducing the possibility of specialization in two-person households.
The lower panel examines the decompositions for the cases in which we turn individual factors oﬀ. The same essential patterns emerge in this extended model, with
the BK channels of income eﬀects increasing demand for skill-intensive output and
increasing scale combining to account for roughly the same amount of service share
increase as SBTC. Overall, the magnitudes of these channels are somewhat smaller in
the extended model. The demographic change in household composition contributes
2.9 percentage points to the increase; and when all factors are put together, they
overpredict the growth of services. In the extended model, married couples have
higher rates of home production and consume smaller shares of market services. The
27

decline in the importance of married households in the population therefore increases
the relative size of the service sector through a compositional eﬀect.
Table 8 examines the importance of the endogenous education and skill premium
responses in the extended model. This analysis is analogous to the exercise in Table
4, where we aggregate households’ problems at the benchmark equilibrium prices,
but keep either the relative wage ﬁxed, schooling decisions ﬁxed, or both ﬁxed at
their 1965 values. In Table 8, we look at the impacts of doing this separately for
various subpopulations. The impact of the skill premium for men has a relatively
small eﬀect on the service share, while the impact of men’s educational choices are
negligible. In total, the two together account for less than 3 percentage points. The
eﬀects for women, however, are more than twice as strong, and both educational
choices and the skill premium play some role. Female labor supply decisions are
clearly disproportionately important in understanding service growth. Examining
this more closely, when we look at single women and married women separately in
the lower panels of Table 8, we see that the impact on married women is somewhat
larger.
In the data, the market labor supply of women relative to men rose by 32.0
percentage points. Table 9 examines the models’ predictions along this front. The
factors we have modeled can account for an 18.7 percentage point increase (coincidentally nearly identical to the service share increase) along this dimension. Recall
that we merely targeted the initial relative market work hour ratios in the economy,
so the features of the model endogenously driving service economy growth also endogenously explain 58(=18.7/32.0) percent of the observed increase in relative female
market labor supply. The lower panel decomposes the diﬀerent exogenous factors in
the model that drive this endogenous increase. The BK forces of higher productivity and demand for skill-intensive services and larger eﬃcient scale of services are
both important and together explain about three-quarters of the increase. As it did
with the service share increase, SBTC again explains even more than the BK forces.
On the other hand, manufacturing-biased technical change now has a large negative
eﬀect on female labor supply by lowering the cost of the intermediate goods used
intensively in home production, and this oﬀsets three-quarters of the increase. Fi28

nally, demographic changes lead to an increase in female labor supply through a pure
composition eﬀect: Single females have higher labor supply than married females, so
the falling proportion of married couples increases overall female labor supply.
In the introduction, we mentioned the coincident trends of rising female employment in services and the rising service share. We now evaluate to what extent this
is a causal relationship. We do so by asking how much the service share would
have increased if the labor supply decisions of a particular group were kept ﬁxed at
their 1965 levels, e.g., female labor supply decisions. That is, we impose potentially
suboptimal labor supply decisions, but allow households to optimize along other dimensions. Also, we solve a full GE model in this case and insist on market clearing
conditions holding, given the suboptimal labor supply decisions. The results are presented in Table 10 for diﬀerent subpopulations. For men, the impact of labor supply
is quite negligible, which is not surprising since labor supply was already quite high
for men in 1965. What is more surprising is that the impact for women, although
four times that of men, is still quite small. If women were constrained to supply the
same amount of labor in 2010 as they did in 1965, the model predicts that the service
share increase would have been only 2.2 percentage points less than in the unconstrained model. The decomposition shows that this is driven almost exclusively by
the labor supply of married women.
The numbers are surprising and require a bit of discussion. As a caveat, recall that
the model only explained 58 percent of the true increase in the relative labor supply
of females. All of this underprediction comes from underpredicting the increase in
married female labor supply relative to married male labor supply. (Indeed, we
somewhat overestimate the increase in relative labor supply of single females relative
to single males.) Thus, there are clearly some aspects of female labor supply that our
model doesn’t capture, and it is possible that these would be linked with services.
However, we suspect that the growth in services and female employment may simply
be correlated because of a mild comparative advantage in services that we don’t
model. In that case, a minor causal role may indeed exist. This is certainly what
our model suggests. Further analysis is beyond the scope of this paper. In sum,
the conclusion that the model can explain the growth in services is robust to the
29

addition of female labor supply and married couples, as are the importance of skillbiased technical change and the BK factors. Moreoever, the model itself can explain
over half of the catchup of female labor supply with male labor supply. The declining
proportion of married couples in the population plays a smaller role in the growth
in services and a larger role in the increase in female labor supply.

6

Conclusion

We have shown that the BK model is a quantitatively plausible explanation for the
observed growth in the share of services in the United States between 1965 and 2010.
In particular, the rising scale of services, rising demand for skill-intensive output
stemming from income eﬀects, and skill-biased technical change all play quantitatively important roles in the growth of services. These latter two manifest themselves
largely through increases in the skill premium and the fraction of the population who
are high-skilled.
These results are robust to extending the model to allow for married couples,
specialization, and gender-speciﬁc labor supply. However, in this model the falling
proportion of married couples in the population and, to a lesser extent, the endogenous increase in female labor supply, especially among married women, also play
quantitatively important roles. Still, a caveat is that the model only explains about
half of the observed increase in female labor supply and only a small fraction of the
increase in the labor supply of married women relative to married men. These results
may presumably be driven by forces outside of the model and are promising avenues
for future research.

References
[1] Acemoglu, D. and V. Guerrieri. (2008). “Capital Deepening and Nonbalanced Economic Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 116(3): 467498.

30

[2] Aguiar, M. and E. Hurst. (2007). “Measuring Trends in Leisure: The
Allocation of Time over Five Decades,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122(3), pp. 969-1006.
[3] Baumol, W. J. “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy
of Urban Crisis,” American Economic Review, 1967, 57(3): pp. 415-26.
[4] Buera, F. and J. Kaboski. (2009). “Can Traditional Theories of Structural Change Fit The Data?,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 7(2-3), pp. 469-477
[5] Buera, F. and J. Kaboski. (2012a). “The Rise of the Service Economy,”
American Economic Review, 102 (October 2012): 2540-69
[6] Buera, F. and J. Kaboski (2012b). “Scale and the Origins of Structural
Change,” Journal of Economic Theory, 147 (March 2012): 684-712.
[7] Duarte, M. and D. Restuccia (2010) “The Role of the Structural Transformation in Aggregate Productivity,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
125(1), pp. 129-173
[8] Echevarria, C. (1997) “Changes in Sectoral Composition Associated
with Economic Growth.” International Economic Review, 1997, 38(2),
pp. 431-452.
[9] Goldin, C. (2006). “The Quiet Revolution that Transformed Women’s
Employment, Education, and Family,” 2006 Ely Lecture, American Economic Association Meetings, Boston MA.
[10] Goldin, C., F. Lawrence, & I. Kuziemko. (2006). “The Homecoming of
American College Women: the Reversal of the College Gender Gap,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 20, number 4, pp. 133-156.
[11] Gollin, D., S. Parente, and R. Rogerson (2002). “The Role of Agriculture in Development,” American Economic Review, 92(2), Papers and
Proceedings, pp. 160-164.
31

[12] Greenwood, J., A. Seshadri, and M. Yorukoglu (2005). “Engines of Liberation,” Review of Economic Studies 72, pp. 109-133.
[13] Jones, L.E., R.E. Manuelli, and E.R. McGrattan (2003). “Why are Married Women Working So Much?” Staﬀ Report 317, Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis.
[14] Jorgenson, D. and K. Stiroh (2000). “Raising the Speed Limit: U.S.
Economic Growth in the Information Age,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, pp. 125-211.
[15] Katz, L.F. and Murphy K.M. (1992). “Changes in Relative Wages, 19631987: Supply and Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
107(1), pp. 35-78.
[16] Kongsamut, P., S. Rebelo, and D. Xie. (2001) “Beyond Balanced
Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, 2001, 68, pp. 869-882.
[17] Lee, D. and L.K. Wolpin (2006). “Intersectoral Labor Mobility and the
Growth of the Service Sector,” Econometrica, 74(1), pp. 1-46.
[18] Mulligan, C. B. and Y. Rubinstein (2008) “Selection, Investment, and
Women’s Relative Wages over Time.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2008, 123(3), pp. 1061-110.
[19] Ngai, L. R. and C.A. Pissarides. (2007). “Structural Change In A Multisector Model of Growth.” American Economic Review, 97 (1). pp.
429-443.
[20] Ngai, L. R. and C.A. Pissarides. (2007). “Trends in Hours and Economic
Growth.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(2), pp. 239-256
[21] Ngai, L. R. and B. Petrongolo (2012). “Structural Tranformation, Marketization and Female Employment.” Mimeo London School of Economics.
32

0.90

Figure 1: Growth of Value-Added Share of Services
Services

Share of Total Value-Added

0.80
Goods
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
1965

1970

1975

1980

1985 1990
Year

1995

2000

2005

2010

50

Figure 2: Importance of Female Employment in
Service Sector Growth
Female, Services

% of Total Employment

45
40
Male, Services

35
30
25

Male, Goods

20
15
10

Female, Goods

5
0
1965

1970

1975

1980

1985 1990
Year

1995

2000

2005

2010

Table 1: Calibration of Benchmark Model

Moment
Initial Value (1965) Moments:
Service Share
Intermediate Manufacturing Inputs/Value-Added
Skill Premium
High-Skilled Fraction of Population
Growth (1965-2010) Moments:
Increase inHigh-Skilled Fraction of Population
Increase in Skill Premium
Growth in Relative Market Work Hours of High to Low Skilled Population
Growth in Real Per Capita GDP
Growth in Relative Price of Services/Manufacturing

Data
Value

Model
Value

Relevant
Parameter

Parameter
Value

0.65
0.12
1.41
0.23

0.65
0.12
1.41
0.23

ν
n1965
0
Beta: a

0.67
8.52
1.39
3.61

0.36
0.41
0.03
1.44
0.44

0.36
0.41
0.03
1.44
0.44

Beta: b
λ
γh
γS
γG

6.51
0.70
0.0054
0.0135
0.0193

Table 2: Service Growth in Benchmark Model
(Current) Value-Added Service Share
Moment

1965

2010

Percentage Point
Increase

Data
Model

0.650
0.650

0.813
0.809

16.3
15.9

Note: The model matches the data in 1965 by calibration.

Table 3: Decomposing Service Share Increase: Counterfactuals
Percentage
Point
Difference

Percent of
Benchmark

All Factors (Benchmark)

15.9

-

No Income Effect
No Scale Effect
No Income or Scale Effects
No Skill-Biased Technical Change
No Sector-Biased Technical Change

5.2
4.6
10.7
12.6
-1.6

32.8%
28.8%
67.1%
79.1%
-10.2%

Only Income Effect

3.8

23.9%

Only Scale Effect

6.3

39.4%

9.7
9.4
-11.0

61.2%
58.9%
-69.4%

Simulation

Only Income and Scale Effects
Only Skill-Biased Technical Change
Only Sector-Biased Technical Change

Note: The "Percentage Point Difference" is the total percentage point increase in the current-value, value-added
service share for "All Factors" and the "Only" simulations in the lower panel. For the "No" simulations, it is the
difference between the "All Factors" service share increase and the service share increase under the specified
"No" simulation.

Table 4: Effect of Skill Premium and Educational Choices
Counterfactual Percentage Point
Increase in Service Share

Skill Premium
Fixed at 1965 Value

Benchmark Skill Premium

Fixed at 1965 Choices

3.2

6.8

Benchmark Educational Choices

10.2

15.9

Note: The simulations shows the increase in the current-value value-added service share between 1965
and 2010 under counterfactual simulations when fixing the skill premium and educational choices at
either the benchmark 2010 values or the initial 1965 values. Budget constraints are imposed, but market
clearing conditions are not. The simulations are thus aggregations of partial equilibrium household
decisions.

Table 5: Counterfactual Impacts on Other Changes Over Time
Growth in
Relative
Price of
Services

Fraction of
High Skilled

ΔSkill
Premium

Growth in
Real GDP
per Capita

All Factors/Data

0.36

0.41

1.44

0.44

Income Effect
Scale Effect
Income and Scale Effects
Skill-Biased Technical Change
Goods-Biased Technical Change

0.12
0.02
0.14
0.28
-0.04

0.14
0.00
0.14
0.29
0.02

1.38
0.11
1.42
0.53
-0.02

0.06
0.13
0.18
-0.01
0.32

Moment

Note: These effects are calculated as the difference between the increase or growth of the specified moment in the model with all factors and
the data moment in the simulation where the specified effect is turned off in 2010. Thus, these are comparable to the "No" effects in Table 3.

Table 6: Calibration of Extended Model

Moment
Initial Value (1965) Moments:
Service Share
Intermediate Manufacturing Inputs/Value-Added
Skill Premium
High-Skilled Fraction of Population
Relative Market Work Hours (Married Female/Married Male)
Relative Market Work Hours (Single Female/Single Male)
Relative Market Work Hours (Married Women/Single Women)
Growth (1965-2010) Moments:
Increase inHigh-Skilled Fraction of Population
Increase in Skill Premium
Growth in Relative Market Work Hours of High to Low Skilled Population
Growth in Real Per Capita GDP
Growth in Relative Price of Services/Manufacturing

Data
Value

Model
Value

Relevant
Parameter

Parameter
Value

0.65
0.12
1.41
0.23
0.29
0.80
0.38

0.65
0.12
1.41
0.23
0.29
0.80
0.38

ν
n1965
0
Beta: a
Af
Am
nc

0.581
8.518
1.430
3.596
0.678
0.165
1.173

0.36
0.41
0.03
1.44
0.44

0.36
0.41
0.03
1.44
0.44

Beta: b
λ
γh
γS
γG

6.889
0.647
0.0059
0.0112
0.0171

Table 7: Service Share Growth and Decomposition in Extended Model
Percentage Point Increase in Service Share

Percentage Point Difference

Percent of Benchmark

Full Simulation

18.7

-

Income Effect
Scale Effect
Income and Scale Effects
Skill-Biased Technical Change
Sector-Biased Technical Change
Demographic Change

3.2
4.1
7.7
7.7
-0.1
2.9

17.3%
22.0%
41.2%
41.0%
-0.3%
15.7%

Simulation

Note: These effects are calculated as the difference between the current-value, value-added service share increase in the extended model with all
factors and the service share increase in the simulation where the specified effect is turned off in 2010. Thus, these are comparable to the "No"

Table 8: Effect of Skill Premium and Educational Choices on Service Share
Counterfactual Percentage Point
Increase in Service Share

Skill Premium
Fixed at 1965 Value

Benchmark Skill Premium

Fixed at 1965 Choices

15.9

18.5

Benchmark Educational Choices

15.9

18.7

Fixed at 1965 Choices

12.8

14.5

Benchmark Educational Choices

15.9

18.7

Single Women

Fixed at 1965 Choices
Benchmark Educational Choices

14.9
15.9

17.4
18.7

Married Women

Fixed at 1965 Choices
Benchmark Educational Choices

13.8
15.9

16.0
18.7

All Men

All Women

Note: The simulations shows the increase in the current-value value-added service share between 1965 and 2010 under
counterfactual simulations when fixing the skill premium and educational choices for the stated subpopulation at either the
benchmark 2010 values or the initial 1965 values. Budget constraints are satisfied, but market clearing conditions are not
imposed, and so the values simply aggregate the partial equilibrium decisions of households.

Table 9: Decomposing Female Market Labor Increase in Extended Model: Counterfactuals
Percentage Point Increase in
Female Relative Market Labor Supply (Female/Male)
Percentage Point Difference

Percent of Benchmark

All Factors (Benchmark)

18.7

-

Income Effect
Scale Effect
Income and Scale Effects
Skill-Biased Technical Change
Sector-Biased Technical Change
Demographic Change

7.8
5.6
14.1
16.8
-14.2
9.3

41.9%
30.0%
75.6%
89.8%
-75.8%
49.5%

Simulation

Note: The comparable moment in the data is 32.0 percentage points. The "Percentage Point Difference" is the total percentage
point increase in the Female Relative Market Labor Supply for "All Factors", while each specified "Effect" is the difference
between the "All Factors" increase and the increase when the specified effect is turned off. That is, these are the female relative
market labor supply analogs to the "No" effects in Table 3.

Table 10: Effect of Labor Supply Decisions on the Service Share
Labor Supply Decisions

Counterfactual Percentage Point
Increase in Service Share

Fixed at 1965 Levels

18.2

Benchmark Level

18.7

Fixed at 1965 Levels

16.5

Benchmark Level

18.7

Single Women

Fixed at 1965 Levels
Benchmark Level

18.1
18.7

Married Women

Fixed at 1965 Levels
Benchmark Level

16.8
18.7

All Men

All Women

Note: The simulations shows the increase in the current-value value-added service share
between 1965 and 2010 under counterfactual simulations when fixing the labor supply
decisions at either the benchmark 2010 values or the initial 1965 values. These decisions
may be suboptimal, but agents optimize along other dimensions given these decisions, and
market clearing conditions and budget constraints are imposed.

A

Characterization of a Married Couple’s Problem

Proof. [Proof of Proposition 1] The budget constraint for a schooling choice, lh, is
denoted as follows:
2
nc

z lh
ˆ

z lh
ˆ

pS (z, t)dz = (1 − 2

pG (z, t)dz + 2
0

z lh
ˆ

z lh

zlh

e−γS t z
dz) + w(1 − 2
Am

zlh
ˆ

0

e−γS t z
dz − θ). (10)
Af

The budget constraint for a schooling choice, hl, is denoted as follows:
2
nc

z hl
ˆ

z hl
ˆ

pS (z, t)dz = w(1 − 2

pG (z, t)dz + 2
0

z hl
ˆ

z hl

zhl

e−γS t z
dz − θ) + (1 − 2
Am

zhl
ˆ

0

e−γS t z
dz). (11)
Af

Assume z ∗ , z ∗ and z ∗ are the optimal allocations for the schooling choice, lh.
Case One: A1m ≤ Awf
Under lh, the wife faces a higher opportunity cost in home production, which
implies the following inequality:
ˆz∗
2
z∗
∗ 2

e

−γS t

z

Am

ˆz∗
> 2

0
∗ 2

∗ 2

(z ) − (z )
Am

e−γS t z
dz
Af

>

(z )
.
Af

(12)

e−γS t z
dz.
Af

(13)



Next, we deﬁne z as follows:
ˆz∗
2
z

e−γS t z
=2
Am

33

ˆz∗
0

Equation (13) can be simpliﬁed as follows:


(z )2
(z ∗ )2 (z ∗ )2
=
−
.
Am
Am
Af

(14)





It is easy to show that z > 0 and 1 − 2
1−2

z´∗
z∗

e−γS t z
Am

´z e−γs t z
0

Af

dz > 0 given z ∗ ≥ z ∗ , Af > Am ,

dz ≥ 0 and the inequality (12). Next, we subtract the RHS of (10) from


the RHS of (11), with (z ∗ , z ∗ ) for the schooling choice lh and (z ∗ , z ) for the schooling
choice hl:


ˆz
(1 − 2

e

−γs t

0
∗ 2

Af

z

ˆz∗
dz) − (1 − 2
z∗
−γS t



) − (z )
(z )2
e
= e
−
Am
Af
∗ 2
∗ 2
(z ) − (z )
Am (z ∗ )2 (z ∗ )2
= e−γS t
− e−γS t
(
−
)
Am
Af Am
Af




1
1
1
Am 1
−γS t
∗ 2
∗ 2
−γS t ∗ 2
= e
(z ) − (z )
−e
−
(z )
−
Am Af
Af
Af Af




1
1
1
Am 1
−γS t ∗ 2 Am
−γS t ∗ 2
> e
−e
(z )
−
(z )
−
Af Am Af
Af
Af Af
= 0.
−γS t (z

∗ 2

e−γs t z
dz)
Am

(15)

Line 3 of (15) follows from (14), and Line 5 of (15) follows from the inequality (12).
The inequality (15) shows that a married couple can consume (z ∗ , z ∗ + q; q > 0) if
their schooling choice is (hl) instead of (lh).
Case Two: A1m > Awf
The wife will always have a comparative advantage in home production regardless
of schooling choices. It is easy to show that the schooling choice (hl) dominates the
z´∗
−γ t
schooling choice (lh) if 1 − 2 e ASf z dz ≥ 0, or equivalently z ∗ ≤ eγS t Af .
0

We still need to show that (hl) dominates (lh) when z ∗ >
34

eγS t Af in the following

steps. First, under (lh), the time constraint of the high-skilled wife will be binding,
−γs t
which implies 1 − θ = e Af (z ∗ )2 . Then, the RHS of (10) can be simpliﬁed as follows:
RHSlh (z ∗ , z ∗ ) = 1 − 2

ˆz∗
z∗



(16)



eγS t Af . With z hl = z ∗ and zhl = z , the RHS of (11) can

Next, we deﬁne z as
be simpliﬁed as follows:

∗

e−γs t z
e−γs t ∗ 2 Af
dz = 1 −
(z ) +
(1 − θ)
Am
Am
Am

ˆz∗



RHShl (z , z ) = w(1 − 2
z



e−γS t z
e−γs t ∗ 2 Af
dz − θ) = w 1 −
(z ) +
−θ
Am
Am
Am

(17)



By subtracting RHSlh (z ∗ , z ∗ ) from RHShl (z ∗ , z ),we can obtain:



Af
e−γs t ∗ 2 Af
+θ
(z ) +
−w >0
RHShl (z , z ) − RHSlh (z , z ) = (w − 1) 1 −
Am
Am
Am
(18)
∗ ∗
The inequality (18) shows that a married couple can consume (z , z + q; q > 0)
if their schooling choice is (hl) instead of (lh). Therefore, the schooling choice (hl)
always dominates the schooling choice (lh).
Proof. [Proof of Proposition 2] Given a schooling choice, the Kuhn-Tucker conditions that characterize the optimum, z ∗ , z ∗ and z ∗ are
∗





∗

∗

35

μ(

e−γs t z ∗
e−γs t z ∗
1
wem + pG (z ∗ , t) − pS (z ∗ , t)) + η1
− η3 = 1 − ν,
Am
nc
Am
ν = μpS (z ∗ , t),
μwem

(19)
(20)

e−γs t z ∗
e−γs t z ∗
e−γs t z ∗
e−γs t z ∗
− μwef
= η3 + η 2
− η1
,
Am
Af
Af
Am

(21)

1 − tm − θI(em )  0, η1  0, (1 − tm − θI(em ))η1 = 0,

(22)

1 − tf − θI(ef )  0, η2  0, (1 − tf − θI(ef ))η2 = 0,

(23)

2 (z ∗ − z ∗ )  0, η3  0, 2 (z ∗ − z ∗ ) η3 = 0,

(24)

where η1 , η2 and η3 are the Kuhn-Tucker multipliers associated with the inequality
constraints (22), (23) and (24), respectively, and μ is the marginal utility of income.
Condition (21) characterizes the division of home production z̃ ∗ . It is driven by
the comparative advantage in home production, depending on the values of Af and
Am . If Af > Am , the wife will have a comparative advantage in home production.
According to Proposition 1, the schooling choice of (lh) will never be chosen. Then,
given Am < Af and w > 1, the LHS of (21) should be positive unless z ∗ is equal
to zero. First, we show that it is never optimal to choose z to be zero. Suppose
that z ∗ = 0. If z ∗ > 0, a married couple can always improve the outcome by setting
z´∗
−γ t
tm = 0 and tf = 2 e ASf z dz, so z ∗ has to be zero, which implies η1 = 0. In order to
0

satisfy Condition (21), η3 has to be zero as well. Given η1 = 0 and η3 = 0, Condition
(19) can be simpliﬁed as follows:

μ

1
e−γS t z ∗
wem + pG (z ∗ , t) − ps (z ∗ , t)
Am
nc


= 1 − ν.

(25)

The LHS of (25) is zero, but the RHS of (25) is positive, which leads to a contradiction. Therefore, z ∗ and z ∗ cannot be zero and the LHS of (21) should be positive.
Next, we show that tf > tm . Suppose that tf ≤ tm . Then, η2 = 0 and η3 = 0. It
implies that the RHS of (21) will be zero or negative. Again, this leads to a contradiction. Therefore, tf > tm . If tm > 0, then η3 = 0. In order to let the RHS of
36

(21) be positive, η2 has to be positive, which implies that the wife will not work in
the market. If 1 − tf − θI(ef ) > 0, then η2 = 0. In order to let the RHS of (21)
be positive, η3 has to be positive, which implies that the husband will not work at
home.

37

