NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MARGINAL COSTS OF INCOME
REDISTRIBUTION AT THE STATE LEVEL

William R. Johnson

Working Paper No. 1937

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1986

Research support from NBER's project on State and Local Public
Finance is gratefully acknowledged. Helpful comments were received
from Charles Brown, Robert Moffitt, Edgar Olsen, Harvey Rosen and
Jon Skinner. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research project in State and Local Public Finance.
Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1937
June 1986

Marginal Costs of Income Redistribution at the State Level

ABSTRACT

Previous analyses of the cost of redistribution by a unitary government

have focussed on the welfare losses of distorted labor supply choices. On the
other hand, the analysis of redistribution b,y local qovernments in a federal

system has emphasized the effect of the migration of taxpayers and transfer
recipients in raising the cost (faced by state residents) of engaging in more

redistribution. This paper combines both migration and labor supply effects
to compute marginal redistribution costs at the state and federal level.
Surprisingly, for a wide range of parameter values, states face lower
redistribution costs than the national government because they are able to

"export" some of the cost through lower federal tax revenue. The normative
implication of the analysis is that any case for national redistribution
policies must be based on benefit spillovers across state lines rather than on
tax competition among state governments.

William R. Johnson
Department of Economics
Rouss Hall
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22901

I.

Introduction

The question of the appropriate level of government to undertake income
redistribution is receiving renewed attention from economists in the light of
President Reagan's desire to devolve some income redistribution

responsibilities from the federal government to the states. In a recent
paper, Brown and Oates (1984) show, using a formal public choice model, that

the possibility of migration between states leads to suboptimal transfer
levels even when taxpayers care only about transfer recipients within their

own states. With benefit spillovers across states, the argument for federal
responsibility for redistribution is, presumably, even stronger.
Gramlich (1985) also argues that migration is strong enough to lead to
suboptirnal levels of transfers at the state level because states with low
benefit

levels will be able to "export" their poor, increasing the cost of

redistribution

to high—benefit states. Gramlich's conclusion is based on the

empirical work in Gramlich and Laren (1984) which finds that the migration

effect is "very strong".... "though only in the very long run." (1984, p.
510). The implicit argument is that migration raises the cost of
redistribution at the state level compared to the federal level.1

Another line of inquiry has sought to uncover empirically the effect of

state tax and expenditure policies on state income levels. Helms (1985), uses
time series - cross section data on state expenditure and tax policies, and
finds that, while spending on public services (schools, highways, etc.)
increases personal income, increased state transfer payments financed by state

taxes significantly reduce personal income. The cause of the reduction is
presumably a combination of migration and incentive effects. Indeed, Helms'
estimates indicate a very large response to transfer spending; one more dollar

2

of

transfers reduces state personal income in the long run by $14.83. Helms

concludes,

"States which seek to devote substantial tax revenues to transfer
payments will experience significantly reduced growth prospects,
which limits the scope for redistribution at the state and local
levels."

The purpose of this paper is to estimate the cost of a marginal increase
in income redistribution for a state under various assumptions about migration
and labor supply elasticities and to compare these costs to the marginal cost

of redistribution at the federal level. The somewhat surprising result of the
analysis is that states face lower costs of redistribution than the federal

government in many plausible cases. The intuition behind this result is that
part of the cost of redistribution can be "exported" to other states because

federal tax revenues fall as the state's income falls. However, no conclusion
can be made about the appropriate level of government to undertake income
redistribution since that question depends also on the extent of benefit
spillovers (how much are the residents of one state better off when the
incomes of the poor in another state are raised?).

Section II of the paper introduces the model used to estimate marginal
redistribution

costs in the context of a single jurisduction. Section III

extends the model to a federal system and estimates costs of state

redistribution. Section IV concludes.

3

II. A Simple Model With One Jurisdiction

Before introducing the complication of a federal system of taxes and
expenditures, it is useful to present the basic model used to compute the

marginal cost of income redistribution. The model necessarily abstracts from
many features of reality in order to be easily understood and manipulated.

Thus, the results of the model should be considered more suggestive than
conclusi ye.

Current net income of household i, including the effects of existing
taxes and transfers, is denoted by Y., i = 1, n. Since we restrict our

attention to incremental changes in redistribution financed by taxes on labor
income alone, gross taxable income should be interpreted as labor earnings,

WL1, where W. is the gross return to each unit of labor, L1, supplied to the
market. Although the global budget constraint facing the household is highly
non—linear, due to the complex system of taxes and transfers now in place, it
can be approximated locally by the linear constraint V1 =

B1

+

(l-t1)

W1L1.

Hence B1 is the "virtual income" of household i and t1 is its marginal tax

rate. Small changes in the tax-transfer system can be represented by changes
in the parameters of this linear budget constraint, which is the local
approximation to the global non—linear budget constraint.

The response of labor supply, Li, to small changes in t and B1 is
pararneterized as follows:

W. L.

(1)

W1dL1 =

— it

dt1 —

C

dB1.

Equation (1) can be easily interpreted. The left hand side is the change
in gross labor income induced by tax and transfer changes which, in this

4

partial equilibrium analysis, are assumed not to affect the gross return,

W1. The first term on the right is the response to changes in the marginal
tax rate, t1, as parameterized by

,

the

uncompensated elasticity of supply

of L with respect to net wages, W1(1_t). Note that for a given value of c

the effect of dt is greater the larger is t. because a given change in the
tax rate implies a greater percentage change in net factor returns. The
second term on the right hand side of (1) is the pure income effect of changes
in B1; the parameter C is the marginal propensity to consume leisure out of
unearned income.

Suppose the government attempts to increase marginally the current amount
of redistribution by imposing a uniform additional tax, dt, on labor incomes
of all households to finance a uniform addition, dB, to every household's

virtual income.2 In other words, redistribution at the margin is undertaken
by a dernogrant financed by proportional taxes on labor income. Of course, the
amount of the demogrant dB depends on additional tax revenue, by the marginal
government budget constraint:

n

(2)

ndB =
1=1

[(WL.)dt
1 1

+

t.W.dL1].

The left—hand side of (2) is total demogrants paid, or ndB. The right-hand
side of (2) expresses the change in tax revenue as the sum of the additional

tax rate, dt, applied to current taxable income, and the current marginal tax
rate, t., applied to the change in factor income induced by the new policy.
Second-order terms are omitted.
Substituting (2) into (1) and rearranging yields:

5

[W.L.
.11

(3)

dt

En

(1 —

ct./1-t.)]
1

1

C Et1)j

Equation (3) is related to the slope of the Laffer curve; it gives the

additional per capita transfer (dB) produced by an incremental tax (dt). When
factor supplies are completely unresponsive to any economic variable
(c =

= 0),

then dB is just average taxable income (the revenue produced by a
dt

100% tax).

The marqinal cost of redistribution can be thought of as the cost induced

by these marginal policies per unit of benefit. One measure of the cost is
the change in the total income of society,

dY1, with the corresponding
1

measure of the benefit being the income gained by the low income households.

These are measures of market income gains and losses and do not include the

welfare effects of changes in leisure. A better measure, therefore, compares
the social cost (welfare loss) of redistribution to the welfare gained by

households at the bottom. Both measures are presented below.
The change in the net income of any one household induced by the marginal
policy changes is:

(4)

dY. = [Q(1 —

where

dB/dt, as given by (3). Equation (4) states that income of

(1—t.) C) —

WL

(1÷c)] dt

household i rises by the amount of the additional demogrant (Qdt) but falls by
the

amount of additional taxes on the original income (W1Ldt) plus the change

in after—tax income induced by the behavioral response to the policy change
[— (1—t. ) C

—

6W L1

]dt.

6

The change in the welfare of any one household, dZ1, induced by the
marginal policy changes is' just the change in net transfers less the

additional welfare cost (excess burden) of the marginal redistribution. Since
this last term is the tax revenue lost by the compensated change in labor
supply, we have

(5)

dZ. = dB.
1

1

-

W.L.dt.

t.W.dL.

11 1

-

11 1

ct W L.
+ [-CW1L1t1dt1

dt]

—

In (5), the first three terms are the change in net transfers while the terms
in square brackets are the excess burden of the tax increase.3
The change in welfare for any household subject to the marginal
redistribution policy of a demogrant financed by a proportional tax can be

found by substituting dB

(6)

dB =

Qdt,

dt1 =

dt,

and equation (1) into (5):

dZ1 = (Q — W L )(1-i-Ct )dt

The effect of a marginal redistribution on the income and welfare is computed

in two steps. First, the demogrant that can be financed by a marginal increse
in taxation, dt, is calculated using (3). Then, that value of Q is used to
compute the impact on income and welfare of each household, according to (4)

and (6). The information needed for these calculations is labor income, W1L,
and marginal tax rates, t, for each household as well as values of C and c.
The data set used is the March, 1976 Current Population Survey with
imputations of transfers and taxes as described in Browning and Johnson

(1984). Labor income is given directly for each household; marginal tax rates

7

have been computed by relating changes in after—tax, after-transfer income to
changes in before-tax, before—transfer income by $1000 income brackets.

Different marginal tax rates are computed for households with aged heads and

for different household sizes. Thus, marginal tax rates include the effect of
benefit reductions in transfer programs.

Reasonable values for

and C must also be established. The

uncompensated elasticity of labor supply, c,

is

assumed to fall between —.2

and .4 with the negative elasticity sometimes estimated for men more than
offset by the substantial positive wage elasticities estimated for women.4
The marginal propensity to consume leisure, C, is a less familiar concept but
can be related to the income elasticity of labor supply by

C =

(7)

— (1—8)

where y is the pure income elasticity of labor supply and 8 is the share of

leisure in full income. If e is roughly .5 then C is roughly half the income

elasticity of labor supply. A range of C between 0 and .4 is chosen.5 Recall
that C is the fraction of an additional dollar of pure income spent on
lei sure.

To distill the changes in income and welfare of many thousands of
households into an easily comprehensible form, the total welfare (or income)

change for all households is divided by the welfare (or income) change for
those households in the bottom quintile of the income

distribution.

This

ratio assumes the value of zero when redistribution is a zero—sum game (that
is, socially costless) and can be interpreted as the social cost of increasing
the bottom quintile's welfare (or income) by one dollar.

8

Table 1 displays the two measures of the cost of redistribution faced by
a single jurisdiction for a range of values of C and c.

Obviously the cost

is zero when labor supply does not respond to changes in t or B (that is, the
loss in income to the top four quintiles equals the gain to the lowest

quintile.). As expected, the cost is quite sensitive to the labor supply
parameters C and c. Table 1 also shows that the marginal cost of
redistribution can be substantial even when labor supply is fairly

inelastic. To put the marginal costs of redistribution into perspective,
consider Okun's (1975) vivid "leaky bucket" image. The cost of redistribution
is the amount of water (welfare) which leaks from the bucket as it is carried

from rich to poor. For labor supply parameters C = .1 and c =

.1,

43% of the

(marginal) welfare disappears before it reaches the poor (.76/1.76 = 43%).
The corresponding leakage in income terms is 65%.

III. Redistribution In A Federal System

We turn now to consider the costs of redistribution for both local and

national governments in a federal system. For simplicity, state and local
governments -are not distinguished in the model ; all local taxes and

redistributive expenditures are attributed to the state. Another crucial
assumption is that each state is "small" relative to the entire country in the
sense that one state's taxing and spending policies have a negligable effect
on the tax and spending policies of the national government.

In other words,

a change in federal revenue caused by one state's policies does not affect the

well-being of the residents of that state. Finally, each state is assumed to
take other states' behavior as given in making its choices; the Nash

9

equilbrium concept might be invoked to justify this assumption.6
The most important difference between state and federal taxation is that
factors of production are more mobile between states than between countries.

In fact, no international mobility is assumed. This is clearly reasonable for
labor resources but less so for capital, since U.S. residents can invest their
capital outside the country and avoid some taxes that fall on capital where it
is used rather than where the recipient of its income lives (e.g., property

taxes). Still, some taxes on capital income cannot be fully avoided by moving
capital abroad (e.g., individual income tax). Given the complexity of the
taxation of capital and ignorance about the elasticity of capital flows among
taxing jurisdictions, it is probably best to focus on the taxation of labor
income for the time being.

The mobility of labor between states is assumed to be a function of

changes in after—tax (and transfer) incomes. Specifically, if a change in a
state's tax or transfer policies, evaluated at the current level of labor
supply, changes net income by X %,

it

will induce a change of

X % in the

number of residents. Hence, r is the migration elasticity, which is assumed

to characterize residents at all income levels. An increase in state taxes
used to finance more redistribution will reduce the net income of high-income

citizens (X < 0) and induce out-migration. The same policy enhances the
incomes of low-income residents (X > 0) and so induces in—migration.
Most

of the recent research on migration responses to redistribution

focusses on the behavior of transfer recipients. Gramlich and Laren (1984)
estimate the elasticity of transfer recipient populations with respect to
benefits levels, with results for various models and data sets ranging from

.11 to 1.7. Blank (1984) has also estimated the migratory response of
transfer recipients to changes in benefit levels. For example, she estimates

10

that, for New York, a 20—25% reduction in benefits implies an increase in the
out—migration rate which would yield a 16% lower recipient population after 20

years. Since she does not consider in—migration, her estimates put an upper
bound on the migration elasticity of about .75.

To incorporate migration responses into the analysis of redistribution
costs at the state level, we must adjust the number of persons at each income

level by the migratory response to marginal tax and transfer changes. The
change in net incomes for household i at the previous level of labor supply,

induced by changes in marginal tax rates, dt. and virtual income, dB1, is:

X =

-(W.L.)
11

dt. +
1

dB..
1

The change in the number of people with income Y, dN1, (normalizing
N1 =

1),

is given by

11

(8)

- -(dN1)(Y1)
W.L.dt.
•11 1

dN1 =

+ dB.

1 (-b1dt1

,

or

1

+

dB/Y1 ), where b1 = W1L1/Y1.

Without deductibility of state taxes from federal taxes (which will be

introduced later on), the overall marginal tax rate, t, is just the sum of
nominal federal and state rates, t. =

tfj

+

t1.

Under the "small state"

assumption, federal taxes and benefits do not respond to changes in one
state's taxes or transfers, so

dt = dt51

and

dB1 =

dB1.

11

Restricting states to imposing, on the margin, proportional taxes to finance
demogrants, we have

= 1, n

dt5 = dt5

i =1,n.

dB51=dBs

Now consider the marginal budget constraint faced by the state. The
change in expenditures is the sum of additional benefits paid to existing
residents, of whom there are n5, plus (minus) the state's share of full
benefits paid to new in—migrants (out—migrants), or:

(9)

+

BdN

Again, second—order terms are neglected and summations are taken over all

households in the state. The change in tax revenue is the sum of the changes
due to the new tax rate, to labor supply responses of existing residents, and
to migratory responses:

c

(10)

dt (WL1 )

+E

[-

W.L.

i11

dt - CdB5]

+ E

t51W1L1dN

Equating (9) and (10), and substituting (8) yields the Laffer slope
relation for a state government:

12

(11)

dBS [

S

+B

• +

i

1

=

dt5

[

W1L1

+

E

Si

B5 b1r)

b.i)]

(C -

1

2

-E

(Y11

cW.L.

+

The only additional data needed to calculate (11), beyond that used to
compute redistribution costs in the single—government case in the previous
section, is information on B51 and

that portion of total taxes and

benefits attributable to state (and local) qovernnients. For purposes of these
calculations it is assumed that state taxes and benefits are the same
proportion, ô, of overall taxes and benefits, where ô is the share of state

and local government spending in total government spending. Thus,

=

(12)

ot , B

=

oB1

B1 is computed as the vertical intercept of each household's linearized budget
constrai nt:

=

— (1—ti

)W1 L1

Table 2 presents marginal redistribution costs for state governments
computed using (11), (6) and (7) for a range of values of ,,

the

migration

elasticity, and some of the same labor supply parameters shown in Table i.8
To avoid confusing the issues of redistribution across states with the issue
of redistribution within a state, the state's income distribution is assumed

to be identical to that of the entire country. Hence, the data used are the
national data used to construct Table 1.

13

Table 2 shows that marginal redistribution costs depend in the expected

way on labor supply responses and migration elasticities. The welfare
tradeoff is less sensitive to labor supply parameters than the market income

tradeoff, as it was in the unitary government case of Table 1. The major
surprise in Table 2 comes from comparing the cost to a state of redistributing
income with the cost to a unitary government of doing the same (as in Table

1). When

=

0, one might think the costs should be the same since a state

government appears to face the same constraints when migration is inelastic as
the unitary government in Table 1.

However, this is not the case. When labor

earnings within the state fall as the state increases redistribution, federal

revenue is reduced. Hence some of the costs of statewide redistribution can
be "exported" outside the state by reducing tax revenues available to the

federal government. According to the "small state" assumption, this reduction
is federal tax revenue has a negligible effect on economic well—being within
the state.

The national government's redistribution costs in a federal system should
be equivalent to the unitary government's costs explored in the previous

section. This is because, although redistribution by the federal government
reduces labor incomes and hence state government revenues, that cost is
internalized because citizens cannot move to avoid the costs of

redistribution. When comparing Tables 1 and 2 to get an idea of the relative
cost to the taxpayers of redistributing income at the state or federal level,
it

is

clear that migration elasticities must be substantial for the migration

effect

to outweigh the tax-exporting effect and make redistribution

more

costly to the voters at the state level than at the federal level.
For

=

.1,

C =

.1,

the migration elasticity must exceed .5 to raise the

state's welfare cost above the federal government's. At

=

.2,

C =

.2,

the

14

threshold migration elasticity at which state and federal costs are equal
rises to above 1.0. ThLis, this indirect tax-exporting effect, which will

naturally be greater the more responsive is labor supply, can easily outweigh
the migration effect to keep marginal state redistribution costs below federal
costs.

Deducti bill ty

As we have seen, a significant amount of the excess burden of local taxes

can be exported to other taxpayers. Not surprisingly, this result is
strengthened when the deductibility of state and local taxes from the federal

income tax is considered. To get a crude measure of the impact of
deductibility, it was assumed that only the top two income quintiles could

itemize on their federal tax returns. For them, an increase in the state tax

rate by dt reduces their federal liability by tf

dt5, where tf is the

overall federal tax rate.9 The change in the overall tax rate is: dt =

dt5 (1_tf). Computing marginal redistribution costs for a state allowing for
deductibility yields the estimates shown in Table 3. Clearly, deductibility
dramatically reduces redistribution costs. With no labor supply responses
(C =

0,

=

0),

redistribution becomes a positive—sum game whose costs are

borne to a considerable extent by taxpayers outside the state. The key is, of
course, that redistribution converts taxable income into tax-exempt income in

the form of transfers. If state transfers were taxable at the federal level,
then states could not directly export the costs of redistribution.
The numbers in Table 3 indicate a sizeable effect of deductibility in
reducing state redistribution costs below the federal costs for the same labor

15

supply responses. The threshold migration elasticity at which state marginal
costs equal federal marginal costs becomes very large (close to or greater

than 2.5 for each parameter set listed). Therefore, with deductibility, it
becomes extremely unlikely that states face higher marginal costs of
redistribution than the federal government.

Another feature of the current federal system in the U.S. which affects
the marginal cost of state redistribution is the availability of federal

matching grants for redistributional expenditures. A large empirical
literature exists which shows that these matching formulae do increase state

expenditures on redistribution (see Moffitt (1984), for example). Hence,
consideration of matching grants would reduce even further the state costs of
redistribution found in Tables 2 and 3.
It is important to realize exactly what this result means.

If there were

no cross—state benefit externalities involved with income redistribution, then
the lower cost faced by state voters would argue for the positive proposition
that redistribution in a federal system (for example, in a Nash equilibrium
among identical states) would exceed that in a comparable centralized fiscal
system.

However, since these cross-state spillovers almost certainly exist,

the cost advantage of state redistribution may not
spillovers

and redistribution at the

be enough to offset the

sub—national level may still be

suboptimal. The case for a national redistribution policy, however, must rest
on the benefit spillovers and not on the migration of either recipients or
taxpayers.

16

IV. Conclusion

This paper has examined the effect of additional income redistribution at
the state and national level when both labor supply and location respond to

economic incentives. Marginal redistribution is accomplished by a
proportional tax on labor income which finances a per person demogrant, a
policy which, in effect, rotates each individual 's budget constraint through

some breakeven point. Although it is possible that other redistributive
policies might be more efficient than this one, it is unlikely that the
paper's conclusions concerning the relative costs of state and national

redistributive policies would be radically different. Another point that
bears repeating is that the costs of redistribution computed here are the
costs borne only by the residents of the redistributing jurisdiction, not true
social costs.

To summarize, the purpose of this paper has been to compute the marginal
costs of income redistribution by states in a federal system as a function of

labor supply and migration responses. The major conclusions are that:

(1)

marginal costs for states are sensitive to labor supply elasticities as well
as migration elasticities and (2) marginal state costs are likely to be less
than federal costs, especially with deductibility and matching grants.
Therefore, the case for a national redistributive policy must be based on
benefit spillovers rather than on tax competition among localities.

17

Footnotes

1.

However, Gramlich (1985) acknowledges that benefits would remain low in
low-benefit states even if costs were reduced, since federal matching
grants now in place effectively reduce the cost to states.

2.

A proportional tax—cum-demogrant policy is studied both because of
computational ease and because it approximates an expansion of the
current U.S. redistributional system (see Browning and Johnson (1984, p.

180)). At first glance, it would appear that a more efficient policy
would restrict the dernogrant to the lowest income quintile. This,
however, would require very high marginal tax rates, or a notch, on low

income households. Also, note that the restriction that it be equal for
all households preserves the kink—points of the piecewise linear budget
constraint.
3.

The compensated change in labor supply due to a tax change dt is the

total effect less the income effect. The total effect is given by (1)
as (—

dt).

The income effect is the additional tax revenue at the

original labor supply (W L dt) times the pure income effect on labor
supply (C/W) from equation (1).
4.

Killingsworth's (1983) survey indicates roughly inelastic male
elasticities but substantially positive female elasticities.

5.

Hausinan's (1981) very large estimates of income effects imply a value of
C of about .8.

6.

This assumption is common in this context; see Bergstrom, Blume and
Varjan (1986).

18

7.

Gramlich and Larn argue that taxpayer migration is much less important
since a change in redistribution has a much smaller impact on their

incomes than on the incomes of the poor. While this is true, since the
number of taxpayers is large relative to transfer recipients, the effect
of taxpayer migration on
8.

may be significant.

The measurement of costs and benefits is ambiguous when the population

changes due to migration. The benefits here are the gain in welfare or
income to the average person in the lowest quintile. The cost is the
lost welfare or income to a resident who does not migrate, summed over
all income classes.
9.

This crude procedure overstates the effect of deductibility because even
for itemizers state and local taxes are not deductable from some federal
taxes (such as payroll taxes).

19

References

Theodore Bergstrom, Lawrence Blume, and Hal Varian, "On the Private Provision
of Public Goods" Journal of Public Economics, 29, 1986.
Rebecca Blank, "The Effect of Economic Opportunity on the Location Decisions
of Female-Headed Households" Princeton University, 1984.
Charles Brown and Wallace Oates, "Assistance to the Poor in a Federal System"
University of Maryland, 1984.
Edgar Browning and William Johnson, 'The Trade—off between Equality and
Efficiency" Journal of Political Economy, April, 1984.
Edward M. Gramlich, "Reforming U.S. Fiscal Arrangements" in D. Rubinfield and

J. Quigley, eds. American Domestic Priorities (Berkeley: University of
California Press), 1985.
Edward M. Gramlich and Deborah S. Laren, "Migration and Income Redistribution
Responsibilities" Journal of Human Resources, Fall, 1984.
Jerry Hausman, "Labor Supply" in H. Aaron and J. Pechman, eds. How Taxes
Affect Economic Behavior (Washington: Brookings Institution), 1981.

L. Jay Helms, "The Effect of State and Local Taxes on Economic Growth: A Time
Series - Cross Section Approach" Review of Economics and Statisics,
November, 1985.

Mark Killingsworth, Labor Supply (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press),
1983.

Robert Moffitt, "The Effects of Grants—in-aid on State and Local

Expenditures: The Case of AFDC" Journal of Public Economics April, 1984.
Arthur Okun, Equality and Efficiency: The Big Tradeoff (Washington:
Brookings Institution), 1975.

Table 1: Marginal Welfare Cost of Redistribution in a
Single Jurisdiction (Income Trade—Off in Parentheses)

Uncompensated Supply Elasticity
E
C

0

-.2

—.1

0

*

*

0
(0)

.1

.2

*

*

*
-.03
(—.10)

3

.4

*

—.05
(—.18)

—.25

.1

-.50
(—1.15)

.2

.3

(—2.60)

-1.89
(—4.51)

—2.87
(—7.11)
—3.24
(—8.69)

-1.11

-.24

-.76

-1.41

-2.21

(—.60)

(—1.89)

(—3.52)

(—5.70)

-.48

-1.03

(—1.25) (—2.70)
-.71

—1.28

(—.70)

(—1.99) (—3.62)

—.46
(—1.36)

(—2.81) (—4.64)

—.95

—1.54

.4

(—4.56)

-2.53
—3.61
(—7.04) (—10.51)

—1.98
(—5.73)

—2.85
—3.98
(—8.56) (—12.60)

-1.69

—2.26

—3.17

—4.36

(—7.04) (—10.32) (—15.06)

*These parameter combinations are ruled out because they imply positive pure
substitution effects.

Note: Marginal cost is change in welfare (or income) of all households per $
of welfare (or income) gained by households in bottom quintile. Welfare
change given. by (5); income change by (4). C is the marginal propensity to
consume leisure.

Table 2: Marginal Welfare Cost of Redistribution by States
in a Federal System (Income Trade—off in Parentheses)

Migration Elasticity ()

Labor Supply
Response

0

.5

=

0

-.42

0,

C = 0

(0)

=

.1,

C =

.1

=

.2,

C =

.2

—.28
(—1.30)
-.60
(—2.91)

=

=

c =

.3,

.4,

C =

C =

.3

.4

0, C = .1

c = —.1, C =

.3

—.93
(—4.92)
—1.29
(—7.49)

Notes: See Table 1.

2.5

-.90

-3.01

(.42)

(-.90)

(-3.01)

-.74
(—1.86)

—1.27
(—2.50)

—3.61
(—5.42)

-1.09
(—3.65)

-1.67
(—4.54)

-4.31
(—8.67)

-1.47

—2.12

-5.12

(—5.93)

-1.89
(—8.88)

-.08
(—.43)

(—.88)

—.05

-.45

(—.49)

1.0

-.50

(.91)

(—7.14) (—13.17)
—2.61

-6.06

(—10.62) (—19.77)
-.99
(—1.40)

-3.09
(—3.68)

—.90
(—1.40)

—2.82
(—3.49)

Table 3: Marginal Welfare Cost of Redistribution by States
in a Federal System with Deductability
(Income Trade-Off in Parentheses)

Migration Elasticity ()

Labor Supply
0

Response
E

= 0,

c =

.1,

C = 0

C =

.1

=

.2,
.3,

C =

C =

.2

.3

.4,

C =

.4

.95

.68

-.39

(.95)

(.68)

(—.39)

.96

.79
(—.95)
.57

.33

(—4.22)
=

=

0,

C =

.1

—.1, C = .3

2.5

1.20

(—2.40)
=

1.0

(1.20)

(.23)
=

.5

.74
(-.09)
.51

(—1.37)
.27

(-2.95)
.01

(-4.96)

.44

-.71

(—.45)

(-1.88)

.19
(—1.84)

—1.06
(—3.77)

—.07
(—3.59)

—1.44
(—6.25)

—.36
(—5.82)

—1.86
(—9.57)

.87

.60

—.47

(.85)

(.59)

(.29)

(-.86)

1.07
(.72)

.85

.59

—.41

(.47)

(.19)

(—.89)

1.11

Notes: See Table 1. A positive number means an increase in total income with
extra redistribution.

