NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC BUYERS
Marc Martos-Vila
Matthew Rhodes-Kropf
Jarrad Harford
Working Paper 19378
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19378

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

We thank Ulf Axelson, Murillo Campello, Alexander Gorbenko, Matthias Kahl, Rich Mathews, Ramana
Nanda, Thomas Philippon, Gordon Phillips, Jeremy Stein, Per Stromberg, S. Viswanathan, and Gregor
Weiss for fruitful discussions and comments, and we thank seminar participants at the 2013 AFA Meetings
in Chicago, 2012 WFA Meetings in Las Vegas, 2012 EFA Meetings in Copenhagen, First ECCCS
(European Center for Corporate Control Studies) Workshop in Lille, France, Campus for Finance 2012,
LBS Private Equity Findings Symposium 2012, Harvard University, Claremont McKenna College,
London School of Economics, U. Carlos III Madrid and UC Davis Symposium on Financial institutions
& Intermediaries. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Marc Martos-Vila, Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, and Jarrad Harford. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial vs. Strategic Buyers
Marc Martos-Vila, Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, and Jarrad Harford
NBER Working Paper No. 19378
August 2013
JEL No. G24,G34
ABSTRACT
This paper introduces the impact of debt misvaluation on merger and acquisition activity. Debt misvaluation
helps explain the shifting dominance of financial acquirers (private equity firms) relative to strategic
acquirers (operating companies). The effects of overvalued debt might seem limited since both acquirer
types and target firms can access the debt markets. However, fundamental differences in governance
and project co-insurance between the two types of acquirer interact with debt misvaluation, resulting
in variation in how assets are owned that depends on debt market conditions. We find support for
our theory in merger data using a novel measure of debt misvaluation.

Marc Martos-Vila
UCLA
Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Pz.
Los Angeles CA 90095
marc.martos-vila@anderson.ucla.edu
Matthew Rhodes-Kropf
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 313
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mrhodeskropf@hbs.edu

Jarrad Harford
University of Washington Business School
Box 353200
Seattle, WA 98195-3200
jarrad@u.washington.edu

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

1

Mergers and Acquisitions (M&A) occur in waves of activity with recent troughs, for example,
of only a few thousand deals in 2003 and peaks of over ten thousand deals in 1999 and 2006.1
Within this oscillation of activity there is another shifting pattern: the percentage of so called
financial sponsors (private equity firms) vs. strategic buyers (operating companies) seems to
ebb and flow.
Figure 1 examines the financial sponsor vs. strategic proportion of M&A activity of all public
targets with values less than $1 billion recorded in the SDC Platinum data base from 1984-2010.2
It is immediately clear that the fraction of total deal value acquired by financial sponsors has
varied dramatically over the last 25 years. This same pattern is true across many industries.
16000

3.5%
Private Equity

14000

Strategic

3.0%

C&I Loan Spread
12000

2.5%

$ Billions

10000
2.0%
8000
1.5%
6000
1.0%

4000
2000

0.5%

0

0.0%

Figure 1. US M&A Volume ($10M-$1B) Financial vs. Strategic

Any particular transaction has many factors that drive the ultimate acquirer’s willingnessto-pay. And many theories propose reasons why particular firms or industries may be ripe for
1 U.S. merger activity as reported by SDC Platinum data base. See Harford (2005), Rhodes-Kropf and Viswanathan
(2004), Mitchell and Mulherin (1996), Andrade et al. (2001), and Holmstrom and Kaplan (2001) for empirical evidence on
merger waves.
2 Private equity firms are limited in the size of checks they can write to buy a firm by the amount they have under
management and covenants with their investors, called limited partners or LPs. Both strategic and financial buyers can
reasonably acquire public targets with values less than $1 billion. Increasing the target size cutoff dampens the percentage
of PE activity in every period, but the increases and decreases in activity are still evident. We also removed deals less than
$10M as a standard screen. The C&I spread is the commercial and industrial loan rates minus the federal funds rate. See
William E. Fruhan (2010) for more on the role of PE in acquisitions and the shifting pattern across time. In the regressions
that follow we do not cut the data by the size of the transaction.

2

FEBRUARY 2013

acquisition activity.3 However, the broad pattern of financial sponsor activity suggests a broad
economic explanation for the coordination.
Little research directly considers the competition between financial and strategic buyers.4
Recent papers by Bargeron et al. (2008), Hege et al. (2012), and Dittmar et al. (2012) focus on
bidding behavior and target premiums between strategic and financial acquirers. Gorbenko and
Malenko (2013) considers the bidding behavior of strategic vs. financial bidders focusing on how
synergies cause different bidding behavior than the search for undervalued assets. Shivdasani
and Wang (2011) report that structured credit fueled the most recent buyout boom. And
Holmstrom and Kaplan (2001) document and discuss the LBO wave in the late 1980s. However,
little research offers any broad insights into the rising and falling tides of private equity activity
through the different merger waves.5
What drives either financial or strategic buyers to have a more dominant position in M&A
activity at different points in time? This question is important not only because the economic
magnitude of this activity is so large, but also because the balance of power between financial
vs. strategic acquirers changes the ownership structure of assets and alters the incentives and
governance mechanisms that surround the business that are the engine of our economy.6
One potential broad economic mechanism that would imply a shifting willingness-to-pay by
strategic acquirers stems from Rhodes-Kropf and Viswanathan (2004) and Shleifer and Vishny
(2003) who suggest that overvalued acquirers will bid more and overvalued targets are more
willing to accept takeover offers.7 But clearly, financial buyers who must pay in cash should
avoid overvalued targets. This implies that patterns of financial vs. strategic activity could be
3 See Jensen (1986), Maksimovic and Phillips (2001), Gorton et al. (2009), Jovanovic and Rousseau (2002), Mitchell and
Mulherin (1996), Lehn et al. (1990), Mulherin and Boone (2000), and Harford (2005).
4 Müller and Panunzi (2004), Morellec and Zhdanov (2008) and Ivashina and Kovner (2011) examine the leverage of
financial buyers but they do not consider potential strategic buyers.
5 We discuss our relationship to the only paper of which we know, Haddad et al. (2011), below.
6 Academic work as well as the lay press suggest that there are potentially many different costs and benefits of public
vs. private ownership. The difference can alter incentives, promote a long or short run focus, allow for tighter monitoring
and less shirking, etc.
7 Support for the misvaluation theory has been found by Rhodes-Kropf et al. (2005), Ang and Cheng (2006), Dong et al.
(2006) and others.

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

3

driven by the same phenomenon. However, a quick look at figure 1 suggests that something else
must explain financial sponsor activity as the local peaks of financial sponsor activity relative to
strategic activity correspond with stock market peaks such as the late 90s and 2006-2007, with
dips in the early 90s and 2001 recessions.
Harford (2005) shows that interest rates, specifically the spread between the average interest
rate on commercial and industrial loans and the Federal Funds rate, are significantly inversely
correlated with merger activity as can be seen in Figure 1. Although Harford (2005) proposes
no formal theory of merger activity, he argues that this spread is a proxy for overall liquidity or
ease of financing.
In this paper we combine ideas from the above work and introduce the possibility of misvalued
debt markets. We demonstrate how misvalued debt can both fuel M&A activity and alter the
balance between financial and strategic buyers.
While it seems reasonable that if equity markets can be misvalued then so can debt markets,
it is much less obvious that “cheap” debt should lead to more acquisition activity. After all, the
targets can also access cheap debt and so are more valuable as stand-alone entities when debt is
cheap. On top of this, it is not clear how debt misvaluation should alter the interplay between
financial and strategic buyers. Just believing that debt markets are overvalued does not imply a
benefit to one type of buyer. After all, if both types of acquirers find a misvalued debt market,
cannot both take advantage of it? Since it is not ex-ante obvious what misvalued debt might do
to the market for acquisitions or how it would differentially impact the participants, our model
provides important insights and understanding. We also provide some supportive evidence of
our main theoretical implications in the data to help show the strength of the theory.
While we assume that each type of buyer and the target can equally access the debt market,
there exist fundamental differences that alter the benefit to each. The fundamental differences
between a strategic buyer and a financial buyer are 1) strategic buyers have a current project (or
projects) they are considering combining with the target, while financial sponsors evaluate the

4

FEBRUARY 2013

target as a stand-alone project, and 2) financial buyers have a different corporate governance
structure (monitoring technology) than strategic buyers.8 We interact misvalued debt with
these fundamental differences to develop both a co-insurance effect and a monitoring effect of
misvalued debt.
Co-insurance arises anytime less-than-perfectly correlated projects are combined. This idea
was first proposed by Lewellen (1971) and then extended by Higgins and Schall (1975) and
Galai and Masulis (1976) and has been repeatedly considered in the financial literature both
empirically and theoretically. For example, see Kim and McConnell (1977) for an early empirical
examination of co-insurance on debt prices after mergers, while Leland (2007) completes an indepth theoretic examination, and Faure-Grimaud and Inderst (2005) considers the effect of
uncorrelated projects in the context of conglomerates and governance. We build on this work to
examine how co-insurance interacts with the potential misvaluation of debt claims even when
agents are risk neutral.
We show that financial sponsors are better able to take advantage of interest rates that are
“too low” because strategics are diversifying and therefore minimizing the error investors make.
While financial buyers are hurt relatively more by interest rates that are too high because
diversification is highly valued when project failure rates are expected to be high. Therefore,
even though both strategic and financial buyers would like to take advantage of interest rates
that are “too low” and avoid borrowing when interest rates are “too high” they are differentially
impacted by the errors and are willing to pay relatively more or less depending on the sign of
the error made on interest rates.
There is also a monitoring effect because PE buyers are often thought to have better oversight
and governance than strategics. However, this monitoring technology is costly. When overvaluation reduces the perception of the moral hazard / governance problem it reduces the perceived
8 We will see that it may be beneficial for strategics to acquire targets in a bankruptcy remote way. To the extent this
is possible (while still achieving synergies) one prediction from our model is when this is more likely to occur.

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

5

cost of monitoring. This, in turn, enhances the ability of financial buyers to increase leverage
and pay more. In which case the governance of a financial buyer relative to a strategic buyer will
potentially cause financial buyers to dominate in overvalued debt markets. The joint presence
of moral hazard and misvaluation yields interesting insights and allows us to contribute at a
methodological level to the literature by analyzing an agency model with asymmetric information
between investors and managers.9
Overall, the potential for misvalued debt has a number of interesting empirical implications.
First and foremost, the possibility of misvalued debt not only changes the likelihood of an
acquisition, it also changes the type of buyer and the way the assets are owned. These predictions
have empirical content because although debt market mispricing may be difficult to determine in
real time, by looking backward we should be able to find times when when credit was particularly
misvalued and see if debt overvaluation corresponds with increased M&A activity and increased
PE activity relative to strategic buyers.
We take our predictions to the data to show some suggestive evidence on the effect of misvalued
debt. We introduce a novel measure of debt market overvaluation and find that it strongly
correlates with the ratio of private equity (PE) to strategic merger activity. Moreover, debt
market overvaluation drives out any relationship between the PE/Strategic merger activity ratio
and the high-yield credit spread. Although we do not test all of our predictions, as this is
predominantly a theory paper, we do find a number of other results that support the relevance
of our theory.
Our theory predicts that PE firms will tend to dominate strategic buyers during times when
debt markets are overvalued, but the relative dominance of PE firms to strategics should be even
greater if the strategic acquirer is a conglomerate. Conglomerates have even larger co-insurance
9 Our paper contributes to the burgeoning literature on the effect of differential beliefs on contracting such as Landier
and Thesmar (2009), Gervais et al. (2011), and Goel and Thakor (2008). While these papers look at managers who are
overoptimistic, we assume the manager is correctly informed but the investor mistakes (possibly optimism) interact with
the moral hazard problem.

6

FEBRUARY 2013

effects. Thus, the effects we propose suggest that overvalued debt markets should lead to greater
dominance of financial buyers over conglomerates than over more focused strategic acquirers.
We also find support for this prediction in the data.
Moreover, the model has implications for the cross section of conglomerates’ leverage. As we
have just argued, in overvalued debt markets conglomerates are not able to raise as much leverage
as financial buyers. On the other hand, conglomerates should do relatively more acquiring
(and less divesting) during undervalued debt markets, but during undervalued debt markets
leverage use will be relatively lower. Therefore, if, as in Baker and Wurgler (2002), the effects
on capital structure are persistent, then since more stand-alone firms with financial backers and
high leverage will be created in overvalued debt markets and conglomerates will tend to make
relatively more acquisitions during undervalued debt markets, conglomerates may have lower
leverage on average.
Note that although the possibility of overvalued debt may help financial buyers win the target,
overvalued debt may not help financial buyers’ returns. Overvalued debt increases all financial
buyer’s willingness-to-pay, but competition may cause the gains to go to the target. Since PE
firms are more likely to win in overvalued credit markets, they should use more leverage and
pay higher prices. Axelson et al. (2013) find support for this idea and report that credit market
conditions affect the prices paid and are the main driver of the quantity of debt used in buyouts.
Furthermore, Axelson et al. (2013) find that highly levered transactions are associated with
lower fund returns. Also, Hege et al. (2012) report that sellers of assets to PE buyers earn
positive returns significantly greater than in sales to public operating firms.
Together these implications and early findings suggest that the possibility of misvalued debt
may have important impacts on both firms and investors, on who buys whom, and for default
levels in the economy. We hope these ideas guide future work to some interesting findings.
A recent working paper, Haddad et al. (2011), offers an alternative view on the shifting buyout
activity. The authors argue that more LBOs should occur when risk-free rates are high and the

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

7

risk premium is low due to the benefits and cost of concentrated ownership. Much like the work
in M&A that has shown effects due both to misvaluation and changing economic conditions, it
is likely that buyout activity is also affected both by fundamentals and misvaluation. It would
be interesting to look for both effects in the data.
I.

The Model

The basic set up comes from the workhorse model of Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) with some
interesting additions. This setup has been used to model the effect of financial intermediaries
such as banks and private equity firms on aggregate investment when there are financing constraints. We build on this model to more easily connect the results to the literature and also
because it provides a straight-forward way of modeling governance issues among the different
types of organizational forms.
The economy consists of three types of agents: managers, private equity partners, and investors. They differ in both their abilities to generate returns and their information sets, in a
way that will be clear shortly. All agents are risk-neutral. We differ from Holmstrom and Tirole
(1997) in that we focus on the highest willingness-to-pay for a project as well as whether or not
the project can obtain financing. We also add potential misvaluation.
A.

Managers and Private Equity Partners

There is a project for sale with a current manager, who owns the project, and there are two
potential buyers of the project: a PE firm (who joins with a manager), and a manager with a
current project (a merger or strategic acquirer). Whether or not the project is purchased, it
requires an investment I in period 1 to realize its return in period 2. In period 2, the investment
generates a verifiable return equaling either 0 (failure) or R (success). A stand-alone project
returns R, a project with a PE partner who monitors the project, returns Rpe , and a project
together with another project returns Rs per project.

8

FEBRUARY 2013

The probability that the project succeeds is either pH or pL depending on the manager’s
project choice (or equivalently effort choice), with ∆p ≡ pH − pL > 0. Projects are run by
managers who receive private benefits of 0, b or B where 0 < b < B. Projects with a private
benefit of b or B have a low success probability of pL while the ‘good’, high probability, projects
have no private benefits. This can be interpreted either as reduced/increased effort affecting
probabilities of success, or as a managerial pet project with higher private benefits but lower
expected returns. Thus, without proper incentives managers will choose lower expected return
projects with higher private benefits.
The potential benefit of including a private equity investor is a greater return (Rpe > R) and
that PE firms can monitor the project and prevent the manager from choosing the high private
benefit project. However, PE firms must pay a cost, c > 0, to monitor and will therefore only
monitor if they have the incentives to do so. We assume that b + c − B > 0 so that there is both
a cost and a potential benefit to engaging with a PE firm and not all firms should do so.
Potential buyers of the project are willing to pay up to a maximum value V
firm, or V

s

pe

if they are a PE

if they are a manager with another project (strategic acquisition with synergies).

The stand-alone manager values the project at V which is just the highest amount they could
extract from the firm if it is not sold. The price paid by a buyer is for the right to invest I in
i

the project. Therefore, the total amount needed for the project is V + I. The buyer may pay
for the project and the needed investment with either the cash they posses or by raising money
from investors. Stand-alone and strategic managers have capital Am and PE investors may
choose to invest capital Ape . In order to focus on the interesting case when outside investors
are needed we will assume that Am + Ape < I. Initially, and to facilitate the comparison
between different organizational forms, we assume Ape = 0; then, in section IV.C, we consider
how different amounts of internal funds alter strategic and financial buyer’s willingness-to-pay.
We also assume that there are infinitely many investors who do not monitor and demand an

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

9

expected return of γ.10 Since an optimal contract in this setup pays investors first and gives
the residual to those who need incentives, we will often refer to managers as raising debt from
investors.
The figure below summarizes the three possible organizational forms. The setup so far is
similar to Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) except that we have introduced the idea of a strategic
firm as well as the notion of an acquisition and a highest willingness-to-pay.
PE
Strategic
Stand-alone Acquisition Acquisition Assumption
Success Payoff
R
Rpe
2Rs
pe
s
Maximum Value
V
V
V
Private Benefits
B
b
2B
B>b
Monitoring Cost
−
c
−
b+c−B >0
Internal Funds
Am
Am + Ape
2Am
I > Am + Ape
Figure 2. Summary of Parameters and assumptions

B.

Uninformed Investors

The most interesting addition to the standard modeling assumptions is the potential for investors to not know and thus estimate with error or misperceive the probability of success and
failure. We assume that all managers (including acquiring managers) and private equity investors know pH and pL . However, investors do not know the true probabilities and instead use
the probabilities p0H and p0L in assessing expected values.
A difference between the probabilities used by managers and those used by investors could arise
fully rationally due to asymmetric information as in Myers and Majluf (1984). Or, any biases,
irrationality, or limited cognitive ability and limits to arbitrage could also result in an equilibrium
misperception in the probability of success (see Barberis and Thaler (2003), Hirshleifer (2001),
and Shleifer (2000) for summaries). In this paper we take no stand on the source of the mistake
10 γ could include a return due to the supply and demand for capital as well as for the equilibrium amount of expected
agency costs in the model.

10

FEBRUARY 2013

only that it is possible for investors to be mistaken. Uninformed investors still require a return
γ and have probability beliefs such that only the good projects are economically viable, i.e.,
p0H R − γI > 0 > p0L R − γI + B.
The project probabilities and mistakes have project specific parts and parts that relate to the
industry or economy as a whole, as well as other parts that relate to different characteristics
of the firm (such as geography or asset intangibility). Informed players know the mistake but
not the components of the mistake. If probabilities arise from many different unknown sources
actions by the informed are not fully revealing. This makes arbitrage more challenging and
thus the limits to arbitrage argument more plausible. For simplicity we do not examine how
uninformed investors might update given the actions of the informed. The idea is that there
is enough noise in a single deal that investors would learn little about aggregate debt market
mispricing from a single deal.11
If debt markets can be under or overvalued, then the obvious conclusion is that firms should
tend to issue more debt when it is overvalued. Furthermore, it would seem that all types of
buyers and the stand-alone firm could take advantage of it equally, but we will see that this
is not the case. Instead valuation bubbles in the debt market can lead to overall increases in
acquisition activity but also to waves of dominance of one type of buyer over another.

II.

Organizational Forms

This section will determine the highest amount the PE firm and the strategic buyer would be
willing to offer, while simultaneously determining the reservation price of the stand-alone firm.
With these benchmarks established the following section will examine the drivers that give each
11 Under asymmetric information uninformed investors would update their beliefs conditional on informed player actions.
Given the richness of the model we leave this for future work and suppress updating. The ideas we present here would
continue to hold with updating as long there was enough noise in the model that informed actions were not fully revealing.
For example, in Rhodes-Kropf and Viswanathan (2004), buyers are mispriced but sellers cannot distinguish between overvaluation or high synergies and so when market wide overvaluation is high sellers update prices but still overestimate the
synergies. The inclusion of updating could create wave dynamics such as in Rhodes-Kropf and Viswanathan (2004) in that
each deal would cause small shifts in the misvaluation until early deals were realized and revealed the truth. We model the
willingness-to-pay in a single deal without updating or dynamics.

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

11

type of organizational form a higher willingness-to-pay and thus an advantage in the takeover
market.

A.

Private Equity Buyout

We first consider a manager who combines forces with a PE investor as an alternative organizational form to manage the company’s assets.
One optimal contract requires the manager to invest Am and the uninformed investors to
invest the balance of V

pe

+ I − Am . The contract then pays everyone nothing if the project fails

pe
pe
and if the project succeeds divides the payoff Rpe into Rm
> 0 for the manager, Rpe
> 0 for the
pe
pe
+ Rupe = Rpe . Investors
+ Rm
PE investor and Rupe > 0 for the uninformed investor, where Rpe

will only invest if they believe the manager will choose the good project. However, if the PE
pe
pe
firm monitors the manager (at a cost c ≥ 0) investors need only believe that p0H Rm
≥ p0L Rm
+ b.

Therefore, the incentive-compatible investor belief requires that the manager is paid at least

pe
Rm
≥ b/∆p0 ,

(1)

pe
and the belief that the PE monitors management requires the investors to believe that p0H Rpe
≥
pe
p0L Rpe
+ c. Therefore, the incentive-compatible investor belief also requires

pe
Rpe
≥ c/∆p0 .

(2)

If conditions (1) and (2) hold then uninformed investors will invest V
also expect to earn γ on this investment. Thus, p0H Rupe = γ(V

pe

pe
pe
return to investors, the manager earns Rm
= Rpe − Rpe
− γ(V

pe

+ I − Am as long as they

+ I − Am ). Given the required
pe

+ I − Am )/p0H if the project

is successful. Using this expression and the investors’ perception of the PE’s IC constraint, the

12

FEBRUARY 2013

investors think that the manager’s IC constraint is

Investor0 s view of IC

pe
Rm
= Rpe − c/∆p0 − γ(V

pe

+ I − Am )/p0H ≥ b/∆p0

However, uninformed investors potentially have an incorrect view. The manager will actually
only choose the good project (while the PE investor will monitor) if

pe
Rm
= Rpe − c/∆p − γ(V

pe

+ I − Am )/p0H ≥ b/∆p

(3)

This is the true IC constraint for the manager.
The notion that there is both a true IC constraint and a different perceived IC constraint is
a novel aspect of our model. Only if the perceived IC constraint holds will investors invest, but
only if the actual IC constraint, equation (3), holds will managers choose the better project.
In solving for the highest willingness-to-pay we can treat the manager and PE investor as one
unit because they are both informed. Thus, either the manager will choose the better project
and the PE investor will monitor or both will shirk.12
The manager’s expected return must also be greater than γAm otherwise the manager would
rather invest Am elsewhere. We assume an inelastic supply of projects that earn γ. Therefore,
the manager’s individual rationality constraint is

M anager0 s IR



pe
 Rm
≥ γAm /pH if M anager IC holds

pe
 Rm
≥ (γAm − B)/pL if M anager IC does not hold

This is different from a standard model without misvaluation because in a standard model
the manager’s IC always holds in equilibrium. However, with misvaluation it is possible that
investors believe that the IC holds and believe that the managers will choose the better project
12 Specifically,

pe
we assume that Rm
< B/∆p otherwise the manager behaves without monitoring

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

13

even when they will not. In an equilibrium with misvaluation investors may invest and find that
the manager chooses to shirk. Thus, the IR constraint must ensure that the managers’ decision
to participate is rational even when their IC does not hold.13
Having derived all the relevant constraints of the model, we start by solving the optimization
program that derives the maximum willingness-to-pay of each type. This result is contained in
the following proposition.
PROPOSITION 1: The highest willingness-to-pay by a PE firm, V

pe

, is such that the following

holds:

Rpe − γ(V

pe

+ I − Am )/p0H = max[(b + c)/∆p0 , γAm /pH + c/∆p]
if γAm /pH ≥ b/∆p (4a)

Rpe − γ(V

pe

+ I − Am )/p0H = max[(b + c)/∆p0 , (γAm − B)/pL ]
if γAm /pH < b/∆p (4b)

The result of proposition 1 is four equations that describe the potential highest willingnessto-pay. Which one is in effect depends on the model’s parameters. In some cases either the
perceived IC or IR will bind at a point where the real IC is met (equation (4a)). Or, the
perceived IC or IR will bind at a point where the real IC is potentially not met (equation (4b)).
In words, the PE/Manager combination is willing to raise its offer until either the perceived IC
or an IR binds.
Although the point of the paper is to compare the PE offer to the strategic offer, the standalone firm will serve as a benchmark. The following corollary demonstrates the reservation price
of a stand-alone firm.
13 The PE IR always holds because if their IC holds then Rpe ≥ c/∆p > c/p
pe
H and if their IC does not hold than any
pe
positive Rpe
is greater than or equal to the IR bound of zero.

14

FEBRUARY 2013

COROLLARY 1: The reservation value of the stand-alone firm, V , is such that the following
holds:
R − γ(V + I − Am )/p0H = max[B/∆p0 , γAm /pH ]
if γAm /pH ≥ B/∆p (5a)
R − γ(V + I − Am )/p0H = max[B/∆p0 , (γAm − B)/pL ]
if γAm /pH < B/∆p (5b)

One might have expected the stand-alone value of the firm to simply be the discounted net
present value of the investment. Without misvaluation the price would either be the net present
value or would be constrained by the inability to borrow due to the moral hazard problem.
With misvaluation there is a difference between B/∆p0 and B/∆p as well as (b + c)/∆p0 and
(b + c)/∆p (in Proposition 1). Thus, it is the mispricing directly and through its interaction
with the moral hazard problem that leads to differences in the willingness-to-pay. Mispricing
also creates the possibility that managers, with or without a PE partner, shirk in equilibrium.
This cannot happen in a standard model but is possible with mispricing. We will return to this
in a moment.
B.

Strategic Acquisition

In this section we consider a manager who already has a project and is trying to buy a second
project. We will call this manager a strategic acquirer and assume she has access to cash in the
amount of twice Am (i.e. As = Am ) to allow proper comparison with alternative organizational
forms.
Because our definition of a firm is a pair consisting of a project and a manager, after a strategic
acquisition the new entity will have two managers, each with a project. Each project still requires
an investment of I and generates a return Rs with the same real and perceived probabilities as

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

15

described earlier. The payoffs of all claims are based on the outcome of both projects. Thus, we
are ruling out project financing as this would be the same as a manager with a single project,
which we have already analyzed.14
With two projects, one optimal contract requires the acquiring manager to invest 2Am , and

s
the uninformed investors to invest the balance of 2 V + I − Am . An optimal contract then
pays the two managers nothing if both projects fail, pays the managers nothing if one project
s > 0 for both managers (each
fails, and if both projects succeed divides the payoff 2Rs into 2Rm
s ) and Rs > 0 for the uninformed investor, where 2Rs + Rs = 2Rs .
receives Rm
u
m
u

Given that managers and projects are symmetric, incentives will always be such that both
managers will choose the good project or both will choose the worse project.15 Furthermore,
uninformed investors will always perceive that both managers will choose the same type of
project given the incentives.16 Thus, given that only good projects are economically viable,
uninformed investors will only invest if they believe managers will choose the better projects.
Now, however, a manager only gets paid if both projects pay off, thus investors need to believe
s
0 0
s
17 Therefore, the incentive compatible investor belief requires that
that p02
H Rm ≥ pH pL Rm + B.

the manager is paid at least

Investor0 s view of IC

s
Rm
≥ B/p0H ∆p0

(6)

However, since p0H ∆p0 6= pH ∆p the manager will not actually choose the good project unless
s ≥ B/p ∆p – we must account for this when we consider the manager’s individual rationality
Rm
H
14 This

is equivalent to assuming that the returns from each project cannot be verifiably attached to that project.
the first manager choosing the good project means the second manager wants to choose the bad project, then
s < p p Rs + B. But this implies p p Rs < p2 Rs + B because p /p
p2H Rm
H L m
H L m
L m
L
H < 1. Which means that if the second
manager chooses the bad project then so will the first. So it is a Nash equilibrium for both to choose the high private
benefit project. If the first manager choosing the bad project means the second manager wants to choose the good project,
s ≥ p2 Rs + B s . But this implies p2 Rs ≥ p p Rs + B because p /p
then pH pL Rm
L m
H m
H L m
H
L > 1. Which means that if the
second manager chooses the good project then so will the first. So it is then a Nash equilibrium for both to choose the good
project.
16 The math in the last footnote holds with primes on each probability.
17 We assume investors focus on the pareto-dominating equilibrium where both mangers choose the good project as long
as it is incentive compatible.
15 If

16

FEBRUARY 2013

constraint.

s
If condition (6) holds then uninformed investors will invest 2 V + I − Am if they expect to
s

s
0
0
s
earn γ on this investment. Thus, p02
H Ru + 2pH (1 − pH )R = 2γ(V + I − Am ). Note that this

equation uses the fact that in case only one of the projects is successful the payoff to the investor
is the entire cash flow available, Rs , thus investors retain a debt-like priority. Hence the only
unknown variable is Rus .
Given the previous equations, both managers will only choose the better projects if

M anager0 s IC

s

s
0
s 0
Rm
= Rs − γ(V + I − Am )/p02
H + (1 − pH )R /pH ≥ B/pH ∆p.

And investors will only provide debt for the project if they believe managers will choose the
better projects.
The manager’s expected return must also be greater than γAm otherwise she would rather
invest Am elsewhere. As before, we assume an inelastic supply of projects that earn γ. Therefore,
the manager’s individual rationality constraint is

M anager0 s IR



 Rs ≥ γAm /p2 if M anager IC holds
m
H

 Rs ≥ (γAm − B)/pH pL if M anager IC does not hold
m

We can use the same logic as above to arrive at the strategic buyer’s willingness-to-pay,
presented in the following proposition.
s

PROPOSITION 2: The highest V a strategic acquirer is willing to pay is defined by
s

0
0
2
Rs /p0H − γ(V + I − Am )/p02
H = max[B/pH ∆p , γAm /pH ]

if γAm /pH ≥ B/∆p (7a)
s

0
0
Rs /p0H − γ(V + I − Am )/p02
H = max[B/pH ∆p , (γAm − B)/pH pL ]

if γAm /pH < B/∆p (7b)

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

17

The different possible equations stem from the same interaction between the misvaluation the
perceived IC, the real IC and the IR discussed above for Proposition 1.
This completes the characterization of a strategic acquisition where two projects are organized
under the same firm. Having examined the three possible organizational forms we next compare
them and derive the main results and predictions of the paper.
III.

Moral Hazard and Misvaluation

In order to analyze how the moral hazard problem and its corporate governance implications
are affected by the possibility of misvaluation, we will start by adding some additional structure
to our existing model. In particular, we will think of p0H and p0L not just as parameters but
functions of an underlying variable that measures the extent of asymmetric information or
misvaluation, µ. That is, with a slight abuse of notation, let us define p0H ≡ p0H (µ) and p0L ≡
p0L (µ), where p0 is a continuous, differentiable and strictly increasing function of µ over its
domain: (−∞, +∞), it is bounded between 0 and 1 and 1 ≥ ∆p0 ≡ p0H − p0L > 0, ∀µ. Moreover
we shall note that p0H (0) = pH and p0L (0) = pL ; namely, in the absence of misvaluation (µ = 0)
the perceived probability p0 coincides with the true probability, p, and since 0 ≤ p0 ≤ 1, we also
require that limµ→∞ p0 (µ) = 1 and limµ→−∞ p0 (µ) = 0. Given this structure, µ > 0 results in
overvaluation while µ < 0 results in undervaluation.
In order to understand the potential impacts of overvaluation it is important to distinguish
between two possible types of overvaluation. We do so in the next proposition which separates
overvaluation depending on whether it effects ‘good’ projects more or less than ‘bad’ projects,
as this distinction alters the perceived moral hazard problem.
PROPOSITION 3: Overvaluation has an ambiguous effect on the moral hazard problem. If
∂p0H /∂µ > ∂p0L /∂µ, overvaluation reduces the perceived moral hazard problem, but makes equilibrium shirking possible. If ∂p0H /∂µ < ∂p0L /∂µ, the opposite is true: overvaluation increases
the perceived moral hazard problem, but the equilibrium has no shirking.

18

FEBRUARY 2013

A striking result occurs when overvaluation is introduced into a standard moral hazard setting.
Because misvaluation causes the investor to incorrectly perceive probabilities, a difference between the true and perceived incentive compatibility constraint appears. Absent misvaluation,
only the no-private-benefit project is funded in equilibrium because it is the only economically
viable project. However, with misvaluation, the possibility that under some parameter configurations the perceived IC holds whereas the true does not, allows a firm to be funded even though
the worse project is chosen in equilibrium.
When ∂p0H /∂µ > ∂p0L /∂µ, which we will call loosening overvaluation, overvaluation decreases
the perception of the moral hazard problem and increases the willingness of investors to lend
relative to tightening overvaluation where ∂p0H /∂µ < ∂p0L /∂µ. With loosening overvaluation
actual misbehavior is possible even though the investor perception is that the problem has
gotten better. In fact, equilibrium shirking is possible precisely because investors perceive the
problem to be better than it actually is.
This notion of the impact of overvaluation on behavior matches the ideas of Jensen (2005),
Bolton et al. (2006) and Bolton et al. (2005) wherein overvaluation worsens the moral hazard
problem. However, this is not the only possibility. With tightening overvaluation investors
overestimate the probability but simultaneous perceive the moral hazard problem to be worse.
In this case they require the manager to be paid even more before they are willing to lend in
order to believe that he will not shirk. Of course, since the manager is paid even more than is
needed he does not shirk in equilibrium - thus the moral hazard problem is improved. Relative
to loosening overvaluation, with tightening overvaluation investors are willing to fund fewer
managers and lend less. In fact, if this tightening effect is large enough investors will be less
willing to fund an overvalued firm than one that is not misvalued.
Loosening misvaluation seems logically like the most common and intuitive type of overvaluation, but in what follows we will consider the implications of both types of overvaluation.
The notions of loosening or tightening overvaluation are interesting because they lead to dif-

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

19

ferent predictions. Loosening overvaluation leads to increased lending relative to tightening
overvaluation (although both have high prices). We will see that some of the predicted effects
of overvaluation will be more pronounced in overvalued times with increased lending. We will
examine this interaction in the data at the end of the paper.
IV.

Comparing Different Organizational Forms

We split this section into two parts. The first analyzes the relative ability of the different
organizational forms to create value and thus bid higher for a given target. We call this the
‘price’ effect. Within the first part, we separate out the main drivers of the willingness-to-pay
into the coinsurance effect and the monitoring effect. In the second part of the section we focus
on the predictions of the model in terms of the aggregate number of firms that we expect could
be acquired under one or another organizational form. We call this the ‘quantities’ effect.
A.

The Price Effect

In order to highlight the effect that results from diversification in markets with asymmetric
information we first abstract away from the moral hazard part of our set-up. We do so without
loss of generality in the sense that this effect does not depend on the extent or existence of moral
hazard between investors and management, we choose to isolate it only for expositional reasons.
To do so, we simply need to limit the importance of the moral hazard problem until it is not
affecting prices. This requires only a small enough b and B but for simplicity we assume that
b = B = 0. We also assume Rpe = Rs so there is both no moral hazard issue and no return
benefit to any organizational form. The following proposition contains an important result of
this paper.
PROPOSITION 4 (The Co-insurance Effect): Absent moral hazard, if debt is overvalued, µ >
0, then V

pe

s

> V . The opposite is true when debt is undervalued. Moreover, the difference in

willingness-to-pay V

pe

s

− V increases (decreases) with overvaluation (undervaluation).

20

FEBRUARY 2013

PROOF:
First, using the results in proposition 1 and 2, it is easy to see that the relevant equations
become (4b) and (7b) since Am /pH pL ≥ Am /p2H > 0. The difference between V

pe

and V

s

is,

after some algebra,


p0H
pH

2

p0
− H
pH

!
Am .

The term is positive if and only if p0H > pH , that is, when debt is overvalued. By taking the
derivative with respect to p0H it is immediate to see that the derivative is positive as well.
This proposition shows us that one effect of overvaluation always helps non-diversified PE companies outbid strategic buyers. More generally, the more diversified the merged company becomes,
the larger the disadvantage when debt is overvalued. This occurs because the combination of
projects effectively reduces the valuation mistake being made by investors. That is, they underestimate the default probability, but that makes them underestimate the co-insurance benefit.
The mistakes offset and thus an overvalued debt market cannot be as exploited by a strategic
buyer as it can be by a stand-alone or PE buyer.
The co-insurance effect penalizing strategics does not mean that financial buyers will always
beat strategics in overvalued markets. In general, there are other effects that will also influence
who is willing to pay more, such as potential synergies, and, of course, governance effects that
we explore next.
We now add back the moral hazard environment. As we have explained, one of the main differences between financial and strategic acquirers is that the monitoring capacity of PE sponsors
alleviates the agency cost caused by the moral hazard problem. In order to highlight the effect
that results from the interaction between overvaluation and moral hazard we assume the moral
hazard problem is large enough that it is affecting prices. Specifically, in order to isolate the
impact of misvaluation on the moral hazard problem we assume that private benefits are large
enough relative to the firm’s cash (B > γAm (1 − pL ) and b > γAm ∆p/pH ). These assumptions

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

21

are again without loss of generality in the sense that the moral hazard effect does not depend on
the existence or magnitude of the issues that stem from diversification/co-insurance. We also
now allow Rpe and Rs to vary and consider the set of synergies and PE value enhancements
that result in one or the other type being willing to pay more. The following proposition then
demonstrates the monitoring effect, which is a central point in our paper. We will see that
overvaluation alters the set of financial buyers who are willing to pay more than a strategic
acquirer and also changes the relative amount each is willing to offer.
PROPOSITION 5 (The Monitoring Effect): If debt is overvalued, µ > 0, and there is loosening
overvaluation, ∂p0H /∂µ > ∂p0L /∂µ, then the set of financial and strategic buyers such that the
financial buyer is willing to pay more than the strategic acquirer is larger, i.e., for any given
Rs , increasing µ increases the set of Rpe s such that V

pe

s

> V . Furthermore, within this set of

financial and strategic buyers overvaluation increases the financial buyers relative willingness to
pay, ∂(V

pe

s

− V )/∂µ > 0.

However, if debt is overvalued, µ > 0, and there is tightening overvaluation, ∂p0H /∂µ <
∂p0L /∂µ, then the set of financial and strategic buyers such that the financial buyer is willing to
pay more than the strategic acquirer is smaller, and within this set, overvaluation may or may
not increase the financial buyers relative willingness to pay.
The two types of overvaluation have distinct effects on the moral hazard problem because they
differentially affect the perception of the problem. The perception of the agency cost changes
the value of monitoring and hence alters the ability of the firm to borrow money, which in turn
alters the willingness to pay. If the perception of the moral hazard problem gets better (loosening
overvaluation) then investors perceive the monitoring costs to be lower and thus perceive the
total value creation of a financial buyer to be greater. This increases the investors willingnessto-lend to the financial buyer which in turn both changes the set of PE firms that can win as
well as increases their relative willingness to pay.

22

FEBRUARY 2013

An interesting corollary to both of the above propositions is that their effects are magnified
by the current interest rate environment.
COROLLARY 2: The required rate of return, γ, amplifies the effects of overvaluation. In particular, the lower γ is, the larger the effect of overvaluation on the difference in the willingnessto-pay of financial and strategic buyers.
This suggests that in times when the required return is low overvaluation affects the price
difference between financial and strategic buyers to a larger extent. Lowering the discount rate
increases the financial and strategic buyers willingness-to-pay (it increases the net present value
of the project) but also the rate at which these amounts differ with overvaluation. This is because
the marginal effect of overvaluation is in itself proportional to the value of the company. Thus,
whatever the first order effect of overvaluation is, it is magnified by a lower required return.
Overall, as long as synergies (Rs ) or financial buyer gains (Rpe ) are large relative to the standalone project then increasing overvaluation will increase the willingness-to-pay of both types of
buyers relative to the stand-alone reservation value. This effect is straightforward, but what is
more interesting is how they are relatively affected. We argue that the fundamental differences
between a strategic buyer and a financial buyer are that strategic buyers have a current project,
and financial buyers have a better monitoring technology (although it is a costly technology).
We see above that both differences have implications for the relative dominance of one over the
other. Whether or not financial buyers tend to be willing to pay more than strategic buyers
when the market is overvalued is a combination of the monitoring effect, the coinsurance effect
and other firm parameters such as synergies. A strategic buyer is unable to take full advantage
of overvaluation because he has a current project that partially offsets the lenders valuation
mistake. In other words, diversified acquirers are not able to extract information rents to the
extent that financial buyers do. At the same time, when overvaluation lowers the perceived
agency cost the increased costs associated with the PE monitoring technology are seen as less

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

23

of a burden, allowing them to borrow more and pay more. These two effects working together
suggest a potential mechanism for a changing ratio of strategic to financial acquirers that depends
on the level of overvaluation in debt markets.
The model provides novel intuition as to why and when PE may dominate strategic buyers
and thus how to examine the data. First, we would like to find at least suggestive evidence that
relative PE activity is higher in periods when debt is misvalued. But moreover, if the coinsurance effect is correct, then the relative dominance of PE should be even greater as compared
to conglomerate strategic buyers. This is because conglomerate buyers are more diversified and
should be more impacted by the coinsurance effect (see online appendix for proof). Furthermore,
Proposition 5 showed that with loosening overvaluation the monitoring effect should help financial buyers to a greater extent than with tightening overvaluation. This suggests an interaction
effect – the relative PE dominance should be even greater in times when debt is overvalued and
there is increased lending activity in the market. And finally, if PE activity is relatively higher
in periods with greater misvaluation this effect should be even larger when interest rates are low.
We turn to the data to examine these ideas in Section VI but first we examine the quantities
effect.
B.

The Quantities Effect and Aggregate Acquisition Activity

The hidden-action agency problem creates an ex-ante financing constraint and establishes a
minimum amount of internal funds needed to obtain outside financing. This cutoff determines
whether a particular organizational form (PE, strategic or stand-alone) will be able to sell a
debt instrument in order to finance the investment and acquisition. As this cutoff changes,
the number of potential PE or strategic buyers will increase or decrease, further explaining the
shifting type of acquirer (financial or strategic).
In this section we examine, among other things, when overvaluation allows more companies
to raise financing under the sponsorship of a PE firm versus a strategic deal. This effect, which

24

FEBRUARY 2013

we refer to as the quantity effect, should be added to the price effects discussed in the previous
section in order to have a complete picture of the determinants of merger activity.
We start by solving for the minimum required cash for each type of firm organization. The
minimum cash is always the point at which the perceived pledgable income is equal to the
amount raised from outsiders, I − Am . For a PE acquirer the minimum acceptable cash is

pe

Am ≥ Am = I −

p0H pe b + c
(R −
).
γ
∆p0

(8)

p0H
B
(R −
).
γ
∆p0

(9)

For a stand-alone firm,
Am ≥ Am = I −

Or for a strategic acquisition the minimum Am is defined by

s

Am ≥ Am = I −
pe

p0H
γ

s



B
Rs −
.
∆p0
pe

(10)

s

If and when Am < Am all firms with Am ∈ [Am , Am ) can only be acquired by a financial
sponsor. Moreover, because such mass of firms possess the smallest amount of internal funds,
they would also be highly leveraged deals.
The following proposition and corollary compare the three cutoffs.
PROPOSITION 6 (PE Buyout Activity and Strategic Activity): If ∂p0H /∂µ > ∂p0L /∂µ (loosening overvaluation), then
i) debt overvaluation (µ > 0) loosens financial constraints on all organizational forms, allowing
the funding of deals with lower internal funds;
ii) debt overvaluation (µ > 0) increases the set of financial and strategic buyers for which the
pe

s

minimum acceptable cash in a PE deal is less than in a strategic deal (Am < Am ). In other
pe

s

words, for any given Rs , increasing µ increases the set of Rpe s such that Am < Am .

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

25

However, if ∂p0H /∂µ < ∂p0L /∂µ (tightening overvaluation), then debt overvaluation (µ > 0) may
or may not allow for the funding of deals with lower internal funds, and decreases the set of
pe

s

financial and strategic buyers for which Am < Am .
The driver of point one stems from the same intuition as Proposition 3 - if overvaluation reduces the perception of the moral hazard problem then it loosens the constraints on all types of
organizational form. Loosening overvaluation reduces this perception. With tightening overvaluation there are two counteracting effects. The value of the investment is perceived to be higher,
this loosens financial constraints, however, the moral hazard problem is perceived to be worse,
this tightens financial constraints. The dominate effect depends on the particular parameters.
If we consider the more intuitive type of overvaluation – loosening overvaluation that reduces
financial constraints – then we find that overvaluation unambiguously increases PE activity
because it increases the situations in which only a PE firm will be able to acquire the target. The
following corollary demonstrates that loosening overvaluation also increases overall acquisition
activity by both financial and strategic acquirers.
pe

s

COROLLARY 3: Loosening overvaluation increases (Am − Am ) and (Am − Am ) as long as
financial buyers are economically efficient and strategics have positive synergies. Tightening
overvaluation may or may not have the same effect.
This corollary tells us that loosening overvaluation increases the set of firms that must be
acquired by either a financial buyer or a strategic. Of course synergies must be positive or PE
benefits must outweigh the increased monitoring costs, or else there are no firms that can be
acquired. In summary, the quantity effect not only changes the ratio of financial to strategic
acquirers, but also increases overall activity.
We have shown that with loosening overvaluation there exists an increase in the mass of firms
pe

s

with Am ∈ [Am , Am ) which only financial bidders can buy and hence a PE buyout is the optimal
s

organizational form, while for firms such that Am ≥ Am both types of buyers are likely to be

26

FEBRUARY 2013

present in an auction for the company. And furthermore, if we believe some strategics have
s

synergies greater than or equal to zero, then Am ≥ Am . For firms with enough capital all three
organizational forms are possible. The figure below illustrates the case which becomes more
s

pe

likely with loosening overvaluation, Am > Am > Am . Thus, with loosening overvaluation PE
firms can purchase targets with even less cash and take on even greater leverage.

Figure 3. Effect of overvaluation on minimum required capital.

Combining the quantity results from this section with the previous results on pricing we have
that leverage should be higher in PE deals, for two reasons. One, when overvaluation causes
financial buyers to pay more, they finance this with increased leverage. And two, since I is
fixed, if a PE buyer alleviates the financing constraint those firms that now access investors
will do so with larger amounts of debt. This is consistent with the empirical evidence that PE
deals are not only highly leveraged but have leverage that depends on debt market conditions
more than fundamental factors (see Axelson et al. (2013)). However, Axelson et al. (2013) argue
that because leverage and returns are negatively related, their findings are inconsistent with a
market-timing story. Our model shows that overvaluation may cause the willingness-to-pay to
increase but this does not imply increased returns. The benefit of overvalued debt markets may

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

27

accrue to the target.
Overall we have shown how debt overvaluation can have an effect both on the acquirer
willingness-to-pay and on the acquirer ability to finance the deal that could explain why we
see increased financial sponsor activity that correlates with overvaluation in the debt market,
particularly in highly active debt markets.

C.

The Impact of Cash

In order to more easily compare the organization forms, we assumed above that PE investors
brought no additional cash to the transaction. In this subsection we relax this assumption. If
the financial buyer brings cash to the acquisition then, since monitoring ability is scarce, the
financial buyer commands a premium return on his cash, γ pe ≥ γ.18 Therefore, we endogenize
the amount of cash brought by the financial buyer. We do so by finding the amount that allows
for the highest offer. Thus, the PE’s individual rationality constraint will determine PE capital,
Ape . If the PE IC holds then the PE investor is willing to alter his capital until the point where
γ pe Ape = pH c/∆p. Thus, investors must perceive that the PE investor will monitor and it must
be individually rational for him to do so. If the PE IC does not hold, then the PE investor does
not invest any capital.

PROPOSITION 7: Allowing financial buyers to have positive cash increases their willingnessto-pay, but does not change the effect of overvaluation on their willingness-to-pay.

Thus, if we endogenize the financial buyer’s cash we see that this provides another reason that
the financial buyer may offer a higher price, but cash does not change the effects of misvaluation.
18 The minimum acceptable rate of return when the PE IC holds is determined by the condition p c/∆p − c = γA
pe =
H
γpH c/γ pe ∆p which translates into γ pe = γpH /pL .

28

FEBRUARY 2013

V.

A.

Predictions and Discussion

The Merger Wave of 2005-07

The starting point of this paper was the observation that the one thing that seemed to characterize the last wave of acquisition activity of 2005-2007 was the relatively more predominant
role of financial buyers. It has been argued by both industry practitioners and some academics
that this period was characterized as a period of potentially overvalued debt and hence “too
low” yields and increased lending. This casual observation is consistent with, and predicted by,
our model. Our model provides a characterization of this last merger wave as one potentially
caused by, or at least magnified by, the misvaluation of debt.

B.

The Collapse of the PE Market

Our static setup can also be taken a little further, in a more dynamic thought experiment. Let
us assume that debt maturities are shorter than the investment horizon: in this case financial
buyers must impound their forecast of future expected misvaluation in debt markets into their
willingness-to-pay today. If debt markets shift from over to undervaluation it may turn out that
a financial buyer paid significantly more than the investment is now worth given that it has to
be refinanced with underpriced debt. To be clear, this was not a mistake ex-ante but will lead
to the possibility of sudden collapses ex-post that are not related to a change in the health of
the underlying target. Furthermore, the larger the original debt market mispricing the larger
the resulting financial distress situation. Therefore, depending on the costs of financial distress,
the underlying target firm may be impacted in a way that would not have occurred had debt
markets been correctly priced at all times.

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

C.

29

Divestitures and Asset Sales

Even though we have motivated this paper in the context of acquisition activity, its predictions and implications go beyond asset expansion and can be more generally related to overall
restructuring activity. One example of this broader interpretation can be made in the context
of optimal asset sale policies. When debt is overvalued a diversified company can potentially
unlock value by divesting a division. As a stand-alone entity the division should be better able
to extract information rents from lesser informed investors. However, a divestiture will only be
an optimal strategy provided, of course, that there are no significant synergies between the division to be divested and the rest of the divisions that comprise the original firm. Hence in terms
of overvalued debt markets, our paper suggests not only more acquisition activity (with potentially more financial buyers) but also more divestitures or asset sales undertaken by diversified
companies or conglomerates. The reason for this prediction is the same driving our acquisition
results, namely, the interaction of information asymmetries and diversification of cash flows.

D.

Correlated Projects

A limiting force on the co-insurance effect occurs when firm’s cash flows are positively correlated, as opposed to independent. In this case, the price effect shown in Proposition 4 is
diminished and financial buyers enjoy a lower advantage, compared to strategics. An extreme
example is the case of perfectly correlated projects. If the two projects are perfectly positively
correlated, then the possibility of diversification disappears. The strategic acquirer scenario
then becomes equal to the stand-alone case. The relevant comparison becomes the stand-alone
and the private equity cases, where the differences arise from the different agency costs and
monitoring. We highlight this observation because it has empirical content: strategic acquirers
whose cash flows are more correlated with the target’s are more able to outbid financial buyers.

30

FEBRUARY 2013

VI.

Evidence

Although this is predominantly a theory paper, we present some evidence that demonstrates
support for the idea that debt market misvaluation may be an important driver. We hope this
will encourage future work to take a more in-depth look.
In practice, misvaluation would imply that firms with relatively high ratings default too often.
As it turns out, Moody’s tracks the ex-post accuracy of its rating measures, using the 5-year
Average Position (henceforth, AP). According to Moody’s, the position of any debt issuance is
defined as the share of debt issuances in a cohort rated better than it in the year the debt was
issued. It assumes each debt issuance occupies the midpoint of its rating category. For example,
the position of every Aa2 debt issuance is the share of the cohort rated Aaa or Aa1 plus half
the share rated Aa2. The 5 year AP is then calculated as simply the average of the positions
of the debt issuances that defaulted within 5 years. Intuitively, a more powerful rating system
should have low rated defaults and high rated non-defaulters, meaning the AP should be high.
A higher AP reflects better ex-post accuracy of Moody’s ratings. If all defaulters were initially
given the lowest rating, then the AP would approach one. Alternatively if all defaulters were
initially given a random rating then the AP would be about 1/2. And if all defaulters were
initially given the best rating then the AP would approach zero. Thus, if more defaulters are
given higher ratings then the AP would fall. Therefore, our concept of overvaluation (higher
rated companies defaulting too often) will be captured by lower average positions. Moody’s has
provided us with quarterly cohort 5-year average position (AP ) measures, and using the raw
data from Moody’s we have constructed AP for each of the Fama-French 12 industries.
We also use an alternative measure of misvaluation - the ratio of ratings downgrades to
upgrades three years after the year of interest. We get similar inferences using this alternative. In
head-to-head tests, the downgrade-to-upgrade ratio loses significance in the presence of average

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

31

position (AP).19 So we report the results from the use of average position.
We control for other measures of bond market activity and conditions, such as the 5-year
Treasury rate, the high-yield credit spread, and the average spread over the Federal Funds rate
for commercial and industrial loans. As a general measure of equity valuations, we also control
for the median market to book ratio (based on the Compustat population) and the standard
deviation of the market to book ratio. For the level of economic activity we employ change in
GDP.
Our measure of private equity activity is the fraction of the value of all deals for public targets
accounted for by financial sponsors (also known as private equity or leveraged-buy-outs (LBOs).
We calculate this on an annual basis. Figure 4 plots the average position and the percentage
of PE activity. For our annual regression the dependent variable is the fraction of value of all
deals done by PE in a given Fama-French industry, and we also look at a dependent variable as
an indicator variable set to 1 for high PE periods. We define a high PE period as a year where
the average fraction of activity accounted for by PE activity is more than 8.86% (which is the
sample mean of the value ratio of PE deals).
Since our predictions are sharper for the relative impacts of misvaluation on PE versus conglomerate activity we also construct the P E/(P E + conglomerate) ratio using the value of PE
and conglomerate deals. Because we are interested in the co-insurance effect we define a conglomerate acquirer as an acquirer that is in Fama-French 12 industries other than the target
company - these are clearly diversified entities.
Table I presents summary statistics for the variables used in our estimation. The average
fraction of activity accounted for by PE acquirers is 8.86% and 27.27% of our years are high PE
periods. The P E/(P E + conglomerate) ratio averages 21%. The aggregate average position
fluctuates within a relatively tight range (between 81% and 92%), so even relatively small changes
19 We suspect this is because downgrades-to-upgrades is not cohort specific so it makes it difficult to identify exactly
when the misvaluation occurred.

32

FEBRUARY 2013
%val_PE

ap

0.6

0.94
0.92

0.5

0.9
0.88

0.4

0.86
0.3

0.84
0.82

0.2

0.8
0.78

0.1

0.76
0.74
19842
19844
19852
19854
19862
19864
19872
19874
19882
19884
19892
19894
19902
19904
19912
19914
19922
19924
19932
19934
19942
19944
19952
19954
19962
19964
19972
19974
19982
19984
19992
19994
20002
20004
20012
20014
20022
20024
20032
20034
20042
20044
20052
20054
20062

0

Figure 4. Moody’s average position (ap) and the percentage of PE activity (%val P E)

in the average position reflect large changes in bond market ‘misvaluation’. At the industry level,
on the other hand, the range expands to 50% and 99%.
[See Table I]
We start by estimating a Tobit model of the fraction of financial buyers. We use a Tobit
in order to account for the potential censoring of the dependent variable at 0. We present
the results as marginal effects in Table II (columns 1 through 6), where the first row contains
aggregate average position (AP), our measure of bond market pricing accuracy, and the second
row the same variable calculated at the Fama-French 12, FF12, industry level. Initially we run
regressions without average position so that we see the expected effects for the control variables.
For example, the high-yield spread is negatively correlated with PE activity. We then add
average position. It is significantly negative, confirming that in periods when ‘overvaluation’
is high, as measured with a low AP, PE activity increases as a fraction of total M&A activity.
The effect is economically large as well: a 1% decrease in aggregate AP increases the fraction
of PE activity by 3.2%. For industry level AP, the range of values is about 5 times that of

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

33

the aggregate AP and the coefficient about 1/5th of the aggregate AP so that a 1% decrease
in industry AP increases the ratio of PE activity by 0.6%. Since the mean of PE activity is
8.9% it is indeed economically important. Interestingly, the high-yield spread loses significance
when debt mispricing (AP) is included (see columns 3, 4 and 6). Thus, high PE activity does
not seem to be just about changing economic conditions but rather is highly related to ratings
mistakes.20 Said another way, to the extent that AP is an accurate measure of mispricing and
our theory is correct, then AP should drive out or reduce the coefficient on the high yield spread
because the remaining variation in the high yield spread should relate to fundamental reasons
that are not related to mispricing.
Column 5 includes industry fixed effects to control for industry unobserved heterogeneity.
Note that the coefficient on AP continues to be significant even though, as we would expect,
it is slightly less negative than in column 4. Thus, times when the industry AP is above its
average, PE activity is also above its industry average. The smaller coefficient in column 5
suggests that some of the effect in column 4 comes from cross industry effects - industries with
lower AP tend to have higher PE activity than those with higher AP. For robustness, column 6
in Table II presents logistic regressions predicting the probability of high PE activity. The effect
of AP has the predicted sign and it is also significant. In unreported results we also rerun our
analysis with private equity activity measured as the fraction of the count (rather than value) of
all deals for public targets accounted for by financial sponsors, and find similar results. Finally,
in untabulated results we include the aggregate dollars raised by PE firms as a control (as well
as lagged dollars raised) and find similar coefficients. This controls for any concerns that the
effect of PE dominance may be coming from an effect due to increased capital availability rather
than the shifting bond market misvaluation.
[See Table II]
20 Our treasury results are consistent with the prediction of a recent working paper, Haddad et al. (2011), that argues
that more LBOs should occur when risk-free rates are high. It is not surprising that PE activity is related both to changing
economic conditions as well as misvaluation.

34

FEBRUARY 2013

In table III we continue to test some of the results and mechanisms of our theory. First,
the coinsurance effect, shown in proposition 4, predicts that a conglomerate acquirer should be
even more impacted in their relative ability to acquire when debt markets become overvalued
because they are diversified and most impacted by the coinsurance effect. In Table III (column
1 and 2) we present Tobit regressions, the dependent variable of which is the ratio of PE
activity to PE plus conglomerate activity, P E/(P E + conglomerate). AP is again significantly
negative, confirming that in periods when misvaluation increases, as measured by low AP, PE
activity increases relative to conglomerate activity. The effect is economically large as well: a
1% decrease in AP increases the fraction P E/(P E + conglomerate) by 4.83%. Since the mean
of P E/(P E + conglomerate) is 24.2% it is indeed economically important. As predicted by 4,
the effect is 50% larger than it is for all acquirers (see column 3 of table II). Thus, the relative
impact of PE to conglomerates is even stronger than on overall activity, as predicted. This
finding is supportive of the coinsurance effect and neither an obvious prediction or something
previously known.
[See Table III]
In columns 3 and 4 of table III we take the idea of loosening and tightening overvaluation
to the data to examine the monitoring effect. Proposition 5 predicts that the monitoring effect
should help PE acquirers to a greater extent when there is loosening overvaluation. If loosening
overvaluation is the type of overvaluation that prevails, aggregate lending should increase (see
proposition 3). Therefore even if one cannot observe directly the type of overvaluation we could
see whether the data is consistent with its implication in terms of aggregate lending. We define
High ∆D as a year that belongs to the upper quartile of the aggregate change in debt issuance for
all Compustat firms in any given year. The marginal effect of loosening overvaluation is captured
by the interaction between the dummy for large increase in debt and AP (both aggregate and
industry). As predicted, the interaction has a significantly negative sign, providing indirect

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

35

evidence of loosening overvaluation and the impact of the monitoring effect on PE activity.
Finally, in columns 5 and 6 we test the result in corollary 2. There we showed that the effect
of overvaluation is amplified in times when the required rate of return is low. To test this idea
we create a dummy called Low H-Y which takes the value of one for an year belonging to the
lowest quartile of the high-yield spread. The interaction of such indicator and AP is negative
and significant, consistent with the prediction of the corollary.
VII.

Concluding Remarks

In this paper we introduce debt market misvaluation in M&A. We also highlight and explain
the oscillating pattern of financial vs. strategic acquirers within merger waves. We demonstrate
that debt misvaluation can explain increased activity and the relative dominance of financial
buyers. This is non-obvious because an overvalued debt market should raise the value of standalone firms as well as the willingness-to-pay of both financial and strategic acquirers as they can
all access cheap debt. We model how misvaluation interacts with both co-insurance (Lewellen
(1971)) and the moral hazard problem, to give financial firms a relative advantage when debt
markets are overvalued.
We find a strong correlation in the data between measures of debt market misvaluation and
the fraction of acquisition activity due to PE acquirers. This is consistent with our theory,
which provides a possible explanation for this correlation. Further predictions of our theory are
supported by the data. Thus, the evidence is consistent with the idea that misvaluation in the
debt market is driving the relative dominance of PE activity.
Overall, by combining moral hazard and co-insurance with the idea of debt misvaluation we
gain considerable insights into a previously unexplored pattern. We hope that future work will
further examine the impact of potentially misvalued debt markets and show its relevance to
M&A activity in the same way that so much has followed from the ideas of equity misvaluation.

36

FEBRUARY 2013

REFERENCES

Andrade, Gregor, Mark Mitchell, and Erik Stafford. “New Evidence and Perspectives on Mergers.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 15 (2001), pp. 103–120.
Ang, James S., and Yingmei Cheng. “Direct evidence on the market-driven acquisitions theory.”
Journal of Financial Research 29 (2006), pp. 199–216.
Axelson, Ulf, Tim Jenkinson, Per Stromberg, and Michael S. Weisbach. “Borrow Cheap, Buy
High? The Determinants of Leverage and Pricing in Buyouts.” Forthcoming, Journal of
Finance (2013).
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeff Wurgler. “Market timing and capital structure.” Journal of Finance
57 (2002), pp. 1–32.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Richard H. Thaler. “A Survey of Behavioral Finance.” In George
Constantinides, Milton Haris, and Rene M. Stulz, editors, “Handbook of the Economics of
Finance,” Amsterdam, North Holland: MacMillan (2003).
Bargeron, Leonce L., Frederik P. Schlingemann, Rene M. Stulz, and Chad J. Zutter. “Why do
private acquirers pay so little compared to public acquirers?” Journal of Financial Economics
89 (2008), pp. 375–390.
Bolton, Patrick, Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong. “Pay for Short-Term Performance: Executive
Compensation in Speculative Markets.” Journal of Corporation Law (2005).
Bolton, Patrick, Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong. “Executive Compensation and Short-termist
Behavior in Speculative Markets.” Review of Economic Studies 73 (2006), pp. 577–610.
Dittmar, Amy, Di Li, and Amrita Nain. “If pays to Follow the Leader:Acquiring Targets Picked
by Private Equity.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 47 (2012), pp. 901–931.

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

37

Dong, Ming, David Hirshleifer, Scott Richardson, and Siew Hong Teoh. “Does Investor Misvaluation Drive the Takeover Market?” Journal of Finance 61 (2006), pp. 725–762.
Faure-Grimaud, Antoine, and Roman Inderst. “Conglomerate entrenchment under optimal
financial contracting.” American Economic Review 95 (2005), pp. 850–861.
Galai, D., and Ronald W. Masulis. “The Option Pricing Model and the Risk Factor of Stock.”
Journal of Financial Economics (1976).
Gervais, Simon, J.B. Heaton, and Terrance Odean. “Overconfidence, Compensation Contracts,
and Capital Budgeting.” Journal of Finance 66 (2011), pp. 1735–1777.
Goel, Anand M., and Anjan V. Thakor. “Overconfidence, CEO selection and corporate governance.” Journal of Finance 63 (2008), pp. 27372784.
Gorbenko, Alexander S., and Andrei Malenko. “Strategic and Financial Bidders in Takeover
Auctions.” Forthcoming, Journal of Finance (2013).
Gorton, Gary, Matthias Kahl, and Richard Rosen. “Eat or be eaten: A theory of mergers and
merger waves.” Journal of Finance 64 (2009), pp. 1291–1344.
Haddad, Valentin, Erik Loualiche, and Matthew Plosser. “Seeing the Forest Through the Trees:
The Impact of Aggregate Discount Rates on Buyout Activity.” University of Chicago working
paper (2011).
Harford, Jarrad. “What Drives Merger Waves.” Journal of Financial Economics 77 (2005), pp.
529–560.
Hege, Ulrich, Stefano Lovo, Myron B. Slovin, and Marie E. Sushka. “Asset Sales and the Role
of Buyers: Strategic Buyers versus Private Equity.” HEC Paris working paper (2012).
Higgins, Robert, and Lawrence Schall. “Corporate bankruptcy and conglomerate merger.” Journal of Finance 30 (1975), pp. 93–113.

38

FEBRUARY 2013

Hirshleifer, David. “Investor psychology and asset pricing.” The Journal of Finance 56 (2001),
pp. 1533–1597.
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Steven N. Kaplan. “Corporate Governance and Merger Activity in the
United States: Making Sense of the 1980s and 1990s.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 15
(2001), pp. 121–144.
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole. “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the Real
Sector.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (1997), pp. 663–691.
Ivashina, Victoria, and Anna Kovner. “The private equity advantage: Leveraged buyout firms
and relationship banking.” Review of Financial Studies 24 (2011), pp. 2462–2498.
Jensen, Michael. “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers.” American Economic Review 76 (1986), pp. 323–329.
Jensen, Michael. “Agency Costs of Overvalued Equity.” Financial Management 34 (2005), pp.
5–19.
Jovanovic, Boyan, and Peter Rousseau. “The Q-Theory of Mergers.” The American Economic
Review, Papers and Proceedings 92 (2002), pp. 198–204.
Kim, E. Han, and John McConnell. “Corporate mergers and the co-insurance of corporate
debt.” Journal of Finance 32 (1977), pp. 349–365.
Landier, Augustin, and David Thesmar. “Financial contracting with Optimistic Entrepreneurs.”
Review of Financial Studies 22 (2009), pp. 118–150.
Lehn, Kenneth, Jeffry Netter, and Annette Poulsen. “Consolidating Corporate Control: DualClass Recapitalization versus Leveraged Buyouts.” Journal of Financial Economics 27 (1990),
pp. 557–580.

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

39

Leland, Hane. “On purely financial synergies and the optimal scope of the firm: implications
for mergers, spin-offs, and structured finance.” Journal of Finance 62 (2007), pp. 765–807.
Lewellen, W. G. “A Pure Financial Rationale for the Conglomerate Merger.” Journal of Finance
(1971).
Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon Phillips. “The Market for Corporate Assets: Who Engages
in Mergers and Asset Sales and Are There Efficiency Gains?” The Journal of Finance LVI
(2001), pp. 2019–2065.
Mitchell, Mark L., and J. Harold Mulherin. “The impact of industry shocks on takeover and
restructuring activity.” Journal of Financial Economics 41 (1996), pp. 193–229.
Morellec, Erwan, and Alexei Zhdanov. “Financing and Takeovers.” Journal of Financial Economics 87 (2008), pp. 556–581.
Mulherin, J. Harold, and Audra L. Boone. “Comparing acquisitions and divestitures.” Journal
of Corporate Finance 6 (2000), pp. 117–139.
Müller, Holger M., and Fausto Panunzi. “Tender Offers and Leverage.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 119 (2004), pp. 1217–1248.
Myers, Stewart C., and N. S. Majluf. “Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms
have information that investors do not have.” Journal of Financial Economics 13 (1984), pp.
187–221.
Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew, David Robinson, and S. Viswanathan. “Valuation Waves and Merger
Activity: The Empirical Evidence.” Journal of Finance 77 (2005), pp. 561–603.
Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew, and S. Viswanathan. “Market Valuation and Merger Waves.” Journal
of Finance 59 (2004), pp. 2685–2718.

40

FEBRUARY 2013

Shivdasani, Anil, and Yihui Wang. “Did Structured Credit Fuel the LBO Boom.” Journal of
Finance 66 (2011), pp. 1291–1328.
Shleifer, Andrei. Inefficient Markets–An Introduction to Behavioral Finance. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1 edition (2000).
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. “Stock Market Driven Acquisitions.” Journal of
Financial Economics 70 (2003), pp. 295–311.
William E. Fruhan, Jr. “The Role of Private Equity Firms in Merger and Acquisition Transactions.” Harvard Business School Case 9-206-101 (2010).

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

41

Table I. Summary Statistics
Value by PE is the sum of the value of transactions by PE sponsors divided by the total
M&A value. This is calculated for each Fama-French 12 industry. High PE is a dummy variable
that takes the value of 1 if PE participation as a percentage of total deal value is above 8.86%
and 0 otherwise. Aggregate AP is Moody’s 5-year average position, a measure of the accuracy
of a given year’s bond ratings over the following 5 years. FF12 AP is the same measure at
the industry level. We define AP more formally in section VI. 5-year Treasury is the yield
to maturity for 5-year Treasuries. The High-Yield Spread is the difference between the Bank
of America Merrill Lynch High-yield 100 index yield and the 5-year Treasury Yield. The C&I
Spread is the spread between the average rate on commercial and industrial loans and the Federal
Funds rate (Series E.2 from the Federal Reserve). The Change in GDP is the annual growth
rate of GDP. Median M/B and Std Dev (M/B) are the median and standard deviation of the
market-to-book ratio for Compustat firms (data are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile)
at the Fama-French 12 industry level. There are 176 annual-industry observations from 1984 to
2005.

Variable

Mean

Std Dev

Min

Max

Value by PE

0.0886

0.1579

0

0.8374

High PE

0.2727

0.4466

0

1

Aggregate AP

0.8540

0.0299

0.8079

0.9179

FF12 AP

0.8288

0.0920

0.5

0.9935

5yr Treasury

5.9028

1.6809

3.03

9.09

High-Yield Spread

6.0638

2.2299

3.771

12.476

C&I Spread

1.6216

0.2461

1.19

2.12

Change in GDP

3.0833

1.2591

-0.2330

4.8254

Median M/B

1.5301

0.4352

0.9024

3.2877

Std Dev M/B

9.5218

20.3417

0.2864

158.0153

Observations

176

42

FEBRUARY 2013

Table II. Financial Buyer’s Activity Relative to Strategic’s
This table shows Tobit regressions (columns 1-5) and a logistic regression (column 6). Value
PE is the fraction of total PE participation over total deal value. High PE is a dummy variable
that takes the value of 1 if PE participation as a percentage of total deal value is above 8.86%
and 0 otherwise. Observations are the annual and industry level. Reported values are marginal
effects. Standard errors are in parenthesis. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.10.

Variables
Aggregate AP

Value PE
(1)

Value PE
(2)

Value PE
(3)
-3.2256***
(0.8887)

FF12 AP
5yr Treasury
High-Yield Spread
C&I Spread
Change in GDP

0.0429***
(0.0119)
-0.0192**
(0.0079)
0.2942***
(0.0905)
0.0217
(0.0152)

M/B (industry)
St Dev M/B
Industry FE
Observations

N
176

0.0413***
(0.0122)
-0.0209***
(0.0079)
0.2801***
(0.0921)
0.0246
(0.0150)
-0.0810**
(0.0383)
0.0007
(0.0009)
N
176

0.0460***
(0.0116)
0.0135
(0.0120)
0.2314***
(0.0877)
0.0118
(0.0146)
-0.0816**
(0.0365)
0.0005
(0.0008)
N
176

Value PE
(4)

Value PE
(5)

High PE
(6)

-0.6240***
(0.1740)
0.0448***
(0.0117)
-0.0126
(0.0079)
0.2733***
(0.0879)
0.0205
(0.0143)
-0.0704*
(0.0366)
0.0009
(0.0008)
N
176

-0.5318***
(0.2047)
0.0389***
(0.0114)
-0.0158**
(0.0078)
0.2356***
(0.0843)
0.0206
(0.0140)
-0.1187*
(0.0641)
0.0011
(0.0009)
Y
176

-0.7756**
(0.3449)
0.0888***
(0.0207)
-0.0158
(0.0151)
0.4609***
(0.1763)
0.0229
(0.0283)
-0.1097
(0.0848)
0.0020
(0.0015)
N
176

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

43

Table III. Financial Buyer’s Activity. Further Tests
This table shows Tobit regressions. Value PE is the fraction of total PE participation over total
deal value. PE Cong is defined as PE/(PE+Conglomerate) and analogous to Value PE, except
that only deals by PE sponsors and by conglomerate acquirers are included. Conglomerate
acquirers are defined as acquirers with SIC codes different from the target firm according to
the Fama-French 12 industries classification. High ∆D is an indicator that is 1 in a year that
belongs to the upper quartile of the aggregate change in debt issuance for all Compustat firms in
any given year. Low H-Y is an indicator this is 1 for any year belonging to the lowest quartile of
High Yield Spread. Observations are at the annual level and either at the industry or aggregate
level. Reported values are marginal effects. Standard errors are in parenthesis. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗
p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.10.

Variables
Aggregate AP

PE Cong
(1)
-4.830***
(1.545)

PE Cong
(2)
-4.264***
(1.474)

FF12 AP

Value PE
(3)

-0.4789**
(0.1972)
0.6107*
(0.3471)

High ∆D
AP x High ∆D
FF12 AP x High ∆D

Value PE
(4)
-3.1736***
(0.8993)

Value PE
(5)

-0.5742***
(0.1739)
4.6679*
(2.5304)
-5.4247*
(2.9672)

-0.7786*
(0.4339)

AP x Low H-Y

-0.0951*
(0.0527)

FF12 AP x Low H-Y
5yr Treasury
High-Yield Spread
C&I Spread

0.052***
(0.020)
0.0100
(0.0212)
0.438***
(0.139)

0.040**
(0.011)
0.0003
(0.0207)
0.349**
(0.136)

-0.0942
(0.0644)
-0.0003
(0.0015)
No
173

-0.216*
(0.112)
0.0005
(0.0017)
Yes
173

Change GDP
M/B (industry)
St Dev M/B
Industry FE
Observations

Value PE
(6)
-2.9088***
(0.8941)

0.0445***
(0.0117)
-0.0141*
(0.0079)
0.2735***
(0.0883)
0.0198
(0.0142)
-0.0733**
(0.0363)
0.0009
(0.0008)
No
176

0.0322**
(0.0134)
0.0182
(0.0123)
0.1511
(0.0935)
-0.0037
(0.0162)
-0.0719**
(0.0362)
0.0006
(0.0008)
No
176

-0.1045*
(0.0540)
0.0393***
(0.0119)
-0.0213**
(0.0091)
0.2234**
(0.0903)
0.0205
(0.0142)
-0.0690*
(0.0363)
0.0008
(0.0008)
No
176

0.0407***
(0.0119)
0.0025
(0.0134)
0.1904**
(0.0895)
0.0131
(0.0145)
-0.0793**
(0.0362)
0.0005
(0.0008)
No
176

44

FEBRUARY 2013

Technical Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1.
pe

By definition, V is the largest number such that the manager’s payoff satisfies the perceived
pe
pe
pe
IC constraint, Rm
≥ b/∆p0 , and the relevant IR, which is either Rm
≥ γAm /pH or Rm
≥ (γAm −
B)/pL depending on whether the manager’s true IC constraint binds. Thus, the “if” statement
in the proposition checks to see if the true IC constraint is met when the IR constraint binds.
The manager’s ability to extract value is constrained by the perceived IC and IR constraints.
pe
First, if γAm /pH ≥ b/∆p, the true IC binds if the manager participates because Rm
≥
pe
γAm /pH ⇒ Rm ≥ b/∆p. Therefore the manager exerts effort and the relevant IR in this
pe
≥ γAm /pH . The highest willingness-to-pay is defined by the constraint that allows
case is Rm
shareholders to extract the highest value. Since uninformed investors of the project expect to
pe
pe
get p0H Rupe = γ(V + I − Am ), and Rpe − Rupe = Rm
+ Rpe
, we can rewrite the perceived IC
constraint as
Rpe − γ(V pe + I − Am )/p0H ≥ (b + c) /∆p0

and also the IR constraint as
Rpe − γ(V pe + I − Am )/p0H ≥ γAm /pH + c/∆p.
It is easy to see that the maximum willingness-to-pay is constrained by the maximum value of
the right hand side of the above constraints, which explains the max function in the proposition.
If (b + c) /∆p0 ≥ γAm /pH + c/∆p,
V

pe

=

p0H (Rpe − (b + c) /∆p0 )
− I + Am
γ

and if γAm /pH + c/∆p > (b + c) /∆p0 ,
V

pe



p0H Rpe
p0H
c
=
−I + 1−
Am − p0H
.
γ
pH
∆p

Secondly, if γAm /pH < b/∆p then (γAm − B)/pH < (γAm − b)/pH < γAm /pL . Therefore, if
(b + c)/∆p0 < (γAm − B)/pL then the manager chooses the lower probability project and the
pe
relevant IR is Rm
≥ (γAm − B) /pL . If (b + c) /∆p0 ≥ (γAm − B) /pL ,
V

pe

=

p0H (Rpe − (b + c) /∆p0 )
− I + Am
γ

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

45

and if (γAm − B) /pL > (b + c) /∆p0 ,
V

pe



p0H (Rpe + B/pL )
p0H
=
Am .
−I + 1−
γ
pL

Proof of Corollary 1.
The result follows directly from proposition 1 by simply setting Rpe = R, c = 0 and b = B.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 2.
The proof follows the same steps as the proof of proposition 1 using the derivation of the
different equations from the main text. Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 3.
From Corollary 1 we know that if B/∆p0 is larger than or equal to either γAm /pH or (γAm −
B)/pL then
p0 (R − B/∆p0 )
− I + Am .
V = H
γ
Note that from the perceived IC constraint, the moral hazard cost is equal to B/∆p0 . If
∂p0H /∂µ > ∂p0L /∂µ then the perceived moral hazard cost decreases with overvaluation because
∂B/∆p0
B
=− 0
∂µ
∆p



∂p0H
∂p0
− L
∂µ
∂µ


< 0,

whereas when ∂p0L /∂µ > ∂p0H /∂µ the opposite is true.
In the first case, which we call loosening overvaluation because it loosens the perceived IC
constraint, it is possible for the perceived IC constraint to hold at the same time as the true
IC constraint does not. To show this, assume that γAm < B/∆p (in which case it follows that
(γAm − B)/pL < γAm ). In that case it is possible that B/∆p0 > γAm , implying that investors
believe that the manager is exerting effort and it is perceived to be individually rational to do so,
but since B/∆p0 > B/∆p her true IC is not met. This possibility does not arise with tightening
overvaluation because then B/∆p0 < B/∆p ∀µ, hence when the perceived IC holds so does the
true IC constraint. Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 5.
First, note that B/(1 − pL ) > γAm ⇒ B/∆p0 > γAm , ∀µ. Moreover loosening overvaluation
implies ∆p0 > ∆p, ∀µ hence B/∆p > γAm . This means that the equation determining maximum
willingness-to-pay by a strategic acquirer is given by (7b). Second, if pH b/∆p > γAm then it
is also easy to verify that what determines highest willingness-to-pay of a PE buyer is (4b).

46

FEBRUARY 2013

Altogether, we must consider
V

pe

=

and
s

V =
The difference is
V

pe

p0H pe b + c
(R −
) − I + Am
γ
∆p0

p0H s
(R − B/∆p0 ) − I + Am .
γ



p0H
b+c−B
pe
s
(R − R ) −
,
−V =
γ
∆p0
s

pe

s

and the set of parameter values such that V − V > 0 include any set {Rpe , Rs , b, c, B, ∆p0 }
such that
b+c−B
Rpe − Rs >
≡ ∆R∗ (µ).
∆p0
Furthermore, for a given {b, c, B, ∆p0 } there is a set {Rpe , Rs } such that V
Rpe − Rs > ∆R∗ (µ). Taking derivatives, we find
∂ V

pe

−V
∂µ

s


=

Rpe − Rs b + c − B
−
γ
γ∆p0


First note that Rpe − Rs −

b+c−B
∆p0



∂p0H
∂µ



−V

s

> 0, i.e.,

 0

∂p0H
∂p0L
0 b + c − B ∂pH
+ pH
−
.
∂µ
γ∆p02
∂µ
∂µ

> 0 iff Rpe − Rs > ∆R∗ (µ). This is so because of the

definition of ∆R∗ (µ) and by noting that overvaluation implies
LEMMA 1: Loosening overvaluation implies
∂∆R∗ (µ)
∂µ

pe

∂∆R∗ (µ)
∂µ

∂p0H
∂µ

> 0.

< 0 whereas tightening overvaluation im-

plies
> 0.
PROOF:
Using (VII) and taking derivatives yields


∂p0L
b + c − B ∂p0H
∂∆R∗ (µ)
=−
−
.
∂µ
∆p02
∂µ
∂µ
Given that b + c − B > 0, a necessary condition for

∂∆R∗ (µ)
∂µ

< 0 is

∂p0H
∂µ

−

∂p0L
∂µ

the condition for loosening overvaluation. Similarly a necessary condition for
∂p0H
∂µ

−

∂p0L
∂µ

> 0, which is
∂∆R∗ (µ)
∂µ

> 0 is

< 0, which is the condition for tightening overvaluation.

The lemma above implies that loosening overvaluation causes the set of returns {Rpe , Rs } such
∗ (µ)
that Rpe − Rs > ∆R∗ (µ) to increase since ∂∆R
< 0. Moreover for those {Rpe , Rs } such that
∂µ
pe
s
∂ (V −V )
Rpe − Rs > ∆R∗ (µ),
> 0 since Rpe − Rs − b+c−B
∂µ
∆p0 > 0 and by loosening overvaluation
∂p0H
∂µ

−

∂p0L
∂µ

> 0.

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

47

On the other hand, tightening overvaluation causes the set of returns {Rpe , Rs } such that
∗ (µ)
Rpe − Rs > ∆R∗ (µ) to decrease since ∂∆R
> 0. Moreover for those {Rpe , Rs } such that
∂µ
pe
s
∂ (V −V )
Rpe − Rs > ∆R∗ (µ) the sign of
is ambiguous since by definition Rpe − Rs − b+c−B
∂µ
∆p0 >
∂p0

∂p0

0 but tightening overvaluation implies ∂µH − ∂µL < 0, hence the overall marginal effect of
overvaluation depends on the parameter values and which of the two effects dominate. Q.E.D.
Proof of Corollary 2.
We differentiate the difference in willingness to pay with respect to overvaluation to obtain
∂ V

pe

−V
∂µ

s

1
=
γ





∂p0L
b + c − B ∂p0H
1 p0H (b + c − B) ∂p0H
pe
s
R −R −
.
+
−
∆p0
∂µ
γ
∆p02
∂µ
∂µ

To evaluate how the marginal effect of overvaluation is affected by the required rate of return γ
we take derivatives of the expression above to find that
pe

∂ V −V
∂µ∂γ

s

1
=− 2
γ





∂p0L
b + c − B ∂p0H
1 p0H (b + c − B) ∂p0H
pe
s
R −R −
.
− 2
−
∆p0
∂µ
γ
∆p02
∂µ
∂µ

pe
s
pe
s
Notice that if and when ∂ V − V /∂µ < 0 ⇒ ∂ V − V /∂µ∂γ > 0 and vice versa. In
pe
s
words, if overvaluation has a negative (positive) effect on V − V then a lower γ will make
such effect even more negative (positive). Thus the direct effect of misvaluation is amplified
by the required rate of return and the amplification result does not depend on the sign of
pe
s
∂ V − V /∂µ. Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 6.
pe

s

First, from (8) and (9) we can express Am − Am as
pe
Am

−

s
Am



p0H
b+c−B
pe
s
=−
R −R −
;
γ
∆p0
pe

s

and the set of parameter values such that Am − Am < 0 include any {Rpe , Rs , b, c, B, ∆p0 } such
that
b+c−B
e
Rpe > Rs +
≡ R(µ).
∆p0
pe

s

Furthermore, for a given {b, c, B, ∆p0 , Rs } there is a set of values for Rpe such that Am −Am < 0,
e
i.e., Rpe > R(µ).
Taking derivatives, we find
 pe

 0

pe
s 
∂ Am − Am
∂p0L
R − Rs b + c − B ∂p0H
0 b + c − B ∂pH
=
−
+
p
−
.
H
∂µ
γ
γ∆p0
∂µ
γ∆p02
∂µ
∂µ
First note that (Rpe − Rs − (b + c − B) /∆p0 )

∂p0H
∂µ

e
> 0 iff Rpe > R(µ).
This is so because of the

48

FEBRUARY 2013

e
definition of R(µ)
and by noting that overvaluation implies

∂p0H
∂µ

> 0.

e
LEMMA 2: Loosening overvaluation implies ∂ R(µ)/∂µ
< 0 whereas tightening overvaluation
e
implies ∂ R(µ)/∂µ > 0.
PROOF:
Note that



e
∂p0L
∂ R(µ)
b + c − B ∂p0H
,
=−
−
∂µ
∆p02
∂µ
∂µ

given that b + c − B > 0, a necessary condition for

e
∂ R(µ)
∂µ

< 0 is

∂p0H
∂µ

−

∂p0L
∂µ

the condition for loosening overvaluation. Similarly a necessary condition for
∂p0H
∂µ

−

∂p0L
∂µ

> 0, which is
e
∂ R(µ)
∂µ

> 0 is

< 0, which is the condition for tightening overvaluation.

The lemma above implies that loosening overvaluation causes the set of returns Rpe such
e
e
e
< 0. Moreover for those Rpe such that Rpe > R(µ),
that Rpe > R(µ)
to increase since ∂ R(µ)
∂µ
pe

s

∂Am −Am
∂µ

> 0 since Rpe −Rs −(b + c − B) /∆p0 > 0 and by loosening overvaluation

∂p0H
∂µ

−

Rpe

∂p0L
∂µ

> 0.

Rpe

On the other hand, tightening overvaluation causes the set of returns
such that
>
epe (µ)
∂R
pe
pe
pe
e (µ) the sign
to decrease since ∂µ > 0. Moreover for those R such that R > R

epe (µ)
R

pe

of

s

∂Am −Am
∂µ

is ambiguous since by definition Rpe − Rs − (b + c − B) /∆p0 > 0 but tightening
∂p0

∂p0

overvaluation implies ∂µH − ∂µL < 0, hence the overall marginal effect of overvaluation depends
on the parameter values and which of the two effects dominate. Q.E.D.
Proof of Corollary 3.
pe

Taking derivatives of Am − Am with respect to µ results in the following expression:
 pe



pe 
∂ Am − Am
p0H b + c − B ∂p0H
∂p0L
R − R b + c − B ∂p0H
=
−
+
−
.
∂µ
γ
γ∆p0
∂µ
γ
∆p02
∂µ
∂µ
A PE acquisition is economically efficient as long as the benefits outweigh the costs, i.e., Rpe −
pe
∂ (Am −Am )
∂p0
∂p0
R > b+c−B
.
If
so
then
> 0 as long as ∂µH − ∂µL > 0, which is the definition of
∆p0
∂µ
loosening misvaluation.
On the other hand, if overvaluation is tightening the effect of overvaluation is ambiguous even
pe
when R γ−R − b+c−B
γ∆p0 ≤ 0.
s

Taking derivatives of Am − Am with respect to µ results in the following expression:
 s

s 
∂ Am − Am
R − R ∂p0H
=
,
∂µ
γ
∂µ
which is positive as long as synergies are non-negative, i.e., Rs > R. Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 7.

FINANCIAL VS. STRATEGIC

49

A first step requires rewriting Proposition 1 to take into account the financial buyer’s decision
to contribute her own funds in the deal. The lemma below is the equivalent of proposition 1
with (endogenously determined) PE capital, once we take into account that the PE only invests
her own capital Ape if her IC constraint holds (which can only occur when the manager’s IC
holds). In which case the PE capital, Ape , is determined in equilibrium by the IR constraint,
provided that this increases the willingness-to-pay (if adding more capital decreases the offer
price then the PE firm adds no capital).
LEMMA 3: Including Ape will modify the amount borrowed from uninformed investors and also
the IR for the PE manager, therefore, (4a) becomes


Rpe − γ (V pe + I − Am − Ape ) /p0H = max (b + c)/∆p0 , γAm /pH + γ pe Ape /pH
if γAm /pH ≥ b/∆p
and (4b) can be rewritten as


Rpe − γ (V pe + I − Am − Ape ) /p0H = max (b + c)/∆p0 , (γAm − B) /pL
if γAm /pH < b/∆p.
If γAm /pH ≥ b/∆p, there are two cases that we must assess. If max[(b + c)/∆p0 , γAm /pH +
γ pe Ape /pH ] = (b + c)/∆p0 , then Ape increases the bid and equals pH c/γ pe ∆p , based on the PE
IR constraint, which is given by
pe
pH Rpe
= γ pe Ape
The true IC constraint is
pe
Rpe
≥ c/∆p.

Therefore the PE’s willingness to pay is given by
V

pe

=

p0H (Rpe − (b + c) /∆p0 )
pH c
− I + Am +
.
γ
γ pe ∆p

On the other hand if max[(b + c)/∆p0 , γAm /pH + γ pe Ape /pH ] = γAm /pH + γ pe Ape /pH then
V

pe

= p0H Rpe /γ − I + Am + Ape − p0H Am /pH − p0H γ pe Ape /γpH .

Since p0H > pH and γ pe > γ then Ape negatively affects the maximum bidding price, and in
equilibrium Ape = 0, and
V

pe

= p0H Rpe /γ − I + Am − p0H Am /pH

50

FEBRUARY 2013

If max[(b + c)/∆p0 , (γAm − B) /pL ] = (γAm − B) /pL , then when γAm /pH < b/∆p the manager’s true IC does not hold, and therefore the PE manager does not monitor and Ape = 0.
Therefore,


p0H (Rpe + B/pL )
p0H
pe
Am .
V =
−I + 1−
γ
pL
If max[(b + c)/∆p0 , (γAm − B) /pL ] = (b + c)/∆p0 , then
V

pe

=

p0H (Rpe − (b + c) /∆p0 )
− I + Am + Ape .
γ

Furthermore, if (b + c)/∆p0 > γAm /pH + γ pe Ape /pH (with Ape = pH c/γ pe ∆p) then the IC holds
and
p0 (Rpe − (b + c) /∆p0 )
pH c
pe
V = H
− I + Am +
.
γ
γ pe ∆p
otherwise the IC does not hold and Ape = 0 so
V

pe

=

p0H (Rpe − (b + c) /∆p0 )
− I + Am .
γ
pe

As we can see from comparing the new price expressions with proposition 1, V weakly
pe
increases in the amount Ape = pH c/γ pe ∆p. In other words, V increases by pH c/γ pe ∆p when
Ape > 0. Otherwise it is equal to the case with no PE capital. This proves the first part of the
proposition. Furthermore, since
V

pe

=V

pe

(No PE capital) + pH c/γ pe ∆p,

it is immediate to realize that
pe

∂V
∂V
=
∂µ
which concludes the proof. Q.E.D.

pe

(No PE capital)
,
∂µ

