                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     POLICY UNCERTAINTY, TRADE AND WELFARE:
                    THEORY AND EVIDENCE FOR CHINA AND THE U.S.

                                            Kyle Handley
                                            Nuno Limão

                                        Working Paper 19376
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19376


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2013




We thank Stephanie Aaronson, Helia Costa, Lauren Deason, Rafael Dix-Carneiro, Gisela Rua, Jagadeesh
Sivadasan and participants at the WAITS conference, Lisbon meeting on Institutions and Political
Economy, Western Michigan University and University of Michigan for useful comments. Jeronimo
Carballo provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Kyle Handley and Nuno Limão. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Policy Uncertainty, Trade and Welfare: Theory and Evidence for China and the U.S.
Kyle Handley and Nuno Limão
NBER Working Paper No. 19376
August 2013
JEL No. D8,D92,F1,F13,F14,F5,O24

                                              ABSTRACT

We assess the impact of U.S. trade policy uncertainty (TPU) toward China in a tractable general equilibrium
framework with heterogeneous firms. We show that increased TPU reduces investment in export entry
and technology upgrading, which in turn reduces trade flows and real income for consumers. We apply
the model to analyze China's export boom around its WTO accession and argue that in the case of
the U.S. the most important policy effect was a reduction in TPU: granting permanent normal trade
relationship status and thus ending the annual threat to revert to Smoot-Hawley tariff levels. We construct
a theory-consistent measure of TPU and estimate that it can explain between 22-30% of Chinese exports
to the US after WTO accession. We also estimate a welfare gain of removing this TPU for U.S. consumers
and find it is of similar magnitude to the U.S. gain from new imported varieties in 1990-2001.


Kyle Handley
University of Michigan
Ross School of Business - R3434
701 Tappan St.
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
handleyk@umich.edu

Nuno Limão
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
limao@econ.umd.edu
1     Introduction

    One of the most important economic developments of the last 20 years is China’s integration into the
global trading system. The share of world imports from China rose from about 2% to 11% between 1990-
2010. The share of U.S. imports from China in that period rose even faster: from 3% to 19%. More
importantly, the U.S. share grew 1 percentage point per year on average in 2001-2010–twice the rate in
1990-2000. Recent evidence indicates that this export boom had large impacts–contributing to declines in
U.S. prices (cf. Auer and Fischer, 2010) and lower manufacturing employment and local wages (cf. Autor
et al., Forthcoming). Some authors note the inflection year of the export growth to the U.S. coincides with
China’s WTO membership (December 2001) and argue that the accession may have reduced trade costs
faced by Chinese exporters.1 This argument is somewhat puzzling given that U.S. applied trade barriers
toward China remained largely unchanged at the time of accession.

    We provide theoretical and empirical evidence that China’s WTO accession did significantly contribute
to its export boom to the U.S. by reducing the policy uncertainty faced by Chinese exporters. We also
examine the impact this had on aggregate prices and welfare of U.S. consumers. China’s WTO accession led
the U.S. to finally implement the permanent most favored nation (MFN) status in 2002, which ended the
annual threat to impose high tariﬀs on Chinese goods. Although China never lost its MFN status after it
was granted in 1980, it came close: after the Tiananmen square protests there was pressure to revoke MFN
status with Congress voting on such a bill every year in the 1990s and the House passing it three times.
Had MFN status been revoked the U.S. would have reverted to Smoot-Hawley tariﬀ levels and a trade war
would likely have ensued. In 2000 for example, the average U.S. MFN tariﬀ was 4% but if China had lost its
MFN status it would have faced an average tariﬀ of 35% with about one fifth of product tariﬀ lines going
up to at least 50%. Figure 1 illustrates that products with higher threat tariﬀs relative to MFN prior to
WTO accession had stronger export growth to the U.S. after accession by employing both a linear and a
non-parametric fit.2

    The potential impact of this policy uncertainty and the channel through which it aﬀected trade was
understood by policy makers and firms. For example, after President Clinton delinked the MFN status from
China’s domestic practices in 1994 the Hong Kong Secretary for Trade and Industry celebrated the U.S.
decision stating that it had “removed a major issue of uncertainty and we can now go ahead with business
plans in the normal way” and that the impact of renewal on investment and re-exports “(...) can only be
evaluated retrospectively. But it will remove the threat of potential losses that would have arisen as a result
of revocation.” But the uncertainty remained, in 1997 the Chinese Foreign Trade Minister urged the U.S.
to abandon trade status reviews: “The question of MFN has long stymied the development of Sino-U.S.
   1 Autor et al., Forthcoming, make this point and also cite other motives for this export growth. China’s share of world

income has risen driven by internal reforms (many in the 1990s) with a subset of these being targeted to exports, e.g. improved
access to foreign technology & inputs (Hsieh and Klenow, 2009) and relaxed FDI rules (Bloningen and Ma, 2010).
   2 The non-parametric fit suggests that the relationship is not log linear, which is something we investigate in the model and

test in the empirical section where we provide details about the data and estimation.



                                                               1
economic ties and trade (...) [It] has created a feeling of instability among the business communities of the
two countries and has not been conducive to bilateral trade development”.3

    The eﬀects of policy uncertainty on U.S. businesses activity and consumer welfare were also recognized.
A coalition of businesses in the toy, apparel, footwear and electronics industries as well as exporters that
feared retaliation lobbied Congress to make MFN permanent (Zeng, 2003). The Tyco Toys CEO said
“We view the imposition of conditions upon the renewal of MFN as virtually synonymous with outright
revocation. Conditionality means uncertainty.”4 Reports prepared for Congress discussed the higher prices
that consumers would face following revocation given the incidence of higher tariﬀ rates (Pregelj, 2001).

    The first question we address is how do we identify and quantify the impact of U.S. trade policy uncer-
tainty (TPU) on China’s export boom. The answer has implications beyond this particular important event.
It can inform us about the potential impacts of other sources of policy uncertainty, such as U.S. threats
to impose tariﬀs against “currency manipulators” or revoke unilateral preferences to developing countries.
More broadly, our results are relevant for understanding whether trade agreements promote trade. This is
a central goal of the World Trade Organization (WTO), but its success is questioned by some (Rose, 2004)
and supported by others (cf. Subramanian and Wei, 2007). By quantifying the role of trade agreements in
reducing policy uncertainty, our work highlights how the WTO can promote trade through a channel that
is largely missing from the empirical and theoretical debate, barring recent exceptions discussed below.5

    The second question we address is what are the aggregate price and welfare eﬀects of TPU. The initial
impetus for this question is the doubling of Chinese import penetration in the U.S. between 2000-2005, which
may have depressed aggregate prices and thus improved U.S. consumer welfare. The broader motivation is
to contribute to the long standing question of the aggregate gains from trade. Recent work by Arkolakis et
al. (2012) has focused on the gains from removing applied trade barriers. Our framework highlights and
quantifies an additional source of welfare gains from trade reform: the removal of TPU. We will focus on
consumer gains that arise from lower prices due to firm entry and technology upgrading investments.

    Our theoretical approach captures the concerns of policy makers and business leaders over future policy
by focusing on the interaction between uncertainty and irreversible investment decisions. When the cost of
investment is sunk, firms may have an option value of waiting and thus delay investment until uncertainty
is resolved or business conditions improve. The basic theoretical mechanism for this interaction is well
understood (cf. Bernanke, 1983; Dixit, 1991) and there is some evidence that economic uncertainty, as
proxied by stock market volatility, leads firms to delay investments (Bloom et al., 2007). In the international
   3 The news sources are respectively: “HK business leaders laud US decision” South China Morning Post, 5/28/94, Business

section; “Minister urges USA to abandon trade status reviews” Xinhua news agency, 10/5/97, FE/D3044/G. After WTO
accession, the same Ministry pointed out that by establishing “the permanent normal trade relationship with China, [the U.S.]
eliminated the major long-standing obstacle to the improvement of Sino-U.S. (...) economic relations and trade.” (in “China-US
trade volume increases 32 times in 23 years - Xinhua reports” BBC Summary of World Broadcasts, 2/18/2002.)
   4 “China Most-Favored-Nation Status,” Hearing before the Committee on Finance, U.S. Senate, June 6, 1996, p. 97.
   5 The WTO site for example states that “Just as important as freer trade — perhaps more important — are other principles

of the WTO system. For example: non-discrimination, and making sure the conditions for trade are stable, predictable and
transparent.” (www.wto.org)



                                                              2
trade context, there is evidence of sunk costs to export market entry (cf. Roberts and Tybout, 1997) but most
empirical research on uncertainty’s impact on export dynamics has focused on exchange rate uncertainty
and found small or negligible impacts (IMF, 2010).

    Only a small body of research addresses the theoretical and empirical implications of economic policy
uncertainty, in part because measurement and quantification of its causal eﬀects is diﬃcult (Rodrik, 1991).
In recent work, Baker et al. (2012) construct a news-based index of policy uncertainty and find it is useful in
predicting declines in output and employment in VARs. Our focus and approach are considerably diﬀerent
since we use applied policy and counter-factual policy measures, both of which are observable, to directly
estimate the eﬀect of policy uncertainty on economic activity in a structural framework.

    In section 2 we develop a tractable dynamic heterogeneous firms’ model and use it to derive and then
estimate the impacts of current and future trade policy on firms and consumers. In doing so we extend the
partial equilibrium framework from Handley and Limão, 2012 (HL) in two important ways. First, we allow
firms to not only make sunk cost investments to enter foreign markets (as in HL) but also to upgrade their
technology (to one with lower marginal cost). Second, we allow for TPU in a two country general equilibrium
context where export entry and upgrading aﬀect the importer’s price index.

    By allowing for upgrading, the extended model predicts that reductions in TPU will generate new exports
via both the extensive margin (as new firms invest to enter) and the intensive one: via endogenous technology
upgrading by incumbent exporters. This additional intensive margin eﬀect is important since new entrants
are typically small and the contribution of intensive margin growth of surviving firms to total export growth
is especially important for China (cf. Amiti and Freund, 2008, and Manova and Zhang, 2009). Moreover,
in other countries there is evidence that applied tariﬀ changes can trigger within firm productivity increases
(cf. Trefler, 2004, Lileeva and Trefler 2010) so it is plausible that the same may happen due to reductions
in TPU. This could account for the evidence of substantial firm-level TFP growth increases in China since
2001 (Brandt et al, 2012).6

    The general equilibrium price eﬀects are motivated both by the sizeable increase in Chinese import
penetration and our objective of examining its welfare impacts. We show that the general equilibrium price
eﬀects dampen the direct eﬀect of TPU on entry and upgrading but do not eliminate it. Briefly, a TPU
reduction generates an incentive to enter and upgrade but this then leads to a reduction in the price index
due to love of variety and lower costs. This price eﬀect of reforms that lower TPU is central in generating
welfare gains in our model.

    The model allows us to aggregate firm decisions to generate a tractable TPU-augmented gravity equation
at the industry level. The model consistent TPU measure captures the proportion of profits lost that Chinese
exporters expected before WTO accession if China ever lost its MFN status. Importantly, this pre-WTO
   6 While our current data does not allow us to test the firm-level channel directly, we will show how it operates and that it is
taken into account in the estimation.




                                                                3
uncertainty measure can be calculated by using observable MFN and threat tariﬀs (so called column 2
tariﬀs). We then provide evidence that Chinese export growth in 2000-2005 was higher in those industries
with higher initial TPU. Our identification approach is robust to industry specific unobserved heterogeneity,
sector specific growth trends and addresses potential non-linear eﬀects via non-linear and semi-parametric
estimation. We also control for a variety of changes in applied trade barriers, including tariﬀs and non-tariﬀ
barriers and transport costs.

   We combine the policy and trade cost data with HS-6 export flows to estimate certain model parameters
that we use to calculate the implied general equilibrium price eﬀects. In our baseline we find that uncertainty
reduction lead to as much as a 32 log point increase in Chinese exports to the U.S., which translates into
an applied tariﬀ equivalent of up to 8.5 percentage points. Using a semi-parametric approach we fail to
reject the non-linear form of the model-consistent TPU measure, but we do reject the fit that uses a linear
measure of column 2 tariﬀs. These tests suggest that we should not rely on linear measures of column 2
tariﬀs, particularly when making quantitative predictions. Our preferred quantification allows for non-linear
eﬀects of TPU present in the model; doing so is quantitatively important and generates a more conservative
estimate (22 log points instead of 32), which translates into a change in exports of $55 billion dollars in 2005
due to TPU.

   We use the model and our estimates to compute the counterfactual increase in the price index if China
had lost its MFN status and faced column 2 tariﬀs and find it is about 3.3% percent. This translates into
a similarly valued reduction in real income for consumers that spend most income on diﬀerentiated goods.
We decompose the potential welfare cost of TPU into two eﬀects, one which we estimate and refer to as
a within state eﬀect. This welfare cost eﬀect of higher uncertainty captures the increase in prices due to
depressed entry and upgrading even when applied trade policy has not changed. It is as high as 0.8 percent of
U.S. welfare. This is of comparable magnitude to welfare gains from diﬀerent sources in deterministic trade
models. For example, Broda and Weinstein (2006) estimate that the U.S. welfare gain from new varieties
imported from all its partners is about 0.8 percent in the period of 1990-2001. Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare
(Forthcoming) calculate that a worldwide tariﬀ war would lower North American welfare by 0.7 percent.

   The model also permits us to estimate that the TPU reduction increased Chinese varieties exported to
the U.S. by 44 log points. The eﬀect of TPU on entry is larger than on exports as predicted by the model.
We also find supporting evidence for this entry channel by exploring additional data, namely changes in the
number of traded HS-10 varieties within each industry.

   We contribute to the literature on trade agreements more broadly. The influential economic theory of
the GATT/WTO proposed by Bagwell and Staiger (1999) argues that this agreement internalizes the terms-
of-trade eﬀects imposed by tariﬀs. There is now evidence that countries possess market power and explore
it when they are not in an agreement but less so after an agreement (Broda et al, 2008; Bagwell and Staiger,
2011; Ludema and Mayda, Forthcoming). Moreover, the welfare cost of trade wars that would likely occur



                                                       4
without such agreements are potentially large–about 3.5% for the U.S. (Ossa, 2013). But this theory and
evidence on the WTO has largely ignored TPU. Recent work by Handley (2012) shows that reducing WTO
binding tariﬀ commitments, a measure of the worst case tariﬀs, would increase entry of foreign products in
Australia. Limão and Maggi (2013) endogenize policy uncertainty and provide conditions such that there
is an uncertainty reducing motive for agreements in a standard general equilibrium model and derive a
suﬃcient statistic for evaluating their aggregate welfare gains. We contribute to this literature by providing
both theoretical and empirical evidence for welfare gains from reducing TPU through trade agreements in a
dynamic setting with heterogenous firms.

    We also contribute to the growing literature assessing the reduced form impact of Chinese exports on
wages and employment in the European Union (cf. Bloom et al., 2012) and the U.S. (cf. Pierce and Schott,
2012). The latter study appeals to the theoretical TPU mechanism in HL to use U.S. column 2 tariﬀs as a
reduced form determinant of the impact of Chinese exports on U.S. manufacturing employment. However, in
HL there is no aggregate impact of TPU on the importer (the European Community) because the exporter
is assumed to be small (Portugal). In contrast, the model and evidence in our current paper does include an
impact of TPU on the importer via the price index and thus a channel via which a reduced form impact of
column 2 tariﬀs on US outcomes may be justified.7 Two important diﬀerences relative to the recent work on
the impact of China’s export boom on labor markets is that our focus is on the trade and consumer welfare
eﬀects and our structural approach allows us to perform counterfactual exercises. For example, we provide a
decomposition of the uncertainty eﬀect and find that a substantial fraction is explained by a mean preserving
tariﬀ risk reduction, and the rest is due to locking in tariﬀs below the mean. More interestingly perhaps,
we quantify the uncertainty impact of proposed legislation that threatens to impose tariﬀs of almost 30% on
“currency manipulators”. We find that implementing such legislation in 2012 would have had similar trade
eﬀects to removing China’s permanent MFN status and a higher welfare cost to U.S. consumers.

    The paper is structured as follows. The following section presents the theory. Section 3 describes the
empirical approach and data and provides the estimates and quantification. We summarize the main results
and implications in section 4. The theory and data appendices contain details on derivations, data and
estimation.



2     Theory

    We first present the building blocks of the partial equilibrium version of the model and use it to analyze
firm export entry and technology upgrading decisions. In section 2.4 we provide the remaining elements
required for the general equilibrium model, which we use to re-examine the entry and upgrading decisions
   7 The general equilibrium price index eﬀects turn out to be important empirically since we find them to attenuate the impact

of TPU. We also find that the TPU eﬀects are lower when we allow for the non-linear, model consistent measure of uncertainty,
and that this measure provides a better fit to the trade data.




                                                              5
and to derive new results on the price index and consumer welfare. The notation is defined in the text but
we also provide a reference table in the last page.


2.1       Demand, Supply and Pricing

    The utility function,  01− , is identical across consumers and countries. It is defined over the numeraire
good, 0, which is homogenous, freely traded with expenditure share 1 − , and a subutility index,  =
£R           ¤1
        
   ∈Ω 
                  . In this CES aggregator there is a continuum of diﬀerentiated varieties, , from the set of
available goods, Ω, with an elasticity of substitution,  = 1 (1 − )  1. Total expenditure on diﬀerentiated
goods in a country is denoted by  and consumers face prices  so the aggregate demand for each variety
is standard and given by
                                                                  ³  ´−
                                                           =                                                              (1)
                                                                  
               hR                     i1(1−)
where  =         ∈Ω
                        ( )1−               is the country’s price index for the diﬀerentiated goods. While income,
the price index and individual prices are specific to an importer country we dispense with importer subscripts
below. The consumer price for each variety,  , includes trade costs. In the theory we focus on advalorem
import tariﬀs, which are generally product or industry specific, so we denote the tariﬀ factor that an importer
sets on the group of varieties  by  ≥ 1, so free trade is represented by  = 1. We will refer to diﬀerent
 as industries.8 Therefore, producers of any variety  of product  receive   .

    We first determine the optimal price and operating profits for each monopolistically competitive firm
conditional on supplying a market. For firms with a given technology, the marginal production cost parame-
ter,  , is constant and heterogenous across firms. Given a wage,  , in the exporting country , the firms’
production marginal cost is then   . Firms must also incur an advalorem export cost, which for now we
assume is industry specific and denoted by  . This cost can include transport charges and other costs
associated with producing and supplying goods for a foreign market as we discuss in section 2.3. In a deter-
ministic setting the firm chooses prices (or quantities) to maximize operating profits in each period to each
export market,  = (  −    )  , leading to the standard mark-up rule over cost, ̃ =    .
The consumer faces this price augmented by any import tariﬀ on that product:  = (   )  .

    Firms make all production and pricing decisions after the policy and thus demand is known, so only their
entry and upgrading investment decisions are made under uncertainty. Substituting the demand function
and markup rule into the definition of operating profits we obtain


                                                        =  − 1−
                                                                      1−
                                                                                                                          (2)

where  ≡ (1 − )  (  )1− , summarizes aggregate conditions, e.g. domestic wage,  , and demand in
   8 To   map this directly to the subutility index for diﬀerentiated goods we can simply partition Ω into  sets and require
                                                                                      1
                                                                                      
identical elasticity of substitution across and within them to obtain  =    ∈Ω         and similarly for the price index.
                                                                                    




                                                                  6
a foreign market, which the firms take as given. In section 2.4 we place additional structure on the model
and examine how uncertainty can aﬀect . In particular we will be interested in the eﬀects via the price
index,  . To isolate this we pin down the wage by assuming the homogenous good is always produced in each
country and uses only labor so the wage is simply the marginal product in that sector, which we normalize to
unity. Moreover, consumers of the diﬀerentiated good are workers who will have no other source of income
and thus expenditure on the diﬀerentiated sector is  is simply a fraction  of the constant labor income.9


2.2     Policy Uncertainty and Firm Entry

    Our focus is on firm decisions related to the export market. Thus, we take the mass of domestic dif-
ferentiated good firms as given.10 In order to enter a foreign market a firm must incur a sunk investment
cost,  .11 A firm with production cost parameter  obtains operating profits from exporting equal to
 (   ) =  1−
                        where  ≡  − 1−
                                                 represents the conditions each firm in an industry  faces
in the export destination. Initially we allow profits to depend on the policy state  only through the tariﬀ
factor  − . We can rationalize this by thinking of entering firms in a “small” industry (e.g. a given HS-6
category, of which there are more than 5000) or in a set of industries that are “small”. By this we mean
that changes to policy in that industry  (or set of industries) has a negligible impact on the aggregate
variables and so on . In section 2.4 we examine how export decisions aﬀect aggregate conditions in the
destination market. In the absence of aggregate eﬀects, a firm in an industry  is also not aﬀected by policy
in other (small) industries. This allows us to consider the impact of policy changes industry by industry and
to identify  for a given industry with the policy state for that industry.

    Below we omit the industry subscript  to simplify the notation. There is a continuum of firms in each
industry and they diﬀer only according to their cost. Therefore all firms with cost at or below a threshold,
 , will enter the export market in state . We determine that threshold first in the absence of uncertainty,
as a benchmark, and then when there is uncertainty about the future state of market conditions,  .

    If market conditions are at state  and are not expected to change then the deterministic cutoﬀ for
entering a new export market, 
                                , is defined by

                                   ¡        ¢            ∙           ¸ −1
                                                                        1
                                     
                                                             
                                              =  ⇔  =                   for each                                             (3)
                                    1−                    (1 − ) 

where operating profits are discounted by , the probability that the firm will survive (there is no pure time
discounting). Given the absence of fixed costs of exporting per period, the firm will continue to export until
     9 As we will discuss in section 2.4, this requires that workers do not receive any policy revenue rebates or profits, which will

go to entrepreneurs that own blueprints for each variety.
   1 0 A simple way to rationalize this is the existence of a mass  of entrepreneurs that is constant each period. Each has one

unit of specific capital (a blueprint for a variety with a production technology with marginal cost  ). If there are no entry
costs into the domestic market then there are always  varieties in the domestic market.
   1 1 There is evidence that these can be large. We do not take a strong stand on this, other than to assume that there are some

fixed costs to export and that they are at least partially irreversible. We will return to this point later.



                                                                 7
it is exogenously hit by a death shock.

    With uncertainty about future policy the firm must decide whether to enter the market today or wait
until conditions improve. At  a firm will be just indiﬀerent if it has cost 
                                                                               , which is implicitly defined

by the equality of the expected value of exporting, Π , given the current state net of the sunk cost and the
expected value of waiting, Π .


                                         Π (                     
                                                    ) −  = Π (   ) for each                                          (4)

                                                  12
Any firm in this industry with  ≤ 
                                     will export.

    To solve for the cutoﬀs we now model the policy regime, which is characterized by a Markov transition
matrix and associated tariﬀ values. The general element of the policy state transition matrix  is 0 –the
transition probability from state  to 0 . To maintain tractability and provide sharper results we impose some
structure on this transition process that captures key features of the empirical application we subsequently
explore: the U.S. policy towards China. Namely, starting in 1980 China was granted temporary MFN status
by the U.S., which we denote by  = . Thus, until late 2001 a Chinese exporter in an industry  faced a
tariﬀ  but believed that the MFN status could be revoked in which case the U.S. would transition to a
state  = 2 where it charged the column 2 tariﬀ, which was typically much higher so 2 ≥  . We denote
the probability of this transition by 2 . During the last part of that period, the late 1990s and through
2001, China was negotiating entry into the WTO. We model this via a probability, 0 , of transition from the
temporary MFN status to entry into the WTO, which we denote  = 0. The latter state is characterized by
a tariﬀ 0 ≤  and a probability of column 2 that is lower than before (02 ≤ 2 ) possibly even negligible
(02 → 0). We also assume that if China faced column 2 tariﬀs then it would be less likely to transition to
the WTO state directly than would be the case if it were in a negotiation/MFN stage, i.e. 20 ≤ 0 .

    We summarize the policy regime as follows:

   1. There are 3 possible policy states: column 2 ( = 2), temporary MFN ( = ) and WTO ( = 0) and
      2 ≥  ≥ 0 for each  .

   2. Policy  transitions from  to 0 with probability 0 , summarized by a matrix 

   3. The transition to either extreme state is more likely if it occurs from  = , i.e. 2 ≥ 02 and
      0 ≥ 20 .

    We make two simplifying assumptions that are consistent with this general description of the regime.
First, it is not possible to transition from column 2 to the agreement without first passing the MFN/negotiation
   1 2 We note that some firms above the cutoﬀ that previously entered under better conditions will continue to exporter until hit

by the exogenous death shock. We discuss these firms when we consider general equilibrium implications, but their presence
is of no consequence for determining   given our small industry assumption.




                                                                8
stage and second, the WTO state is absorbing, 00 = 1.13 Thus the policy transition matrix is
                                                  Ã 0               2    22 !
                                               =  0                  2                                     (5)
                                                    00              0      0


   The period profit ordering across states for any exporting firm is therefore 2   ≤ 0 . Then the
expected value of exporting, denoted by Π , can be written as

                                                                P
                                 Π (  ) = (  ) +         0 0 Π (0  )   each                   (6)


   If a firm exports in state  and the policy persists into the next period then the firm faces the exact same
policy and aggregate conditions (which we will show is not necessarily the case when we allow for general
equilibrium eﬀects). The expected value of exporting next period will be the same as the current period
value. For any firm we have a linear system of three equations (one for each state) that can be solved for
each Π (  ). It is simple to solve for  6= 

                                               (  ) +  Π (  )
                               Π (  ) =                                each  6=                             (7)
                                                         1 − 

Using (6), (7) and simplifying we obtain the following for  = 

                                            (  )            P          (  )
                               Π (  ) =           +            6=                                   (8)
                                            1 −        1 −             1 − 
                  h                              i
                        0                2
where  ≡  +  0 1−00
                                    + 2 1−22
                                                   reflects the probability that given a current state  =  this
state will be revisited the following period,  , or in future periods if the firm survives (with probability
) and the policy goes to a diﬀerent state, e.g. column 2 (with probability 2 ) and then returns to  (with
               2
probability   1−22 ).

   If  = 0 then conditions can’t improve further so the expected value of waiting is zero for any firm with
cost at or above the entry cutoﬀ in this state, which is thus implicitly given by

                                         (0                      
                                                 0 ) + 0 Π (  0 )
                                                                          =
                                                     1 − 00

Any firm with   
                   0 will not enter at  = 0. Moreover, as we would expect and will confirm, the cost

cutoﬀ under the agreement is the highest and the one under column 2 the lowest, i.e.         
                                                                                      0 ≥  ≥ 2 . So any

firm with   
               0 never enter in any other (worse) state. Note also that since we take the limit case where
                                                  1(−1)
0 → 0 we have     
                 0 = 0 = [0  (1 − ) ]                  .

   We now find the values of waiting evaluated at the cutoﬀ for each of the other two states. The expected
  1 3 In practice the WTO does not end all TPU but the evidence we will consider suggests that it did end TPU regarding

column 2 tariﬀs.




                                                                9
value of waiting for a firm at the worst state is


                      Π (2  ) = 0 +  [22 Π (2  ) + 2 [Π (  ) − ]]   if  ∈ [    
                                                                                               2   ]        (9)


   If it does not enter today it obtains zero profits and if it survives and nothing changes (which occurs
with probability 22 ) then it has the same expected value of waiting. Otherwise it faces a lower tariﬀ, with
probability 2 , then it enters, provided that its cost is suﬃciently low, i.e.  ∈ [    
                                                                                       2   ]. We solve this

expected value of waiting and replace in (4), which yields the cutoﬀ for entry at column 2
                                                         £               ¤
                  (2  ) + 2 Π (  
                                             2)      2 Π (  
                                                                    2)−     (2  
                                                                                     2)
                                                − =                       ⇔            =                    (10)
                             1 − 22                      1 − 22           1−

We see the cutoﬀ is implicitly given by the equality of  and the present discounted value of profits as if
the firm always expected to face 2 , therefore     
                                                 2 = 2 . While firms are aware that conditions may improve

that does not lead them to be more willing to enter than if conditions did not improve because they can
simply wait and enter when conditions change for the better.

   Finally, the value of waiting at  =  is


          Π (  ) = 0 +  [ Π (  ) + 2 Π (2  ) + 0 [Π (0  ) − ]] if  ∈ [    
                                                                                                     0 ]   (11)

A firm that decides to wait and not enter at MFN returns to the same value if conditions do not change,
Π (  ). If conditions worsen, it will continue to wait but at a higher tariﬀ, Π (2  ). Otherwise, if
conditions improve and its cost is at or below the threshold at that point then it will enter.

   We can provide a simple interpretation of the value of waiting. We simplify (11) using (9) and (7)
evaluated at the entry threshold for MFN where the indiﬀerence condition (4) is satisfied (see appendix A.1
for derivation)
                                                            ∙                                     ¸
                                           0               (0                      
                                                                       ) + 0 Π (   )
                  Π (  
                            ) =        ³                 ´                                    −             (12)
                                                    2
                                   1 −   + 2 1−                   1 − 00
                                                       22



If the firm survives there is some probability that in the following period or a subsequent one the policy
state will transition from MFN to  = 0 and induce the firm to pay the sunk cost and obtain the expected
value of exporting.

   Plugging in the value of exporting in (8) and the value of waiting in (12) into the indiﬀerence condition
in (4) we can solve for the cutoﬀ 
                                    . In the proof of Proposition 1 (in appendix section A.1) we obtain an

expression for the cutoﬀ that allows us to compare it directly to its deterministic counterpart


                                                                 
                                                 =   ( )                                          (13)




                                                            10
The partial equilibrium uncertainty factor,  ( ), is defined as follows

                                                  ∙                µ              ¶¸ −1
                                                                                      1
                                                   1−                 2 ()
                                      ( ) ≡                    1+                                                (14)
                                                 1 −  ̃ ()          1 − 22
             ³        ´−
                 2                                             2 14
where  ≡                 and ̃ () ≡ 1 − 2 () + 2 () 1−22
                                                                      . To interpret the expression and some of our
results it is useful to define MFN policy uncertainty as the situation when there is some probability of exiting
the MFN state, i.e. when  ≡ 1 −   0. We then say there is an increase in MFN policy uncertainty
when  increases such that a policy is more likely but the odds of either the worst or best case scenario
                                                2 ()         2
remain the same. Formally, this implies         0 ()   =   (1−2 )   where 2 is the probability of  = 2 conditional on
exiting MFN. The uncertainty factor is increasing in profits under the worst case scenario relative to MFN,
 ≤ 1. For the subsequent results it is also useful to highlight the possibility of tariﬀ increases starting at
a given state and since we rule these out after the agreement we have that tariﬀ increases are possible if
2   and 2 ()  0.

   Proposition 1 uses these definitions to summarize the eﬀects of TPU on the export entry cost cutoﬀs in
partial equilibrium, i.e. when foreign exporters have a negligible impact on the importer price index.15

   Proposition 1 (Policy Uncertainty and Entry in Partial Equilibrium):
(a) The entry cutoﬀ under MFN policy uncertainty,                                                       
                                                    , is proportional to its deterministic counterpart,  ,

by the uncertainty factor,  ( ), in eq. (14).
(b)                                                     
      is lower than its deterministic counterpart (    ) and decreasing in MFN policy uncertainty

(  ln                                                                         
          =  ln    0) iﬀ tariﬀ increases are possible, otherwise  =  .

(c)                                               
      is lower than the agreement cutoﬀ (   0 = 0 ) if tariﬀ increases are possible or tariﬀs are lower

under the agreement ( 0   ) or both.

   In appendix A.1 we provide a complete proof, here we outline the main points. Part (a) of the proposition
summarizes the cutoﬀ relationship in (13). To show that     
                                                            in part (b) we provide the necessary and

suﬃcient conditions for the uncertainty factor to be lower than unity. If we evaluate  ( ) in (14) at
either 2 = 0 or  = 1 we verify that it is unity and thus     
                                                              =  , so the condition is necessary to have

the possibility of tariﬀs above MFN for     
                                            . The intuition is analogous to the one for the worst case

scenario cutoﬀ where we showed that the potential for good news is not relevant for the marginal entrant’s
decision. In terms of the estimation, it implies that we can nest the possibility that firms believed that
2 = 0 in our estimation. Evaluating (14) at   1 and 2 () = 2  0 we find  ( )  1 so
the condition is suﬃcient. While MFN policy uncertainty can lead to lower or higher tariﬀs, it is only the
possibility of the latter that aﬀects entry, that is if we have   0 but 2 = 0 (so tariﬀ increases are not
possible) then uncertainty has no impact on entry in the MFN state, but if tariﬀ increases are possible then
 1 4 This captures the long run probability that a firm starting at  =  will not be in  = 2.
 1 5 Proposition 1 applies the same basic insight in Handley and Limão (2012) to a policy process with state dependence even
after the policy shock.


                                                                11
entry is reduced. This is an example of the “bad news principle” (Bernanke, 1983).

    In the empirical section we will focus on the impact of entering into the WTO, which is modelled as a
change from state  to state 0 within a given policy regime, so part (c) compares those cutoﬀs. If tariﬀ
increases are possible then     
                                , as shown in part (b). Thus even if applied tariﬀs do not change with

the agreement (0 =  ) we have             
                                     = 0 = 0 , where the first equality is clear from the deterministic

cutoﬀ in (3) and the second one is due to the assumption that the agreement is an absorbing state. The
agreement could also relax the cutoﬀ if tariﬀ increases are not possible provided it lowered the applied tariﬀs.
In the latter case             
                     =   0 = 0 where the first equality is shown in (b) and the inequality is from

(3). This implies it is important to control for applied tariﬀ changes to separately identify the eﬀect of
uncertainty.

    We will also test if there were significant changes in MFN policy uncertainty before the agreement, e.g. in
years where an MFN vote was more likely. We think of this as a change in the policy regime since it changes
the transition process,  . Part (b) of proposition 1 also shows that the entry cost cutoﬀ is monotonically
decreasing in . We show this by first noting that the semi-elasticity of 
                                                                            with respect to  is equal to that

of  ( ) and diﬀerentiating (14). While the sign of the result is global, it will also be useful to have the
semi-elasticity expression around the case with no MFN uncertainty, which is

                                   ln  ( )               2
                                                 |=0 =                     ( − 1) ≤ 0                                     (15)
                                                      ( − 1) (1 − 22 )

where the inequality is strict if 2  0 and 2   such that   1. We will explore variation across
industries in  − 1, the percent profit reduction under column 2 relative to MFN, to identify the impact of
policy uncertainty.

    If, as we are assuming, the agreement is an absorbing state then switching to it leads to a reduction in
TPU broadly defined. In the empirical section we will also quantify the impact of the agreement that can
be attributed to mean preserving changes in the policy, i.e. to changes in pure risk. To understand the
basic insight consider first starting at  and examining the impact of a regime change that eliminates MFN
policy uncertainty (i.e. sets  = 0). If  is at the industry’s long-run mean then this corresponds to a pure
policy risk reduction and so all entry is due to risk reduction.16 However, if  was below its long-run mean
then the change in  has the additional eﬀect of locking in lower mean tariﬀs. The latter case where  is
below the mean is the relevant one in our empirical application and so we will calculate the counterfactual
impact of an agreement that eliminated policy uncertainty if initial tariﬀs were at their long-run mean to
quantify the importance of the pure risk component of WTO entry.

    In addition to the ordering of the cutoﬀs in proposition 1 in appendix A.1 we can also show that the
MFN cutoﬀ is higher than that under column 2 if and only if   1. So under this condition and those in
  1 6 It is straightforward to show in this three state process that when state  has a policy 
                                                                                                 equal to the long-run mean then
a decrease in  induces a mean preserving compression of the initial conditional policy distribution,  (+1 | =   ).




                                                               12
proposition 1 we have that only the most eﬃcient firms would enter under column 2; under temporary MFN
some additional firms enter; and under a secure agreement an even larger set of firms enters. In summary,
we have
                                                                  
                                               2 = 2     ≤ 0 = 0                                                    (16)

    One final note on the importance of sunk costs, , for the results above. As long as   0 the cutoﬀ
expressions, their ordering, and their elasticity with respect to applied policy and future policy remain
                                                                                               17
unchanged. We can clearly see this since 
                                           is log separable in  , which is independent of .   If  = 0
but the firm instead faces a per-period fixed cost, then the entry problem is simpler. Each period it exports
if it has cost below a cutoﬀ given by the equality of operating profit and the period fixed cost. In this case,
policy uncertainty has no impact on entry decisions, since they are made after uncertainty about the relevant
payoﬀ (today’s) is resolved. Even if small shipments to specific foreign buyers may take place by incurring a
small period fixed cost, we would argue that sustaining mass exporting requires large sunk cost investments.
Therefore we now extend the model to show how changes in policy uncertainty can lead firms to upgrade
their export technology and thus aﬀect the intensive margin of exports.


2.3     Policy Uncertainty and Firm Technology Upgrade

    The impact of trade reforms on within-firm productivity is one of general interest but has ignored the role
of TPU. Therefore, we now model the impact of TPU on technology upgrade investments, which provides
a channel for changes in TPU to change exports of incumbent firms. The technology upgrading channel is
plausible in the case of China given that its firms have had both large increases in TFP growth since the
WTO accession and strong export growth at the intensive margin.18

    A simple way to illustrate the main points is to focus on technology upgrades that are export market
specific. More specifically, if the firm has already paid the initial export entry cost, , it can then decide to
incur an additional  to lower its marginal export cost by a fraction   1 of the original industry baseline
value, , which we recall is the variable export cost component that is unrelated to tariﬀs.19 Its period
   1 7 The elasticity of the number of firms with respect to policy is also independent of  under standard distributions such as

Pareto, which we use later. In such cases variation in  would not provide useful variation in identifying the entry elasticity
across industries for example.
   1 8 We are not aware of any direct evidence of the impact of foreign tariﬀs on Chinese productivity but Brandt et al (2012)

find that firm-level TFP growth in manufacturing between 2001-2007 is about three times higher than prior to WTO accession,
1998-2001. Moreover, the TFP growth in the WTO period is higher for larger firms, which is consistent with our model’s
prediction that those are the most likely to upgrade. Manova and Zhang (2009) find that from 2003-2005, the share of export
growth was 30% from entry, 42% from expansion at surviving firm-product-destinations, and 28% from surviving firm expansion
into new products and destinations. We find that continuing varieties at the HS-10 digit level account for 85% of export growth
from China to the US in 2000-2005.
   1 9 An interpretation of this advalorem export cost is that it represents some portion of the freight, insurance, labelling or

meeting a product standard that is export specific and the firm can invest in a lower marginal cost technology to achieve these.
To be more specific, we can think of diﬀerent types of export entry. One alternative is for the firm to post a small advertisement
or make a personal contact with a buyer at a fair and then ship some of the good directly to the buyer (so low fixed cost and high
marginal cost of exporting). Another alternative is to pay a larger fixed (sunk) cost to establish a distribution network, have a
marketing campaign, go through standard verification processes, etc, and then mass ship its products every period through a
distributor that has lower marginal costs. Another interpretation is that a firm has a plant that produces only for exporting
and it invests in production technology that is specific to that plant.


                                                               13
profits can therefore be written as  (   ) =  ( )1− =  − 1− ( )1− . So  1− − 1 is the
growth in period operating profits due to the upgrade. Thus, if policy is deterministic, a firm with export
cost  will be indiﬀerent between upgrading or not if its marginal cost of production is 
                                                                                           , which is defined
     ¡        ¢     ¡      ¢
by                
             −     =  (1 − )

                                                   " ¡         ¢ # −1
                                                                    1

                                                     1− − 1
                                           
                                               =                                                           (17)
                                                     (1 − )

   Depending on the upgrade technology parameters we could have equilibria where the upgrading is done
by all, none, or only a fraction of exporters. We focus on the latter case, which we find is the most interesting.
This implies that the marginal entrant into exporting will not upgrade and therefore the entry cutoﬀ, 
                                                                                                        , is

still the one given by (3). Using this we can see that the upgrade cutoﬀ is proportional to the entry cutoﬀ
by an upgrading parameter . Thus we have


                                                             
                                                         =                                              (18)
                                           ∙             ¸ 1
                                            ¡ 1−   ¢  −1
                                         ≡      −1         1                                              (19)
                                                      

   In sum, assuming that only a fraction of exporters upgrade then the entry cutoﬀ is unchanged and higher
than the upgrade cutoﬀ. This is assured by the restriction that   1, i.e. that the marginal cost reduction
is suﬃciently high relative to the fixed costs. Note that  is independent of the policy and therefore so is
the ratio of cutoﬀs. This simple extension magnifies the impact of policy since even small tariﬀ reductions
can generate large changes in exports due to upgrading from incumbent exporters. More importantly, and
diﬀerently from others who examine the impact of applied policies on upgrading (cf. Bustos, 2011), we will
now see how policy uncertainty can aﬀect exports for continuing exporters via upgrading.

   We now determine the cutoﬀs under uncertainty when upgrading is possible. We will show that when
only a fraction of exporters in each state upgrade then the ratio of the upgrade to the entry cutoﬀ is , which
is the same ratio found for the deterministic case. This implies that the elasticity of the upgrade and entry
cutoﬀs with respect to policy and its uncertainty are the same–a result we will use in the aggregation and
estimation. To simplify the exposition we focus on determining the upgrade cutoﬀs. Given the similarities
with the entry decision we will simply point out how we must modify the setup to incorporate upgrading,
state the results in the text and prove them in appendix A.2.

   We continue to assume that in any given state only a fraction of exporters upgrade so the marginal
entrant in state  would not consider upgrading in that state. Moreover, if  is suﬃciently low then even the
most productive marginal entrant would never upgrade, i.e. even a firm that is indiﬀerent about entering
under the worst policy state would never upgrade when conditions improved. For ease of exposition we focus
on the latter case since it allows us to use the entry cutoﬀs derived in the previous section. We will thus say



                                                          14
                                                                                 ¡ ¢
that the upgrading parameter is suﬃciently low if   ̄ and ̄ is defined by                 
                                                                               0 ̄ = 2 where 2 is the

entry cutoﬀ under column 2 tariﬀs previously derived and 
                                                          0 () is the upgrade cutoﬀ under the agreement

scenario that we derive below.20

   At a given state  a firm will be just indiﬀerent between upgrading if it has cost 
                                                                                        , which is implicitly

defined by the equality of the expected value of exporting using the upgraded technology net of the sunk
cost and the expected value of waiting while using the old technology.



                                      Π (                        
                                                   ) −  = Π (    ) for each                            (20)

   The upgrade factor  multiplies the cost in the expression of operating profits for each period after
upgrading. Since  is state independent it is straightforward to show that the expected value of exporting
under the new technology is given by the same general expression derived in (6), but replacing the marginal
cost  with . This means that the value of exporting under upgrading is simply


                                         Π (   ) =  1− Π (   ) for each                            (21)


   The value of waiting will also reflect the upgrade possibility but now must explicitly account for the
profits before upgrading. Thus we write the value of waiting with  as a separate parameter–to clarify the
diﬀerence in functional form relative to the initial formulation. To illustrate the diﬀerence consider the value
of waiting at the MFN state


Π (   ) = (  ) +  [ Π (   ) + 2 Π (2   ) + 0 [Π (0  ) −  ]] if  ∈ [     
                                                                                                                   0 ]

                                                                                                            (22)
The key diﬀerences relative to the value of waiting for entry in (11) are that now a firm that has not upgraded
makes positive export profit today. Moreover, in the following period the firm either transitions to the same
state or to column 2 tariﬀs, in which case it still waits and thus uses the initial technology, or transitions to
the agreement state, where it will upgrade.

   In the appendix we derive Π (2   ) and use that along with (21) in (22) to solve for Π (   ). We
then use this and (21) along with the indiﬀerence condition in (20) to obtain the upgrade cutoﬀ under MFN.
The following Proposition characterizes the impact of TPU on entry and upgrading in partial equilibrium.

   Proposition 2 (Policy Uncertainty, Entry and Technology Upgrading in Partial Equilibrium):
When firms can pay a sunk cost to upgrade their export technology and the upgrading parameter is suﬃciently
low (   ̄ ≤ 1)
(a) the entry cutoﬀ are given by Proposition 1;
(b) the upgrading cutoﬀ is proportional to the entry cutoﬀ:     
                                                               =  for all ;
 2 0 In   the appendix we provide the threshold value of  below which this holds in terms of parameters.



                                                                15
(c)                                                                                                    
      is lower than its deterministic counterpart by the uncertainty factor in eq. (14):  =     ;

and decreasing in MFN policy uncertainty:  ln 
                                                  =  ln    0 iﬀ tariﬀ increases are possible;

(d)                                                  
      is lower than the agreement cutoﬀ (   0 = 0 ) if tariﬀ increases are possible or tariﬀs are

lower under the agreement ( 0   ) or both.

   Part (a) holds because if   ̄ then upgrading does not lower marginal costs by enough for the marginal
entrants to ever upgrade. Thus their value of entry and waiting are not aﬀected by the possibility of upgrading
that is only done by others and so the entry cutoﬀs and their properties are still given by Proposition 1.

   The proportionality of the upgrade to the entry cutoﬀs in part (b) is analogous to the one we found under
the deterministic case. Since the upgrading parameter is independent of policy values the result holds for all
policy states. Moreover, parts (a) and (b) then imply that the upgrade cutoﬀ “inherits” all the properties
of the entry cutoﬀs with respect to TPU. Namely, the upgrade cutoﬀ under uncertainty is proportional to
the deterministic cutoﬀ in (17) by the same uncertainty factor in (14). This also implies that the elasticity
of either cutoﬀ with respect to policy uncertainty factors is similar.

   Finally, part (d) notes that entry into the agreement has the additional eﬀect of leading firms with
 ∈ (     
        0 ] to upgrade. Therefore, reductions in uncertainty also increase exports by existing exporters

that are suﬃciently productive. We illustrate the cutoﬀs under uncertainty and the deterministic case in
Figure 2.21

   In the appendix we show that the relationship between the cutoﬀs in other states are similar, i.e. 
                                                                                                        =


   for all  so the ordering of cutoﬀs for upgrading across diﬀerent states is the same as the ordering for

entry in (16).


2.4     Policy Uncertainty and Aggregate Eﬀects

   Thus far we focused on a situation where the impact of export entry and upgrading is too small to aﬀect
domestic aggregate variables. We now relax this assumption and examine the impact of TPU on consumer
welfare via the price index. The exposition focuses on the entry decisions and at the end of the section we
argue that the upgrade cutoﬀs are proportional to the entry ones, by the constant factor , which we show
in the Appendix.


2.4.1    Setup

   Recent work on China’s export boom focuses on its costs for the U.S.; we focus on the potential benefits
to consumers of lower prices from reducing policy uncertainty. This requires some additional structure to
  2 1 If the productivity distribution is unbounded then some firms will have upgraded in any state and so the new upgraders

are exporters with intermediate productivity levels. If the distribution were bounded then it is possible that upgrading only
takes place at the best state and by the most productive exporters.




                                                             16
tackle two new issues. First, tariﬀ changes in any one industry has cross-industry eﬀects through the price
index. Second, we must address transition dynamics in aggregate state variables.

    A potential exporter must form expectations about its own and other cross-industry tariﬀs aﬀecting the
price index. We continue to employ the same transition matrix,  , but now assume that it applies to the
full vector of tariﬀs,  , which is common knowledge. In terms of our empirical application this implies that
Chinese exporters expect that if China obtains permanent MFN (or loses it) this change will aﬀect all of
China’s tariﬀs.

    Transition dynamics in aggregate variables arise directly due to changes in policy and indirectly through
the evolution of the price index. Specifically, we account for the fact that after a bad shock, firms above
the cutoﬀ threshold will exit over time. This leads to both contemporaneous adjustment and longer run
transition dynamics in the price index. Therefore, the economic conditions variable will be time and state
dependent,  = ( )− 1−  . The aggregate variable  depends on the exporting country’s wage, the
importer’s expenditure on diﬀerentiated goods,  , and its price index  . Recall that the numeraire is
freely traded and produced under a constant marginal product of labor equal to unity and the population is
suﬃciently large for the numeraire to be produced in equilibrium, so the wage is unity. To close the model
in a tractable way we make the following simplifying assumptions:

  A1 There is no borrowing technology available across periods so current expenditures must equal current
      income each period for each individual.

  A2 All agents have labor endowments of  each period. We assume there are two types of agents:
      entrepreneurs and workers. A fraction of agents are entrepreneurs with constant mass  . Entrepreneurs
      are endowed with a blueprint for a variety, embodied in the marginal cost parameter  . They receive
      any quasi-rents from that blueprint, i.e. the profits of variety . Any import policy revenue is rebated
      lump-sum to the entrepreneurs. Given this, the only source of income for workers is the wage.

  A3 The constant expenditure share of per period utility on diﬀerentiated goods is   0 for workers and
      zero for entrepreneurs.

    We highlight two implications of this structure. First, assumptions A1-A3, the constant equilibrium wage
and worker population imply that expenditure on diﬀerentiated goods in any given period is constant, which
allows us to focus on the impact of uncertainty on prices. Second, the preference structure in A3 maps
the firm problem we previously derived to the one solved by the entrepreneur. Assuming the entrepreneurs
survive each period with probability  and are income risk neutral, their decision to use  units of labor
(or equivalently the numeraire) to start exporting depends exactly on whether the expected value of doing
so net of the entry cost exceeds the value of waiting, as previously given by (4).22
  2 2 In making the entry decision the entrepeneurs take any lump-sum tariﬀ rebates as given. Also, we rule out the possibility

that entrepreneurs are credit constrained by assuming that their endowment  ≥ max{ }, so they can always self-finance
the sunk cost in a single period even if it exceeds that period’s operating profits.


                                                              17
    Finally, we restrict our attention to a 2-country model so entry into a foreign market does not aﬀect the
mass of firms from any other countries selling in that market.23 We can then write the price index as follows
                             Z                                 Z                                         Z
                                              1−                                           1−                              1−
                 1−   =              ( )       =                  (    )          +            ( )           
                                 ∈Ω                           ∈Ω                                  ∈Ω


The measure of domestic varieties available at any time, Ω , is constant due to the fixed mass of domestic
firms and no domestic entry costs. Therefore the price index varies over time only because of the country’s
own import tariﬀs, reflected in   and the current set of foreign varieties sold there, denoted by Ω . The
latter set always includes foreign firms with cost below the cutoﬀ but may also include legacy firms that
entered when conditions were better in the past but would not enter today. Whenever economic conditions
today are at least as good as the past,                 ∞
                                           ≥ max{− } =0 for each  , we can write the price index as a

function of the vector of current tariﬀs and cutoﬀs (  c ).

                                    "              Z                                              Z                               # 1−
                                                                                                                                     1
                                                        
                                     P                   
                                                                            1−                                        1−
                   (  c ) =                          (   )        () +                  ( )                    (23)
                                                    0                                              ∈Ω

where  () represents the CDF of costs in industry  . In the presence of legacy firms, the price index will
reflect previous cutoﬀs as we will subsequently discuss.

    Given these assumptions we now define the equilibrium. The only additional impact of policy uncertainty
on firm decisions relative to the previous sections is due to changes in the price index. The exogenous policy
state  ∈ {0  2} and corresponding tariﬀ variable  evolves according the process described by the policy
regime previously described. Consumers maximize utility and firms (entrepreneurs) maximize profits as
described above. An equilibrium at period  is then fully described by the set endogenous vector of industry
entry cutoﬀs, c , the price index,  , and the measure of foreign varieties available, Ω , such that labor
and goods markets clear and trade is balanced.24 In what follows, we characterize the equilibrium values of
the main variables of interest, c and  .


2.4.2    Deterministic policy

    The deterministic policy entry cutoﬀ is still defined by the expression in (3). However, this is now an
implicit solution since  depends on all industry cutoﬀs. To gain insight into this eﬀect consider starting
in some state , which is expected to persist indefinitely so the cutoﬀ in any given industry is   . The
                                                                                                   ¡        ¢
associated price index can be written as a function of the state’s tariﬀ and cutoﬀ vectors,  =    c
                                                                                                           .

One important point to note is that even though the countries may be asymmetric, the structure of the
model implies that each country’s price index depends only on its own policy and the cutoﬀs that determine
  2 3 Recall that there is a fixed mass, 
                                           , of domestic firms that always sells at home because there are no domestic fixed
costs. An exogenous fraction 1 −  of these dies at the end of each period but it is replaced at the start of the next so the mass
 remains unchanged.
  2 4 The labor market clearing condition closes the model, but it only determines the allocation of labor to the numeraire sector.

Since this will not aﬀect the cutoﬀs and price index we do not include it here.



                                                                           18
which foreign firms sell domestically.

    The elasticity of entry with respect to tariﬀs now requires comparative statics on a system of equations
that determine the foreign exporter entry cutoﬀs in each of the  industries and one equation for the domestic
price index. To verify that this system has a unique equilibrium we first make use of the fact that the cutoﬀs
are linear in  and in constant parameters. So any industry cutoﬀ can be written as a linear function of
                                                                                          h              i 1
                                                                                            (  )− −1 
some base industry cutoﬀ,                                         
                            , and relative parameters, i.e.  =    where   ≡                 .

Using this we write the reduced form index as

                                                            ¡                  ¡        ¢¢
                                                                   
                                                                     c 6=                                          (24)


which is a positive function that is continuous and non-increasing in 
                                                                        –as illustrated by the price schedule

in figure 3.25 The entry schedule for the base industry has positive slope, since                
                                                                                       0 and  | →0 = 0.

Therefore these two schedules intersect at an equilibrium and do so only once, as shown in figure 3.

    Consider now an unexpected permanent reduction in tariﬀs. Denoting proportional changes by ̂ ≡  ln ,
figure 4 depicts a radial liberalization where ̂ = ̂  0 for all  so relative cutoﬀs are unchanged. The
initial equilibrium is at point  and at any given value of the price index this increases profits enough for
some firms in the base industry to enter. So the entry cutoﬀ is higher and if we rule out price index eﬀects,
as in proposition 1, the new cutoﬀ would be at point PE. However, the price index schedule will also pivot
down since for any cutoﬀ the consumer prices are lower following the liberalization so the new equilibrium
is at point GE. The price index clearly falls and thus we have less entry than under the partial equilibrium
case but more than under high tariﬀs, as we show below.

    To find the impact of a general change in tariﬀs (where ̂ can vary across industries) we solve the
following system

                                                           P ¡                
                                                                                ¢
                                                       ̂ =    ̂ +  ̂                                                (25)
                                                              
                                                      ̂
                                                         =−     ̂ + ̂ for each                                            (26)
                                                             −1

                  ln  (c )                       ln  (c )
where  ≡          ln        and  ≡               ln        evaluated at the original tariﬀ values. Replacing the cutoﬀ
equation in ̂ we obtain                                                  µ                    ¶
                                                                                     
                                                                P              − −1 
                                                         ̂ =         
                                                                                   P               ̂                         (27)
                                                                               1 −  
We can then use this to verify that the radial liberalization (̂ = ̂  0) increases cutoﬀs in all industries
                                                     µ                           ¶
                                                      P                                  ̂
                                  ̂
                                     |̂ =̂   =            −                       P           0 for each 
                                                                    −1              1−       
  2 5 It can be shown that  ≤ 0 for all  , strictly so for small enough , and   = 
                                                                                                 for all  6= . Continuity
holds provided that the distribution of firms in each industry is not bounded above so there is always at least one active exporter.




                                                                                19
                                                        P                    
                                                                                                P
where the inequality is due to  ≤ 0 and                       1 ≤    −1 .   We have            ≤ 1 since the highest
possible elasticity would occur if all goods (including domestic) were taxed at  and the partial elasticity of
 with respect to it would then be 1. One implication of this result is that all exporters will have higher
profits in markets where liberalization leaves relative tariﬀs unchanged.

    With a specific productivity distribution such as Pareto, we can provide closed form solutions for  and
 as functions of the model parameters and the share of imported diﬀerentiated goods at the initial tariﬀ.
So the expression in (27) can be used to measure gains from trade liberalization to workers, who are the
sole consumers of the diﬀerentiated good. Given the utility function we use the gain from the liberalization
is simply −̂ , the proportional change in the price index weighted by the diﬀerentiated goods’ share in
expenditure.26

    Recall from section 2.2 that the tariﬀ ordering in the setting we consider is 2 ≥  ≥ 0 for all
 . In the absence of general equilibrium eﬀects this ordering implied foreign exporter profits were lowest at
column 2 and highest under the agreement. The result for the cutoﬀ above shows that the same ordering
would result if (in a deterministic setting) the tariﬀ reductions from state 2 to  and then to 0 kept   
unchanged across states and for all  . We also obtain the same ordering for each firm when the tariﬀ change
in an industry goes in the same direction as all the other industries and either (i) the changes are not too
diﬀerent across industries or (ii) the price index eﬀect is not too large.27 For exposition purposes we will
assume that either because of (i) or (ii) in the deterministic setting the direct eﬀect of worst case tariﬀs
dominates if the operating profit in the deterministic equilibrium is lower under column 2 tariﬀs than under
                                ¡ ¢        ¡ ¢
MFN tariﬀs for all industries,  2   ≤   , which requires


                                              ¡    ¢−1           ¡  ¢−1
                                      (2 )− 2      ≤ ( )−       all                                                 (28)

This amounts to requiring the direct tariﬀ eﬀect on the operating profit dominates the indirect eﬀect via
the price index. This condition could be violated by a specific industry if its column 2 tariﬀ is very close
to the MFN but in general it seems reasonable to assume that for most industries, as own tariﬀs fall this
eﬀect dominates, which implies that new exporters would enter. Moreover, in the empirical section we will
provide some evidence that the indirect eﬀect is generally smaller than the direct one.28 A somewhat more
stringent condition is that the direct eﬀect of tariﬀs dominates, which extends the condition above to include
                                                                         ¡ ¢       ¡ ¢       ¡ ¢
an additional inequality between the MFN and agreement profits:         2  ≤    ≤  0 . It is clear

from (26) that this last condition is necessary and suﬃcient for ̂
                                                                    ≥ 0.

  2 6 To  verify this note that the indirect utility is ̃ − where ̃ =   (1 − )(1−) is constant since  is the period labor
endowment and  = 1 in the diversified equilibrium.
  2 7 Using (27) and the definitions of the elasticity in the appendix we can provide specific conditions for this to hold, such as

high enough export costs, .
  2 8 If the condition above fails for a particular industry then we would have to reorder the states in terms of profitability so

that under column 2 some industries would be at their worst state and others would not, which would mainly complicate the
aggregation.




                                                                   20
2.4.3   Unanticipated shocks and transition dynamics

   To gain some insight into the transition dynamics (which we will later use) consider a situation where
initially the policy is at the worst case state and expected to remain unchanged. What is the adjustment
path when there is an unanticipated permanent decrease in all tariﬀs? If the proportional decrease is similar
across industries then we can again illustrate this in figure 4: the economy moves immediately from the
initial equilibrium, point , to the new one, point . There are no transition dynamics because firms can
immediately enter in response to the improved conditions. There are also no transition dynamics if tariﬀs
fall by diﬀerent proportions provided that the direct eﬀect of worst case tariﬀs dominates.

   Consider now an unanticipated permanent increase in tariﬀs. Under a radial tariﬀ increase the steady
state values are those already described in figure 4 and reproduced in figure 5 where the initial equilibrium
is labelled  and the final equilibrium is at point 2 . However, unlike the liberalization case, now there
are transition dynamics. The motive for the asymmetry in the adjustment path is that after a tariﬀ increase
firms with costs above the cutoﬀ will continue to export (since they face no period fixed cost) until they are
hit with a death shock.

   The adjustment path involves a jump from  to a point on the entry schedule between 2  and 2
followed by an adjustment over time to 2 . To understand this note that the price index initially jumps
due to the direct eﬀect of higher tariﬀs.     If there was no death shock then after the tariﬀ increase, the
equilibrium would have permanently higher prices at    and all of the firms would still be exporting. With
the exogenous death shock the least productive firms do not re-enter after being hit by that shock so the
initial price is higher than    so we must jump to a point above 2  . Each period after the initial jump
firms are dying and the least productive with   
                                                   2 do not re-enter and thus there is a monotonic increase

in the price index towards its steady state, 2 .

   We need only show that the entry schedule in the adjustment period is the same as the steady state
schedule at 2 . At some time  during the transition a firm that was hit by a death shock must decide
                                                                                     P
between re-entering the export market today or waiting. If it enters today it obtains ∞
                                                                                      = 
                                                                                            −
                                                                                                (2  ) and
if it waits then it obtains zero today. But if it is just indiﬀerent between the two then in the following period
                                            P
it will enter for sure and obtain a PDV of ∞   = +1 
                                                        −
                                                            (2  ) because after the shock aggregate conditions
will be improving (since  increases as firms exit). Therefore the firm that after the shock is indiﬀerent
between entering at  or not is the one where the extra profit from entering today relative to tomorrow,
(2  ), is just enough to cover the extra cost paid today instead of next period (1 − ) . Equating these
we obtain that after any transition period  the firm that is indiﬀerent about entering when  = 2 must
satisfy (2  
                 2 ) = (1 − ) . Therefore the entry schedule as a function of 2 is the same as the one

derived for the steady state. The equilibrium cutoﬀ in transition, 
                                                                    2 , can be related to the “steady state”




                                                        21
cutoﬀ 
       2 in any given industry as follows

                                                  ∙             ¸ −1
                                                                   1             ∙         ¸ −1
                                                                                              1
                                                     2                             2
                                          
                                           2   =                       =   
                                                                             2                                                  (29)
                                                  (1 − )                            2

Note that 2 2 is equal to the ratio of profits at  relative to steady state under  = 2. It is lower than
                                         
unity as long as the price index at  , 2 , is below its steady state, 2 , as we argued above. In sum, after
a negative shock there is sluggish exit and so conditions for potential entrants are worse in transition than
in steady state and when we consider policy uncertainty we need to take this into account to compute the
value functions.


2.4.4    Policy uncertainty, entry, upgrading, prices and welfare

    We now build on the deterministic case to analyze TPU. First, we relate the column 2 and WTO
scenarios to their deterministic counterparts. Second, we derive the impact of TPU under the MFN state
on firm decisions, the price index and consumer welfare.


Entry and Prices


    As described in the previous section there are transition dynamics whenever a shock worsens conditions
due to exogenous exit, which aﬀects the price index. When the direct eﬀect of tariﬀs on profits dominates
the price index eﬀect then a switch to column 2 worsens conditions for the firm so the cutoﬀs we determine
in this state, 
                2 , will be time dependent. But at the MFN state there is no history of better conditions thus

we need only determine one cutoﬀ per industry in this state.29 Similarly, there is a single cutoﬀ per industry
under the WTO. In sum, below we determine           
                                           0 ,  and 2 ; since the approach is similar to section (2.2)

we will describe the main results and provide the details in the appendix.

    The entry cutoﬀ under the WTO is given by the deterministic expression in (3), but now it takes into
account the price index eﬀect in (23); with each of these expressions evaluated at 0 .

    The worst case entry schedule is the one derived in (29). The argument is similar to the one made in the
deterministic case after an unexpected shock: after  periods of moving to  = 2 a firm that is indiﬀerent
between entering at  or waiting will surely enter at  + 1 if it survives. The reason is that conditions
will improve with certainty either because the tariﬀ state improves (back to MFN) or because the aggregate
conditions improve (as other firms exit). Thus a firm is indiﬀerent if Π (2  ) −  = Π (2  ), which
we show in the appendix yields exactly (2                                      
                                                2 ) = (1 − )  and therefore 2 = 2 . So the transition

dynamics will be similar to what we derived under the unexpected permanent tariﬀ increase: a jump in the
price index followed by exit and an increasing price index (and falling cutoﬀ). The main diﬀerence is that
   2 9 The reason why there is no history of better conditions at  =  is that the only other state that would yield such conditions

is the agreement, from which there is no exit.




                                                                 22
under uncertainty we start at a diﬀerent equilibrium, which in the radial case would be at point  in figure
5, as we argue below.

    As in the deterministic economy, whenever there is no history of better conditions at state  = , the
economy reaches a steady state immediately with no transition dynamics.30 We can determine a single cutoﬀ
for each industry in general equilibrium at the MFN state, but to do so we must account for the transition
dynamics in the values of exporting and waiting under  = 2. At the MFN state, the functional forms for the
expected values of exporting (6) and waiting (11) are unchanged, but we must solve for the expected value
of exporting and waiting for the period when a shock leading to column 2 tariﬀs occurs, i.e. Π (2 =0  )
and Π (2 =0  
                   ). After doing so we employ the indiﬀerence condition in (4) for the MFN state to derive


  and relate it to the deterministic cutoﬀ via the uncertainty factor as follows

                                         ∙               ¸ −1
                                                            1
                                                                                             
                                  
                                    =                            (̃ ) = 
                                                                                 (̃ )     
                                                                                                                             (30)
                                             (1 − )                                          
                                                    ∙                  µ               ¶¸ −1
                                                                                           1
                                                          1−              2 ()
                                     (̃ ) ≡                        1+          ̃                                       (31)
                                                        1 −  ̃ ()       1 − 22
The last expression has one key diﬀerence relative to the partial equilibrium uncertainty factor in (14): the
          ³ ´−
term ̃ = 2     . This term still reflects the ratio of the PDV of profits under the worst case scenario
relative to state  but it now takes into account a general equilibrium eﬀect given by
                                                                 P∞
                                                  (1 − 22 )      =0   (22 ) 2
                                             ≡                                         ≥ 1                                 (32)
                                                                  

This eﬀect captures the average business conditions (other than tariﬀs) after a transition to column 2 tariﬀs
relative to the conditions under MFN,  , and is common to all industries. In the absence of MFN policy
uncertainty ( = 1) we have  (̃ ) = 1. In Appendix A.3 we show that when the direct eﬀect
dominates, as we assume, we have ̃  1 and this implies that  (̃ )  1.

    The additional diﬀerence between the uncertainty and deterministic cutoﬀ is the diﬀerence in the price
index due to uncertainty. This arises because                   
                                                is evaluated at  but, under uncertainty the price index

will generally be higher due to less entry, as we argue below. Therefore, all else equal the general equilibrium
eﬀects partially oﬀset the direct impact of uncertainty on entry, as we also saw in the deterministic case.
                                                                                  
Whenever the policy changes have negligible general equilibrium eﬀects (i.e.   and  2 close to
1) then                                                                         
          =   ( ) so when the price eﬀects are negligible we have  ()   under the conditions

given in Proposition 1.

    Proposition 3 establishes the relationship between the cutoﬀs when price eﬀects are not negligible.
  3 0 There is exit below the threshold due to death each period but it is immediately oﬀset by entry so the price index and other

aggregate quantities are unchanged.




                                                                   23
   Proposition 3 (Policy Uncertainty and Entry in General Equilibrium):
                                                                         
(a) The entry cutoﬀ under MFN policy uncertainty is    
                                                      = U  (̃  )   where  (̃  ) is in eq.
                                                                                 

(31).
(b) If tariﬀ increases are possible and the direct eﬀect of worst case tariﬀs dominates then eliminating MFN
uncertainty (  = 0) increases entry and decreases the price index at MFN:      
                                                                             ≤  for all V (at least
                      
one strict) and    ;
(c) If tariﬀ increases are possible and the direct eﬀect of tariﬀs dominates then the agreement increases entry
and decreases the price index:                                                            
                                 ≤ 0 = 0 for all  (at least one strict) and   0 = 0 .



   Proposition 3 is the general equilibrium equivalent of Proposition 1. The central diﬀerence is that we
now allow tariﬀs to aﬀect the importer price index. This is reflected in part (a) in two ways. First, the
uncertainty cutoﬀ U  (̃ ) is evaluated at ̃ =  ≥  so there is a smaller eﬀect of TPU on entry than
in partial equilibrium because if higher tariﬀs do arrive there will be exit and the price index will be higher.
Second, and for a similar reason, the price index in the MFN state is higher under uncertainty, which leads
to relatively more entry than in the absence of general equilibrium eﬀects.

   Part (b) provides a suﬃcient condition for uncertainty to lower the cutoﬀ and thus entry in the MFN state.
Recall from Proposition 1 that the possibility of tariﬀ increases was necessary and suﬃcient, now to ensure
                                                                                              ¡        ¢ −1
that  = 2 is still the worst case for firms we require not just that 2   but that 2   2 
                                                                                                         



such that the direct eﬀect of worst case tariﬀs in (28) dominates. To understand the role of this condition
and the result in part (b) consider the case of a radial liberalization such that 2  is identical across  .
In this case it is straightforward to show that the direct eﬀect dominates. Moreover, in this case  (̃  )
                                   ³     ´−
is the same for all  since ̃ = 2
                                             . In the deterministic analysis we showed that the cutoﬀ for any
 can be written as a linear function of a base industry cutoﬀ and relative parameters:      
                                                                                          =    where
      h             i 1
             )− −1 
  ≡ (
                     . We can do the same under uncertainty for the cutoﬀs in states  = 0 2 since

their functional form is unchanged. Therefore we can also write the reduced form price index functions for
these two states in terms of the base cutoﬀs and   , as we did in (24). What is less obvious is that we can
do the same for the MFN state. We can do so because under a radial liberalization  (̃  ) is the same
for all  so we can re-express the relative cutoﬀs under uncertainty as a function of   and obtain the same
as in the deterministic case,                     
                                 =   =   . Thus the price index can be written in reduced

form as in (24), which depends only on 
                                         ,   and tariﬀs but not on . This implies that a decrease

in  does not alter the price index schedule if 2  is identical across  . The equilibrium under TPU
must therefore lie on the deterministic price schedule in figure 5, on a point such as  . To see that the
deterministic equilibrium must entail higher entry and lower  consider starting at  and setting  = 0.
In this case  = 1 and so at the original price index level the cutoﬀ must increase, given the relative cutoﬀs
are unchanged that must occur for all industries so the price index moves down along the original schedule.




                                                       24
    The empirical analysis explores variation in tariﬀs across industries. Therefore in the appendix we show
that part (b) of Proposition 3 also holds without a radial liberalization provided the direct eﬀect of worst
case tariﬀs dominates. This condition ensures the cost cutoﬀs move in the same direction in all industries
and thus the price index falls. Part (c) compares the MFN outcome with the agreement. If the tariﬀs under
MFN and the agreement are the same then we can simply use the result in part (b). If they are lower
under the agreement we have additional entry and a lower price provided again that the direct eﬀect of tariﬀ
reductions dominates the eﬀect from a lower price index.


Consumer welfare


    We now derive expressions for the welfare gains to consumers of changes TPU. To obtain expressions that
we can quantify empirically we derive these eﬀects around the deterministic equilibrium, which we showed
exists and is unique and a special case of the more general model when  = 0. For given values of ̃ the
only direct impact of  occurs through  (̃ ) via changes in the transition probability terms ̃ and 2 .31
Therefore the total impact of changing the policy regime on the uncertainty factor around  = 0 is

                            ln  (̃  )               2
                                             |=0 =                     (̃ |=0 − 1) each                                (33)
                                                  ( − 1) (1 − 22 )
                                                                                 
where ̃ |=0 implies that  is evaluated at the deterministic values of  and 2 previously derived. This
eﬀect on  will then aﬀect the cutoﬀs, which will in turn impact the price index and welfare. The price
index in the MFN state under uncertainty can be written as a function of the tariﬀs and cutoﬀs in that state,
 (  c ). From (30) we have 
                                   (     ), which is log linear in each of these arguments so the

impact of changing  is found by replacing (33) in the following system and solving it:

                              ln 
                                            ln           ln 
                                      |=0 =           |=0 +         |=0                 each                            (34)
                                                             
                               ln         P       ln 
                                                          
                                      |=0 =              |=0                                                           (35)
                                                      

The first term in the cutoﬀ expression is the direct eﬀect of TPU on each industry, which is similar to the
one without price eﬀects but now evaluated at ̃. As we noted before this direct eﬀect lowers the cutoﬀ. The
second term is the indirect eﬀect through the price index, which is positive if uncertainty lowers a weighted
average of the cutoﬀs and thus increases the price index. The relevant weight is the price index elasticity
                                                          ln  (c )
with respect to export entry cost cutoﬀs,  ≡             ln  |=0 .   We can verify that uncertainty increases the
price index by solving the system to obtain

                               ln                2         P
                                      |=0 =                       ̃ (̃ − 1) |=0  0                                   (36)
                                           ( − 1) (1 − 22 ) 
  3 1 Changes in  aﬀect current conditions and therefore the future price path reflected in ̃. However, the latter are indirect

general equilibrium eﬀects and are multiplied by  and so they are negligible when evaluating around  = 0.




                                                               25
                          P
where ̃ ≡   (1 −           )  0 since   0 due to love of variety. MFN policy uncertainty will then
increase the price index if ̃  1 for all  , which we show in Proposition 3 holds whenever the direct eﬀect
of worst case tariﬀs dominates.32 The general equilibrium eﬀect due to reduced competition is common to
all industries and partially oﬀsets the direct eﬀect. In our estimation, we will control for it and estimate the
direct eﬀect, which is an overestimate of the total eﬀect of uncertainty on entry. We will then employ the
estimated parameters and data to provide an estimate of the price index elasticity with respect to  using
(36) to bound the general equilibrium eﬀect of TPU on the cutoﬀ and trade.33

    Proposition 4 summarizes the impact of TPU on the price index and consumer welfare.

    Proposition 4 (Policy Uncertainty, Prices and Consumer Welfare in General Equilibrium):
If tariﬀ increases are possible and the direct eﬀect of worst case tariﬀs dominates then
                                                                                                                    ln 
(a) an increase in MFN policy uncertainty increases the importer’s price index in the MFN state by                     |=0

given by (36) and lowers consumer welfare in that state by −  ln |=0 .
(b) consumer expected welfare is higher under an agreement that eliminates uncertainty even if tariﬀs remain
at MFN levels.


    As we argued above the price eﬀect is positive and therefore −  ln |=0  0 and we need only show
it represents a welfare eﬀect in the MFN state. To see this recall that the consumers of diﬀerentiated goods
                                         −
have period indirect utility equal to ̃  where ̃ is constant so the growth in the period utility due to a
change in  is −  ln . In the appendix we also show that this corresponds to one of the two impacts of 
on expected welfare for consumers, which is given by

                                      −
                               = ̃  + ̃ [ (1 − 2 ) 0 + 2 2 + (1 − )  ]                                    (37)


where 0 and 2 are the expected welfare values after switching to  = 0 2 respectively. Solving for 
we obtain the following expression for consumer welfare growth due to a change in 
                                                                   µ                                ¶
                    ln             ln           ̃                − (1 − 2 ) 0 − 2 2
                           |=0 = −         |=0 −                                                     |=0             (38)
                                                1 − ̃                       

The first term captures the negative impact of increased uncertainty on consumer welfare in the current state
due to lower firm entry and the resulting higher price index, as encompassed in part (a) and explained above.
Therefore we label the term −  ln |=0 the “within state welfare eﬀect” of policy uncertainty. The second
term captures the “mean state switching welfare eﬀect” of policy uncertainty. If at MFN a policy shock
becomes more likely then the probability of switching to either of the other states is higher and expected
welfare would decrease if in the deterministic setting  is higher than the average in the other states,
  3 2 A weaker necessary and suﬃcient condition for uncertainty to increase the price index is for the import weighted measure

of ̃ − 1 to be negative, as we show in the appendix.
  3 3 The expression in (36) holds for general distributions of productivity; in the appendix we show what it implies under the

standard Pareto distribution that we employ in the estimation.


                                                              26
(1 − 2 ) 0 + 2 2 . The latter case is plausible in the setting that we will consider where the applied tariﬀs
did not change much between the MFN and the agreement states. In appendix A.3 we derive expressions
for both eﬀects. In the quantification section we discuss how our estimates allow us to quantify the within
state welfare eﬀect.34

    Part (b) of proposition 4, that welfare is higher under the agreement, is a global property for all   0,
which we prove in the appendix. The welfare gain for consumers is again driven by price decreases, which
are due to higher variety and possibly lower tariﬀs.

    In sum, thus far in this section we showed that:
1. The basic approach can be extended to incorporate general equilibrium eﬀects arising from the impact of
the extensive margin.
2. We can still estimate a direct or partial eﬀect of uncertainty in industry  on entry in that industry.
But this partial eﬀect overestimates the total eﬀect of a reduction in uncertainty in the presence of general
equilibrium eﬀects, particularly if uncertainty is reduced for all industries simultaneously. We will employ
(34) to adjust for those eﬀects in the quantification. This will use the price elasticities,  , which we show
in the appendix, can be derived as a function of data and parameters to be estimated.
3. Increased policy uncertainty has a negative within state welfare eﬀect on consumers, via higher price index
due to lower foreign entry, and possibly also a negative eﬀect from increasing the probability of switching to
other states if those states generate lower welfare on average then the current one.


Technology Upgrade


    The final step is to allow for upgrading in this setting. In section 2.3 we showed that the upgrade cutoﬀ
was lower than the entry cutoﬀ by a fixed technology parameter, i.e.       
                                                                       =  . A similar result holds when

there are price eﬀects. This can be shown by allowing for the possibility to upgrade and imposing a large
enough cost to do so that the marginal entrant in any state does not upgrade (i.e.      
                                                                                    0  2 =0 ). In that

situation, the entry cutoﬀ expressions are the same we derived above, e.g. (30).35 Given this result, we can
apply the approach in section 2.3 to show that the ratio of the upgrade to the entry cutoﬀ is simply the fixed
upgrade parameter, e.g.                 
                          =  , where  and  are respectively given by (30) and (19). We show this

explicitly in appendix A.4.

    It is also possible to derive the general equilibrium eﬀects of uncertainty under upgrading. The approach
would be similar to the one we used above. The expression in (34) would still hold but the price term
        ¡        ¢
( ln  c    
            c ) would now include eﬀects from entry and upgrade. To obtain the total eﬀect of
  3 4 We are not analyzing welfare during the transition period where  increases but rather capturing the change in welfare that

we would have in a deterministic situation against one where the economy started with some positive uncertainty. We do not
need to solve explicitly for the values of 0 and 2 under uncertainty because the impact of  on either of these is multiplied
by  evaluated at zero so their eﬀect disappears.
  3 5 The entry cutoﬀ equilibrium values will be diﬀerent since the price index will now reflect lower prices by firms that upgrade,

but as long as the ordering of profits in (28) still holds when evaluated at the new price index, the entry cutoﬀ expressions will
be unchanged. Note also that (28) implies the same ranking of profits for the firm if it upgrades its technology.


                                                                27
uncertainty we now need to solve the system that includes the two types of cutoﬀ in each industry and the
price index. In the appendix we show that increases in uncertainty will increase the price index both by
reducing entry and upgrading. Moreover, since       
                                                =  , the expression for the price index semi-elasticity

with respect to  will be similar to the one derived without upgrading in (36) but the equilibrium value of
̃ and ̃ will be diﬀerent since it will reflect trade flows and the price level with upgrading.


2.5    Policy Uncertainty and Industry Exports

   We now examine how changes in policy uncertainty translate into export growth and derive a tractable
estimation equation at the industry level.

   The export revenue received by a given firm in state  in an industry  is    . When we aggregate
firm sales over the (endogenous) set of export firms at  (Ω ) we obtain the industry export value. When
upgrading is possible there is a subset of firms that upgrades (Ω ) and has costs lower than the remaining
set of firms (Ω \ Ω ). Using the optimal price and quantity derived before and the economic conditions
variable  we obtain
                                      "Z                                Z                                    #
                                                        1−                                       1−
                         =                (  )         +                     ( )                (39)
                                        ∈Ω                              ∈Ω \Ω


   For a given mass of firms that export and upgrade, exports can only grow if current economic conditions
improve, i.e. if  increases, which requires changes in the applied policy for example, but does not depend
on policy uncertainty. Therefore policy uncertainty aﬀects exports only through its eﬀect on the mass of
firms that export or upgrade. For a given level of current conditions,  , both entry and upgrading raise
the terms in brackets and thus raise exports. Moreover, this mass is increasing in the fraction of foreign
firms that decide to export, i.e. the fraction with costs below the entry cutoﬀ we derived previously, 
                                                                                                         .

So, for given  , reductions in uncertainty increase 
                                                         and thus exports.

   We could employ (39) and the cutoﬀ expressions derived to examine the first order eﬀects of alternative
variables. However, we explore the structure of the model by assuming a specific productivity distribution to
obtain sharper predictions, nest a standard gravity model in our framework, and provide precise conditions
under which we can identify the impact of uncertainty on exports. Since our data will apply to what we
model as states  = 0 and , our derivation below focuses on these. The steady state mass of exporting
                                        ¡ ¢
firms in states  and  is equal to   
                                           , the product of all producers in industry  in the export

country times the fraction with costs below the cutoﬀ (since  is the CDF of costs). A suﬃcient condition
                                      ¡ ¢
in the context of the model for      to exactly capture the mass of exports is for the agreement to
be an absorbing state, 00 = 1, as we have assumed. Then conditions cannot improve further in state 0.
Since there is no history of better conditions then temporary MFN, an assumption that applies to China’s




                                                            28
situation, it will also hold in state .36 In this case we can write exports as
                                    "Z                                         Z                        #
                                            
                                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                             1−                           1−
                =                          ( )          () +             ()      ()    for  = 0 
                                       0                                        
                                                                                   



where we used the relationship between the upgrade and entry cutoﬀ previously derived.

    We then assume that productivity has a Pareto distribution that is bounded below at 1 but unbounded
above so  () = (  ) . Using this and assuming    − 1 we can integrate the cost terms and simplify
to obtain
                                             =  (
                                                         )
                                                            −+1
                                                                    for  = 0 

where the industry specific parameters reflecting distribution and upgrading factors are respectively  ≡
 
 
       
     −+1   and  ≡ 1 +  ( )  1. In order to compare to standard gravity equations we take logs, use
  

the definition of  , the entry cutoﬀ expression derived for 
                                                                 and simplify to obtain


                                                                                     
            ln  = ( −  + 1) ln  (̃  ) −                 ln  −  ln  +     ln  + ln  + ln ̃            (40)
                                                               −1                    −1
                    ³             ´ −+1
                                     −1
                           1
where ̃ ≡           (1−)             . In the absence of policy uncertainty  = 1 and when no upgrading is
possible  = 1 then we have a standard gravity equation (cf. Chaney, 2008). All else equal, the elasticity of
exports with respect to the upgrading technology parameter,  , is positive and can vary across industries,
as we would expect. However, exports are log separable in the upgrading factor,  , so that elasticity is
independent of the state under the standard Pareto distribution.



3     Evidence

    We use the model to examine the impact of U.S. policy uncertainty on China’s exports. In particular
we analyze how China’s WTO accession, which eliminated the annual MFN renewal debate in the U.S.,
contributed to China’s export boom to the U.S. We focus on the predictions for trade values, which will
reflect both entry and upgrading eﬀects and then quantify the impact of policy uncertainty on exports and
welfare. In section 3.7 we also test and quantify the entry predictions of the model.


3.1     Empirical Approach

    To identify the impact of TPU on exports via the augmented gravity equation in (40) we must measure
the uncertainty factor. If before the agreement, at  = , there was no policy uncertainty ( = 0) and
thus no probability of the worst case scenario (2 = 2 = 0) then the model generates a standard gravity
  3 6 An alternative condition is that there was an agreement but it ended in the distant past so that most firms that would have

entered with costs above   would have died.




                                                                       29
equation with an extra upgrading term. Using this insight as our null hypothesis, we use (33) to approximate
                   2 (1−̃ )
 (̃  ) =   (−1)(1−22 )  +    where  is an approximation error term.37 We can then rewrite (40) as

                                Ã       µ      ¶− !
              −  + 1 2         −1     2                               
ln  = −                       −                −       ln  − ln  +     ln  +ln  +ln ̃ +
                − 1 1 − 22                       −1                    −1
                                                                                                      (41)
where we recall that  is common across industries so it can be estimated as part of the coeﬃcient on
³     ´−
  2
       . Rewriting in terms of estimable parameters we obtain

                                    Ã      µ         ¶− !
                                               2
                  ln  = −        1−                     +  ln  +  ln  +  +  +                        (42)
                                               

                                                                                                         −+1 2
We estimate each of the  , which are related to the structural parameters as follows:  =              −1 1−22      ≥ 0,
so it is predicted to be zero if and only if 2 = 0. If there were negligible price eﬀects of switching states
( = 1) our estimate of  could be used to calculate the full impact of removing policy uncertainty but
                                                         ¡        ¢
otherwise we also have to take into account the term  1 −  −1 , which is captured as part of the time
              ¡        ¢   
eﬀect:  ≡  1 −  −1 + −1 ln  . Our approach is to estimate  , which will provide an upper bound on
the total eﬀect of uncertainty reduction and then in the quantification section provide an estimate of  that
allows us to adjust the estimate to reflect the general equilibrium eﬀects. We note that  will capture the
impact of TPU on total exports in an industry reflecting both entry and any technology upgrading eﬀects.38
                                           
    The applied tariﬀ coeﬃcient is  = − −1  0, which reflects the first order eﬀect of the tariﬀ . The model
assumes the advalorem export cost,  , is not state dependent and could thus be absorbed as part of the
industry dummy,  . In the estimation however, we allow for a more general export cost, which includes an
unobservable industry specific component and an observable component,  , which can vary by industry
and over time. More specifically, we assume ln  = ln ˜ + ln  and use data on cost of insurance
and freight to capture the observable component so in this case we have  = −  0, which is typical in
heterogeneous firm trade gravity models.39 The industry eﬀect is then,  =  ln ˜ + ln  + ln ̃ , which
also reflects technology upgrading ( ) as well as a combination of other industry factors in ̃ , namely the
entry costs, productivity distribution parameter,  , and the mass of Chinese producers in  .

    Since we cannot observe all the industry characteristics in  we require variation over time to identify
the impact of uncertainty. Moreover, we are interested in the impact of the change in uncertainty after the
U.S. removed the threat of column 2 tariﬀs due to China’s WTO entry. So our baseline estimates focus on
  3 7 We will also explore if the results are sensitive to this approximation via non-linear and semi-parametric estimation.
  3 8 Thiscan be done through a single parameter since according to the model both the entry and upgrading cutoﬀs have the
same elasticity with respect to TPU.
  3 9 Because tariﬀs are paid by the importer in the model rather than modeled as transport costs, our tariﬀ elasticity does not

reduce to the shape parameter  as in Chaney (2008) for example.




                                                               30
a simple diﬀerence, where below ∆ ln  = ln 0 − ln  .
                                        Ã       µ         ¶− !
                                                    2
                        ∆ ln  =        1−                     +  ∆ ln  +  ∆ ln  +  +                         (43)
                                                    

The impact of uncertainty on export growth reflects only the pre-agreement level of uncertainty. This reflects
our assumption that exporters do not anticipate an exit from the agreement, i.e. 00 = 1–an assumption
that we subsequently examine.40

    The estimation equation (43) explores some additional identifying assumptions, which allow us to clearly
link our baseline estimates to the theory: (1) 2 is common across industries because we are interested
in the probability of switching policy states or regimes and that is the most relevant case in our empirical
application; (2) the Pareto shape parameter  is constant across industries, but the bound  can vary over
 ; (3) the elasticity of substitution is identical across industries and (4) the upgrade technology, sunk costs,
and mass of producers can vary across industries but not over the short time period we consider. We will
relax some of these assumptions in the empirical analysis. For example, in the robustness section we address
the possibility of industry-specific growth trends and other potential threats to identification.


3.2      Data and Policy Background

    We combine trade and policy data from several sources. Trade flow data at the 6 digit level of the
Harmonized System (HS-6) are obtained from 1996-2005 from the World Bank’s World Integrated Trade
Solution (WITS). These data are concorded by WITS over time to the 1996 version of the HS. We then
combine it with policy data on the U.S. statutory MFN and Column 2 tariﬀs that are also obtained annually
from schedules available in WITS at the 8-digit, tariﬀ line level.41 We obtain an advalorem measure of
transport costs using import data from the NBER that includes both the customs value of import and the
costs of insurance and freight required to ship goods to the U.S. Consistent with our model all advalorem
tariﬀs and transport costs rates are converted to their iceberg form and logged (so an advalorem tariﬀ of
20% is converted to  = 12). We will also employ the NBER data to examine product entry at the HS-10
digit level.

    There are 5,113 HS-6 codes in the 1996 classification and China exported in 3,617 of these in both 2000
and 2005. The baseline analysis focuses on those codes traded in both years so that a log growth rate exists.
This selection that at least one firm exports in an HS-6 in each period is not problematic in this setting for
two reasons. First, the model predicts that if there is ever a positive mass of Chinese firms in an industry
  4 0 This
                                                                             
            implies that ln 0 = 0 and the constant is  = −  1 −  −1 + −1   ∆ ln  and  = − . If  is not zero after
the agreement and we note that column 2 tariﬀs stayed unchanged, then we can interpret our estimate of  = 2000 −  so
if there is no change in probabilities the estimate will be zero but if the probability of going to column 2 and/or staying there
falls then  0.
   4 1 Tariﬀs in about 94% of HS-6 tariﬀ lines in 2005, are levied on an advalorem basis but some are specific tariﬀs levied on a

per unit basis. In the appendix we describe how we calculate the advalorem equivalent (AVE) of specific duties and below we
show our results are robust to their inclusion.



                                                                  31
then at least some will be productive enough to export. Second, and more importantly, these continuing
HS6 codes account for 99.8% of all export growth from China to the U.S. in this period. Moreover, we will
also address the selection issue directly by showing that the results are robust to using midpoint growth
rates that allow us to incorporate HS-6 codes that had zero values in either year.

   China’s WTO accession in December 2001 changed few applied U.S. trade policy barriers relative to
other exporters, e.g. changes in MFN tariﬀs averaged one half percent or less.42 The ensuing export boom
is thus diﬃcult to explain with standard trade models. Our model suggests another source of growth, the
accession secured China’s pre-existing MFN status permanently and reduced TPU. While China was first
granted MFN status by the U.S. in the 1980s, it was subject to annual renewal with severe consequences
of revocation. China would have faced column 2 tariﬀs and a trade war would likely have ensued. For our
baseline sample, which is summarized in Table 1, we calculate that the (simple) average tariﬀ China would
face in the U.S. would rise from 4% (MFN) to 31% (column 2) if it lost its MFN status in 2000. Although
China never lost MFN status, it came quite close: in the 1990s Congress voted every year on whether to
revoke MFN and the House passed such a bill three times.

   There was uncertainty about both China’s accession to the WTO and its permanent normal trade relations
(PNTR) with the U.S. as late as 2000. Foreign and economic relations between these countries remained
tense into the late 1990s for several reasons including the accidental bombing of the Chinese embassy in
Serbia by NATO in May 1999. In the summer of 2000 there was a vote in Congress to revoke China’s MFN
status. In October 2000 Congress passed the U.S.-China Relations Act granting PNTR but its enactment
was contingent on China’s accession to the WTO. In the meantime, a U.S. spy plane collided with a Chinese
fighter jet over the South China Sea in April 2001. Protracted negotiations over China’s WTO accession
meant votes were held again in the summer of 2001 over whether to revoke MFN. The president was required
to determine whether the terms of China’s WTO accession satisfied its obligations under the Act. Otherwise
the U.S. could opt-out of providing MFN status to China under Article XIII of the WTO, a right it had
exercised with respect to other members of the WTO. China joined the WTO on December 11, 2001 and the
U.S. eﬀectively enacted PNTR on January 1, 2002.43 This strongly suggests that uncertainty about column
2 tariﬀs remained at least until 2000 and that it was not reduced until 2002. Thus we focus on the growth
between 2000-2005 but will also show that the basic eﬀect is present for other relevant periods.


3.3        Non-parametric Evidence

   The central variable to identify the eﬀect of TPU is the proportion of profits lost conditional on a bad
                           
shock, 1 − (  ) . We use the U.S. MFN tariﬀ in product  for  and the respective column 2 tariﬀ
for  , and find that this potential loss was on average 52% when  = 3, which will be the baseline used
 4 2 The   exception is textiles quotas that were fully lifted in 2005 and can be controlled for empirically.
 4 3 Pregelj  (2001) provides details on the U.S. MFN status relative to China.




                                                                  32
unless otherwise stated.44 The standard deviation of this measure is 20% so there is a reasonable amount of
variation across industries. Importantly, there is also substantial variation in export growth, which suggests
that the boom can’t be explained by aggregate shocks. Average growth between 2000 and 2005 is 129 log
points with a standard deviation of 167.45

    We then divide the sample into terciles according to the uncertainty measure and recompute the statistics
                                                                                                                  −
for the lowest and highest terciles. Recall that  varies across industries only due to (  )                   so the
terciles are independent of our linear approximation or choice of  to compute the potential profits lost. As
we see in Table 1 the average column 2 tariﬀ was nearly 40% in high uncertainty goods, which translates
into an average potential profit loss of 64% if the MFN status had been revoked. Export growth was 118
log points for low uncertainty whereas it was higher, 136, for high uncertainty industries, a mean diﬀerence
that is statistically diﬀerent.

    Figure 1 provides additional non-parametric evidence of this relationship by estimating a local linear
regression (lowess) of export growth on ln (  ). We confirm the higher growth in goods with higher
uncertainty pre-WTO obtained in the mean test and find a non-negative relationship over the full range of
the uncertainty measure. It also suggests the relationship is not driven by outliers since the lowess procedure
used downweights them.

    While we focus on Chinese export growth, in section 3.7 we also examine the predictions for variety
growth. Given our current data we can only examine entry indirectly by considering the growth in the
number of HS-10 goods traded in any given HS-6 as a proxy for variety growth. The proportion of high
uncertainty HS-6 codes that experienced variety growth was 82% whereas that occurred for only 66% of HS-6
codes with low uncertainty, a diﬀerence that is statistically significant according to a 2-sample proportions
test.


3.4     Estimates: Policy Uncertainty and Exports

    We begin by estimating the baseline model and testing some of its predictions. We then show these
results are robust to weaker identifying assumptions, outliers and alternative measures of protection. We
also provide evidence for the functional form of the uncertainty measure implied by the model.


Baseline


    We first use OLS to estimate the model on the baseline sample described above using equation (43). The
results in Table 2 are consistent with the structural interpretation of the parameters. In column 1 we see
  4 4 We do not use the U.S. bound tariﬀ commitments to compute the uncertainty measure for two reasons. First, bound tariﬀ

commitments only apply to WTO members so if China’s MFN status was revoked prior to WTO accession the U.S. would
revert to column 2 tariﬀs. Second, after accession Chinese exporters could consider the uncertainty induced by the possibility
of moving from MFN to the bound tariﬀs but those two are identical for the modal tariﬀ line.
  4 5 Much of the growth in the overall sample was concentrated in machinery, textiles, furniture, and metals sectors as also

noted by Berger and Martin (2013).


                                                             33
that the coeﬃcient on pre-WTO accession uncertainty,  , is positive and significant. The coeﬃcients on
tariﬀs and transport costs are negative and significant. The estimation equation contains an over identifying
                    
restriction  =   −1  ,   which we can’t reject. We therefore re-estimate the model in column 2 with this
restriction, which increases the precision of the model across all coeﬃcients. In the robustness checks that
follow, we report both unconstrained and constrained regression whenever possible.

   The baseline uses  = 3 since this is the median value from the estimates of Broda and Weinsten (2006)
for the U.S. But in Table A2 we construct the uncertainty variable using alternative  = 2 4 and find similar
results.


Sector level growth trends


   The estimating equation in (43) assumes that the industry eﬀect  captured variables such as sunk costs
and the mass of foreign producers in an industry. The model assumes these parameters are time invariant,
but we now address the possibility that they vary over time. If there was unexpected growth in any industry
variable that was common to all industries then the baseline estimate controls for it through the constant
term, . We can also allow that growth to be common to sectors (groups of industries) by including a full
set of 21 sector dummies in the diﬀerence equation (43). Obviously, either scenario admits an IID industry
specific term, which is included in the error.

   We report the results that control for sector specific growth heterogeneity in columns 3 and 4 of Table 2.
The pattern of coeﬃcients is similar to the baseline and the coeﬃcient on uncertainty remains positive and
significant. The coeﬃcients on tariﬀs and transport costs are significant in the constrained regressions.

   One reason for the increase in precision in the constrained regressions is that most applied tariﬀ changes
are very small during our sample period, and there may be a few influential observations. In Table A3 we
address this possibility using a robust regression method and find results that are qualitatively similar to
Table 2 but the tariﬀ change coeﬃcient is now significant in the restricted and unrestricted versions with or
without controlling for sector growth heterogeneity.


3.5    Robustness

Additional measures of protection and sample selection


   The regressions in columns 3 and 4 of Table 2 already control for changes in trade barriers other than
the ones included provided that they change only at the sector level. Nevertheless, there are barriers other
than tariﬀs that can vary at the more disaggregated industry (HS6) level as well–anti-dumping duties,
countervailing duties and China-specific special safeguards. To control for these we create binary indicators
for whether a product has any of these temporary trade barriers (TTBs) in a given year using the database
from Bown (2012). Following China’s accession to the WTO it also became eligible to benefit from the

                                                        34
phase-out of quotas in textiles that had been agreed by WTO members prior to China’s accession under the
Multi-Fiber Agreement (MFA), this was fully implemented by 2005. We have indicators that map to HS-6
categories where such quotas were lifted.46

    In Table 3, we examine whether controlling for changes in TTBs or MFA quotas aﬀects our results.
For comparison, we reproduce the baseline results in column 1. In column 2 we include a regressor for the
change in the binary indicator for both MFA quotas and TTBs and find they have the expected negative
sign. Importantly, their inclusion does not aﬀect the other coeﬃcients and this is also the case when we
control for sector eﬀects (column 3).47

    Anti-dumping and other TTBs may respond to import surges from China. To the extent that these surges
are more likely in some sectors, our sector eﬀects in column 3 already control for this potential endogeneity.48
To address the possibility that this reverse causality could also occur within sectors, we instrument the change
in TTB with its level binary indicator in early years–1997 and 1998. When we do so in column 4 we find
that the coeﬃcient for uncertainty remains virtually unchanged relative to the OLS version in column 3 of
that table or without the TTB variable (column 3 Table 2).49 We also find that the constrained version
         
( =   −1  )   yields very similar coeﬃcients for the uncertainty, tariﬀ and transport variables if we include
the TTB and MFA (column 5 Table 3) or not (column 4 Table 2).

    We also examine whether our results are robust to adding the ad-valorem equivalent (AVE) of any specific
tariﬀs. Including the AVE tariﬀs increases our sample size to 3,599 so it also allow us to address if there
is any potential sample selection issue in the baseline sample that excluded HS-6 codes that contained only
specific tariﬀs. We use AVEs to compute both the change in applied tariﬀs and uncertainty and in Table A4
we find that the latter is positive and significant across all the specifications analogous to the baseline Table
2. As may be expected, including AVE tariﬀs introduces noise and measurement error into the computation
of tariﬀ changes. This error biases the coeﬃcient on tariﬀs toward zero and so in the subsequent robustness
and quantification we focus on results for industries in our baseline sample with statutory ad-valorem tariﬀs,
which covers about 98% of the total export growth of Chinese exports to the U.S. in 2000-2005.

    In Table A5 we expand our sample to include HS-6 codes that transition from traded to non-traded
status (and vice versa) between 2000 and 2005. Because we cannot compute log changes of these transitions,
we accommodate them using a mid-point growth rate as our dependent variable in estimation equation (43)
given by (0 −  ) (0 +  )2. When we re-run the specifications in Table 2 using this alternative
dependent variable we continue to find a positive and significant coeﬃcient for the uncertainty measure. The
magnitude of the coeﬃcients is not directly comparable with the baseline results because of the rescaling of
  4 6 Additionaldetails on the TTB and MFA indicators appear in the data appendix.
  4 7 Below we also provide evidence that the baseline results in 2000-2005 are similar to those in 2000-2004, which was a period
when the quotas were mostly still in place.
  4 8 The MFA dates back to the 1980s and its phaseout was implemented with the Uruguay Round in 1996 before China was a

member of the GATT/WTO. As such, it is plausibly exogenous as a barrier to China’s imports.
  4 9 The two instruments pass a Sargan over-identifying restriction test and we also fail to reject the exogeneity of the TTB

variable using a Durbin-Wu-Hausman test. The instruments have significant explanatory power in the first stage, with the
relevant F-statistic above 10.


                                                               35
the dependent variable.


Pre-accession growth trends and time-varying uncertainty coeﬃcients


   If prior to accession certain HS-6 industries were growing faster and they continued to do so after accession
then this could generate a bias. If the fastest growers had the highest profit loss measure then our baseline
would tend to be upwards biased and vice versa. We examine this possibility by running our baseline
estimation on pre-accession export growth and in Table A6 column 3 we find no significant eﬀect of the
initial uncertainty measure. This test also indicates that the coeﬃcient on uncertainty did not change in
this pre-accession period.50

   We can provide some additional evidence that growth trends at the HS-6 level are not driving the baseline
findings. If an industry variable is growing at the same rate in the pre and post accession period then we can
remove it by taking the diﬀerence of the post-accession growth (2005-2000) and the growth in a pre-accession
period. In the appendix we provide the econometric details on how this is implemented. The first column
of Table A6 shows the baseline results are robust to this diﬀerence-of-diﬀerences specification.

   The results above focus on specific years and a balanced panel. We now explore the full panel and examine
if the uncertainty coeﬃcient changed over time in the way predicted by the model. Consider a generalized
version of the level equation (42) that allows the uncertainty coeﬃcient to vary by year, subscript , and
includes time by sector eﬀects,  , in addition to industry (HS-6) fixed eﬀects  .
                          Ã      µ         ¶− !
                                     2
         ln  = −      1−                     +  ln  +  ln  +  +  +  ;  = 1996    2006
                                     

   We estimate two versions of this equation. First, recall that there is almost no variation over 2000-2005
in the uncertainty variable so in the baseline we focused in the change in coeﬃcient. To compare the panel
results with the baseline we initially use  = 2000 in the uncertainty measure. In this case we cannot
identify  for each year since the uncertainty regressor only varies across  and we include  . Instead,
we estimate the coeﬃcient change over time relative to a base year, namely − ( − 2000 ). The estimates
in Table 4 show that the impact of the uncertainty variable in 1996-2001 is identical to 2000, which is what
the model would predict since PNTR was only fully enacted in 2002. The eﬀect is uniformly positive and
significant following WTO accession in 2002 and all subsequent years. Therefore, the change in the impact
of uncertainty matches China’s accession and PNTR status with the U.S. We also note the magnitude of the
2005 estimate is comparable to what we found in the baseline.

   Recall that the model has predictions not only for a change in state (from temporary MFN to WTO)
but also for changes in policy regime within a state, e.g. changes in  in the MFN state. By estimating the
impact of uncertainty during the MFN state by year we can also see that the coeﬃcients in years prior to
  5 0 The pre-accession period we consider is 1999-1996 to avoid another potential change in trade regime: the implementation

of the Uruguay Round in 1995.


                                                               36
the WTO accession are not statistically diﬀerent from each other. This suggests that minor changes in the
legislation or in the relations between the U.S. and China did significantly aﬀect Chinese firms’ beliefs about
losing the MFN status. Those beliefs were only revised after WTO accession. The point estimates increase
until 2005 and stabilize in 2006, which may reflect a gradual reduction in  until the full transition takes
place, around 2005.

    While the baseline and panel thus far estimate the change in the impact of uncertainty, − ( − 2000 ),
we now provide estimates for the level of these coeﬃcients. We can only do this in the panel because there
is variation in the uncertainty measure in the period 1996-2000 because of changes in the applied tariﬀs (as
the Uruguay Round was implemented). This allows us to identify pre- and post-accession coeﬃcients. We
construct the uncertainty measure for each industry year restricting the coeﬃcient such that  =  for
 = 1996 − 2001 and  =  for  = 2002 − 2006. The model predicts that   0,    and
 ≥ 0 , where the last prediction is an equality if the agreement eliminated this source of uncertainty.
In the second column of Table 4 we find evidence that supports these three hypothesis: uncertainty lowered
exports in 1996-2001, it had a significantly smaller impact in the post period, and that post eﬀect is not
significantly diﬀerent from zero. Note also that the diﬀerence in coeﬃcients  −  is 0.68, which is
the same as our corresponding baseline point estimate in column 3 of Table 2.


Outliers, approximation, elasticity and functional form


    To determine if the results are robust to the presence of influential outliers we do the following. First,
in Table A3 we employ a robust regression estimation that places less weight on outliers and find results
that are qualitatively similar to Table 2. Second, we use a median regression and also find results that are
similar to the baseline in terms of sign and all variables are significant at the 1% level (available on request).
Third, transport cost can be measured with error and so we analyze if the results are robust to trimming
extreme values.51 In Table 5 column 1 we find results similar to the analogous specification that uses the
full sample (column 2 Table 2) in terms of sign and significance. The same is true when we include sector
eﬀects (column 3). In both cases the eﬀect of the transport cost variable is stronger possibly indicating that
the extreme values reflected measurement error.

    Our estimation thus far relied on an approximation to the uncertainty term and imposed particular values
for , which allowed for linear estimation. We now ask if there is evidence supporting this approach. We
do so in two complementary ways. First, we use a semi-parametric approach that does not place much
theoretical structure on the estimation and compare the fit with our linear approach. Second, we employ
non-linear least squares (NLLS) and explore the structure of the theoretical model to compare the resulting
coeﬃcients with the ones previously obtained. For either approach it is useful to re-write the uncertainty
                                                ³ ´
term in the estimation equation as a function,  ̃ , so the general form of the estimation equation is
  5 1 More specifically, we drop observations that lie outside the interquartile range by more than three times the value of that

range, which is about 5% of the baseline sample.


                                                               37
                                            ³ ´
                                 ∆ ln  =  ̃ +  ∆ ln  +  ∆ ln  +  +                                              (44)

    Standard trade models with a gravity structure yield an estimation equation that is a special case of (44)
with  = 0. It is plausible that in other models with uncertainty, trade would depend on some log separable
                                                                                               ³    ³ ´´
uncertainty function that depends on the worst case scenario relative to the current policy,  ̃ 2 ,
but the exact functional form will depend on the model’s assumptions. Since in our baseline we employ
                                                    ³ ´−
a particular polynomial approximation, linear in − 2    , that is what we now use as the argument
     ³ ´
in  ̃ in (44) to estimate Robinson’s (1988) double residual semi-parametric regression. Figure 6
                                                    ³ ´−3
presents the semi-parametric fit plotted against 1 − 2  .52 It is clear that the partial association of
the initial uncertainty measure and subsequent growth is positive. We also plot the prediction from our
linear approximation (green line) and find that it lies everywhere within the 95% confidence interval of the
semi-parametric fit.

    When we employ  = 3 we fail to reject the equality of fit between the baseline parametric and semi-
parametric using the test in Hardle and Mammen (1993). Moreover, when we re-run the semi-parametric
test using  = 1 we do reject the equality of that fit against a first order polynomial. Therefore the data
suggest that this policy ratio is relevant and its eﬀect on export growth is non-linear and can be captured
by a power function such as the one we use in the baseline. These tests suggest that we should not rely on
linear measures of column 2 tariﬀs when making quantitative predictions about the impact of TPU.53

    The non-parametric results provide supporting evidence for our approximation of the uncertainty factor
and choice of . We now examine these using NLLS. The model’s structure implies a specific functional form
     ³ ´
for  ̃ , which we employ in (44) to estimate the following equation using NLLS:54

                                       Ã        µ ¶− !
                           −  + 1             2        
              ∆ ln  = −            ln 1 + ̃         +     ∆ ln  +  ∆ ln  + ̃ +                                     (45)
                             −1                        −1

               2                          1−
where ̃ ≡   1−22    and ̃ ≡ − −+1
                                      −1 ln 1− ̃ . In order to help identify the parameters of interest we explore

the theoretical constraints  =  =  −1
                                          .
                                            55
                                               If the uncertainty factor approximation is reasonable then we
should find the following when we compare the linear constrained estimates with the NLLS estimation at
 = 3. First, we confirm the coeﬃcients for the tariﬀ and transport cost regressor are similar by comparing
  5 2 We do not place any constraints on the tariﬀ or transport cost coeﬃcients, include section dummies and focus on the

baseline sample to compare with Table 2.
  5 3 We approximate the distribution of the test statistic using 1000 wild bootstrap replications. Our baseline parametric model,

 = 3, has a test statistic of 1.22, scaled to the Normal distribution, and a simulated critical value of 1.96, so we can’t reject the
equality at the 10% level. When we employ  = 1 in the semi-parametric estimation we reject the equality of fit between this
and a first order polynomial approximation, which is equivalent to using a linear approximation with − 2 as a regressor.
The test statistic is 2.32 and the critical value is 1.96.                      
                                                                                                    −               
                                                                                         2
  5 4 The model implies that  ̃
                                       = − ( −  + 1) ln  (̃ ) = − −+1
                                                                          −1
                                                                                ln 1 + 1−      2               1−
                                                                                                              + ln 1− ̃
                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                              22     
  5 5 Given
          that the NLLS estimation relies on the model structure and the variation in the transport cost variable to identify
, we minimize the potential influence of outliers by focusing on the subsample without transport cost outliers just described
above.



                                                                 38
columns 1 and 2 or 3 and 4 of Table 5.56 Second, we use the delta method to construct an estimate for
                                                                         −+1
the uncertainty parameter estimated under OLS,  =                       −1 ̃ .       We find that the estimated  implied
by NLLS is positive and significant. The point estimate with sector eﬀects, for example, is 0.67, which is
within one standard error of its OLS counterpart. We also test if  = 3 by running NLLS on the unrestricted
version of (45). The last row of Table 5 shows that we are unable to reject this restriction.


3.6       Quantification

   We now quantify the eﬀect of the policy uncertainty reduction on trade, prices and consumer welfare.

Baseline exports, price and welfare


   Using the parameter definitions in (42) we can provide an expression for the average “partial eﬀect” over
industries of eliminating uncertainty while holding everything else fixed, including the price index, as follows
                                                          Ã             µ         ¶− !         Ã      µ         ¶− !
                                                              −1            2                            2
                  E (ln 0 − ln  ) |̄ ̄̄ =  E          −                      ≤  E 1 −                         (46)
                                                                                                        

The middle expression still reflects a general equilibrium eﬀect,  ≥ 1, due to the possibility of a worst
case scenario present before the agreement. Therefore the expression on the RHS of the inequality is an
upper bound for this partial eﬀect. To obtain this upper bound we simply take the product of the estimated
coeﬃcient and the sample mean of the uncertainty variable. We employ the estimate in column 4 of Table
2, ̂ = 07, and find that the uncertainty removal lead to export growth of up to 37 log points, as shown in
the top left of Table 6.
                                                                                                 ¡        ¢
                                                                                                         −1
   To determine how close the upper bound is to the real eﬀect recall from the model that  ∈ [1 2      ].
From (46) we can see that even if  6= 0 as estimated, the average partial eﬀect could still be zero if
        ³     ´−
 −1 = E 
           2
                  . But this would require the price index in the worst case scenario to be 1.45 times higher
than under MFN. This is an implausibly large impact of column 2 tariﬀs even if fully and irreversibly imple-
mented given the import penetration of China, which was about 0.02 in 2000 and 0.04 in 2005. Therefore
any reasonable estimates of  will not overturn the sign of the estimated uncertainty eﬀect, the question is
whether the magnitude is very diﬀerent from the upper bound of 37 log points.57
              ¡        ¢
                      −1
   We employ 2         as an upper bound for . In appendix A.5.1 we show that this ratio of price
indices is a weighted average of tariﬀ changes multiplied by an aggregate coeﬃcient that depends on the
parameters  and  and the aggregate import penetration of China. Using the baseline in column 4 of Table
 5 6 We    also find that the constant is higher under NLLS as predicted since ̃  .
                                                                          −3                          −1
                                                                                                      
 5 7 To   see this note that in our baseline we would require −1 = E 2      = 047 and therefore 2      to be at least 2.09.
                                                                                                          
The import penetration figures are obtained from Census data and defined as Chinese imports/US shipments-Exports+Imports).
Auer and Fischer (2010) estimate that a 1 percentage point increase in import penetration would lower the US PPI by 2.35%
so even if China went from the post agreement penetration to no trade with the US the impact on the PPI would be at most
4×2.35%.


                                                                   39
2 ( = 3 and  = 26) yields a price index increase of about 1.77 log points and implies an upper bound for
 = 104. Using this value to evaluate the middle expression in (46) we obtain what we call the partial eﬀect
in column 2 of Table 6, which is 34 log points. Since the bound for  relies on an approximation around the
deterministic policy we employ 2005 values to calculate it but find that the partial eﬀect is not very sensitive
to reasonable alternative upper bounds for .

    Next we calculate the “average total eﬀect”, which adds the price impact generated by changing uncer-
tainty alone to the partial eﬀect described.58
                                                          Ã            µ         ¶− !
                                                              −1           2
                     E (ln 0 − ln  ) |̄ ̄ =  E          −                     +  (ln 0  ) |̄ ̄
                                                                           

In Appendix A.5.1 we show how the model allows us to use the data and estimated parameters to calculate
the growth in the price index due to eliminating uncertainty: ln 0  ≈ −  ln |=0 . This growth is
about -0.8 log points so  (ln 0  ) | is -2 log points, which we add to the partial eﬀect to obtain the
average total eﬀect in the last column of Table 6: 32 log points.

    Another way to quantify the importance of uncertainty on trade is to ask what its trade cost equivalent
is, i.e. how large a change in average trade cost is required to generate the change in trade caused by the
uncertainty change. We obtain this for the partial eﬀect in column 2 of Table 6 by dividing the impact
of uncertainty calculated above by the transport cost elasticity, which implies a trade cost equivalent of
13 percentage points. We can also calculate the applied tariﬀ advalorem equivalent, which is 9 percentage
points, as we report in Table 6.59

    One advantage of this approach is that it can be used not just to estimate the impacts of observed
changes but also evaluate counterfactuals. For example, what would be the average ln change in exports if
policy uncertainty was re-introduced in year ? Below we will examine such a counterfactual in the context
of currency manipulation legislation, here we illustrate how it relates to the estimates we have discussed.
In the absence of general equilibrium eﬀects the impact of re-introducingµpre-WTO uncertainty   in year  is
                                                                              ³     ´− ¶
                                                                                2
simply the last term in (46)–what we called the upper bound eﬀect,  E 1 −           . This equivalence
between the quantification and counterfactual interpretation is due to the following (1)  is a combination
                                                                                                                    2
of deep parameters; (2) the counterfactual calls for re-introducing the pre-WTO value for                              (otherwise
we would simply recompute this value) and (3) other variables that may have changed are log separable.

    In the presence of general equilibrium eﬀects we should recalculate ln 0  and , which depend on year
 product export shares and import penetration. In practice, for  = 2005 we obtain the estimates in Table
   5 8 We obtain this by adding the price eﬀect subsumed in the  term in (41) to the partial eﬀect represented by the middle

expression in (46).
   5 9 Note that the calculation of the applied tariﬀ equivalent applies exactly only after the agreement when uncertainty is

eliminated and so it should be interpreted as the increase in the applied tariﬀ required after such an agreement to eliminate
the export growth caused by uncertainty reduction. The transport cost equivalent is not subject to this issue because it does
not enter the uncertainty variable. The advalorem equivalents are very similar for the average partial and total eﬀect of tariﬀs
(and transport costs) because similarly to the uncertainty variable these variables also have price index eﬀects, which we take
into account in calculating the advalorem equivalent.



                                                              40
6 because the upper bound for  and the price eﬀects require evaluation around a deterministic equilibrium.
But the values in Table 6 are not very sensitive to using reasonable alternative upper bounds for  and
import penetration. In sum, the results in Table 6 also tell us that re-introducing policy uncertainty in 2005
would have lowered exports by about 32 log points on average.

    Keeping in mind this counterfactual interpretation of our estimates we now examine the impact of un-
certainty on consumer welfare. In particular we ask: what are the bounds on the growth in expected
consumer welfare from raising policy uncertainty to its pre-agreement level? Recall that in (38) we de-
composed the impact of uncertainty into a “within state welfare eﬀect”, which when multiplied by  yields
−  ln |=0 =−08 percent, and a “mean state switching welfare eﬀect”. The latter reflects the higher
probability that tariﬀs will transition to a new state and would require information we do not have (namely
on transition probabilities in other states and the consumer discount factor, ̃). However, since applied
tariﬀs under the MFN and post agreement state were very similar the mean state switching eﬀect would
further decrease welfare.60

    To place the welfare eﬀect in context, consider a consumer that spends all income on diﬀerentiated
products ( = 1). In this case increasing uncertainty back to the pre agreement level would reduce expected
welfare by at least 0.8 percent (the within state eﬀect) and at most by about 1.8 percent–the full change
in the price index in the deterministic vs. column 2 state. By comparison, Broda and Weinstein (2006)
estimate that the real income gain from new imported varieties in the U.S. between 1990-2001 was 0.8
percent.61 Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (Forthcoming) calculate that a worldwide tariﬀ war (uniform
tariﬀs of 40%) would lower North American welfare by 0.7 percent in a static model with heterogenous firms,
monopolistic competition and multiple sectors.62

    Given the interest of the impact of trade on employment and wages in the transition period we also
quantify the impact of uncertainty on aggregate exports for other years since WTO entry. We do so by
applying the counterfactual above to the panel estimates from Table 4. In figure 7, the top line represents
aggregate export value (in $ billion) and the dashed one represents the counterfactual exports if uncertainty
was re-introduced in year . So the diﬀerence between them provides a measure of the impact of TPU on
aggregate exports.63
  6 0 In appendix A.5.3 we show that we can approximate this welfare eﬀect without the technology parameters because they
are already reflected in the export level that we use to weight up the change in the cutoﬀs that generate the price index change.
   6 1 As is standard in most trade models neither of these quantifications takes into account services. However, the model and

calculations do take into account the large fraction of non-traded goods since many of the diﬀerentiated goods are produced by
firms that are not productive enough to export. This is reflected in the low values of import penetration from China, which
captures imports/US consumption.
   6 2 Our model diﬀers on some important dimensions: e.g. uncertainty, sunk costs, an outside good and no free entry in the

domestic market. Both our model and most other trade models abstracts from services due to data constraints. However, the
model and calculations do take into account the large fraction of non-traded goods since many of the diﬀerentiated goods are
produced by firms that are not productive enough to export. This isreflected in the  import
                                                                                              penetration used in the calculations.
                                                                                      
   6 3 More specifically the counterfactual is                                       2 −
                                                 ̂ =     exp −     1− 
                                                                                     
                                                                                                 where  represents each of the
coeﬃcients in Table 4 for  = 2002 − 2006.




                                                                41
    We note three points from Figure 7. First, the panel estimates suggest that if policy uncertainty had
remained then Chinese exports in 2002 would have remained largely unchanged relative to 2001.64 The
second point is that the log diﬀerence in 2005 and 2006 is similar, as the model would predict once exporters
believe that the current policy regime is stable. Third, the magnitude of the steady state eﬀect is very high:
a reduction of over 35% of exports in 2005 if TPU was re-introduced. An ex-ante global general equilibrium
study by Arce and Taylor (1997) calculated that if the U.S. revoked MFN status in the mid-1990’s China’s
exports would fall 50%. The eﬀect would likely be larger if applied in 2005 since applied tariﬀs have fallen.
However, it suggests that the panel estimate of 35% for the threat of revoking the MFN status may be an
over estimate. The estimate using the baseline is more reasonable: 30%, but still large so next we examine
if this is partly due to non-linear impacts of the uncertainty term.


Non-linear estimates and risk decomposition


    The quantification we used thus far employed the baseline estimates that relied on a linear approximation
of the uncertainty factor,  . We now use the non-linear estimates in Table 5, which did not require an
approximation. The equivalent of the partial eﬀect in (46) is given by


                        E (ln 0 − ln  ) | = − ( −  + 1) E [ln  (̃ )]
                                                                    ⎡            ³      ´− ⎤
                                                                                   2
                                                         −  + 1 ⎢      1 + ̃        ⎥
                                                    =−            E ⎣ln                     ⎦                              (47)
                                                           −1                1 + ̃ 


where the first line assumes, consistent with evidence, that uncertainty is insignificant after the agreement.
                                                                                                       2
The second line uses the definitions of the parameters estimated in the NLLS: ̃ =                   1−22    and  = .65
In the first row of Table 7 we provide the results, which yield a partial eﬀect of 26 log points. We can also
calculate the full general equilibrium eﬀect and find it is 22 log points. This is 10 log points lower than
the baseline in column 3 of Table 6. The lower eﬀect reflects both the nonlinearity of the impact of the
uncertainty variable and the higher elasticity of exports to transport costs due to removing outliers (which
generates a stronger role for the price index change on exports). When we aggregate the industry eﬀects we
find that re-introducing the threat of column 2 tariﬀs would reduce Chinese exports by 22%, which amounts
to about $55 billion in 2005.

    While the trade impact under NLLS is lower, the price index change due to the uncertainty ends up
being identical to the baseline, −08, and thus so is the welfare impact. Revoking the MFN status in 2005
and imposing column 2 tariﬀs would have increased the price index by 3.3%.
  6 4 This is a large eﬀect but not completely implausible given that the U.S. and Chinese GDP growth rates in 2002 were similar

to those in 2001 (when trade was indeed flat) and only in 2003 did they recover from the recession.
  6 5 In Table 5 column 2 we found  = 44 and  = 082 =  −+1 ̃ , so ̃ = 069 from which we re-calculate =1.07.
                                                                −1          




                                                              42
    Given that the NLLS estimates are the most consistent with the model and are also the most conservative
ones they constitute our preferred specification in terms of quantification and we will use it for subsequent
exercises.

    One such exercise examines what fraction of export growth due to the agreement is attributable a policy
risk reduction, i.e. a mean preserving tariﬀ risk reduction. If MFN tariﬀs prior to the agreement were at
their long-run mean then it is simple to show that the full impact of an agreement that decreases  is due to
a policy risk reduction. However, if the initial tariﬀs are below the long-run mean then the agreement will
have an additional eﬀect of locking in lower mean tariﬀs. In Appendix B.3 we show how to decompose the
impact of the agreement into a mean and risk component. The risk component is given by the counterfactual
impact of a reduction in  if tariﬀs were at their long-run mean and accounts for about 40 percent of the
average partial eﬀect in Table 7.

Counterfactual trade and welfare eﬀects of tariﬀ threats to “currency manipulators”

    Since the mid-2000s recurring bills in the U.S. Congress have called for import barriers to be imposed on
“currency manipulators”. The main target of such bills has been China, which until July 2005 pegged to the
dollar at a rate that was considered by many to be “undervalued”. After that date the peg was removed and
by late 2011 the RMB had revalued by about 30%. Early bills included provisions for across-the-board tariﬀs
of 27.5% on all Chinese goods. Related legislation would require a review process and impose countervailing
duties equal to the implied export subsidy given by the undervaluation percentage.66

    The U.S. House passed such a bill in 2010, the Senate passed a version in 2011 but it did not become
a law. We use the model to compute the counterfactual eﬀect of uncertainty over tariﬀs that would be
generated if such a bill became a law. More specifically, we ask what would be the eﬀect on trade and welfare
of a law requiring periodic currency reviews and threatened high countervailing duties in case of a currency
manipulation status. This law would be much like the MFN renewal process that we analyzed. To apply our
estimates we assume that Chinese exporters believe that the probability of currency manipulation tariﬀs is
similar to that of column 2 tariﬀs during the MFN renewal. We use a currency tariﬀ threat of 27.5% percent
on all goods, which is added to the MFN tariﬀ, as proposed in early legislation. We then use the NLLS
estimates to compute the counterfactual for 2012–the most recent year where the data is available.

    We calculate that currency manipulation laws that include tariﬀ threats would lower Chinese exports to
the U.S. by 21 percent. This includes the eﬀect of the increase in the price index, which implies a welfare
loss for consumers of 1.1, so larger than the MFN renewal process.67 68
   6 6 Methods for determining the magnitude of currency undervaluation vary substantially across legislation. Countervailing

duty triggers for currency undervaluation have also been demanded as a component of prospective free trade agreements such
as the Trans-Pacific Partnership (Morrison and Labonte, 2013).
   6 7 The loss is larger despite the fact that in the currency trade war scenario, tariﬀs would increase to an average of 31, which

is comparable to the threat of column 2 tariﬀs in 1990s. The reason for the larger eﬀect is that the Chinese import penetration
grew from 0.04 in 2005 to 0.07 in 2012.
   6 8 Even if the probability of currency tariﬀs was believed to be half that of column 2 tariﬀs the impacts would be large: Chinese

exports would decrease by 12% and the US price index would rise by 0.5 log points relative to 2012. These calculations assume


                                                                 43
    This exercise further illustrates the large impacts of TPU and how our approach can be used evaluate
interesting counterfactuals.


3.7     Additional Results: policy uncertainty and entry

    We now examine the eﬀect of TPU on entry. We first explore the estimates from the export equation to
quantify the role of entry and then ask if there is corroborating evidence from estimates that use detailed
product level data.

    The model predicts that the number of Chinese varieties exported to the U.S. at time  in industry  ,
denoted by  , is at least (
                                 ) –the fraction of all available Chinese varieties that have costs below

the entry threshold. Moreover, when the current policy conditions are no worse than in the past, e.g. when
 = 0 or  at time , then  is exactly equal to that fraction. We can then use the Pareto assumption
and the derived cutoﬀ, 
                         , to provide a general expression for the number of varieties and then take the

diﬀerence between 2005 and 2000, as done for exports, to obtain

                                                                            
                       ∆ ln  = − ln  −            ∆ ln  − ∆ ln  +     ∆ ln  +                                 (48)
                                                    −1                      −1

The following points are relevant. First, the elasticity of entry with respect to tariﬀs is the same as in the
export equation and that is also the case for export costs. Second, the elasticity of entry with respect to 
is now higher by a factor  ( −  + 1). We use these relationships between coeﬃcients to derive the entry
counterparts of the upper bound, partial and GE eﬀects in the export quantification. For the partial eﬀect
for example, we calculate


                         E (ln 0 − ln  ) | = −E (ln  (̃ ))
                                                               
                                                         =         E (ln 0 − ln  ) |                              (49)
                                                             −+1


    We focus on the NLLS estimates for the export equation that are closer to the theoretical model (column
2 Table 5). We find that reducing uncertainty increased Chinese exported varieties by 48 log points if we
ignore the price index eﬀect and 44 log points when we do take it into account. These results also apply to
the growth of firms that upgrade since the model predicts that their cutoﬀ is proportional to the entry cutoﬀ
up to a constant factor.

    To examine if there is additional evidence for the entry predictions we also explore the data at a more
disaggregated level than the HS-6. More specifically, we examine the growth in the number of traded products
within each industry as a proxy for new varieties exported. With access to firm level data one could construct
all else equal and abstract from any resulting eﬀects of changes in the exchange rate or Chinese tariﬀs. In our model Chinese
tariﬀ retaliation would reduce the profits of US exporters but not the welfare of US consumers or US imports of diﬀerentiated
goods as long as countries remained diversified. But in practice these other factors can alter the exact magnitudes we calculate.




                                                               44
a variety measure as a firm by HS-10 product. In the appendix, we show that without such data we can still
provide an estimate of the eﬀect of uncertainty on variety entry if the mapping from the number of HS-10
categories to varieties is similar across industries.

    Given the data limitations, our goals are simply to examine whether there is corroborating evidence for
the entry uncertainty channel identified in our trade flow regressions and if so quantify its importance.69 As
shown in the appendix, if we use the growth in the product count as a proxy for variety entry we can identify
the coeﬃcients in (48) up to a factor,  0 ∈ [0 1]. The identifying condition is that this factor is similar across
industries, which allows us to estimate the following equation
                                               Ã    µ         ¶− !
                                                        2
                    ∆ ln ( ) =       1−                     +  ∆ ln  +  ∆ ln  +  +                  (50)
                                                        

where we again approximate the uncertainty term around  = 0, as in the baseline export results.

    In Table 8, we report the results of the specifications analogous to the baseline Table 2 but now focusing
on variety growth. The first column shows the baseline specification and we find that all three variables
have the predicted sign and are statistically significant. In column 3 we control for sector eﬀects and find
similar results. In both cases we test and fail to reject that   =  ( − 1) and impose this constraint
in columns 2 and 4. We can see that the point estimates of the tariﬀ and transport cost elasticity are lower
than their respective values in the export equation (Table 2 column 4), which is consistent with the fact that
the parameters here are scaled by  0 ∈ [0 1].

    In the appendix we show how to use these estimates to quantify the impact of uncertainty on entry in an
exercise similar to the one using the export estimates.70 However, our preferred quantification is the more
conservative one using the NLLS estimates according to which the uncertainty impact on entry was 44 log
points. This is still a large eﬀect, particularly when we consider that the total growth in the number of
Chinese exporting firms to the world over 2000-2005 was 0.83 (Ma et al., 2013).



4     Conclusion

    We assess the impact of U.S. trade policy uncertainty toward China in a tractable general equilibrium
framework with heterogeneous firms. We show that increased policy uncertainty reduces investment in export
entry and technology upgrading, which in turn reduces trade flows and real income for consumers. We apply
the model to the period surrounding China’s accession to the WTO. China’s WTO membership lead the
U.S. to grant it permanent most-favored-nation tariﬀ treatment, ending the annual threat to revoke MFN
  6 9 While in the theoretical model we identify a variety with a unique firm by assuming an entrepreneur is endowed with a

single blueprint we can allow each to be endowed with multiple variety blueprints. If the export entry and upgrade costs are
independent across the number of varieties a firm produces then our results would hold in this setting.
  7 0 Appendix Table A7 contains the estimates. As the model predicts, the impact of uncertainty relative to tariﬀs is higher

for entry (0.17) than for trade flows (0.088). Similarly we can calculate the trade cost advalorem equivalent, which is 0.25, and
verify that it is higher than for trade flows (0.13).



                                                                45
and subject Chinese imports to Smoot-Hawley tariﬀs. While recent work focuses on the costs of the Chinese
export boom to employment and wages, we focus on the potential for gains from reducing TPU.

   We derive observable, theory-consistent measures of TPU and estimate its eﬀect on trade flows, prices
and welfare. Had MFN status been revoked, Chinese exporters would have faced an average profit loss of
over 50%. According to our most conservative estimates this threat had large eﬀects on trade and if it was re-
imposed in 2005 it would have lowered Chinese exports by at least 22%. The welfare cost of this uncertainty
was at least 0.8 percent of consumer real income (if most of their income was spent on diﬀerentiated goods).
We therefore also quantify a new source of gains from trade agreements that remove policy uncertainty, even
if applied tariﬀ changes are small.

   Our findings have implications beyond this particular important event. We show how to calculate the
impact of threats tariﬀs against “currency manipulators” and find that implementing such legislation in 2012
would have had similar trade eﬀects to removing China’s permanent MFN status higher welfare cost to U.S.
consumers. More broadly, our results provide evidence that one of the important channels through which
the WTO can increase trade and welfare is by reducing TPU. This finding is novel because it suggests that
even if two countries achieve low cooperative tariﬀs in a repeated game, like the U.S. and China in 1990s, the
threat the non-cooperative outcome generates enough uncertainty to have real eﬀects on economic activity.
In future work we will investigate firm-level decisions to invest in entry and new technology to directly test
the impact of TPU on each channel.




                                                     46
    References
Amiti, M. and C. Freund. (2010). The Anatomy of China’s Export Growth, China’s Growing Role in World
    Trade, Eds. Robert C. Feenstra and Shang-Jin Wei, University of Chicago Press, p. 35-56
Arce, H. and Taylor, C. (1997), The eﬀects of changing U.S. MFN status for China, Review of World Economics,
    133(4):737-753.
Arkolakis, C., Costinot, A. and Rodriguez-Clare, A. (2012). New Trade Models, Same Old Gains?, American
    Economic Review, 102(1):94-130.
Auer, R. A. and Fischer, A, M. (2010). The eﬀect of low-wage import competition on U.S. inflationary pressure,
    Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(4):491-503.
Autor, D., Dorn, D. and Hanson, G. (Forthcoming). The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Eﬀects of Import
    Competition in the United States. American Economic Review.
Bagwell, K. and Staiger, R. W. (1999). An Economic Theory of GATT. American Economic Review, 89(1):215—
    248.
Bagwell, K., and Staiger, R.W. (2011). What Do Trade Negotiators Negotiate About? Empirical Evidence from
    the World Trade Organization, American Economic Review, 101(4): 1238-73.
Baker, S., Bloom, N. and Davis, S. (2012). Has Economic Policy Uncertainty Hampered the Recovery?, Working
    Papers 2012-003, Becker Friedman Institute for Research In Economics.
Berger, B. and Martin, R. (2013) The growth of Chinese exports: an examination of the detailed trade data,China
    and the World Economy, 21(1):64-90.
Bernanke, B. S. (1983). Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics, 98(1):85-106.
Blonigen, B. A. and Ma, A. C. (2010). Please Pass the Catch-Up: The Relative Performance of Chinese and
    Foreign Firms in Chinese Export, in Feenstra, R. C. and Wei, S.-J. editors, China’s Growing Role in World
    Trade, NBER Books, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, p. 475-509.
Bloom, N., Bond, S., and Reenen, J. V. (2007). Uncertainty and Investment Dynamics. Review of Economic
    Studies, 74(2):391-415.
Bown, Chad P. (2012). Temporary Trade Barriers Database, The World Bank, available at http://econ.worldbank.org/ttbd/
Brambilla, I, Khandelwal, A., and Schott, P. (2010) China’s Experience under the Multi-Fiber Arrangement
    (MFA) and the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing (ATC), in China’s Growing Role in World Trade,
    University of Chicago Press, p. 345-387.
Brandt, L., Van Biesebroeck, J. and Yifan Zhang.(2012) Creative accounting or creative destruction? Firm-level
    productivity growth in Chinese manufacturing, Journal of Development Economics, 97: 339-351.
Broda, C. and Weinstein, D. (2006). Globalization and the gains from variety. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics, 121(2):541-585.
Broda, C., N. Limão, and Weinstein, D. (2008). Optimal Tariﬀs and Market Power: The Evidence, American
    Economic Review, 98(5): 2032-2065.
Bustos, P. (2011). Trade liberalization, exports, and technology upgrading: evidence on the impact of MERCO-
    SUR on argentinian firms. American Economic Review, 101(1):304-40.
Chaney, T. (2008). Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of International Trade. American
    Economic Review, 98(4):1707-21.
Costinot, A. and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. (Forthcoming). Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying the Con-
     sequences of Globalization. Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 4, eds. Gopinah, Helpman and
     Rogoﬀ.
Dixit, A. K. (1989). Entry and exit decisions under uncertainty. Journal of Political Economy, 97(3):620-38.
Handley, K. and Limão, N. (2012). Trade and Investment under Policy Uncertainty: Theory and Firm Evidence.


                                                         47
    NBER Working Papers 17790.
Handley, K. (2012). Exporting under Trade Policy Uncertainty: Theory and Evidence, Working Paper, University
    of Michigan. http://webuser.bus.umich.edu/handleyk/eutpu.pdf
Hardle, W. and E. Mammen. (1993). Comparing Nonparametric Versus Parametric Regression Fits. Annals of
    Statistics, 21(4): 1926-1947.
Hsieh, C.T. and Klenow, P. J. (2009). Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India, The Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1403-48.
International Monetary Fund (2010). World Economic Outlook. Chapter 4.
Impullitti, G. Irarrazabal, A and Luca Opromolla. (2013). A Theory of Entry Into and Exit From Export
    Markets, Journal of International Economics, (90)1, p.75-90.
Lileeva, A. and Trefler, D. (2010). Improved Access to Foreign Markets Raises Plant-Level Productivity... for
     Some Plants, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3):1051-1099.
Limão, N. and G. Maggi. (2012). Uncertainty and Trade Agreements. NBER Working Papers 18703.
Ludema, R. and A. M. Mayda (Forthcoming). Do Terms-of-Trade Eﬀects Matter for Trade Agreements? Theory
    and Evidence from WTO Countries, Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Manova, K. and Zhang, Z. (2009). China’s Exporters and Importers: Firms, Products and Trade Partners, NBER
   Working Papers 15249.
Morrison, W. M. and M. Labonte (2013). China’s Currency Policy: An Analysis of the Economic Issues, CRS
    21625.
Ossa, R. (2013). Trade Wars and Trade Talks with Data. NBER Working Papers 17347.
Pierce, J.R. and Schott, P. K. (2012). The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Manufacturing Employment, NBER
     Working Papers 18655.
Pregelj, V. (2001) Most-Favored-Nation Status of the People’s Republic of China. CRS Report for Congress.
Roberts, M. J. And Tybout, J. (1997). The Decision To Export In Colombia: An Empirical Model Of Entry
    With Sunk Costs American Economic Review, 87(4):545-64
Robinson, P. M. (1988). Root-N-Consistent Semiparametric Regression. Econometrica, 56(4): 931-954.
Rodrik, D. (1991). Policy Uncertainty And Private Investment In Developing Countries. Journal of Development
    Economics, 36(2):229-242.
Rose, A. (2004). Do We Really Know That the WTO Increases Trade?, The American Economic Review,
    94(1):98-114.
Subramanian, A, and SJ Wei. 2007. The WTO promotes trade, strongly but unevenly. Journal of International
    Economics 72(1):151-175.
Trefler, D. (2004). The Long and Short of the Canada-U. S. Free Trade Agreement. American Economic Review,
     94(4):870-895
Zeng, K. (2003). Trade Threats, Trade Wars: Bargaining, Retaliation, and American Coercive Diplomacy,
    University of Michigan Press.




                                                       48
A     Theory Appendix
A.1     Entry threshold
In this appendix we derive the entry thresholds in section 2.2 and prove Proposition 1.
Derivation of expected value of exporting (MFN), eq. (8)

    Π (  ) (1 −  ) = (  ) +  [0 Π (0  ) + 2 Π (2  )]
                                            ∙                                                                      ¸
                                                 (0  ) + 0 Π (  )         (2  ) + 2 Π (  )
    Π (  ) (1 −  ) = (  ) +  0                                 + 2
                                                             1 − 00                           1 − 22

                                               (  )          P         (  )
                               Π (  ) =             +          6=                                            (51)
                                               1 −      1 −            1 − 

Derivation of expected value of waiting (MFN), eq. (12)
To obtain (12) we simplify (11) using (9) and (7) evaluated at the threshold for entry at MFN along with
(4), i.e. Π (                     
                     ) −  = Π (   )
                                 "          £                   ¤        ∙                                     ¸#
                                    2 Π (  ) −                (0                      
                                                                                    ) + 0 Π (   )
      Π (   ) =             2                             + 0                                     −
                        1 −                1 − 22                                1 − 00
                                                  ∙                                        ¸
                                0               (0                       
                                                             ) + 0 Π (   )
      Π (   ) =         ³                 ´                                     −
                        1−       +     2                  1 − 00
                                    2 1−22




Proof of Proposition 1 (Policy Uncertainty and Entry in Partial Equilibrium):
a. The export entry cost cutoﬀ under MFN policy uncertainty,        , is proportional to its deterministic
counterpart, 
               , by the uncertainty factor,  ( ) ,in eq. (14).

Entry cutoﬀ at MFN:     
                      =   ( )


We plug in the value of export in (8) and the value of waiting in (12) into the indiﬀerence condition in (4)
                                                                     2
and re-arrange. We simplify notation by using ̃ − 0 ≡  + 2 1−  22
                                                                            and Π ≡ Π (  
                                                                                              )


                                                                       ∙                             ¸
                                                          0           (0  
                                                                                  ) + 0 Π
                                          Π− = ¡          ¡        ¢¢                        −              (52)
                                                     1 −  ̃ − 0            1 − 00
             µ      µ                      ¶¶
                     ¡        ¢ 0 0            0 (0  
                                                                 )
                                                                         ¡        ¢
              1 −  ̃ − 0 +                 Π=                   +  1 −  ̃
                                  1 − 00             1 − 00
                                                               h                           i ¡          ¢ 0 0
                                                                     0             2
noting that the LHS is simply (1 −  ) Π since  ≡  + 0 1−   00
                                                                           +  2  1− 22
                                                                                            =  ̃ − 0  + 1−00
we can replace it with the value in (51) to obtain

                                        P        (  
                                                         )    0 (0  
                                                                            )
                                                                                  ¡        ¢
                       (  
                               ) +      6=            =                 +  1 −  ̃
                                                 1 −          1 − 00
                                                         
                                                 (2   )     ¡       ¢
                              (  
                                       ) + 2             =  1 −  ̃
                                                 1 − 22




                                                          49
Using the profit function in (2) to write as a function of cost we obtain
                                            ∙                      ¸
                    ¡  ¢−1         1                        2
                           = ¡          ¢  + 2
                                 1 −  ̃                1 − 22
                                ∙              1 "
                                            ¸ −1           Ã               µ ¶− !# −1
                                                                                      1

                                                 1 −             2     2
                          
                            =                               1+
                                   (1 − )        1 −  ̃      (1 − 22 ) 
                                |      {z       }|                     {z               }
                                             
                                                                     


b.                                                                                          
       and  ln   =  ln    0 if and only if 2   and 2  0, otherwise  =  .




                                           
    iﬀ 2   and 2  0 otherwise  = 


Since    
         =  we first show the condition is necessary and suﬃcient for   1.

                                         "        Ã        µ ¶− !# −1 1

                                       1−           2    2
                                   =         1+                          1                             (53)
                                       1 −  ̃    1 − 22 
                      µ ¶− ∙                 ¸         µ                      ¶
                       2              2                             2
                             (1 − )             1 −  1 − 2 + 2            − (1 − )
                                   1 − 22                         1 − 22
                                        µ ¶−
                                          2        2         2
                                                           
                                                1 − 22   1 − 22

The second line uses the definition of ̃ and the third simplifies. Thus   1 iﬀ 2   and 2  0,
otherwise  = 1 and so       
                           =  .



 ln 
        =  ln    0 iﬀ 2   and 2  0


                                                                                                      ln 
From part (a) of the proposition                           
                                   =   ( ) and since  is independent of , we have            
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                               =
 ln  ()
            .   Using (14) we obtain
                                       "             Ã               µ ¶− !#
                    ln 
                              1           1−               2     2
                           =            ln             1+
                            − 1        1 −  ̃       1 − 22 
                                   Ã         ¡        ¢             Ã             µ ¶− !!
                    ln 
                              1         ln 1 −  ̃ ̃                  2    2
                           =         −                     +      ln 1 +
                           −1               ̃                    1 − 22 
                                              Ã µ             ¶   µ    ¶     Ã            µ ¶− !!
                                                                         −
                    ln 
                              1      2             1−           2              2   2
                           =                     −              +            1+                          (54)
                            − 1 1 − 22          1 −  ̃                   1 − 22 

                                              2                   2
where the third line uses ̃ ≡ 1 − 2 + 2 1−22
                                                    = 1 − 2 + 2 1−22
                                                                           and simplifies.

                                              ln  
                                                       0
                                                
                                            µ ¶− Ã                   µ ¶− ! µ          ¶
                                             2                  2  2       1−
                                                        1+
                                                            1 − 22        1 −  ̃
                     µ ¶− ∙              µ         ¶¸ µ           ¶
                      2          2      1−           1−
                            1−                                                                           (55)
                             (1 − 22 ) 1 −  ̃       1 −  ̃


                                                         50
                                                                         ³         ´
                                                                             1−
The term in brackets on the LHS simplifies to the term on the RHS, 1−          ̃
                                                                                    , after we use the definition for
                                                                       ³ ´−
̃ as well as 2 = 1 − 22 . Thus this inequality holds if and only if 2         1. Moreover 2 = 2  0 is
necessary since  ( ) depends on  only through 2 and 2  0.

c.         
      0 = 0 if 2   and 2  0 or 0   or both.

If 2   and 2  0 then                                                                        
                                , as shown in part (b). Since we assume that 00 = 1 we have 0 = 0 .
                                                                 
If 0 ≤  then  ≤ 0 (from (3)) and therefore    ≤ 0 = 0 . If tariﬀ increases are not possible
(2 =  and/or 2 = 0) then                 
                                =   0 = 0 if 0   . The first equality is shown in part (b) and
the inequality is from (3).¤

Ordering of cutoﬀs in (16)

                                                          
                                       2 = 2     ≤ 0 = 0
                                                                    

In the proof of proposition 1 we provide the conditions for             
                                                                ≤ 0 = 0 . In the text we showed that
                                                                 
2 = 2 . Thus here we prove the statement in the text that 2   if and only if   1.


                                                               ⎡                                       ³        ´− ⎤ −1
                                                                                                                       1
                                  ∙               ¸ −1
                                                     1                                                     2
                                          2                   ⎢ (1 − ) (1 −¡22 ) +¢ (1 − ) 2              ⎥
                          
                       2 = 2 =                            
                                                             ⎣                                                     ⎦
                                      (1 − )                                1 −  ̃ (1 − 22 )

      ∙              ¸ −1
                        1    ∙           ¸ −1
                                            1  "Ã               µ ¶− !          # −1
                                                                                    1

              2                                     2      2     1−
                                                 1+
          (1 − )             (1 − )              1 − 22         1 −  ̃
                µ ¶− Ã                       µ ¶− !
                  2                 2      2       1−
                            1+
                                 1 − 22           1 −  ̃
                                                                            2
This is the same inequality as in (55) that we showed to hold iﬀ                1.




                                                               51
A.2       Technological upgrade threshold
In this appendix we derive the upgrade thresholds in section 2.3 and prove Proposition 2.

Derivation of Π (   ).
For  = 0 if it is not optimal to upgrade then the firm obtains (0  ) today and for all future periods since
conditions can’t improve, therefore it is equal to the expected value of exporting at the original technology

                                                   Π (0   ) = Π (0  )                                 (56)
for the remaining states we have Π (   ), given by (22) in the text and for  = 2 we have the following
for  ∈ [     
          2   ]

                             Π (2   ) = (2  ) +  [22 Π (2   ) + 2 [Π (  ) −  ]]   (57)
                Π (2   ) (1 − 22 ) = (2  ) + 2 [Π (  ) −  ]



Reduced form of Π (   )
Using (22), (57) and (21) we obtain

Π (                               
             ) (1 −  ) = (   )
                                  ∙                                                                                           ¸
                                      2 £           
                                                                   £           
                                                                                        ¤¤         £ 1−           
                                                                                                                             ¤
                               +             (2   ) + 2 Π (   ) −  + 0           Π (0   ) − 
                                    1 − 22
                                                 ∙                            ∙                                         ¸¸
               
                      ¡      ¢                       2                       1− (0  ) + 0 Π (  )
  Π (    ) 1 −  ̂ = (   ) +             (2   ) + 0                                    − 
                                                   1 − 22                                    1 − 00


                       2
where ̂ ≡  + 2 1− 22
                              .

Proof of Proposition 2
When firms can pay a sunk cost to upgrade their export technology and the upgrading parameter is suﬃciently
low (   ̄ ≤ 1) we have the results in (a)-(d)

(a) the export entry cutoﬀs are given by Proposition 1
This requires the existence of a critical ̄ such that the marginal entrant into exporting in any state will
never upgrade in any state. In that case the value of starting to export and the value of waiting for the
marginal export entrant in any state  and thus the entry cutoﬀs are given by Proposition 1. For the
critical ̄ it is suﬃcient to obtain the condition for  such that             
                                                                       0 ()  2 since in that case we have
                        
0 ()  2   ≤ 0 where the last two inequalities are shown in appendix A.1. Given that the
agreement is an absorbing state we have        
                                           0 = 0 , which is given by (17). Moreover, as we showed in section
           
2.2 2 = 2 . Thus we require
                                            " ¡         ¢ # −1
                                                             1
                                                                  ∙           ¸ −1
                                                                                 1
                                            0  1− − 1                2
                          
                           0   =   
                                     0   =                                        =     
                                                                                       2 = 2
                                             (1 − )              (1 − ) 

                                                              ∙      ¸ −1
                                                                       −
                                                            2
                                                         
                                                            0
          ³ ´ −1
              −
                                                           ¡         ¢     ³ ´−
           2
so ̄ =    0       . Using the definition of , we require  1− − 1   20 .

(b) the upgrading cutoﬀ is proportional to the entry cutoﬀ:     
                                                               =  for all 



                                                                52
We must first derive the cutoﬀs in each state.

Worst case upgrade cutoﬀ: 
                           2


Using the cutoﬀ in (20) and evaluating at the equilibrium value of exporting for the marginal upgrader at
 = 2 (21) and value of waiting in (57) we obtain


                                            1− Π (2                        
                                                           2 ) −  = Π (2  2  )
   ∙      µ                                    ¶      ¸
            (2                       
                    2 ) + 2 Π (  2 )
                                                                                          £ 1−                     ¤
     1−                                        −  (1 − 22 ) = (2  2 ) + 2       Π (  
                                                                                                          2 ) − 
                         1 − 22
                                                      1− (2                
                                                                   2 ) = (2  2 ) − (2 − (1 − 22 )) 
                                                                          " ¡              ¢ # −1
                                                                                                1

                                                                          2  1− − 1
                                                                   2 =                           = 
                                                                                                      2
                                                                             (1 − ) 

where the second line uses (7) and the third one uses 2 + 22 = 1. Using this result, part (a) of this
proposition, the entry cutoﬀs in Proposition 1 and the deterministic upgrade in (17) we obtain

                                                         
                                                          2   
                                                                2
                                                             =     =
                                                         
                                                          2    
                                                                2


Agreement upgrade cutoﬀ: 
                          0


Using the cutoﬀ condition (20), as well as (21) and (56) we obtain

 1− Π (0  
                0 ) −  = Π (0  )
                                          ∙                 µ                                                                    ¶¸
                            ¡ 1−       ¢                    (  
                                                                      0 )              (0  
                                                                                                 0 )              (2  
                                                                                                                            0 )
           (1 − 00 ) =         − 1 (0  0 ) + 0                +         0              +         2
                                                               1 −        1 −      1 − 00       1 −      1 − 22

where the second line uses (7) and (8). We can factor out the cost and solve the general expression above in
the same way we did for the entry cutoﬀ. But given our assumption that 00 = 1 we obtain 0 = 1 and
                                                        "
                                                        ¡         ¢ # −1
                                                                       1

                                                      0  1− − 1
                                      
                                       0 |00 =1   =                     = 
                                                                             0
                                                       (1 − ) 

Using this result, part (a) of this proposition, the entry cutoﬀs in Proposition 1 and the deterministic upgrade
in (17) we obtain
                                                   
                                                    0    
                                                           0
                                                       =      =
                                                   
                                                    0     
                                                           0


MFN upgrade cutoﬀ: 
                    




                                    1− Π (                           
                                                    ) −  = Π (    )
                                                        ∙                       ∙                                              ¸¸
£ 1−           
                         ¤¡       ¢            
                                                                      
                                                          2 (2   )                                          
                                                                                   1− (0   ) + 0 Π (   )
     Π (   ) −  1 −  ̂ = (   )+                        + 0                                         − 
                                                            1 − 22                                1 − 00

                                                    ∙                                                  ¸
                                                          2                   0  1− (0  
                                                                                                   )
                                                                                                         ¡      ¡        ¢¢
 1− Π (                           
                 ) (1 −  ) = (   )+                 (2  
                                                                          ) +                         − 0 − 1 −  ̂ 
                                                        1 − 22                       1 − 00



                                                               53
     µ                                       ¶                   ∙                                                ¸
 1−                 P         (  
                                         )                        2                  0  1− (0  
                                                                                                              )
                                                                                                                     ¡        ¢
     (   ) +  6=                 =(   ) +             (2   ) +                          + 1 −  ̃ 
                                 1 −                           1 − 22                       1 − 00
              µ                                ¶
  ¡ 1−     ¢                             
                                  (2   )     ¡       ¢
       − 1 (    ) + 2                = 1 −  ̃ 
                                   1 − 22
                                h                       i
                                      0          2                                    2
where 4th line uses  ≡  +  0 1−00
                                            + 2 1−22 from (8) and ̃ ≡ 1 − 2 + 2 1−22 .

To solve for the cutoﬀ we use (2), factor out  and re-arrange to obtain
                                      "     ¡          ¢µ                 ¶# −1
                                                                              1

                                         1− − 1             2 2
                              
                                  =    ¡        ¢      1+
                                          1 −  ̃          1 − 22 
                                          "          Ã               µ ¶− !# −11

                                             1−             2      2
                              
                               
                                       
                                    =              1+                                                        (58)
                                            1 −  ̃      (1 − 22 ) 
                                          |                    {z                  }
                                                              


Using this relationship, part (a) of this proposition, the entry cutoﬀs in Proposition 1 and the deterministic
upgrade in (17) we obtain
                                                   
                                                    =         =
                                               
                                                      
                                                         



(c)                                                                                                  
      is lower than its deterministic counterpart by the uncertainty factor in (14) (  =     )
                                                 
and decreasing in MFN policy uncertainty (  ln   =  ln    0) iﬀ tariﬀ increases are possible;
In proving part (b) we derive      
                                =   in (58) and see that  is the expression in (14).
Using part (b) of the proposition we have  ln                                 
                                                   =  ln    0 since  is independent of  so we
can use the proof of the semi-elasticity of entry in proposition 1.

(d)            
        0 = 0 if tariﬀ increases are possible or tariﬀs are lower under the agreement ( 0   ) or
both.
               0 = 0 and  0 =  0 . Thus the proof of proposition 1b applies here. ¤
From part (b)                         




                                                         54
A.3     Entry, prices and welfare under TPU (general equilibrium)
In this section we derive the worst case cutoﬀ in general equilibrium and prove Propositions 3 and 4.
Deriving      
          2 = 2
Under  = 2 a firm that is indiﬀerent between entering at  or waiting will enter in  + 1 if it survives either
because the tariﬀ state improves or because the aggregate conditions improve. Thus for all  ≥ 0 the value
of waiting and exporting are respectively
                                              £                                                ¤
                     Π (2                                                      
                                2 ) = 0 +  22 Π (2 +1  2 ) + 2 Π (  2 ) −                 (59)
                         Π (2  ) = (2  ) +  [22 Π (2 +1  ) + 2 Π (  )]              (60)

Thus a firm is indiﬀerent between the two when Π (2                       
                                                          2 ) −  = Π (2  2 ), which yields (2  ) =
                              
(1 − )  and therefore 2 = 2 .

Proof of Proposition 3 (Policy Uncertainty and Entry in General Equilibrium):
                                                                            
a. The export cost cutoﬀ under MFN policy uncertainty,    
                                                         = U  (̃  ) 
                                                                              where  (̃  ) is in eq.

(31).
                  

  =U  (̃  )  

The functional form for the expected value of export at  =  is the same as in the baseline (6) and that is
also the case for the value of waiting, given by (11). But they are diﬀerent from the baseline under  = 2
due to transition dynamics. More specifically, we require

                         Π (2 =0  ) = (2 =0  ) +  [22 Π (2 =1  ) + 2 Π (  )]
                                           P                             2
                                         = ∞             
                                             =0 (22 ) (2  ) +             Π (  )
                                                                       1 − 22

where the second line uses the fact that (60) holds for all  and solves it forward.
For the value of waiting we use the fact that a firm that is indiﬀerent between entering at MFN will never
want to enter under column 2, independently of how long ago the shock occurred to obtain
                                                £                                          ¤
                       Π (2 =0                                                  
                                      ) = 0 +  22 Π (2 =1   ) + 2 Π (   )
                                             2
                                         =          Π (  
                                                              )
                                           1 − 22

Replacing Π (2 =0  ) in (6) and Π (2 =0  
                                                    ) in (11) we obtain respectively
                             ∙                                                                                       ¸
                                                                    P∞                            2
 Π (  ) = (  ) +  0 Π (0  ) +  Π (  ) + 2 =0 (22 ) (2  ) +             Π (  )
                                                                                                 1 − 22
                        1          ³             h                     P                       i´
 Π (  ) =        ¡           ¢ (  ) +  0 Π (0  ) + 2 ∞          
                                                                        =0 (22 ) (2  )                     (61)
                 1 −  ̃ − 0


                              ∙                                                                     ¸
                                   £                 ¤                          2
           Π (  
                     )
                                                                   
                          =  0 Π (0   ) −  +  Π (   ) + 2                    
                                                                                       Π (   )
                                                                              1 − 22
                                 0       £                 ¤
                          =       ¡        ¢ Π (0  
                                                       ) − 
                            1 −  ̃ − 0
                          2
where ̃ ≡ 1 − 2 + 2 1−22




                                                             55
Using the indiﬀerence condition and (61), simplifying and solving for 
                                                                        we have

                                                                        Π (                          
                                                                                      ) −  = Π (   )
               h                      P                       i       ¡          ¡           ¢¢ £      £               ¤¤
  (  ) +  0 Π (0  ) + 2 ∞             
                                        =0 (22 ) (2  ) −  1 −  ̃ − 0               = 0 Π (0  
                                                                                                                ) − 
                                                           h    P∞                            i ¡        ¢
                                                                                
                                           (  ) +  2 =0 (22 ) (2  ) = 1 −  ̃ 
                                                    "           P∞                     #
                                                                                
                                                                       ( 22 )    2            ¡      ¢
                                                1 + 2 =0                            1− = 1 −  ̃ 
                                                                        
                                                         "           P∞                       #
                                                                                        
                                            (1 − )          2 =0 (22 ) 2
                                             ¡        ¢ 1+               P∞                    = −1
                                  (1 − )  1 −  ̃          1−           =0      
                                                ∙       
                                                             ¸ −1
                                                                 1 ∙     ¸ −1
                                                                             1
                                                                   
                                                                                   (̃ ) =   
                                                  (1 − )           
                                         ∙              µ                   ¶¸ −1 1
                                             1−              2 ()                     
                                                           1+            ̃             = 
                                                                                                   
                                           1 −  ̃ ()        1 −  22                   
                                         |                   {z                      }
                                                                       (̃)


where  (̃ ) is the expression in (31), which is similar to the one in the absence of GE eﬀects,  ( ),
                                                     ³ ´− (1− )P∞ ( ) 
                                                       2           22   =0  22   2
in (14) except that instead of  we now have ̃ =                                 .

                                                                −   ¡  ¢−1          − ¡  ¢−1
b. If (2  )−  1, 2 ()  0 and (2 )                       2      ≤ ( )           for all  then      
                                                                                                                    ≤ 
                                       
all V (at least one strict) and     ;
                                                                                                   ¡ ¢−1
In part (a) we show              
                         =        .   Here we first show that   1 if (2 )− 2             ≤
       − ¡  ¢−1                                                                                    ¡  ¢
( )           for all  . Since there are no legacy firms at  = , the price index is exactly  c   .
Then if all  decrease then  must increase (since    0 for all  ). Moreover, we show
that the case when  decreases and       increases for all  does not satisfy the equilibrium condition
          

  =     .
              



 (̃ )  1 if ̃  1


                   ∙              µ                   ¶¸ −1
                                                          1            ∙                 ¸
                       1−                2                                    2
                                   1+            ̃             1 ⇔ ̃ (1 − )             1 −  ̃ − (1 − )           (62)
                       1 −  ̃         1 − 22                                1 − 22
This inequality holds if ̃  1 since the term in brackets on the LHS simplifies to the term on the RHS after
we use the definition for ̃ as well as 2 = 1 − 22 .

                   −   ¡  ¢−1          − ¡  ¢−1
̃  1 if (2 )         2      ≤ ( )     

                       µ        ¶−                 P∞
                           2         (1 − 22 )     =0   (22 ) 2                        P∞          
             ̃ ≡                                                           1 ⇐⇒ (1 − 22 )    =0   (22 ) 2  
                                                  
The equivalence is due to the profit definition. ThePinequality holds since 2  2 for all  (lower profits
under transition than steady state) and (1 − 22 ) ∞            
                                                      =0 (22 ) 2 = 2 ≤  where the inequality holds
whenever the direct eﬀect dominates (given by condition in (28)).

      
   and      
              ≤  (at least one strict)




                                                                       56
Possible cases
                                                                                                    
1)     
      
             =     
                        ≥1⇒      
                                      min 1  1 for all  : can’t be an equilibrium since if        
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                ≥ 1 for all
                                                                                                         
             
 then        
             
                  ≤ 1
               
2)     
      
             =     
                       ≤ 1 for all  (at least one strict) requires us to consider two cases.
       

                                                                                          
i.     
          ≤ 1: can’t be an equilibrium since it implies       
                                                               
                                                                      1 for all  and thus    
                                                                                                  1.
                                                                

                                                                    
ii.    
           ∈ (1 min 1 ]: no contradiction since when            
                                                                      
                                                                            ≤ 1 for all  (with at least one strict) then
                                                                       

 

        1
                                                ¡ ¢−1             ¡  ¢−1            ¡ ¢−1
c. If (2  )−  1, 2 ()  0, (2 )− 2      ≤ ( )−         ≤ (0 )− 0      for all 
then             
       ≤ 0 = 0 all  (at least one strict) and   0 = 0
                                                                    

                                                                            ¡  ¢−1            ¡ ¢−1
In part (b) we show that under these conditions (without requiring ( )−         ≤ (0 )− 0      )
we obtain   ≤ 
                    , thus it is suﬃcient to show 
                                                      ≤ 
                                                           0 = 
                                                                 0
If  = 0 then the result is trivial since then                       
                                                   = 0 and    = 0 where in the price relationship
the inequality is from part (b) and the equality is due to  = 0 and  = 
                                                                        
                                                                              0 .
If  ≥ 0 then      
                  ≤ 0 requires

                                         ∙                  ¸ 1
                                                    − 1− −1
                                                                  ∙               ¸ −1
                                                                                      1
                                             
                                                              0 0 − 1−
                                                                               
                                                                ≤
                                               (1 − )               (1 − ) 
                                                    − ¡  ¢−1            ¡    ¢−1
                                              ( )          ≤ (0 )− 0

which is satisfied for all  given our assumption that the tariﬀ eﬀect dominates. Therefore           
                                                                                              ≤ 0 = 0
                                                                    
. Moreover   0 = 0 because    (part b) and  ≥ 0 if  ≥ 0 .¤

Proof of Proposition 4 (Policy Uncertainty, Prices and Consumer Welfare in General Equilib-
rium):
If tariﬀ increases are possible and the direct eﬀect of worst case tariﬀs dominates then
(a) an increase in MFN policy uncertainty increases the importer’s price index in the MFN state by  ln |=0
given by (36) and lowers consumer welfare in that state by −  ln |=0 .
The expression for  ln |=0 is derived in section A.5.2 where we show it is positive.
Therefore −  ln |=0  0 and we need only show it represents a welfare eﬀect in the MFN state. To
see this recall that workers have direct utility  01− where  is the CES aggregator over all varieties and
                                                                          −                             (1−)
 ∈ (0 1]. Since 0 is the numeraire, the period indirect utility is ̃   where ̃ =    (1 − )
is constant since  is the period labor endowment and the wage of the exporter  = 1 in the diversified
equilibrium. Thus the growth in the period utility due to a change in  is −  ln .
We can also show that this corresponds to the “within state welfare eﬀect” that is one of the two impacts of 
on expected welfare for consumers, as discussed after this proposition. Using 2 = 2 and 0 =  (1 − 2 )
we solve for the expected welfare of a worker starting at  =  in equation (37) as
                                        −
                                 = ̃  + ̃ [ (1 − 2 ) 0 + 2 2 + (1 − )  ]
                                                 −
                                            ̃              ̃
                                     =                 +               [(1 − 2 ) 0 + 2 2 ]
                                         1 − ̃ (1 − ) 1 − ̃ (1 − )

where 0 and 2 are the expected welfare values after switching to  = 0 2 respectively. We obtain the




                                                                57
growth in welfare due to a change in  around  = 0 in eq.(38) as follows
                ⎛                       ³       ´                                                    ⎞
         ¯                    −−1                −
 ln  ¯¯      ⎜ 1 −                1 − ̃ −  ̃       1      ̃                             ⎟
         ¯    =⎝        ̃          ³        ´2             +               [(1 − 2 ) 0 + 2 2 ]⎠ |=0
        =0                                                   1 −  ̃
                                      1 − ̃
                                  ⎛       ¡  ¢−−1         ³         ´ ¡ ¢                                                    ⎞
                Ã ¡ ¢− !−1                                                       −
                  ̃  
                                  ⎜   −                |
                                                       =0     1 −  ̃   −          ̃     ̃                                 ⎟
              =                   ⎝̃                   ³        ´2                        +        [(1 − 2 ) 0 + 2 2 ] |=0 ⎠
                     1 − ̃                               1 − ̃                             1 − ̃
                                          µ                                  ¶
                     ln           ̃       − (1 − 2 ) 0 − 2 2
              = −          |=0 −                                             |=0
                                 1 − ̃               

where the impact of  on 0 and 2 disappears around  = 0.
(b) consumer expected welfare is higher under an agreement that eliminates uncertainty even if tariﬀs remain
at MFN levels.
To prove this we show that 0 −   0 and 0 − 2  0


                                                −
                                            ̃                 ̃
                   0 −  = 0 −                       −                 [(1 − 2 ) 0 + 2 2 ]
                                        1 − ̃ (1 − ) 1 − ̃ (1 − )
                                     "                #
                                                                    −
                                        1 − ̃ + ̃2          ̃                 ̃
                               = 0                      −                 −                2 2
                                       1 − ̃ (1 − )       1 − ̃ (1 − ) 1 − ̃ (1 − )
                                 µ                ¶h                        ³       ´              i
                                          1                                                     −
                               =                      ̃2 (0 − 2 ) + 1 − ̃ 0 − ̃
                                   1 − ̃ (1 − )
                                 µ                ¶h
                                          1                                    ¡             ¢i
                               =                      ̃2 (0 − 2 ) + ̃ 0− −     −
                                   1 − ̃ (1 − )
                                 µ                ¶h
                                          1                                   ¡             ¢i
                   0 −                            ̃2 (0 −  ) + ̃ 0− −     −
                                   1 − ̃ (1 − )
                                      0− −  −
                   0 −   ̃                       0
                                    1 − ̃ (1 − 0 )

                                    ̃ −
where the fourth line uses 0 = 1−0̃ . The fifth line used   2 since the latter entails higher tariﬀs
and price indices (and so lower consumer welfare) until there is a shock that leads back to the MFN state.
The last line solves for 0 −  and is positive because if agreement tariﬀs do not change relative to MFN

then 0−   −
                  since these states would diﬀer only because of  and  ln |=0 0, as shown in part (a).
If tariﬀs under the agreement are lower then 0− is even higher. Moreover, as we show in the transition
2 ≥ 2 because the price index rises as firms exit so   2 and thus 0  2 .¤




                                                           58
A.4     Technological upgrade threshold under TPU (general equilibrium)
This section extends the general equilibrium analysis of TPU to allow for upgrading as described at the end
of section 2.4.4.
Assume      
        0  2 =0 s.t. only the most productive will ever upgrade.
The price index now reflects upgrading and thus the equilibrium value of entry cutoﬀs change but their
functional form does not. We continue to assume the direct eﬀect dominates, which requires only that we
evaluate it using the price index that now reflects upgrading.


1.        
    2 = 2 


Under  = 2 a firm that is indiﬀerent between upgrading at  or waiting will upgrade the following period
if it survives either because the tariﬀ state improves or because the aggregate conditions improve. Thus for
all  ≥ 0 the value of waiting and upgrading are respectively
                                                     £                                                           ¤
          Π (2  
                      2  ) = (2  ) + 
                                                 1−
                                                       22 Π (2 +1                       
                                                                         2 ) + 2 Π (  2 ) −  
                                                                                                             1−
                                                                                                                   (63)
            1− Π (2  ) =  1− (2  ) +  1− [22 Π (2 +1  ) + 2 Π (  )]                 (64)

Thus
¡ 1− a firm
           ¢ is indiﬀerent  between the two when  1− Π (2                          
                                                                  2 ) −  = Π (2  2  ), which yields
     − 1 (2  2 ) = (1 − )  . Recall that the entry cutoﬀ is implicitly defined by (2  
                    
                                                                                                           2 ) =
(1 − )  and therefore  2 = 
                                   2 where  is given by  (19).


2.            
    0 = 0 = 0 when 00 = 1.


If the agreement is an absorbing state then 
                                             0 is equal to the deterministic cutoﬀ implicitly given by (17)
when evaluated at the price index consistent with it.


3.       
     = 


The cutoﬀ under uncertainty when  =  is 
                                            and defined by the indiﬀerence condition

                                      1− Π (                        
                                                      ) −  = Π (    )

where Π (  
                 ) is given by (61), evaluated at the new equilibrium cutoﬀ.
For the value of waiting we first use the fact that a firm that is indiﬀerent between upgrading at MFN it
will never want to upgrade under column 2 to obtain
                                                        £                                                    ¤
           Π (2 =0                                                                          
                            ) = (2 =0   ) +  22 Π (2 =1    ) + 2 Π (    )
                                    P                                 2
                                  = ∞                       
                                      =0 (22 ) (2    ) +           Π (  
                                                                                           )
                                                                    1 − 22
which we replace in the value of waiting at MFN


                                   £   £ 1−                      ¤                                                     ¤
Π (  
             ) = (  ) +  0      Π (0                                                          
                                                        ) −  +  Π (    ) + 2 Π (2 =0    )
                                   "     £                          ¤ ³              2
                                                                                            ´                   #
                                     0  1− Π (0  
                                                          ) −  +  + 2 1−22 Π (    )
                                                                                                          
                   = (  ) +                               P∞          
                                                          +2 =0 (22 ) (2    )
                     h                 ¡ 1−                      ¢        P                            i ¡     ¡         ¢¢
                                                                             ∞           
                   = (  ) + 0       Π (0  
                                                        ) −     + 2   =0 (22 )   (2  
                                                                                                     )  1 −  ̃ − 0




                                                            59
Using the indiﬀerence condition and (61), simplifying and solving for 
                                                                        we have


                      h                     P∞                     i        ¡    ¡        ¢¢
                                                        
   1− {(  ) +  0 Π (0  ) + 2 =0 (22 ) (2  ) } −  1 −  ̃ − 0
                                                    ¡                         ¢       P∞           
                                 = (  ) + 0  1− Π (0   ) −  + 2
                                                                                                             
                                                                                        =0 (22 ) (2   )


                      ¡ 1−      ¢³                   P∞                      ´ ¡         ¢
                                                                    
                           − 1 (  ) + 2 =0 (22 ) (2  ) = 1 −  ̃ 
                                            "         P∞                #
                                                                    
                             ¡ 1−        ¢             =0 (22 ) 2
                                                                                  ¡       ¢
                                  − 1 1 + 2                          1− = 1 −  ̃ 
                                                             
                        ¡ 1−      ¢            "          P∞                 #
                                                                         
                           − 1 (1 − )            2 =0 (22 ) 2
                                     ¡        ¢ 1+             P∞              = −1
                      (1 − )       1 −  ̃       1−         =0  
                               ∙               µ                ¶¸ −1
                                                                    1
                                    1−            2 ()                 
                                                1+           ̃        
                                                                           = 
                                                                                   
                                 1 −  ̃ ()       1 − 22                
                               |                  {z                  }
                                                (̃)


where  (̃ ) is the same expression we found for (31) so       
                                                               =  (̃) and the upgrade cutoﬀ shares
the properties of the entry cutoﬀ derived in Proposition 3.




                                                           60
A.5     Comparative statics (general equilibrium)
A.5.1    Eﬀect of trade costs on firm entry and price index

Here we derive the impact of tariﬀs and transport costs on the price index and firm entry. These are used
in the quantification section to provide an upper bound for the term  and to calculate the price eﬀect of
tariﬀs and transport cost to include in the GE advalorem equivalent of uncertainty calculation.
                          P∞                  ³  ´−1                   ³              ´
                 (1−22 ) =0 (22 ) 2                                        
Recall that  ≡                           ≤ 2        so  ≤ exp ( − 1) ln 2 . So we first provide a linear
                                                                                     
approximation to the growth in the deterministic price index due to the change in tariﬀs from MFN to column
2. We do so in the absence of upgrading and then argue that the expression is similar with upgrading (when
written as a function of export shares, which will reflect any upgrading). This is shown in section A.5.3 when
deriving the elasticities of  wrt cutoﬀs. A similar argument to the one in that section can be applied here.
                                                                                     ¡       ¢          ¡     ¢
Recall that we have an implicit solution to the system of  + 1 equations  c   and      for each
 so the total change due to the tariﬀ can be found as follows
                                                  ¡     ¢                        ¡       ¢
                          ¡       ¢ P  ln  c                      P  ln  c  
                    ln  c   =                        ln 
                                                                   +                      ln 
                                               ln                          ln 
                                      −+1 P                              P       
                                    =                              ln 
                                                                           +                  ln 
                                        (1 − )        Σ                       Σ  
            P
where  ≡    . Below we derive the two partial elasticities used in the second line as follows.
Denote Ω  as the set of varieties in industry  produced by firms in country  = () () so
Ω = ∪  Ω  and the price index,  can then be written as
                      Z                             Z                                   Z
                                  1−       P                      1−       P
              1−
                   =        ( )      =               ( )       + 6=              ( )1− 
                       ∈Ω                                  ∈Ω                 ∈Ω 

Using the equilibrium price paid by consumers of imported goods,  = (    ), and the Pareto
                             ln  (c ( ) )
distribution we then obtain      ln  ( )
                                                 as follows
                                         

       ¡           ¢              "            Z                                                   Z                  #
 ln   ( )         1         P                              1−      −       P                       1−
                     =        ln               ((  )  )      ()      + 6=        ( )       ln 
                                                                                                                               
       ln 
                      1 −                   0                                                    ∈Ω
                                      "            Z                                     #
                         1            P                             1−      −
                     =          
                                                   ((  )  )      ()      
                                                                                              
                       1 −   1−              0
                                    ∙                                      ¸
                         1     
                                                      1−    ¡  ¢−
                     =                ((  )  )          
                       1 −   1−                         
                        −  + 1  
                     =
                         1−        
                                                                                                 R 
where the last line follows after using  =  (1 − ) (  )1−  − and  =        0
                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                        ()1−  () 
                                 ln  (c  )
The partial tariﬀ elasticity,        ln      | ,   is obtained as follows




                                                                 61
       ¡      ¢               "             Z                                             Z                   #
 ln            1         P               1
                                                                  1−            P                        1−
                =         ln              ((  )  )      () + 6=          ( )       ln 
     ln        1−                        0                                               ∈Ω 
                                  "             Z                              #
                     1           P              1
                                                                       1−
                =           1−               ((  )  )      () 
                  1 −                         0
                              Z 
                     1           1
                = 1−             ((  )  )1−  ()
                             0
                   
                =
                     
                                                                   1−                             R  1−
where the last line follows after using  =  (1 − ) (  )          − and  =   0 1 ()        () 

Weighted eﬀect of tariﬀ on cutoﬀ

                                                     ¡        ¢                     ¡        ¢
                                 ¡        ¢  ln                      ln     
                           ln      =                     ln  +                       ln 
                                                   ln                          ln  
              P              ¡        ¢   − P          
                         ln      =                        ln  +  ln 
                 Σ                      −1          Σ  

Impact of tariﬀs on 
Replacing the cutoﬀ eﬀect above in the price expression and simplifying
                                            µ                                        ¶
                        ¡     ¢ −+1          − P                                    P     
                  ln  c   =                                   ln  +  ln  +               ln 
                                   (1 − )    −1        Σ                               Σ  
               ∙              ¸             µ                               ¶
      ¡      ¢      −+1         −+1        − P                          P      
 ln  c   1 −              =                                  ln  +                ln 
                     (1 − )       (1 − )    −1        Σ                      Σ  
                                  ∙µ       ¶              ¸
                        ¡     ¢       −     −+1                        P      
                  ln  c   =                       +1                    
                                                                               P    ln 
                                     −1      (1 − )       1 −  −+1
                                                                   (1−)           

If we evaluated the change starting at the MFN values and increasing to column 2 we obtain
                                       ∙                       ¸
                     ¡           ¢           ( −  + 1) +  − 1 P             2
                ln  c ( )   | = −1                        P            ln
                                          ( −  + 1)  +  − 1                



Impact of transport cost on 
                                                  ln  (  )        ln  (  )              ¡        ¢
This can be similarly found if we note that          ln         =       ln         and  ln      | = − ln  +
 ln  , so
                                                  µ                                       ¶
                           ¡        ¢ −+1             P                                P    
                     ln  c   d =              −  P               ln  +  ln  +   P         ln 
                                         (1 − )                                              
                  ∙                 ¸ µ                           ¶
      ¡         ¢         −+1           P                        
 ln  c   d 1 −                 =  P               ln 
                           (1 − )                               − 1
                                       ∙                           ¸
                           ¡       ¢                                P       
                     ln  c   d =                                 P             ln 
                                         ( −  + 1)  + ( − 1)               




                                                            62
A.5.2    Eﬀect of policy uncertainty on firm entry and price index

In equation (36) we provide the semi-elasticity of the price index wrt  as a function of  ≡  ln  (c)  ln 
                                                                                                                 .
We now show that this is similar to the deterministic elasticity derived in section (A.5.1) and then use it
to to obtain the relationship between  () and  in terms of model parameters and data. We first do so in
the absence of upgrading and then show that the expression is similar with upgrading (when written as a
function of export shares). We also use the expression to evaluate the GE impact of changes in uncertainty
on entry.
Denote Ω  as the set of varieties in industry  produced by firms in country  = () () so
Ω = ∪  Ω  and the price index,  can then be written as
                    Z                        Z                             Z
                                       P                          P
             1− =      ( )1−  =           ( )1−  + 6=      ( )1− 
                       ∈Ω                         ∈Ω                           ∈Ω 

Using the equilibrium price paid by consumers of imported goods,  = (    ), and the Pareto
distribution we then obtain  as follows
                            "           Z                                            Z                  #
 ln  (c)          −1       P                         1−      −       P                    1−
           = (1 − )  ln               (   )      ()      + 6=        ( )       ln 
                                                                                                                 
  ln 
                                      0                                             ∈Ω
                                "           Z                                 #
                    −1 
                                P                         1−      −
           = (1 − )                       (   )      ()      
                                                                                   
                        1−             0
                       ∙                                             ¸
                                            1− −  ¡  ¢−+1
           = (1 − )−1   (   ( ))              
                                                     

We then rearrange the equilibrium expression for exports
                                                                 
                                    =  − 1−
                                                 (
                                                    )
                                                      −+1
                                                             
                                                                         (  )1− 
                                                              −  + 1
                                                           
                      ( −  + 1)    =  (   )1−  −  ( )−+1 
                                                              

Using the above relationship we obtain a compact expression for the price index elasticity

                                              ln  (c)     −  + 1  
                                       ≡          
                                                        =−                                                          (65)
                                               ln         −1       



Semi-elasticity of  wrt 
                                                                                  
Using the expression for  derived above in (36) and noting that ̃ ≡        (1−Σ  )   we obtain
                              ¯
                ln  (c ) ¯¯             2          P
                              ¯    =                       ̃ (̃ − 1)
                             =0   ( − 1) (1 − 22 )
                                                                   −+1  
                                             2         P         (1−)    
                                  =                                        P           (̃ − 1)
                                      ( − 1) (1 − 22 )         −+1     
                                                              1−   (1−)      
                                             2              ( −  + 1) 
                                  =                                              Σ  (1 − ̃ )
                                      ( − 1) (1 − 22 ) ( −  + 1)  +  − 1
                                                                                                                ¯
                                                                                                     ln  (c ) ¯
where  ≡ Σ 
                
                  
                        and  ≡       
                                      Σ     . Thus a necessary and suﬃcient condition for                ¯      
    P                                                                                                              =0
0 is   (1 − ̃ ) |=0  0.



                                                         63
Semi-elasticity of entry wrt 

                                  ∙                               ¸¯
P          ln 
                       P             ln  (̃ )  ln  (c ) ¯¯
               |=0 =                       +               ¯
                                                                =0
                         P             2                             2              ( −  + 1)     P
                     =                          (̃ − 1) +                                              (1 − ̃ )
                                ( − 1) (1 − 22 )             ( − 1) (1 − 22 ) ( −  + 1)  +  − 1 
                                           µ                             ¶
                              2                     ( −  + 1)        P
                     =                      1−                                 (̃ − 1)
                       ( − 1) (1 − 22 )      ( −  + 1)  +  − 1




                                                         64
A.5.3       Eﬀect of policy uncertainty on upgrading and price index

We split the price index into the subcomponents depending on the country of origin and industry (1st line
below). In the second line we further divide the foreign varieties in to the endogenous set of firms that
upgrades (Ω ), since they will have lower equilibrium prices and the remaining set of firms (Ω \ Ω ).

                      Z                                      Z                                         Z
            1−                       1−          P                       1−          P                               1−
                 =          ( )           =                   ( )      +        6=            ( )         
                      ∈Ω                                    ∈Ω                                   ∈Ω 
                                 "Z                                Z                              #                  Z
                      P                               1−                                1−               P                               1−
                  =                       ( )          +                     ( )      +        6=                 ( )         
                                  ∈Ω                         ∈Ω \Ω                                      ∈Ω 


Using the equilibrium price,  = (    ) for the non-upgraders and  (    ) for the upgraders,
as well as the Pareto distribution we obtain  at a state such as the MFN one where the cutoﬀs are
        
  =  (we omit the  and  subscripts for the technological parameters for notational simplicity)
             ¯                        "      (Z                                           Z                               )#
  ln  (c) ¯¯             −1 
                                 
                                                 
                                                                       1−       −                           1−      −
             ¯ = (1 − )  1−                      (   )       ()       +       (   )      ()       
                                                                                                                                    
   ln 
              c                               0                                          

                                      "                           (        Z                Z            )#
                                 
                           −1                          1−        1−             −                 −
                  = (1 − )                 (   )                      ()      +        ()        
                               1−                                      0                    
                                    ∙                            n                                                       ¸
                           −1   1                      1−       1−
                                                                         ¡  ¢−+1 ¡  ¢−+1 ¡  ¢−+1 o
                  = (1 − )                 (   )                          +            − 
                               1− 
                    ∙                                                         ¸
                                                    1− −  ¡  ¢−+1
                  = (1 − )−1   (   ( ))                           
                                                             
                           ¡          ¢
where  = 1 + ( )1−+ 1− − 1 and the expression in brackets the same we derived for  | =1 , i.e.
without upgrading so  =  | =1  . This implies that the price elasticity wrt each cutoﬀ is higher under
upgrading. Since we also have that exports with upgrading can be written similarly:  =  | =1  we
obtain the same general expression for the elasticity when written in terms of the export value
                                                                                        −  + 1  
                                              ≡  ln  (c)  ln 
                                                                     |c = −
                                                                                         −1       
Semi-elasticity of  wrt  under upgrading
 depends on  only via  so  ln  is the same as derived without upgrading but now  reflects any
upgrading that took place, as embodied in  , that is we still obtain
                            ¯
              ln  (c ) ¯¯             2              ( −  + 1)      P
                            ¯    =                                               (1 − ̃ )
                           =0   ( − 1) (1 − 22 ) ( −  + 1)  +  − 1
            P
                 
where  ≡             and the tariﬀ inclusive import weights evaluated under the MFN state are defined
as  ≡ Σ 
               
Semi-elasticity of entry and upgrading wrt 
We also obtain a similar expression in terms of export revenues as in the absence of upgrading for the
weighted semi-elasticity of entry with respect to uncertainty
                          ¯       µ                           ¶
        P         ln   ¯
                        ¯                 ( −  + 1)             2         P
                      ¯     =  1 −                                                (̃ − 1)
                         =0          ( −  + 1)  +  − 1 ( − 1) (1 − 22 ) 

which also applies to the upgrading cutoﬀ since       
                                                  =  .




                                                                           65
B     Data and Estimation Appendix
B.1    Data sources and definitions
Change in Ad valorem Tariﬀs ∆ Log change in 1 plus the statutory ad-valorem MFN tariﬀ rate
    aggregated to the HS6 level between 2005 and 2000. Source: TRAINS via WITS download.
Change in AVE Tariﬀs ∆ Log change in 1 plus the advalorem equivalent (AVE) of the MFN tariﬀ
    rate at the HS6 level between 2005 and 2000. For specific tariﬀs, the AVE is given by the ratio of unit
    duty to the average 1996 import unit value. Source: TRAINS for tariﬀ rates and COMTRADE for
    unit values, via WITS download.
Column 2 Tariﬀ 2 Log of 1 plus the column 2 (Smoot-Hawley) tariﬀ rate at the HS6 level. For specific
    tariﬀs at the HS8, base year unit values from 1996 used for all years to compute the AVE tariﬀ and
    then average at the HS6 level. Source: TRAINS for tariﬀ rates and COMTRADE for unit values, via
    WITS download.
                                                                     ³     ´−
Pre-WTO Uncertainty Measure of uncertainty from the model 1 −      2
                                                                               computed using year 2000
    column 2 and MFN tariﬀ rates for ad-valorem and AVE tariﬀ rates respectively.
Change in Transport Costs ∆ Log change in the ratio of trade values inclusive of costs, insurance
    and freight (CIF) to free on board value (FOB). Source: CIF/FOB ratios constructed at HS6 level
    using disaggregated data from Center for International Data (http://cid.econ.ucdavis.edu/)
Change in TTBs Indicators for temporary trade barriers in-force including anti-dumping duties, counter-
    vailing duties, special safeguards, and China-specific special safeguards. Data are aggregated up to
    HS6 level. Source: World Bank Temporary Trade Barriers Database (Bown, 2012)
Change in MFA Indicators for in-force Multi-Fiber Agreement on Textiles and Clothing (MFA/ATC)
    quotas aggregated to the HS6 level and concorded through time. Source: Brambilla et al. (2010)
    available at http://faculty.som.yale.edu/peterschott/sub_international.htm
Change in No. of HS-10 Traded Products Change in log count of traded HS10 products within each
    HS6 industry from 2000 to 2005. Source: disaggregated data from Center for International Data
    (http://cid.econ.ucdavis.edu/)




                                                    66
B.2     Double diﬀerence specification
If there is a growth rate trend in the number of firms in an industry that is industry specific, ∆ (ln  ) =  ,
and  is correlated with our policy or trade cost variables, then identification is still possible via a diﬀerence-
of-diﬀerences approach. We illustrate this using the mass of firms but the variables in  could also be allowed
to have industry specific time trends. This yields the following long diﬀerence
                                         Ã        µ         ¶− !
                                                      2
                  ∆0 ln  =              1−                     +  ∆ ln  +  ∆ ln  +  +  + 
                                                      
where ∆0 is subscripted to denote the diﬀerence over a transition from  to 0.
Now consider taking the diﬀerence between two years that remain in state . For example, if the diﬀerence
above uses 2000 () and 2005 (0) and we will now use the diﬀerence between 1999() and 1996() and
denote it by ∆
                                         Ã        µ         ¶− !
                                                      2
         ∆ ln  = −∆ 0             1−                        +  ∆ ln  +  ∆ ln  + 0 +  + 0               (66)
                                                      
Since both our uncertainty measure and the estimated parameters on the uncertainty measure could change
over time, we denote the parameter on uncertainty by 0 and note that there are two components to the
change in the first term
                       Ã      µ         ¶− !                    Ã        µ         ¶− !       Ã    µ         ¶− !
                                  2                                         2                        2
           −∆ 0     1−                      =     −0 ∆      1−                      −   1−                     ∆ 0
                                                                                                   
The second term is evaluated at final period³tariﬀs,
                                                   ´ which are very close to 2000 levels. Because 2 is
fixed during this period and any variation in 
                                                2
                                                     is due to small changes in  , already controlled by
                           µ    ³     ´− ¶
∆ ln  , we take ∆ 1 −    2
                                            ≈ 0 to obtain

           Ã      µ         ¶− !        Ã        µ         ¶− !
                      2                             2
−∆ 0     1−                     ≈− 1−                           ∆ 0
                                                   
                                         Ã        µ         ¶− !                            Ã   µ      ¶− !
                                                      2             −  + 1 2      0          2             0
                                    =− 1−                                           ∆  =− 1−                 ∆  
                                                                    −1 1−                             

We then take the double diﬀerence, normalizing each diﬀerenced RHS variable by the length of the time
period to obtain magnitudes comparable to our first diﬀerenced results

                                                               µ  ³      ´− ¶
                              µ                               ¶ 1− 
                                                                    µ 2                    ¶
                                          0
   ∆0 ln    ∆ ln            ∆                              ∆0 ln 
                                                                                ∆ ln 
             −           =  1 +                              +              −                                                (67)
       5          3                                5                    5          3
                              µ                         ¶
                                ∆0 ln      ∆ ln 
                         +                −             +  − 0 +  − 0                                                    (68)
                                    5            3

The coeﬃcients from estimating the double diﬀerence equation (68) have the same interpretation as our
baseline regression. The sample size drops since we can only use HS6 industries traded in 2005, 2000, 1999,
and 1996. Further, the double diﬀerenced variables are somewhat noisy so we employ a robust regression
routine that downweights outliers more than 7 times the median absolute deviation from the median residuals,
iterating until convergence.




                                                                     67
B.3     Decomposition of policy credibility eﬀect into mean and risk
Here we provide the analysis summarized in section 3.6 regarding the fraction of export growth due to the
agreement attributable to a mean preserving tariﬀ risk reduction. We first decompose the impact in any
given industry of an agreement that permanently changes tariﬀs from  to 0 into two components:

                                     (0  0 )       (0   )        (0  0 )
                               ln                 = ln                + ln                                     (69)
                                     (   )       (   )        (0   )
                                                    |     {z        }
                                                         Credibility

where we write the exports as a reduced form function of the uncertainty parameter,  , and applied tariﬀ
vector,  , in a given state. Exports also depend on the threat tariﬀs but those are common across states
so we omit them. The RHS follows by addition and subtraction of ln  (0   ), the counterfactual export
value if applied tariﬀs under the agreement (i.e. at 0 ) were  instead of 0 . This permits us to interpret
the first term as a credibility eﬀect of the agreement: the export growth from making pre-agreement tariﬀs
permanent. The second term captures the eﬀect of any applied tariﬀ reductions that occur after WTO entry
when uncertainty has been reduced. In this application 0 ≈  so the second term is small–less than 2 log
points on average. We can decompose the credibility eﬀect as follows
                                                           ∙                                    ¸
                          (0   )       (0  ̄ )       (0   )       (   )
                      ln               = ln               + ln               − ln                         (70)
                          (   )       (  ̄ )       (0  ̄ )       (  ̄ )
where ̄ is the vector representing the long-run mean of the tariﬀ in each industry. So the first term is the
growth in exports due to credibly setting tariﬀs permanently at their long-run mean, i.e. a mean preserving
compression in tariﬀs. If the initial tariﬀ  was at the long-run mean then all of the credibility eﬀect would
be accounted for by the risk reduction. However, if the initial tariﬀs are below the long-run mean then the
agreement will have an additional eﬀect of locking in lower mean tariﬀs. The latter eﬀect is captured by
the term in brackets and is positive because permanent reductions in tariﬀs relative to the mean–the first
term–have larger eﬀect on exports than temporary ones–the second term.
We quantify the risk reduction term, ln  (  (0 ̄ )
                                                    ̄ )
                                                           , by using the partial eﬀect expression in (47) evaluated
at the mean tariﬀ for each industry,̄ . In order to compute the mean tariﬀ we require two additional
assumptions. First, that the column 2 state is absorbing (22 = 1) so starting at  the long-run mean is
̄ = 00           2
          +2 0 + 0 +2 2 , reflecting the probability of going into an agreement relative to a trade war
conditional on abandoning the temporary MFN policy. Second, to compute ̄ we must consider alternative
odds of the agreement relative to trade war state. In our baseline we consider 0 2 = 2, which yields ̄
ranging from 1 to 2.04 with an average of 115 and implies an average export growth of 10 log points due to
tariﬀ risk reduction. Recalling that the average partial eﬀect was about 26 log points (Table 7), we see that
the risk reduction component is almost 40 percent of that value. For alternative odds of entering the WTO
vs. a trade war of 3:1 and 1:1, we find the total growth from risk reduction is between 7 and 15 log points.




                                                           68
B.4     Entry specification and quantification
Specification
The change in the number of exported varieties is unobserved to us and so we treat it as a latent variable and
model how it maps to observable changes in exported products. We assume there is a continuous, increasing,
diﬀerentiable function  (·) that maps varieties to product counts: ln ( ) =  (ln  ). If there was
only one firm in an HS-6 industry and it produced a single variety then we would observe one traded product
(an HS-10 category) in an industry. We cannot observe more traded products than the maximum number
tracked by customs in each industry, i.e. the total number of HS-10 categories in an HS-6. So clearly we
have a lower bound  (ln  = 0) = 0 and an upper bound ln (max      ) =  (ln  ) for all ln  at least
as high as ln  –the (unobserved) threshold where all HS-10 product categories in an HS-6 industry have
positive values. If we assume product counts and varieties are continuous, then  0 ≥ 0 for  ∈ (0  ) and
zero otherwise. The weak inequality accounts for the possibility that diﬀerent firms export within the same
HS-10 category so there is true increase in variety that is not reflected in new HS-10 categories traded. We
log linearize the equation of product counts around ln −1 . Then the change in products between  and
and  − 1 is ∆ ln ( ) ≈  0 (ln −1 ) ∆ ln  . Therefore, if we use the growth in the product count
as a proxy for variety entry we can identify the coeﬃcients in (48) up to a factor,  0 , if that factor is similar
across industries. This implies
                                        Ã     µ       ¶− !
                                                2
                  ∆ ln ( ) =  1 −                  +  ∆ ln  +  ∆ ln  +  +                 (71)
                                                

The estimation coeﬃcients obtained from a linear regression rescale the parameters in (48) by  0 . The
                                     2                 − 0
predicted coeﬃcients are  = −1            0                                    0
                                     1−22  ≥ 0,  = −1  ≤ 0 and  = − ≤ 0 and the constant
         ¡        ¢       
 = − 1 −  −1 +  0 −1 ∆ ln . The weak inequalities capture the possibility that  0 = 0.
In going from this specification to the data, we account for the maximum number of tradable products
within each HS6. We use this information to impose sample restrictions on the regression consistent with
our specification of the  () function. We drop observations if an industry already trades the maximum
number of products available at the beginning and end of the sample — a “max-to-max” transition where
 0 = 0— as well as industries that are non-traded throughout the sample — “zero-to-zero” transitions. This
means we have a symmetric sample restriction at the upper and lower bounds suggested by our mapping .
In estimating the log changes specification we must focus only on the industries with some traded product
in both periods, which is what we also did in the baseline trade flow regression. The estimates are in Table
8.

Quantification
To compute the average change in tariﬀs that would deliver the same expected growth in exported vari-
eties as the uncertainty removal by rearranging E (∆ ln  )  ln 
                                                                ln  = E (∆ ln  ) | in terms of estimated
parameters and data:
                      Ã      µ       ¶− !                  µ         ¶−1        Ã         µ      ¶− !
                                 2              2         −                           2
    E (∆ ln  ) =   −1 −                                             =   −1 −                     
                                         − 1 1 − 22      −1                           

To compute the impact of uncertainty we first obtain an estimate of  0 using the cross equation restriction
implied by the model  0 =   = 04926 = 019, where  is obtained from the baseline export equation
used for quantification
              µ         (column¶4, Table 2). We compute the general equilibrium impact of uncertainty on
         
                      ³     ´−
                −1      2
entry as  0 E  −              +  (ln 0  ) | 




                                                         69
                                                Table 1
                           Summary statistics by pre-WTO policy uncertainty
                                                             Uncertainty
                                                                  Low                High               Total


Chinese export growth to US (Δln, 2005-2000)                      1.18             1.36***               1.29
                                                                 [1.788]            [1.603]            [1.672]
MFN tariff (ln), 2000                                             0.028              0.044              0.039
                                                                 [0.036]            [0.048]            [0.045]
Column 2 tariff (ln), 2000                                        0.158              0.393              0.311
                                                                 [0.096]            [0.116]            [0.156]
                                                   1
Potential profit loss in worst case (pre WTO)                     0.303              0.636               0.52
                                                                 [0.175]            [0.086]            [0.202]
Change in MFN tariff (Δln)                                       -0.002             -0.004             -0.003
                                                                 [0.007]            [0.010]            [0.009]
Change in transport costs (Δln)                                   -0.01             -0.002             -0.005
                                                                 [0.100]            [0.079]            [0.087]
Observations                                                      1080               1080               3242
Notes:
Means with standard deviations in brackets.
Low and High refer to the bottom and top tercile of each variable. Total includes the full sample used in baseline
Table 2.
*** Difference of means between High and Low export growth significant at 1% level
                                                 Table 2
                                   Export Growth from China (2000-2005)
                                             1             2                               3                 4

Uncertainty Pre-WTO                          0.682***         0.731***                0.687***          0.703***
[+]                                           [0.158]          [0.154]                 [0.186]           [0.185]
Change in Tariff (Δln)                       -9.702**         -3.969***                 -6.608          -3.894***
[-]                                           [4.473]           [0.702]                [5.057]           [0.704]
Change in Transport Costs (Δln)             -2.556***         -2.646***               -2.562***         -2.596***
[-]                                           [0.474]           [0.468]                [0.474]           [0.469]
Constant                                     0.895***          0.887***
                                             [0.0881]          [0.0877]


Observations                                   3,242             3,242                  3,242             3,242
R-squared                                       0.03                .                   0.05                .
Sector Fixed Effects                             no                no                    yes               yes
Restriction p-value (F-test)                   0.195                1                   0.588               1
Notes:
Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. Predicted sign of coefficient in brackets under
variable.
Uncertainty measure uses U.S. MFN and Column 2 Tariffs to construct profit loss measure at σ=3
All specifications employ OLS and 2 and 4 impose theoretical constraint on tariffs and transport cost coefficients:
bτ=bd(σ/(σ-1)).
Sectors defined as each of the 21 HS sections comprising similar HS6 products.
                                                     Table 3
                       Export Growth from China (2000-2005): Robustness to Non Tariff Barriers
                                        1              2                3                4                                   5
                     Specification: Baseline      +MFA/TTB        +Section FE        IV (TTB)                            Constrained


Uncertainty Pre-WTO                      0.682***            0.624***            0.688***             0.694***            0.709***
[+]                                        [0.158]             [0.156]             [0.186]              [0.185]             [0.184]
Change in Tariff (Δln)                    -9.702**             -8.791*              -7.47                 -7.61           -3.948***
[-]                                        [4.473]             [4.546]             [5.057]              [5.046]             [0.700]
Change in Transport cost (Δln)           -2.556***           -2.548***           -2.588***            -2.596***           -2.632***
[-]                                        [0.474]             [0.470]             [0.471]              [0.469]             [0.466]
Change in MFA quota status                                     -0.171*            -0.311**             -0.311**            -0.303**
                                                               [0.100]             [0.136]              [0.136]             [0.135]
Change in TTB status                                          -0.831**           -0.913***               -1.303           -0.908***
                                                               [0.332]             [0.339]              [0.902]             [0.338]
Constant                                 0.895***            0.912***
                                         [0.0881]             [0.0874]

Observations                               3,242                3,242               3,242               3,242               3,242
R-squared                                  0.028                0.033               0.054
Sector Fixed Effects                         no                   no                 yes                 yes                    yes
F-stat, 1st Stage                                                                                       10.2
Over-ID restriction (p-value)                                                                           0.566
Restriction p-value (F-test)               0.195                0.281               0.482               0.466                    1
Notes:
Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. Predicted sign of coefficient in brackets under variable.
Specifications 1-3 employ OLS and 5 impose theoretical constraint on tariffs and transport cost coefficients: bτ=bd(σ/(σ-1)).
Specification 4 employs IV. Excluded instruments for Change in TTB are TTB indicators for 1998 and 1997.
Uncertainty measure uses U.S. MFN and Column 2 Tariffs to construct profit loss measure at σ=3
                                                    Table 4
                            Export Growth from China: Panel (1996-2006)
                                                                1                                  2
Uncertainty Pre-effect (1996-2001)                                                            -1.883**
[-bγpre<0]                                                                                     [0.926]
Uncertainty Post-effect (2002-2006)                                                             -1.208
[-bγpost~0]                                                                                    [0.933]
Uncertainty (2000)
     Coefficient relative to 2000 b γ=-(bγt-bγ2000)
                         1996                                -0.211
                         [~0]                               [0.268]
                         1997                               0.0277
                         [~0]                               [0.222]
                         1998                                -0.204
                         [~0]                               [0.166]
                         1999                               0.0775
                         [~0]                               [0.188]
                         2000                                   .

                         2001                                       0.22
                                                                  [0.192]
                         2002                                     0.458**
                          [+]                                     [0.182]
                         2003                                     0.621**
                          [+]                                     [0.299]
                         2004                                    0.724***
                          [+]                                     [0.216]
                         2005                                    0.846***
                          [+]                                     [0.247]
                         2006                                    0.789***
                          [+]                                     [0.291]
Tariff (ln)                                                      -5.358***                   -7.618***
[-]                                                               [1.929]                     [1.990]
Transport Costs (ln)                                             -2.378***                   -2.384***
[-]                                                               [0.223]                     [0.225]
Observations                                                       37,360                      37,347
R-squared                                                           0.03                        0.03
HS6 & Sector by year fixed effects                                   yes                         yes
Restriction p-value (F-test)                                        0.382                       0.046
Notes:
Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering on HS6 and sector-year, in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
Predicted sign of coefficient in brackets under variable. Uncertainty measure uses U.S. MFN and Column 2
Tariffs to construct profit loss measure at σ=3. All specifications employ OLS. In column 1, uncertainty measure
is fixed at 2000 level and interacted with year indicators (omitting 2000). Sectors defined as each of the 21 HS
sections comprising similar HS6 products.
                                              Table 5
                        Export Growth from China (2000-2005): NLLS Estimates
                     estimation method    OLS          NLLS              OLS                             NLLS

Uncertainty (pre-WTO) ¹                       0.646***          0.823***              0.542***           0.668**
[+]                                             [0.149]          [0.305]               [0.184]           [0.338]
Change in Tariff (ln)                         -6.376***         -6.594***             -6.186***         -6.302***
[-]                                             [1.246]          [1.242]               [1.249]           [1.248]
Change in Transport Costs (ln)                -4.251***         -4.396***             -4.124***         -4.202***
[-]                                             [0.831]          [0.828]               [0.833]           [0.832]
constant                                      0.908***          1.579***
                                               [0.0844]          [0.106]

Observations                                    3,074             3,074                 3,074             3,074
R-squared                                                          0.02                                    0.04
Sector Fixed Effects                              no                no                    yes              yes
No. coefficients estimated                         3                 3                    23                23
Restriction test σ=3 (p-value)                    n/a              0.14                   n/a              0.97
Notes
Standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. Predicted sign of coefficient in brackets under
variable.
Sample: All specifications exclude transport cost outliers, as measured by changes in costs more than three times the
interquartile range value beyond the top or bottom quartile value of the baseline sample.
All specifications impose constraint from theory: tariff/transport cost=σ/(σ-1)
1) Uncertainty measure uses U.S. MFN (τm) and Column 2 tariffs (τ2) to construct the profit loss measure. This is
approximated by 1-(τm/τ2)σ under OLS. For the NLLS we do not approximate and use instead the general function
ln(1+b*(τm/τ2)σ) where b is estimated. The estimates from NLLS are then transformed via the delta method using the
model restrictions as described in the text to compute a parameter comparable to the one in the linear specification.
The four specifications in the columns restrict σ=3. We test this by relaxing the restriction in two additional NLLS
specifications; the results in the last line show the p-value at which we can't reject the restriction.
                                                         Table 6
                                  Contribution of Policy Uncertainty to Export Growth
                                                                          Upper bound                Partial            GE

Average export growth from lower uncertainty (Δln)                                   0.37             0.34             0.32

Ad Valorem transport cost equivalent of uncertainty (Δ ln)                           0.14             0.13             0.13

Ad Valorem tariff equivalent of uncertainty (Δln)                                    0.094            0.088            0.086

Notes:
Quantification uses estimates from column 4 of Table 2
The upper bound column assumes no price index effects, which are incorporated in the partial and general equilibrium (GE)
Sectors defined as each of the 21 HS sections comprising similar HS6 products.
                                                   Table 7
                    Contribution of Policy Uncertainty to Export Growth: NLLS estimates
                                                              Upper bound      Partial                       GE

Average export growth from lower uncertainty (Δln)                       0.29             0.26              0.22

Ad Valorem transport cost equivalent of uncertainty (Δln)                0.07             0.06              0.06

Ad Valorem tariff equivalent of uncertainty (Δln)                        0.04             0.04              0.04

Notes:
Quantification uses NLLS estimates from column 2 of Table 5. The upper bound column assumes no price index effects,
which are incorporated in the partial and general equilibrium (GE) columns, as described in the text.
                                                      Table 8
                                       Variety Growth from China (2000-2005)
                                              1              2                                   3                  4

Uncertainty Pre-WTO                        0.253***           0.280***                      0.240***           0.256***
[+]                                         [0.0731]           [0.0711]                      [0.0890]           [0.0885]
Change in Tariff (Δln)                      -2.680**          -0.729***                       -2.263*          -0.733***
[-]                                          [1.291]            [0.245]                       [1.346]            [0.240]
Change in Transport cost (Δln)             -0.440***          -0.486***                     -0.461***          -0.489***
[-]                                          [0.165]            [0.163]                       [0.162]            [0.160]

Observations                                 1,227               1,227                        1,227               1,227
R-squared                                    0.024                  .                         0.061                 .
Sector Fixed Effects                           no                  no                          yes                 yes
Restriction p-value (F-test)                 0.12                   1                         0.246                 1
Notes:
Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. Predicted sign of coefficient in brackets under variable.
All specifications employ OLS and 2 and 4 impose theoretical constraint on tariffs and transport cost coefficients: bτ=bd(σ/(σ-
1)). Constant included but not reported.
The variety growth used as a dependent variable is measured by the ln change in the number of HS-10 products in a given each
HS6.
Sample: All regressions drop max-to-max transitions - observations at the maximum number of tradable HS-10 varieties at
beginning and end of period - and zero-to-zero transitions that are non-traded throughout the sample period.
                                              Table A1
                          Summary Statistics Across Regression Specifications

                                                Table:       1-4, A2-3              A4                 8,A7

Chinese export growth to US (Δln, 2005-2000)                     1.29               1.25                n/a
                                                               [1.672]            [1.678]
Uncertainty Pre-WTO (2000)                                       0.52               0.52                0.52
                                                               [0.202]            [0.226]             [0.193]
Change in Tariff (Δln)                                          -0.003             -0.006              -0.005
                                                             [0.00884]           [0.0213]            [0.0114]
Change in Transport Costs (Δln)                                 -0.005            -0.0055              -0.007
                                                              [0.0870]           [0.0881]            [0.0861]
Change in MFA quota status (binary)                             -0.129             -0.119                n/a
                                                               [0.335]            [0.324]
Change in TTB status (binary)                                 0.00802             0.0075                n/a
                                                               [0.124]            [0.123]
Product growth                                                    n/a                n/a               0.352
                                                                                                      [0.463]

Observations                                                   3,242               3,599               1,227
Fraction of total export growth                                0.976               0.998               0.262
Notes:
Mean and [standard deviation] for variables. See referenced table and text for detailed information about sample and
variable definitions. "n/a": not applicable since variable not used in the corresponding table.
                                            Table A2
           Export Growth from China (2000-2005): robustness across elasticity of substitution
                                        1              2                      3               4
                                                                σ=2

Uncertainty Pre-WTO (σ=2)                  0.791***         0.839***                 0.799***          0.810***
[+]                                         [0.192]          [0.188]                  [0.227]           [0.224]
Change in Tariff (Δln)                     -9.741**         -5.288***                  -6.707         -5.170***
[-]                                         [4.479]          [0.927]                  [5.057]           [0.932]
Change in Transport Costs (Δln)           -2.552***         -2.644***                -2.559***        -2.585***
[-]                                         [0.474]          [0.464]                  [0.475]           [0.466]
constant                                   0.934***         0.928***
                                           [0.0829]         [0.0826]

Observations                                 3,242            3,242                    3,242             3,242
R-squared                                    0.027                                      0.05
Sector Fixed Effects                           no               no                      yes               yes
Restriction p-value (F-test)                 0.311               1                     0.758               1

                                               1                2                        3                 4
                                                                           σ=4
Uncertainty Pre-WTO (σ=4)                 0.640***          0.686***                 0.642***         0.659***
[+]                                         [0.142]           [0.139]                 [0.169]          [0.167]
Change in Tariff (Δln)                     -9.702**         -3.527***                  -6.538         -3.464***
[-]                                         [4.466]           [0.625]                 [5.057]          [0.627]
Change in Transport Costs (Δln)           -2.558***         -2.645***                -2.564***        -2.598***
[-]                                         [0.474]           [0.469]                 [0.474]          [0.470]
                                          0.858***          0.849***
                                           [0.0927]          [0.0923]

Observations                                 3,242            3,242                    3,242             3,242
R-squared                                    0.028                                      0.05
Sector Fixed Effects                           no               no                      yes               yes
Restriction p-value (F-test)                 0.163               1                     0.541               1
Notes:
Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. Predicted sign of coefficient in brackets under
Uncertainty measure uses U.S. MFN and Column 2 Tariffs to construct profit loss measure at σ indicated in each panel
All specifications employ OLS and 2 and 4 impose theoretical constraint on tariffs and transport cost coefficients:
bτ=bd(σ/(σ-1)).
                                               Table A3
                       Export Growth from China (2000-2005): Robustness to outliers
                                            1              2                    3                               4

Uncertainty Pre-WTO                            0.499***           0.559***                0.514***         0.546***
[+]                                              [0.123]            [0.121]                [0.147]           [0.146]
Change in Tariff (Δln)                         -11.27***          -4.035***               -9.741***        -4.089***
[-]                                              [2.813]            [0.417]                [3.083]          [0.4155]
Change in Transport Costs (Δln)                -2.541***          -2.690***               -2.631***        -2.726***
[-]                                              [0.281]            [0.278]                [0.279]           [0.277]
Constant                                       0.866***           0.855***
                                                [0.0676]           [0.0677]

Observations                                     3,242              3,242                   3,242             3,242
R-squared                                         0.04                                       0.06
Sector Fixed Effects                               no                 no                     yes               yes
Notes:
Standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. Predicted sign of coefficient in brackets under variable.
Robust regression downweights outliers more than 7 times the median absolute deviation from the median residual. It
iterates first over Huber weights until convergence and then and Bi-weights.
Specifications 2 and 4 impose theoretical constraint on tariffs and transport cost coefficients: bτ=bd(σ/(σ-1)).
Uncertainty measure uses U.S. MFN and Column 2 Tariffs to construct profit loss measure at σ=3
                                                 Table A4
           Export Growth from China (2000-2005): Robustness to ad-valorem equivalent (AVE) tariffs
                                            1                2                    3                4

Uncertainty Pre-WTO                               0.901***             0.841***                  0.838***            0.770***
[+]                                                 [0.132]              [0.128]                  [0.152]             [0.148]
Change in AVE Tariff (Δln)                           -0.83             -3.398***                   -0.449            -3.386***
[-]                                                 [1.431]              [0.593]                  [1.533]             [0.602]
Change in Transport Costs (Δln)                   -2.491***            -2.266***                 -2.488***           -2.258***
[-]                                                 [0.431]              [0.395]                  [0.434]             [0.402]
Constant                                          0.762***             0.778***
                                                   [0.0748]             [0.0739]

Observations                                         3,599               3,599                     3,599               3,599
R-squared                                             0.03                                          0.06
Sector Fixed Effects                                   no                  no                       yes                  yes
Restriction p-value (F-test)                         0.067                  1                      0.051                  1
Notes:
Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. Predicted sign of coefficient in brackets under variable.
Uncertainty measure uses U.S. MFN statutory and Column 2 Tariffs to construct profit loss measure at σ=3. It uses both ad-
valorem and the AVE of specific tariffs.
All specifications employ OLS and 2 and 4 impose theoretical constraint on tariffs and transport cost coefficients: bτ=bd(σ/(σ-1)).
                                             Table A5
         Export Growth from China (2000-2005): Robustness to (zero inclusive) mid-point growth
                                      1               2                       3               4

Uncertainty Pre-WTO                         0.452***           0.460***                   0.438***            0.433***
[+]                                          [0.0914]           [0.0898]                   [0.110]             [0.109]
Change in Tariff (ln)                          -2.177          -1.128***                    -0.201            -1.072***
[-]                                           [1.981]            [0.304]                   [2.134]             [0.309]
Change in Transport Costs (ln)              -0.737***          -0.752***                  -0.724***           -0.715***
[-]                                           [0.206]            [0.203]                   [0.209]             [0.206]
constant                                    0.651***           0.651***
                                             [0.0523]           [0.0523]

Observations                                  3,766               3,766                     3,766               3,766
R-squared                                     0.014                                         0.035
Sector Fixed Effects                            no                  no                       yes                 yes
Restriction p-value (F-test)                  0.595                  1                      0.682                 1
Notes:
Standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. Predicted sign of coefficient in brackets under variable.
Midpoint growth of export level R is given by 2*(R(t)-R(t-1))/(R(t)+R(t-1)) for t=2005 and t-1=2000. Defined for all
exported 6 digit HS codes with positive exports in either the years 2000, 2005 or both.
Uncertainty measure uses U.S. MFN and Column 2 Tariffs to construct profit loss measure at σ=3
All specifications employ OLS and 2 and 4 impose theoretical constraint on tariffs and transport cost coefficients:
bτ=bd(σ/(σ-1)).
                                                         Table A6
                            Export growth from China: Robustness to Pre-Accession Growth Trends

                                                         1                          2                           3                    4
               Dependent variable (ln):        Annualized Difference in Export Growth                     Pre-Accession Export Growth
                                                      (2005-2000)/5-(1999-1996)/3                                    (1999-1996)



Uncertainty Pre-WTO (2000)                           0.504**                    0.410*
[+]                                                  [0.223]                    [0.225]
Uncertainty Pre-WTO (1996)                                                                                   0.0242               0.059
[~0]                                                                                                        [0.110]              [0.110]
Change in Tariff (Δln) ¹                            -7.226***                  -6.513***                   -4.566***            -4.410***
[-]                                                  [2.178]                    [2.191]                     [1.610]              [1.603]
Change in Transport Cost (Δln) ¹                    -3.249***                  -3.298***                   -3.425***            -3.440***
[-]                                                  [0.303]                    [0.303]                     [0.290]              [0.288]
Change in MFA quota status ¹                                                   -0.378***                                        0.462***
                                                                                [0.112]                                          [0.162]
Change in TTB status ¹                                                           -0.118                                           -0.205
                                                                                [0.218]                                          [0.306]

Observations                                          2,588                      2,588                       2,588                 2,588
R-squared                                             0.047                      0.052                       0.055                 0.058
Notes:
Standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. Predicted sign of coefficient in brackets under variable.
Robust regression employed to address potential effect of outliers or influential individual observations due to double differencing. The
estimation routine downweights outliers more than 7 times the median absolute deviation from the median residual. It iterates first over Huber
weights until convergence and then Bi-weights.
Uncertainty measure uses U.S. MFN and Column 2 Tariffs to construct profit loss measure at σ=3
(1) In columns 1 and 2 the change in tariff and transport cost variable represents double differences. In columns 3 and 4 they are single
differences. Similarly for MFA and TTB variables.
                                                 Table A7
                          Contribution of Policy Uncertainty to Variety Growth
                                                           Upper bound       Partial                     GE

Average entry from lower uncertainty (Δln)                            0.71             0.66              0.64

Ad Valorem transport cost equivalent of uncertainty (Δ ln)            0.27             0.25              0.26

Ad Valorem tariff equivalent of uncertainty (Δln)                     0.18             0.17              0.17

Notes:
Quantification uses estimates from column 4 of Table 8. The upper bound column assumes no price index effects,
which are incorporated in the partial and general equilibrium (GE) columns, as described in the text.
                                        Figure 1
China’s Export Growth 2000-2005 vs. US pre-WTO tariff threat: Non-parametric and Linear fit




                  2
                  1.5
                  1
                  .5




                        0               .2                .4                .6                .8


 Notes: Linear fit from OLS regression: export_growth=1.05 +0.92*ln(τ2/τMFN) where τ2 and τMFN are the column
 2 and MFN tariff factors in 2000; both coefficients are significant at the 1% level. The non-parametric fit uses a
 running-line least-squares smoothing (lowess).




                                          Figure 2
        Policy uncertainty impact on export entry and technology upgrade cost cutoffs



                                         Exporters              Non-Exporters

                                 Upgraded         Standard
                                  Tech.            Tech.

            Uncertainty
                                   cUmz= ߶cUm             cUm                c

           Deterministic
                                             cDmz= ߶cDm          cDm             c
                                                       Figure 3
                                    Deterministic policy price and entry equilibrium
P

    Ph
                                                                      Entry




                                         I


                                                                        Price index
        L
    P


    0
            0
                                                                                                 cDb
                 h
                P : limit with no foreign varieties sold
                PL: limit with all foreign varieties sold


                                                         Figure 4
                     Partial vs. general equilibrium effects of unanticipated permanent liberalization
P

    Ph                                                            Entry (τ2)




                                                                                 Entry (τm)


                                    I                            PE
        PI                                                       *


                                                                                  Price (τ2)
                                         GE
                                                                   Price (τm)
    0
            0
                                                                                                 cDb

                I: Initial equilibrium, PE: Equilibrium after tariff reduction in partial equilibrium
                GE: general equilibrium. Radial decrease: dln(τV)=δ<0 for all V.
                                               Figure 5
                   Transition dynamics after unanticipated permanent tariff increase
              P

                  Ph                                              Entry (τ2)



                                                                                        Entry (τm)
                                            2D

                  PTR                 2TR

                                                 mU
                                                 *                                                 Price (τ2)
                                                      mD
                                                                                    Price (τm)


                  0
                        0
                                                                                                      cDb, cUb
       mD: Initial MFN deterministic equilibrium, 2TR : lower bound cutoff and price after tariff increase dln(τV)=δ>0
       2TR →2D transition path after switch to column 2 until steady state mU: Uncertainty equilibrium (MFN)


                                                 Figure 6
     (Partial) effect of Policy Uncertainty on Export Growth 2000-05: Semi-parametric and Linear fit
                            2
                            1.5
                            1
                            .5




                                  0         .2               .4                .6             .8


Notes: Both fits regress export growth on changes in transport costs, tariffs and section dummies. The linear fit uses OLS and
also includes -(τ2/τMFN)-3, which the semi-parametric uses as an argument of the local polynomial estimated using the
Robinson (1988) semi-parametric estimator. We plot the fit against 1-(τ2/τMFN )-3 for ease of comparison with the uncertainty
variable used in the baseline.
                                                     Figure 7
                                   Aggregate Chinese Exports to U.S. 1996-2006:
                                 Observed and Counterfactual at Pre-WTO Uncertainty
                                                ($ billion, ln scale)




                                                                                                           $ 255
5.5



                                                                                                          $ 165




                                                 $ 105                                        Counterfactual
                                                                                         at Pre WTO Uncertainty

4.5




      $ 54


                                                                                  WTO/PNTR


3.5
   1996       1997        1998       1999       2000        2001       2002       2003         2004        2005     2006

             Notes: Observed exports from Commtrade. Counterfactual uses the panel estimates as described in text
                                         Notation Reference
    Symbol            Description                                                                       Section
          Q           CES subutility index                                                                2.1
          µ           share of income spend on dierentiated goods                                        2.1
         q0           quantity of homogeneous good                                                        2.1
          Ω           set of available dierentiated goods                                                2.1
          σ           elasticity of substitution                                                          2.1
         E            total expenditure on dierentiated goods                                            2.1
         pv           consumer price of variety v                                                         2.1
         P            price index for dierentiated goods                                                 2.1
        τV            tari for industry V                                                                2.1
         cv           unit labor cost for producer of variety v , the inverse of productivity (1/cv )     2.1
        we            wage in exporting country e                                                         2.1
        dV            advalorem transport cost for industry V                                             2.1
         p̃v          producer price of variety v                                                         2.1
         πv           operating prots                                                                    2.1
         A            Aggregate demand and supply conditions A ≡ (1 − ρ) E (we /P ρ)1−σ                   2.1
      K , Kz          sunk cost to start exporting or upgrading (z)                                       2.2
       asV            demand conditions for industry V in state s: asV ≡ AτsV −σ d1−σ   V                 2.2
      cD
       s , cs
             U
                      cost cuto for state s under deterministic (D) or uncertain policy (U)              2.2
          β           probability that the rm/entrepreneur will survive                                  2.2
Πe , Πez , Πw , Πwz   expected value function of exporting (e), waiting (w), or upgrading (·z )           2.2
        M             transition matrix                                                                   2.2
        tss0          transition probability
                                      h       from state s to si0 of transition matrix M                  2.2
        tm                              t0m
                      tm ≡ tmm + β tm0 1−βt 00
                                                      t2m
                                               + tm2 1−βt 22
                                                                                                          2.2
        t̃                                βt2m
                      t̃ ≡ 1 − tm2 + tm2 1−βt 22
                                                                                                          2.2
      Us              Uncertainty factor in state s aecting entry and upgrade cutos                     2.2
       γ              policy persistence parameter, γ ≡ 1 − tmm                                           2.2
       ω              Operating prot in col. 2 vs. MFN, partial equil.: ω ≡ (τ2 /τm )−σ                  2.2
       t2             probability of state s = 2 conditional on exiting MFN state                         2.2
       z              technology upgrade factor to marginal cost, z < 1                                   2.3
       φ              upgrade parameter (equilibrium ratio of upgrade and entry cuto)                    2.3
      kL              labor endowment                                                                     2.4
       N              mass of entrepreneurs                                                               2.4
       Xb             proportional changes in variable X                                                  2.4
     GV (c)           CDF of marginal cost in industry V                                                  2.4
      κV b            relative parameters of cost cuto in industry V to base industry b                  2.4
       εi             elasticity of price index wrt to variable i.                                        2.4
       µ̃             parameters of indirect utility function: µ̃ = we kL µµ (1 − µ)(1−µ)                 2.4
       T              time period since the negative tari shock                                          2.4
       ω̃             Operating prot in col. 2 vs. MFN, general equil.: ω ≡ (τ2 /τm )−σ g                2.4
       g              general equilibrium adjustment factor to prots lost in reversal                    2.4
      ε̃V             adjusted elasticity of price index wrt to cV                                        2.4
Symbol Description                                                                               Section
  Ws           consumer welfare at state s.                                                        2.4
   β̃          discount factor of consumers                                                        2.4
  RsV          export level of industry V in state s                                               2.5
   k           shape parameter of the Pareto distribution for productivity GV (c)                  2.5
  αV           industry specic distribution factor αV ≡ NcVk σ k−σ+1
                                                                  k
                                                                                                   2.5
                                                           V
                                                                                 k−σ+1
               industry modied factor in the export revenue α̃V ≡ αV (1−β)K                       2.5
                                                                                    σ−1
                                                                              1
   α̃V                                                                           V

    ζV         upgrading factor in exports for industry V , ζV ≡ 1 + KKz (φV )k > 1.               2.5
uV ,eV         approximation error terms for industry V                                            3.1
bi ,b̃i ,bei   estimates of parameter i for benchmark, NLLS and product counts                     3.1
 DmV           observable component of advalorem export cost in industry V , state m               3.1
   d˜V         unobservable component of advalorem export costs for industry V                     3.1
f (ŨV )       general functional form for eect of uncertainty term on exports for industry V     3.3
     I         tari inclusive import value relative to dierentiated goods expenditure            3.4
   nV          number of Chinese varieties exported to the U.S. industry V .                       3.5
    v0         non-negative factor relating rm growth product count                               3.5
 rV m          import share of industry V in state m                                               A.5
     ν         function mapping varieties to product counts                                        B.4
