NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN ANALYSIS OF THE
SELECTION OF ARBITRATORS

David E. Bloom
Christopher L. Cavanagh

Working Paper No. 1938

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1986

The authors would like to thank Orley Ashenfelter, two referees,
and seminar participants at Harvard University, Princeton
University, the NBER, and M.I.T. For helpful comments, This
research was supported by NSF Grant SES-8309148. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Labor
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1938
June 1986

An Analysis of the Selection of Arbitrators

ABSTRACT

This paper analyses data on union and employer rankings of different
panels of arbitrators in an actual arbitration system. A random utility
model of bargainer preferences is developed and estimated. The estimates
indicate that unions and employers have similar preferences, in favor of
lawyers, more experienced arbitrators, and arbitrators who seem to have
previously favored their side. Alternative rankings models, which are
estimated to test whether bargainers rank arbitrators strategically, reveal
no evidence of strategic behavior.

David E Bloom
Department of Economics
Harvard University

Christopher L. Cavariagh
Department of Economics
Harvard University

Cambridge, MA 02138

Cambridge, MA 02138

a-

I.

Introduction

Arbitration is a rapidly-growing method for resolving disputes. It is
used widely in the U.S. to resolve private disputes arising under collective
bargaining agreements and commercial contracts, to resolve certain types of
civil disputes, and to set wages in the public sector-.

Although arbitration

has been applied in a wide range of settings and takes numerous forms, the
central feature of virtually all arbitration mechanisms is that they involve a
third party, i.e., an arbitrator or panel of arbitrators, hearing and deciding

how a dispute is to be resolved. In this respect, arbitration may be viewed
as a private sector analog to the court system with arbitrators performing

similar functions to judges. Arbitration tends, however, to be a cheaper,
quicker, and less formal method of dispute resolution than the court system.
Arbitration systems also tend to provide disputing parties with greater
latitude -in choosing "judges" (i.e., arbitrators) than do court systems.1

Among persons who are regularly involved in arbitration, it is generally
accepted that "good arbitrators" are the key to "good arbitration.." However,

there seems to be far less consensus about the meaning of the phrase "good

arbitrators." For example, is a good arbitrator someone who favors your side
or someone who is painstakingly fair in arriving at a decision? Is it someone
who has extensive experience with the type of dispute at hand or someone with

good common sense and the ability to analyze, interpret, and judge? Is it
someone who tries to appease the parties by splitting decisions or someone who
strictly "calls them as he or she sees them?"
Our purpose in this paper is to address these and other related questions

by presenting an empirical analysis of the selection of arbitrators. We do
this by analyzing a remarkable set of data on the preferences of unions and
employers for different arbitrators under New Jersey's Fire and Police

—2-

Arbitration

Law.

According to this law, disputes over terms and conditions of

employment involving New Jersey's organized public safety employees and the

governments that employ them must be resolved by arbitration. Arbitrators,
whose awards are binding by law, are chosen by the bargainers from a roster of
roughly seventy names maintained by the New Jersey Public Employment Relations

Commission (PERC). In cases in which the bargainers are unable to negotiate
an agreement, PERC circulates a list of seven arbitrators and their resumes to
the parties, each of which is instructed to veto three names and to rank, in

order of their preferences, the remaining four names. PERC then appoints as
arbitrator the individual who was not vetoed by either side and whose combined
rank is highest; rank ties are broken randomly by PERC.
Using information on employer and union rankings of different panels of
arbitrators, along with information on the characteristics of the arbitrators,
we attempt to provide direct evidence on the following three issues:

(1) How similar are the preferences of unions and employers with respect
to a given panel of arbitrators?
(2) What characteristics of arbitrators do unions and employers find
desirable or undesirable? Do the unions and employers attach the same
or different weights to specific characteristics? and
(3) Do unions or employers engage in strategic behavior -in
arbitrators?

ranking

In proceeding this way, we also hope to shed light on three broader

issues. First, there has recently developed in the academic literature a body
of theoretical work on the subject of bargaining and arbitration.2 The basic
premise of most of this work is that arbitration is simply a mechanism for

distributing income between conflicting interests. In contrast, institutional
economists and labor practitioners place greater emphasis on arbitration as a

mechanism for helping disputants identify and reach efficient outcomes. In
their view, arbitrators are professional gatherers and processors of information

—3--

who play a highly constructive role -in a bargaining process which is better

treated as a cooperative attempt at problem-solving than as direct economic

conflict. By analyzing the similarity of union and employer preferences for
individual arbitrators and for different arbitrator characteristics, we suspect
that much can be learned about the general issue of whether collective
bargaining is primarily an institution of cooperation or conflict.

Second, one of the most important characteristics of arbitration

systems

is that they may be designed in different ways. Indeed, one key dimension in

which arbitration systems differ involves the mechanism for selecting the

arbitrator. Most mechanisms take account of the parties' preferences, either
through a rank-four/veto-three system like New Jersey's, or by allowing each
party to successively veto a name from an odd-numbered list of three or more

arbitrators. Other arbitration systems appoint arbitrators on a purely rotating
basis from a list agreed to in advance by potential disputants or established by

a third party such as the state. A final system involves the appointment of a
single individual or panel of individuals to arbitrate all disputes involving a

particular set of parties and arising in a specified period of time. The key
feature of all of these systems is that they guarantee the appointment of an

arbitrator without requiring explicit agreement (or even face-to-face contact)
by two parties who are unable to reach agreement on some other (substantive)

matter. In addition, these systems all prescreen individuals before they are
added to the master list of eligible arbitrators. However, the first two
systems provide for an additional level of screening by the parties prior to the

appointment of an arbitrator to hear a particular case. This additional level
of screening -is said to contribute to the legitimacy of the arbitrator and his

award in the eyes of the parties. However, it can also contribute to delays in
the arbitration process, which is one of the most frequently cited complaints

-4-

about arbitration. Thus, -it -is -interesting to ask whether the appointment of

arbitrators can be left entirely in the hands of the state or some impartial
organization like the American Arbitration Association or whether it is
important to take account of the parties' preferences on a case-by-case basis.

We will address this question below when we analyze the strength of union and
employer preferences for different members of a set of "prescreened"
arbitrators .3

Third, our study raises important questions about the possibility of strategic behavior and its treatment in empirical analysis.

In particular, it is

well known that the outcomes of voting mechanisms can often be manipulated by

the strategic misrepresentation of preferences. Although it is natural to
address this problem by directly estimating a structural model of the underlying

economic game, the complexity and dimensionality of the game may render this

approach infeasible, as it does in our case. Thus, we develop some indirect
tests that we think will let us "back our way" into strategic behavior if it is

there. We suspect that the type of indirect approach we propose may be useful
in a variety of game-theoretic settings in which the games are too complicated
to solve.

In the next section of the paper we provide some institutional background
on the selection of arbitrators and describe our data.

In Section III we set

out a simple random utility model that we use to represent the preferences of
employers and unions for arbitrators with different characteristics. We also
present the likelihood function we maximize to estimate the parameters of this

model.4 In Section IV we present a descriptive summary of the data. We also
present estimates of the econometric model as well as two alternative models we

estimate to test for the presence of strategic behavior. Section V summarizes
and concludes the paper.

—5--

II. Institutional Background
Most of the data analyzed in this paper were drawn from the PERC's

arb-itra--

tiori records. First, we collected information on the lists of arbitrators sent
by PERC to disputing parties along with the preference rankings returned to PERC

by the parties. We focused only on cases involving 1980 contract negotiations.
That was the third year of operation of the New Jersey arbitration system and
the third (and final) year in which PERC used its original master list of eli-

gible arbitrators to form panels.5 Thus, we felt that by 1980 the parties had
reasonably good information about the arbitrators on which to base their pre-

ference rankings. In many cases, at least one of the parties did not strictly
follow PERC's request for a preference ranking. Sometimes parties ranked more
than four names on the list; other times the parties vetoed more than three
names; in a few cases a party responded to PERC by saying that all seven names
were equally acceptable; there were also a number of cases in which a party
either failed to express its preferences to PERC or its preferences were simply
not recorded in the PERC records.6 Altogether we collected information on 193

arbitration panels. Of these, 75 are perfect in the sense that both parties
ranked four names and vetoed three names. It should also be noted that many
(indeed, most) of the cases for which PERC circulated arbitration panels did not

end up being arbitrated. In other words, many disputants were able to reach
voluntary settlements after the arbitration panel was circulated but before a

binding arbitration award was rendered. This characteristic of the
bargaining/arbitration process in New Jersey explains why some parties did not
report their arbitrator preferences to PERC (i.e., either their case was settled
before the due date for reporting their preferences or they expected that it
would not end up in arbitration).

—6-

Second, we collected information on the characteristics of the 69

arbitrators on PERC's master list. This information was derived from a variety
of sources including PERC's 1978 and 1979 interest arbitration records and
awards, PERC's 1979 grievance arbitration records, and the arbitrators' resumes.
In collecting this background information, we were guided by the institutional
literature on the relevant characteristics of arbitrators and by conversations

with labor relations practitioners.7 Roughly speaking, the relevant characteristics of arbitrators seem to fall into four categories: (1) impartiality,
(2) consistency, (3) training, and (4) experience.8
Impartiality refers to an arbitrator's lack of predisposition to rule in
favor of one side or another. This characteristic -is usually judged by

considering an arbitrator's prior decisions. It appears to be the most
important characteristic of an arbitrator since no party is likely to be
satisfied with an arbitrator it perceives to be biased against its position.

There has even been some debate over whether disputants prefer arbitrators who
they perceive to be biased in their favor. On the one hand, such bias is
desirable because it suggests a higher probability of receiving a favorable

arbitration decision. But on the other hand, it damages the integrity of the
institution of arbitration and does not promote the legitimacy and mutual
acceptability of the arbitrator's award.

Consistency refers to the extent to which an arbitrator decides cases
solely on their merits, without reference to his (or her) "box score" of

previous decisions. The parties' concern with the consistency of arbitrators
stems from their awareness that many arbitrators derive considerable income
from arbitrating and therefore may have an incentive to "split their awards" in

order to appear impartial and maintain their acceptability. Such a practice
greatly threatens the institution of arbitration since it suggests that a

-7-

certain fraction of cases will be won by a given party, not on their merits,
but simply because they are brought before an arbitrator.

Consistency is most

often judged by subjectively reviewing an arbitrator's previous awards to see
that similar decisions were reached in similar cases.

A third dimension along which arbitrators differ is their training. Most
labor arbitrators are lawyers, undoubtedly because legal training is

well-suited to analyzing and judging the vast majority of labor disputes, i.e.,
disputes over the terms of existing contracts, also known as grievances.
However, the New Jersey system involves disputes over the terms of new

contracts, i.e., disputes oF interest, with the most common and important issue

in dispute being wages. Thus, one might expect that training in other areas,
and especially in economics, might be particularly desirable to the parties.

Arbitration experience is another important characteristic of prospective

arbitrators. Practitioners generally regard this characteristic as a measure
of an individual's expertise as an arbitrator and usually insist upon an
experienced arbitrator in cases involving complex or otherwise difficult

issues. At a more theoretical level, it seems likely that experience -is
desirable because it reduces the uncertainty that risk-averse disputants have
over the outcome of arbitration and thereby reduces its (indirect) cost.9
Indeed, the acquisition of experience is generally regarded to be the most
significant hurdle faced by aspiring labor arbitrators -in the U.S.1°

III. A Model of Arbitrator Selection

In this section we outline a simple model of arbitrator selection. We
start by considering a situation in which an employer (E) and a union (U) are

unable to reach agreement on a vector of contract items although they do agree

(or are compelled by law) to have their dispute resolved by arbitration. A list
of seven potential arbitrators along with information on their qualifications is

—8-

circulated among the two parties by an impartial organization.

Each party is

instructed to veto three names and rank the remaining four names in order of

their preference. The individual who is not vetoed by either side and who has
the lowest combined rank is appointed to hear the case; rank ties are broken by

coin tosses.1'
We now assume that each party has a preference ordering defined over the
entire set of possible arbitration outcomes and that these preference orderings
can be represented by well-behaved Von Neumann-MorgenSterfl utility functions.

We also assume that each party has one set of prior beliefs about the
distribution of arbitration outcomes for each of the seven potential

arbitrators. Finally, we assume that these sets of prior beliefs depend on the
arbitrator's qualifications, some of which are observed.
In this model, an arbitrator's characteristics determine a party's prior

beliefs about the arbitrator's decision. These beliefs, in turn, determine the
expected utility that a party associates with that arbitrator. It follows
that there exist direct mappings of arbitrator characteristics into an expected

utility for each party. For each potential arbitrator (1), we write these
expected utilities as a linear function of the arbitrator's characteristics.

(la)

''Ei =

(ib)

Ui =

where

and

XiE

+

Ei

+ €U-i

(i =

1, 2, ..., 7)

(i = 1, 2, .

. ., 7)

are the expected utilities the employer and union associate

with arbitrator -i; X. is a vector of observed characteristics of arbitrator 1;
and

are vectors of unknown (reduced-form) parameters characterizing the

preferences of the employer and union for different arbitrator characteristics;
and

and €Ui represent random utility effects.
Given this framework, the simplest model one could adopt for arbitrator

-9-.

selection would treat each party as ranking arbitrators in order of their

expected utilities. In other words, each party's stated ranking is assumed to
coincide with the ordering of its true preferences. More complicated models
which account for each party's incentives to rank arbitrators some other way

are possible, too. For now, however, we shall work with the simple model and
defer consideration of alternative models to Section IV.C.
In order to make this model of arbitrator selection
it is necessary to treat the unobserved characteristics

empirically tractable,

and eU (1= 1,

7) as random variables. We do this by assuming that these random
variables have independent extreme value distributions:

Pr(€.

(2)

x) =

exp(—e)

(p = E, U)

(1 =

1,

.

. . , 7)

This distributional assumption is quite common in random utility models of this

general form.12 It is also quite convenient, both analytically and

computation-

ally, in the present application.

We derive the likelihood function for each party's rank choices by
developing an expression for the probability of a particular ranking. For
example, suppose the union ranked a list of seven arbitrators in the
order:

following

(1, 2, 3, 4, Veto, Veto, Veto). The likelihood of this ranking is

simply the probability that

>

> "3

>

> ''5

Y). The

general formula for the probability of a particular ranking is given by
K
(3)

11

MNL(A(j) Remaining choice set, )

J=i

where A(j) denotes the arbitrator who receives the th rank, K is the number of
arbitrators that receive a rank (e.g., four, in the standard case), and MNL is
the mult-inomial logit probability that a party with preference parameters

will

most prefer arbitrator A(j) given the option of choosing from the 8-j least pre-

-10-

ferred arbitratOrs. This probability is defined as
exP(XA,

MNL(A(J) Remaining choice set, 13) =

(4)

exp(X
8—j

where qi8 refers to the remaining choice set of 8-j least preferred arbitrators.
The probability in equation (3) is simply the product of the multinomial
logit probabilities of ranking an arbitrator from among those arbitrators that

have not already been ranked. Notice that this model is extremely amenable to
dealing with the type of unbalanced data configuration we face. For example,
in cases where more than four arbitrators are ranked, the likelihood of the

ranking will simply consist of the product of more than four multinomial logit

probabilities. Thus, this model makes efficient use of all of the preference

ordering information we have available. It should also be noted that this
likelihood function is globally concave. This property guarantees a unique
maximum if the model is asymptotically identified and typically assures numeri—
cal stability in computing maximum likelihood estimates.

IV.

Empirical
A.

Results

Descriptive Statistics

We begin our discussion of empirical results by presenting a descriptive

summary of the data. Table I presents the distribution, across arbitration
panels, of the number of arbitrators not vetoed by either side. If employer and
union preferences tend to be in direct conflict, one would expect most panels to
yield only a single jointly-ranked arbitrator.

Alternatively, if employer and

union preferences tend to be similar, one would expect most panels to yield four

Jointly—ranked names. As the first row of Table I makes clear, neither of
these extremes appears to be true. Over 80 percent of the panels yielded two
or three jointly acceptable arbitrators with an average overlap of nearly 2.5

Table I

Percent Distribution of Number of Arbitrators
Not Vetoed by Either Party*

1

A.

B.

C.

0.

2

3

4

Average
Overlap

All Cases (N=75)

9.3

44.0

37.4

9.3

2.47

Arbitrated Cases (N=29)

6.9

41.4

37.9

13.8

2.59

Negotiated Cases (N=46)

10.9

45.7

37.0

6.5

2.39

Independent Ranki

11.4

*These statistics, as well as those in Table II and Figure I, are based on the
75 cases in which both sides ranked four arbitrators and vetoed three.

—11—

arbitrators

per panel. Observe also the last row of Table I that presents the

distribution of the number of jointly-ranked names under the assumption that
the parties' rankings of arbitrators are independent of each other. A
chi-square test comparing the observed distribution (row A) to the
independent-rankings distribution (row 0) yields a test statistic of 11.2,
which is statistically significant at the .05 level (3 degrees of freedom).

This result suggests that the parties' rankings are not independent. Moreover,
the biggest contribution to the test statistic comes from the proportion of
lists with 4 overlapping names, providing some evidence of positive correlation

in the parties rankings. In addition, it is worth noting that the distribution
of jointly-ranked names is not statistically significantly different in the
subset of 29 cases that ended up being arbitrated than in the subset of 46
cases that ended up being negotiated (i.e., a chi—square test for the equality
of the true distributions yields a test statistic

of 1.4, which is not in the

5 percent tail of a x2 distribution with 3 degrees of freedom).
Since Table I is not informative about the closeness of employer and union
rankings within each panel of arbitrators, we have computed a rank correlation
coefficient (p) for each of the 75 "perfect" cases

(5)

p =

REiRUj

— 4

-i=1

where REj and

are the ranks assigned by the employer and the union, respec-

tively, to the th arbitrator on the panel.13 In Figure I we plot the
(observed) frequency distribution of this statistic. As can be seen from the

plot, there are some cases in which the parties' rankings are very different
(i.e., p

-.5), some cases in which they are very similar (i.e., p

.5), and

many cases in which they seem to be uncorrelated. However, on balance, the
plot seems to produce evidence of a slight tendency for the employer and union
rankings to be positively correlated (p =

.13).14

0.1

0.15

z
0
I—

0

0.

a-

0.05

0

-1.00

-0.50

0

0.50

RANK CORRELATtON

Figure

I

Frequency Distribution of Rank Correlation Coefficient
Computed for Employer and Union Rankings

1.00

—12—

We now take a closer look at the similarity of employer and union
rankings by constructing a two-way contingency table of these rankings and formall')' testing the hypothesis that they are independent.

This contingency

table, which reports the number of times that arbitrators listed on the 75
panels received each of twenty-five possible combinations of employer and union

ranks, is presented in Table II. This table also presents (in parentheses)
theoretical frequencies for each cell computed under the hypothesis that the

rankings are independent.15 The hypothesis of independence is tested using the
familiar x2 statistic which has the value 36.4 for this table. Since
this statistic has 15 degrees of freedom, we reject the hypothesis of
independence at all conventional significance levels (e.g., the critical value

of a

random variable at the 99 percent level is 32.8).

Before leaving Table II, it is interesting to note that the (1, 1) cell

makes the biggest contribution to the x2 statistic. In other words, the
hypothesis of independence is rejected largely because the unions and the
employers ranked the same individual first -in 21 of the 75 panels they

reviewed. Indeed, the observed frequencies are greater than the theoretical

frequencies for all of the diagonal cells in Table II. This provides some
further evidence that employer and union preferences tend to be at least
moderately similar.

We now describe the characteristics of the New Jersey arbitrators. To
begin with, 45 percent of the arbitrators have law degrees and 12 percent are
Ph.D. economists; the remaining 43 percent are labor relations practitioners,
some of whom have Ph.D.ts in labor relations or other areas.

All of the

arbitrators, of which there are only four women, have mediation or factfinding

experience in public sector wage disputes. In addition, two-thirds of the
arbitrators had rendered at least one interest arbitration award in the New

Table II

Two-Way Distribution of Observed Employer and Union Rankings
(Theoretical frequencies are reported in parentheses)

Union
1

2

3

4

V

Total

E
1

M
P

2

21
(10.7)

8

10
(10.7)

11
(10.7)

(10.7)

(32.1)

16

15

14

22

(10.7)

(10.7)

(32.1)

12
(10.7)

14

7

35

(10.7)

(10.7)

(10.7)

(32.1)

10
(10.7)

(10.7)

10
(10.7)

15
(10.7)

30
(32.1)

L
3

V

4

7

10

E

V
R

Total

28

(10.7)

(10.7)

0

5

29

27

25

34

(32.1)

(32.1)

(32.1)

(32.1)

75

75

75

75

110

75

75

75

75

225

(96.4)

225

525

—13—

Jersey system during its first two years of operation, although only 12 percent

of the arbitrators had rendered five or more awards. On average, the New Jersey
arbitrators have about fifteen years of arbitration experience, with the range

of experience being from four years to forty years. Nearly two-thirds of the
arbitrators had been appointed to hear two or more grievance arbitration cases

in the New Jersey public sector in 1979. About one half of the arbitrators are
members of the National Academy of Arbitrators.

In Figure II we plot the average rankings received from the employers and
the unions by the 65 arbitrators who received at least two rankings from each

party.16 In computing these averages we were able to use ranking information
from most of the 193 panels by assigning vetoed arbitrators a rank equal to the

median of the unassigned ranks. As Figure II makes clear, there is considerable
dispersion across arbitrators in the average rankings they received from the

parties. This provides further evidence that the parties prefer some arbitrators to others. Moreover, the average rankings in Figure II exhibit a fairly
high positive correlation (p =

.51),

providing a further indication of simi-

larity between the partiest preferences. Of course, one weakness of the
average-rank statistics plotted in Figure II is that they do not control for the
characteristics of the other arbitrators who appeared on the same lists.
However, controlling for those characteristics is accomplished by our structural
model of arbitrator selection, to which we now turn.
B. Estimation Results

Table III presents estimates of the employer and union preference

parameters of the random utility model in equation (1). Positive signed
coefficients indicate that a particular characteristic tends to increase the
expected utility of an arbitrator and, therefore, the likelihood that the

arbitrator receives a favorable rank. Negative coefficients indicate the

7.00

6.00

0
0

3 5.00 —

00

00

0 ©o o00 0

0

(9

o0

°cP

uJ

f 4.00—

0 0 00 0
0

0

0

0

0

0
0

Q
3.QQ—

00

0 00000

0

0

0

2.00

LcxD

1.00

I

I

I

2.00

3.00

4.00

I

5.00

6.00

EMPLOYER AVERAGES

Figure

II

Average Rankings of Individual Arbitrators,
by Employers and Unions

7.00

-14-

opposite. The estimates were obtained by maximizing the log of the likelihood
function implied by equation (3) for a particular specification of arbitrator

characteristics. The maximization was accomplished on a personal computer
using the modified quadratic hill-climbing method (GRAOX) proposed by Goldfeld

and Quandt (1972). All of the rankings data available from the 193 arbitration
panels were used in the estimation (i.e., we used 129 employer rankings and 160

union rankings). Since the estimates are maximum likelihood, standard tests of
their significance can be performed based on their asymptotic normality.
In specifying the vector of arbitrator characteristics, we paid close
attention to the institutional literature on arbitrator selection reviewed in

Section II. Thus, we attempted to capture the training dimension of an
arbitrator's characteristics by including dummy variables for lawyers and

economists, with all other arbitrators comprising the reference category. We
have no strong priors on the effect of these variables although it does seem
likely that economists would be viewed as best able to resolve the wage and

benefit disputes that are central to most negotiations in New Jersey. Our
specification also includes variables reflecting an arbitrator's experience.
Specifically, we include the number of grievance arbitration appointments each
arbitrator received in 1979 and the number of conventional and final-offer

arbitration awards each arbitrator rendered in New Jersey prior to 1980.17 If
experience is truly a desirable characteristic, we would expect both of these
measures, which are derived from independent arbitration systems, to be
positively associated with each parties' preferences for an arbitrator.
Finally, we attempt to control for an arbitrator's impartiality in several

ways. First, we include a variable (FAVU) defined to be the difference between
the number of final—offer cases decided in favor of unions and the number decided

in favor of employers in the years 1978 and 1979. This variable is non—zero for

—15—

about 55 percent of the arbitrators and takes on values between -4 and 4. If
this variable adequately measures the tendency of an arbitrator to be more sym-

pathetic to one side than the other, and if the parties prefer arbitrators they
perceive to be relatively sympathetic to their position, this variable should be
associated with more favorable rankings from the union and less favorable

rankings from the employer. Second, we construct a variable (FAVUHAT) which
measures the expected difference between the number of final offer cases decided

in favor of unions and employers. This measure is constructed using estimates
of the unconstrained arbitrator decision—making functions reported in
Ashenfelter and Bloom (1984, Table 2, columns 1 for 1978 and 1979) along with

information on the final offers in the 1978 and 1979 cases. The inclusion of
this variable in the empirical model refines the first measure of impartiality

by controlling for an important subset of facts in the final-offer cases. Thus,
under the assumption that the parties evaluate the record of each arbitrator's
final-offer decisions in light of the quality of the final offers they were
forced to choose between, our expectation is that the coefficient of FAVUHAT
will be opposite in sign but have the same absolute magnitude as the coefficient

of FAVU. Third, as a simple alternative measure of arbitrator bias, we include
a variable (AVEDEV) defined as the average wage increase awarded by each

arbitrator in their 1978 and 1979 cases. This variable, which incorporates
information from both conventional and final-offer cases, is expressed as a

deviation from the average of all awards rendered in 1978-79; it has the value

zero for arbitrators who made no awards. If case facts are similar across
bargaining disputes, this variable will provide a reasonable measure of each
arbitrator's tendency to favor the union or the employer.

The estimates in Table III reveal a number of interesting Features about

employer and union preferences for arbitrators. First, both the employers and

(.034)

(.76)

-.27
(1.17)

Number of FOA awards decided
in favor of unions minus number of FOA awards decided in
favor of employers, 1978-79

Predicted value of FAVU
(See text)

FAVU minus FAVUHAT

Arbitrator's average percent

FAVU

FAVUHAT

FAVOIFF

AVEDEV

deviation from grand average
of wage increases.

wage increase, expressed as
(.88)

-.05

-769.1

(.032)

(1.39)
.48

- .077

.22

*Estimated standard errors are reported in parentheses.

(

Log-likelihood
= 0)

-.085

2.23
(3.12)

-.746

-.865
(.225)

-.782
(.219)

-768.9
(-827.4)

—768.9

—772.8

-.046
(.054)

I

I

I

—931.0

-932.8

.082
(.032)

(—1018.0

-929.7

(.105)

.163

(.034)

.076
(.116)

.079

(.018)

(.028)

(.019)

(.032)
I

I

.026

(.012)

-.025

(.012)

(.012)

.080

.005

.078

.078

.097

.046
(.021)

I

I

I

(.030)

(.020)

(.032)

(.099)

(.105)

(.100)

- .085

.058

.060

(.015)

(.013)

(.013)

number of conventional
and final—offer awards rendered in NJ in 1978—79

Total

.076
(.022)

.070

.076

(.208)

.410

(.112)1

(.220)

.194

.109

.101

.158

(4)

(3)

Union Preferences
(2)

(1)

.076

NTOT

1.73

.076
(.013)

(2.56)

(.207)

(.214)

(.205)

Number of final-offer
arbitration (FOA) awards
rendered in NJ in 1978—79

.433

.437

.478

NFOA

3.99
(4.66)

.12

a Ph.D.

Number of grievance arbitration appointments in
NJ public sector in 1979

is

GRAPTS79

(.113)

(.121)

(.114)

Arbitrator
economist

.174

.177

.204

ECONOMIST

.45

law

a

Arbitrator has
degree

LAWYER

(2)

Definition

(1)

(3)

Employer Preferences

Variable

Sample Average for
69 Arbitrators

Table III
Model (CR)*
Maximum Likelihood Estimates of Employer and Union Preference Functions, Complete Rankings

-933.6

.108
(.049)

(.018)

.035

(.014)

.074

-.744
(.223)

(.098)

.219

(4)

-16—

the unions

tend to prefer individuals with law degrees to labor relations

practitioners. However, employers prefer economists to both of these groups

whereas unions prefer both of these groups to economists. Perhaps this
somewhat surprising result is explained by the fact that economists are likely
to be heavily influenced by efficiency considerations whereas lawyers are more
likely to place greater emphasis on equity.

Second, the three measures of an arbitrator's experience (GRAPTS79, NFOA,
and NTOT) typically have positive coefficients in both the employer and union

equations. This indicates that employers and unions both prefer more
experienced arbitrators to less experienced arbitrators, controlling for

variables reflecting their training and impartiality. It is, however, possible
to interpret the experience variables as controlling for arbitrator—specific
characteristics which are not in the model (akin to fixed effects) since, to

some extent, they reflect arbitrators' past popularity. Since it is not
possible for us to distinguish empirically between these alternative
interpretations of the experience variable, we conclude simply that our results
are not inconsistent with the hypothesis that experience is a desirable characterist-ic, as emphasized in the institutional literature on arbitrator
selection.

Third, our measures of arbitrator bias, i.e., their past tendency to favor
unions, have negative coefficients in the employer equation and positive
coefficients in the union equation, whether or not we control for the case

facts. This indicates that employers tend to give poorer rankings to
arbitrators who seem to have favored unions in the past whereas unions tend to

prefer such arbitrators. This finding is consistent with our expectation that
the parties do not like arbitrators whom they perceive to be biased against

them. Note also that the coefficients of FAVUHAT are not significant at the

—27—

five percent level -in

either

the employer or the union equat-ions and that their

inclusion in the equations does not substantially change the magnitudes of the

coefficients of FAVU. In addition, in the employer equation the coefficient of
FAVUHAT is opposite in sign and of roughly the same magnitude as the

coefficient of FAVU. However, in the union equation the two coefficients have
the same sign and, counter to our expectation, we reject the hypothesis that

they sum to zero at the five percent level. Nonetheless, if we constrain the
coefficients of FAVU and FAVUHAT to be equal and opposite in sign (i.e., by
entering FAVOIFF), the measure of bias has the theoretically expected effect
and is close in magnitude to the bias coefficient in the other models.
The last point worth noting about the results in Table III relates to the

magnitudes of the coefficients. These are difficult to interpret since their
scale is determined by our assumption that the 6Ei and €Ui are drawn
independently from extreme value distributions as defined in equation (2).
However, one may gauge the magnitude of the coefficients by measuring their

values in relation to the standard deviation of the c's. The latter are fixed

by our distributional assumption and equal fl/V ( 1.28). Viewed in this way,
we see that all of the coefficient estimates are relatively small in magnitude.
For example, a one standard deviation change in the number of grievance
arbitration appointments only represents a change of about one-fourth of a

standard deviation of c. Thus, while our estimates of the effect of
arbitrators' characteristics on the parties' rankings are reasonably precise,

they are also quite small.18 Given the similarity of results from alternative
specifications (reported in Bloom and Cavanagh, 1985a) that allow for
nonlinearities and that include alternative measures of experience, we suspect
that the large amount of noise we are observing indicates that the parties are
relatively indifferent to many of the arbitrators in the New Jersey system.

-18C.

Testing for Strategic Behavior

As noted earlier, a critical assumption of our analysis is that the

observed rankings data reveal the true preferences of the parties. This would
'e true if each party perceived that it had no incentive to misstate its true

preferences. However, it is not difficult to imagine a scenario in which the
parties do have incentives to rank arbitrators strategically. For example,
suppose the union's true preference ranking of a list of seven arbitrators is
[1. 2, 3, 4, Veto, Veto, Veto] and the employer's true preference ranking is [1,

4, 3, 2, Veto, Veto, Veto]. Although not identical, these preference orderings
do have important similarities: they both rank the first arbitrator as most
preferred and they both veto the fifth, sixth, and seventh arbitrators.

However, if either party has some information about the other party's
preferences, it is quite likely that it will have an incentive to misstate its

true preferences. For example, if each party expects the other to veto the last
three arbitrators on the list, but has no idea how the other party will rank the

first four arbitrators, they will both try to ensure the appointment of the
first arbitrator by presenting identical rankings of [1, Veto, Veto, Veto] for

the first four arbitrators. Thus, the two parties' revealed preferences might
appear quite similar even though the only correspondence between the true and
revealed preferences of each party would be the assignment of the most favorable

rank to the first arbitrator. Other examples, in which similar preferences can
lead to dissimilar rankings, are possible, too. This type of behavior is
particularly distressing since it can lower both parties' welfare (see Bloom and

Cavanagh, 1985b). Moreover, it suggests that the estimates presented so far in
this section may not reflect the parties' true preferences.

A natural way to address this issue is to model the ranking of arbitrators
as a game in which each party must choose a strategy, i.e., a ranking, given

—19-

its

subjective opinion about the ranking of the other party. A natural

definition of equilibrium strategies for this game would be the Bayesian Nash
equilibrium which has the characteristic that neither party can increase its

expected utility by unilaterally changing its strategy. In principle, one
could solve for each party's Nash strategy and derive a likelihood function
that could be maximized to estimate each party's preference parameters

conditional on this strategic behavior. However, in practice, the
dimensionality of the problem makes this infeasible unless substantial
structure is placed on the problem, which we prefer not to do.19 Instead, we
will develop an empirical approach to this issue.
Our test for strategic behavior primarily involves the estimation of

alternative random utility models that use different subsets of information

available in the arbitrator rankings data. Under the null hypothesis that the
data reveal the parties' true preferences, estimates of the parameters of these

models should not be significantly different. We consider two alternative
models. First, we consider a model in which each party assigns a rank of one
to the arbitrator it truly prefers the most, but may rank the remaining six
arbitrators strategically, i.e., not in the true order of their expected

utilities. The likelihood function for this model is derived from expressions

for the probability that A(1) >

A(2)'

A(3)' ''A(4)' ''A(Veto1)' 'A(Veto2)'

'A(Veto3) This is simply a multinomial logit model (MNL). Second, we
consider a model in which each party's ranking correctly distinguishes between
the four most preferred arbitrators and the three least preferred arbitrators,
although the ranking of the top four choices may be done strategically.

The

likelihood function for this model -is derived from expressions for the

probability that A(1)' A(2)' A(3)' A(4) >

A(Veto1)' A(Veto2)' A(Veto3*

This model shall be refer'red to as the rank/veto model (RV).20

-20-

In Table IV we present estimates of the MNL model and the RV model for
specification (1) in Table III.

If the rankings data do not reflect the true

preferences of the parties, then the three sets of estimates will in general
have different probability limits, regardless of the true underlying model.
This suggests that a specification test based on the differences between the
estimated parameter vectors has power against a broad range of alternative

models in which the rankings do not reflect true preferences. This test should
be especially powerful against strategic behavior that is closely approximated

by the MNL or the RV models.21 In constructing this test we follow Hausman
(1978) who suggests a statistic of the form

S =

where the 13

( - )'

(V1 -

V)

(I -

1311)

are estimated parameter vectors, the V are their estimated

variance-covarjance matrices, and the superscripts I and II index the alter-

native estimators. Hausman (1978) shows that, under the null hypothesis, S is
asymptotically distributed as a chi-square random variable with degrees of
freedom equal to the rank of (V1 -

Va).

Test statistics for the hypotheses

CR =

MNL
13

and f3

CR =

RV
f3

are reported

in the last row of Table IV. Since the critical value for these statistics at
the 5 percent level is 11.07, none of the equality hypotheses are rejected with
the single exception of 13CR =

13RV

for employers. Indeed, the closeness of the

parameter estimates in Tables III and IV is a remarkable finding that provides
strong evidence that the rankings data mainly reveal the parties! true

preferences. Even the two estimated parameter vectors that give rise to the
x2 statistic of 36.35 are close in magnitude and substantively no different.
The high x2 value appears to be the result of the two sets of estimates having

virtually identical estimated variances. In other words, the statistic
reflects a precise measure of a small difference; -it does not reflect a large

—21—

difference between the estimated a's. Overall, then, the results of this
subsection provide no support for the hypothesis of strategic behavior by
either party.

V.

Conclusions

This paper opens up the empirical analysis of a new area in the literature

on bargaining under arbitration: the selection of arbitrators. Our major
substantive findings are that (1) employers and unions distinctly prefer some

arbitrators to others, (2) employer and union preferences tend to be moderately
similar to each other; (3) employers tend to prefer arbitrators with training
in economics whereas unions prefer arbitrators with legal training and dislike
economists, (4) both parties prefer arbitrators with greater experience, (5)
there is evidence that the parties' preferences are affected by arbitrators'
win—loss tallies under final—offer arbitration, and (6) there -is no evidence
that the parties rank arbitrators strategically.
Overall, the results suggest that New Jersey's prescreening procedure for

establishing its master list of arbitrators works well. Even after controlling
for the arbitrators' characteristics, there is much noise in the parties'

preference orderings. Nevertheless, it still seems in the interest of the parties to
have input into the appointment of an arbitrator since our results indicate that

they have sensible preferences that they reveal accurately. Indeed,
appointment mechanisms that account for the parties' preferences tend to result
in higher welfare for both parties than mechanisms that appoint arbitrators on
a rotating basis.

Of course, it has been argued that arbitration should be made costly so
that bargainers have an incentive to settle their disputes voluntarily (see

Stevens, 1966; Farber and Katz, 1979; Bloom, 1981). In this view, mechanisms
that allow disputants to choose their arbitrator are undesirable because they

Table IV
Maximum Likelihood Estimates of Employer and Union Preference Functions,
Multiriomial Logit Model (MNL) and Rank/Veto Model (RV)*

Variable

LAWYER

Employer Preferences
MNL
RV

Union Preferences
MNL
RV

.386
(.226)

.146
(.119)

.669
(.391)

(.218)
.082
(.014)

.066

.076

(.025)

(.022)

(.013)

NFOA

.090
(.037)

.044
(.024)

.012
(.034)

.016
(.021)

FAVU

—.098

—.073
(.034)

.166
(.058)

.072
(.033)

ECONOMIST

6RAPTS79

.103

(.057)

Log-likelihood

—220.6

.355

—405.6

.088
(.193)

.169
(.108)

-.574

-.814

(.452)

(.229)

-283.4

-472.2

x2 (CRMNL
4.07

36.35

*Estimated standard errors are reported in parentheses.

3.01

3.57

—22—

reduce the (indirect) costs of arbitration. However, this negative factor must
be weighed against the increased legitimacy an arbitrator will have when the
parties have been involved in his (or her) appointment.

Our empirical results seem to indicate that the New Jersey mechanism for
selecting arbitrators works mainly as a safety net which allows the parties to
filter out the least acceptable arbitrators who survived the prescreening.
In other words, the extraordinary closeness of estimates derived from the

complete rankings and the rank/veto model suggests that most of the information
about the parties preferences comes from the vetoed arbitrators and not from the

rank order of the non-vetoed arbitrators. Indeed, it may well be true that
having seven arbitrators per panel is optimal given the degree of prescreening
that takes place and the nature of the parties' preferences.
Finally, the similarity of union and employer preferences for different

arbitrators suggests that collective bargaining functions more cooperatively

than most existing models indicate. This finding represents potentially
important input into the further development of models of employer-union
interactions.

—23—

Footnotes

1.

For some additional comparisons of arbitration and the court system, in

which the advantages of arbitration are stressed, see the text of Chief Justice
Burger's remarks to the American Arbitration Association and the Minnesota State
Bar Association (Burger, 1985).

2. See, especially, the work of Crawford (1979, 1982) and Farber (1979, 1980).
For a useful review of selected empirical analyses of some of the theoretical
issues raised -in these papers, see Ashenfelter (1985).
3.

In many respects, the selection of an arbitrator is just one example of a

general class of social choice problems in which two or more economic agents
must collectively decide an intermediate or final outcome of some economic game.
Voting for public officials, reaching committee decisions, choosing real estate
appraisers (e.g., in cases of eminent domain), and determining the recipients

of different honors and awards are all examples. But the examples which are
most closely akin to the problem of selecting an arbitrator are the problems of
judge and jury selection.

ifl

the

case of judges, prescreening is substantial

(e.g., all federal judges must be nominated by the President and confirmed by
the Senate), although assignments are random except for the practice of "forum
shopping" and of recusing in situations where there are conflicts of interest.
On the other hand, prescreening is minimal in the process of jury selection
since federal and state jury selection laws generally require that potential
jurors be "selected at random from a fair cross—section of the community (P.L.

90-274, 82 Stat. 53). However, jury selection procedures offer opportunities
to remove jurors both for cause and, although to a lesser extent, without

cause. These procedures, known as voir dire, are modeled in Roth, Kadane, and
DeGroot (1977).

-244.

Detailed derivations of all of the likelihood functions we use and their

properties are presented in the Appendix to Bloom and Cavanagh, 1985a. This
paper is available from the authors on request.
5.

PERC revises its master list of eligible arbitrators every three years.

6. This unbalanced data configuration complicates the descriptive presentation
of the data below. However, the econometric model developed in Section III is
ideally suited to this type of problem and makes efficient use of all available
information.

7. We relied particularly on material contained in MacDonald (1948) and
Elkouri and Elkouri (1985), and on conversations with Ben Fischer (former head
of the Arbitration Department of the United Steelworkers of America) and
Richard Reilly (Regional Director of the American Arbitration Association,
Boston Region).

8. The per diem that arbitrators charge is also a way in which they
differ. Most ad hoc arbitrators, for example, presently charge between two
hundred and six hundred dollars per day, plus expenses. Although little -is
known about the extent to which cost influences the selection of an arbitrator,
-it does drain the parties' funds and has been argued to be an important determinant of the use of arbitration -in the case of financially small disputants

(see Bloom, 1981). In the New Jersey system under study, PERC establishes a
maximum per diem rate which is the rate charged by nearly all of the arbitra-

tors on the master list. As a result, there is very little variation in
arbitration fees across arbitrators. Thus, we do not include this variable in
our empirical analysis.

9. This conclusion requires the assumption that each party is equally risk
averse if negotiated outcomes are a possibility.
10. Recently, however, the high cost, long delays, and general shortage of

—25-

experienced arbitrators have caused some individuals to question the importance

of experience. For example, a system known as expedited arbitration was
adopted by labor and management in the basic steel industry in 1971. Under
th. system, unresolved employee grievances that do not require
precedent-setting rulings are arbitrated by a rotating panel of young,
inexperienced arbitrators (mostly lawyers) who decide the case for a relatively

small fee within two weeks of the decision to arbitrate. Although there has
yet to be an in-depth study of this system, its growing utilization in the
basic steel industry, in other United Steelworker contracts, in some United

Mineworker contracts, and in the U.S. Postal Service provides some evidence of
its success.

11. In this section we ignore the possibility that a voluntary settlement can
occur after the appointment of an arbitrator but prior to arbitration.

12. See, for example, McFadden (1982).
13. If all arbitrators on the panel were assigned a rank between one and seven
by each party, p would always lie in the interval [-1.0, 1.0]. However,
because only four arbitrators of the seven listed on each panel receive a rank,
we were forced to assign a rank of 6.0 to the three vetoed arbitrators (i.e.,

the median of 5, 6, and 7). As a result, our estimates of p must lie in the
interval [-.86, .93].

14. We have not worked out the distribution of p for the incomplete rankings
case. Thus, we are unable to construct a formal test.
15. For example, the expected number of arbitrators vetoed by the union and
ranked first by the employer is 32.1 (=

3/7

•

1/7

•

525).

16. Different arbitrators appeared on different numbers of panels because PERC
generated the panels randomly and because a number of arbitrators requested that
their names not be circulated actively throughout the entire year.

—26--

17. Final-offer arbitration is utilized to resolve about three—fourths of the
bargaining disputes arising under the New Jersey statute.

Under final—offer

arbitration the arbitrator is constrained to render an award which consists of

one or the other of the bargainers' final positions. Most of the remainder of
the New Jersey cases are resolved by conventional arbitration -in which the

arbitrator renders a decision which consists of his or her best judgment of a
fair settlement and which may be a compromise between the parties' final offers.
For a more detailed description of the New Jersey statute see Bloom (1980).

For

an analysis of arbitrator decision-making under the different forms of
arbitration in New Jersey see Ashenfelter and Bloom (1983, 1984).

18. Nevertheless, the arbitrator characteristics included in the model do have
significant explanatory power when considered jointly, as judged by the
difference between the maximized log likelihood and the log likelihood
evaluated at

=

0.

19. In principle, each side has 840 distinct pure ranking strategies, of which

at least several hundred are undominated. Clearly, solving for the Nash
equilibrium strategies in such a game is computationally infeasible (see Bloom
and Cavanagh, 1985b, for a description of equilibria in these and other related
games).

20. It should be stressed that neither the MNL nor the RV model is presumed
to be the correct structural model under strategic behavior.

Both are,

however, reasonable approximations to structural models that strategic behavior

is likely to imply. For example, even when behaving strategically, bargainers
are likely to give the top rank to one of their most preferred arbitrators. In
this case, the MNL model would be a reasonable approximation to the underlying

structural model. Alternatively, strategic behavior is unlikely to imply
vetoing one's most preferred arbitrators. In this case, the RV model would be

—27-

a reasonable approximation.

21. In principle, the test also has power against a broad range of other
specification errors relating to distributional assumption, functional form, and
independence of the errors.

-28Ref erences

Ashenfelter, Orley. 1985. "Evidence on U.S. Experiences with Dispute
Resolution Systems," Princeton University Industrial Relations Section
Working Paper No. 185.
__________ and David E. Bloom. 1983. "The Pitfalls in Judging Arbitrator
Impartiality by Win-Loss Tallies Under Final-Offer Arbitration."
Labor Law Journal 34: 534—539.

1984. "Models of Arbitrator Behavior: Theory and Evidence."
__________
American Economic Review 74: 111-124.
Bloom, David E.

1980. "Customized 'Final-Offer' :

New Jersey's Arbitration

Law." Monthly Labor Review 103: 3033.

1981. "Is Arbitration Really Compatible with Bargaining?"
__________
Industrial Relations 20: 233—244.
__________ and Christopher L. Cavanagh. 1985a. "An Analysis of the Selection
of Arbitrators," Harvard Institute of Economic Research Working Paper
No. 1150.

1985b. "An Analysis of Alternative Mechanisms for
____________________
Selecting Arbitrators." Unpublished paper.
Burger, Warren E. 1985. "Using Arbitration to Achieve Justice." Arbitration
Journal 40: 3-6.

Crawford, Vincent P. 1979. "On Compulsory Arbitration Schemes." Journal of
Political Econonw 87: 131-160.

1982. "Compulsory Arbitration, Arbitral Risk and Negotiated
__________
Settlements: A Case Study in Bargaining Under Imperfect Information."
Review of Economic Studies XLIX: 69-82.
Elkouri, Frank and Edna Asper Elkouri. 1985. How Arbitration Works.
Washington, D.C.: Bureau of National Affairs, Inc.

1980. "An Analysis of Final-Offer Arbitration." Journal of
Farber, Henry S.
Conflict Resolution 35: 683—705.
the
__________ and Harry C. Katz. 1979. "Interest Arbitration, Outcomes, and
Incentive to Bargain." Industrial and Labor Relations Review XXXIII:
55-63.

Goldfeld, Stephen M. and Richard E. Quandt. 1972. Nonlinear Methods in
Econometrics. New York: North Holland, Inc.
Hausman, Jerry. 1978. "Specification Tests in Econometrics."
46: 125171.

Econometrica

-29—

MacDonald, Lois. 1948. "Selection and Tenure of Arbitrators -in Labor Disputes."
Proceedings of First Annual Conference on Labor. Albany, New York:
Matthew Bender and Company, 145-195.

McFadden, Daniel. 1982. "Econometric Models of Probabilistic Choice." In
Charles Manski and Daniel McFadden, Editors, Structural Analysis of
Discrete Data: With Econometric Applications. Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T.
Press.

Roth, Arthur, Joseph B. Kadane, and Morris H. DeGroot. 1977. "Optimal
Peremptory Challenges -in Trials by Juries: A Bilateral Sequential
Process." Operations Research 25: 901—919.
Stevens, Carl M.
1966. "Is Compulsory Arbitration Compatible with
Bargaining?" Industrial Relations 5: 38—52.

Appendix

1. The Econometric Model
In this appendix, we outline some of the main econometric results

used in analyzing the rank—choice models of Section III.
Suppose each of T agents is faced with K options or alternatives.

For each alternative i, each agent has a (random) utility which is a linear
function of the observed attributes of that alternative and some unobserved

attributes. Hence, each agent can coripute the vector of utilities (Y, ...,

Y

(A.l)

it

=X.iti
. +c.it

t

.

+

'1Kt =

=

1,

..., T

CKt

where 1it is the utility agent t attaches to alternative i;

is a vector of

= (, •.•,

observed attributes associated with alternative i and agent t;

is

a vector of unknown parameters characterizing the tastes of the agents;

represents

and

the utility effects of unobserved attributes.

By treating the unobserved attribute terms ——

t =

1,

= i,

..., K

(A.l) as a
... T —— as random variables, the econometrician can view

random utility model which can potentially be used to draw inferences con-

cerning the tastes (F, •'

of the agents.

For our purposes, we suppose that the random variables

pendent extreme value distributions ——

( xl

—x
= e_e

that

have inde-

for i =

is,

1,

..., K

tIn multinomial choice models, this distributional assumption

t =

1,

...,

T.

gives rise to the

extreme—
multi—noinial logit model. See, for example, McFadden (l9T). The

—2—

value distribution is also computationally convenient for the rank—choice
models analyzed below.]

We consider the situation in which the econometrician observes, not
the actual values of the utilities each agent attaches to each alternative, but
the preference rankings of some of the alternatives by each of the agents.

So,

we suppose that for each t the econometrician observes a vector of integers

where Rt(l) indicates which of the alternatives (1, ..., K)

•••

the tth agent most prefers, Rt(2) is the second most preferred alternative

etc. and K Ejl, ..., K} indicates how many

alternatives

we have rank infor-

mation on for agent t. We will consider three different procedures for using
such data to estimate the parameters (8,, •••

K•

Before discussing the sta-

tistical methods, we introduce some additional notation. Let b =

(b1, ••,

be a list of vectors of the same dimensionality as l' •••

S(i,b)

=

exp(X.b.)

MNLt(ii, I

t'l' b)

..., i, b) =
k= 1

In

of

s(i, h)

the multi—nomial logit literature, S.(b) is referred to as
alternative i for agent t with parameters b and MNLt -1
I

is

the

choose

the scale value

1.

...,

multinoriial logit probability that agent t with taste parameters b

b)
will

alternative i, when given the option of choosing amongst alternatives

...,

Method 1. The simplest method for using the rank—choice data to estimate the
parameters

=

(Ba, ••'

is simply to ignore all rankings except the top

ranking. The model then reduces to a multinomial logit model and inference can

—3—

be based on the log.-likelihood function for the MNL model:

L1(b) =

(A.2)

t

logMNL(R(l)

1, ...,

K; b).

Under suitable regularity conditions on the sequence of observed attributes,

the b which maximizes L1(b) will he a consistent and aymptotically normal esti-

mator of the true parameters .

However, this estimator will not, in general,

be asymptotically efficient since it ignores information available in the addi-.

tional rankings ——

R(2),

etc.

Method 2. The second method fully utilizes the information available in the
observed

we need

rankings. To calculate the likelihood function for the ranked data,

to be

parameters

able

to calculate the probability that agent t

b will have rank choice Rt(l), ...,

R+(K).

with preference

Thus, we need to

calculate

R(K); b) =
> •• >

...,

PrbIYR(l)
This

>

> all

the remaining

problem was addressed in Block and Marschak (1960) (see also Beggs,

Cardell and Hausman (1981)). They show that

(A.3)

P

...,

Kt
fl

i=l

M1Lt(R(i)

I

(K.t); h) =

ji, ••• K}

{B(1), ..., Rt(i_l)};

b)

where S denotes set difference. That is, the probability of interest is simply

_14

the product of the MNL probabilities of choosing the 1th alternative given the

option of those alternatives that have not already been chosen.
Using

these calculations, we see that the log—likelihood function

for the rank—choice data is given by

T

L2(b) =

i=l logMNL(R(i)

t=l

Asymptotically

I

{i •..

K}

s {Rt(1), ..., Rt(i_1)};

efficient statistical procedures can be

b).

constructed using the

maximum likelihood estimator based on this likelihood
function. Inference
based on L2(b) will, in general, be more efficient that inference based on

L1(b). [Note also that L2 is globally concave ——
maximum if the model is asymptotically identified

this

guarantees a unique

and typically assures numeri-

cal stability in calculating the MLE.]

Method 3.

uses

The idea underlying

Method 1 is that a likelihood function which

only a part of the available data will yield inefficient but consistent

estimators. In general, any informational garbling will yield consistent but
inefficient

limited information maximum likelihood estimators, so long

as the

information model is identified. Another limited information model of
interest in this paper is one in which the exact rankings of each agent are not
limited

recorded —— what

among the agent's

the

is recorded is the distinction between which alternatives are
most desirable options and which alternatives are among

K_Kt least desirable. Of course, in the special case in which Kt = 1 for

all t, this model is identical with the MNL model and Method 3 simplifies to

Method 1. In general, this method bases inference on the log—likelihood

—5—

function
T

L3(b) =

iog( Pt(a(Rt(l)), ...,
a
t=l

o(R(K.)); b)

where the inner summation is over all permutations a of the integers {R(l),
...,

and the funtion

is

defined by (A.3). Hence, the summation
...

over a equals the probability that

are the top Kt choices of

agent t in any possible order.
Each of the three methods yields an estimator

which is consistent and

asymptotically normal under fairly general regularity conditions. However,

because methods 1 and 3 use only some of the information in the data they are
inefficient but they will yield consistent estimates of 8 under some cir-

cumstances in which the data are not truly generated by the del. For
example, if, for strategic reasons, agents

rankings correctly reflect their top

preferences but not this second, third, etc., then Method 1 will yield con-

sistent estimates of 8 but Methods 2 and 3 will give inconsistent estimates.

Similarly, if agents reorder their xst preferred

alteratives, then Method 3

will yield consistent estimates while 1 and 2 will not.
In general, if the ranking data does not reflect the true preference
rankings of the agents then the three

estimators will have different probabi-

lity limits. These observations suggest

that specification tests based on the

differences between the Method 1 and 3 estimators and
will yield tests with power against a

the

Method 2 estimator

broad range of alternatives for which

the ranking data does not reflect preference rankings.

