NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LIBERTY FOR MORE:
FINANCE AND EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES
Ross Levine
Yona Rubinstein
Working Paper 19380
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19380
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

We thank Carlos Avenancio, Maria Carkovic, Raquel Fernandez, Erica Field, Bob Hall, Jeff Smith,
and seminar participants at the June 6th, 2013 presentation of this research at the Third Annual Cato
Papers on Public Policy Conference for very helpful comments and suggestions. The Cato Institute
provided financial support to both authors for this research. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Ross Levine and Yona Rubinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Liberty for More: Finance and Educational Opportunities
Ross Levine and Yona Rubinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 19380
August 2013, Revised October 2013
JEL No. G21,G28,G38,I21,I22,I24,J08,J24,O15,O16
ABSTRACT
Banking reforms—that reduced interest rates—boosted college enrollment rates among able students
from middle class families. We define “able” students as those with learning aptitude scores in the
top two-thirds of the U.S. population. We define “middle class” as families in which both parents are
not highly-educated (above 12 years of education) and that are neither in the bottom fourth nor in the
top 10 percent of the distribution family income in the U.S. Our findings suggest that credit conditions,
the ability of an individual to benefit from college, and a family’s financial and educational circumstances
combine to shape college decisions. The functioning of the financial system plays a powerful role
in shaping the degree to which a child’s educational choices—and hence economic opportunities—are
defined by parental income.
Ross Levine
Haas School of Business
University of California at Berkeley
545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu
Yona Rubinstein
Department of Management
London School of Economics
London
United Kingdom
y.rubinstein@lse.ac.uk

1.

Introduction
Consider two observations about education and income. First, there is a positive association

between education and income. On average, people who receive more education go on to earn
higher incomes. Second, there is a positive association between parental income and the education
of their children. Thus, higher-income parents tend to have children that receive more education and
this additional education is associated with those children earning higher incomes as adults.1
These two observations motivate a hotly debated question among social scientists: If the
returns to education are so high, why do children from lower-income families obtain less education
than children from higher-income families? If education boosts future incomes, what constrains
children from lower-income families from attaining more education?
One view focuses on the costs: lower-income families do not have the money—and
borrowing is too expensive—to pay for more (Becker, 1975; Kane, 1994; Kane and Rouse, 1999;
Ellwood and Kane, 2000; Belley and Lochner, 2007; Brown, Scholz and Seshadri, 2007). From this
perspective, financial reforms that lower interest rates will boost education, including college
enrollment rates, among children from disadvantaged families that were unable to afford college
when credit was more expensive.
A second view stresses the benefits: the returns to higher education for children from
disadvantaged families are comparatively low, and so they invest less in education (Cameron and
Heckman, 1998, 2001; Shea 2000; Keane and Wolpin, 2001; Carneiro and Heckman, 2002; Keane
2002). That is, if children from lower-income families experience family, community, and grade
school environments that are less conducive to their cognitive and noncognitive development than
children from higher-income families, then their expected benefits from attending college will be
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1

See Behrman and Taubman (1990) Hauser (1993), Kane (1994), Mayer (1997), Manski and Wise (1983), Cameron

1	  	  
	  

corresponding lower. Consequently, by the time students are deciding whether to work or go to
college, their childhood environments have already determined their expected benefits from going
to college. From this perspective, financial reforms that reduce the cost of credit will have a minor
effect as disadvantaged families accurately view the expected benefits as low.2
To assess these views empirically, numerous empirical studies use indirect methods—that
do not rely on directly observing interest rates—to infer whether interest rates materially shape
educational choices because of the difficulties associated with identifying exogenous changes in
interest rates. As we review in greater detail below, a large body of research devoted to estimating
the causal effects of schooling on income (see Card, 1999, 2001) has found that the instrumental
variable estimates of the returns to schooling exceed the OLS estimates. In theory, credit
constrained individuals will have higher returns to education on the margin than less constrained
individuals. This implies that if the instrumental variables capture the schooling choices of credit
constrained individuals more than others, the instrumental variable estimates will be larger (Lang,
1993; Card 1999, 2001). However, it might be inappropriate to interpret the differences between IV
and OLS estimates as reflecting the impact of the cost of credit on educational choices since other
factors can produce these differences (Carneiro and Heckman, 2002; Cameron and Taber, 2004).
A second, but much more limited body of research, directly assesses the impact of interest
rates on education, but there are serious methodological limitations with this line of inquiry too. In
an influential study, Card and Lemieux (2001) find that changes in U.S. interests do not account for
changes in educational choices over the period from 1968 to 1996. But, it is inappropriate to treat
the United States as an integrated capital market with a single interest rate during the 20th century
with corresponding effects on state-level interest rates. State bank regulations differentially
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2

Rather than focusing on reducing the cost of credit, this “benefits” view holds that the most efficacious way to boost
college graduation rates among lower-income families is through early childhood interventions that enhance cognitive
and noncognitive development and thereby boost the returns to education.

2	  	  
	  

influenced the cost of credit in each state. And, states reformed their regulations in different years
during the second half of the 20th century. Consequently, both the level and dynamics of interest
rates differ across states. Furthermore, since many factors might be correlated with both interest
rates and education, it is important to use instrumental variables to identify the impact of interest
rates on education.
By integrating labor and financial economics, we contribute to the study of the impact of
credit conditions on educational choices in several ways. First, we assess whether state-specific
banking reforms that intensified competition among banks and reduced state-specific interest rates
increased the probability that students from those states attended college. Previous research on
education and credit conditions typically fails both to recognize that U.S. credit markets were highly
segmented due to state-specific regulations on banks for virtually the entire 20th century and to
exploit the cross-state heterogeneity in the timing of banking reforms that lowered interest rates. In
one of the largest, if not the largest, financial regulatory reform in the history of the United States,
every state relaxed geographic restrictions on bank branching—intrastate bank branching reform—
during the second half of the 20th century, where the state-specific timings of these deregulations
were independent of interest rates and education. Although these intrastate bank branch
deregulations eased credit conditions, we are—to the best of our knowledge—the first to assess the
impact of these regulatory reforms on educational choices.3
Second, using state-level bank branch deregulation as an instrumental variable for interest
rates, we assess whether this component of state-level interest rates affects the probability that
students from that state attend college. However, one must be cautious in drawing sharp inferences
from the IV analyses, since bank branch deregulation does not necessarily satisfy both conditions
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3

The first version of this NBER Working Paper is forthcoming in the CATO Papers on Public Policy, Volume 3, 2013,
Edited by Jeffrey Miron.

3	  	  
	  

for a valid instrument. Although there is no evidence that educational choices or interest rates
influence the timing of bank deregulation in a state, the exclusionary condition might not hold. For
example, bank deregulation might accelerate economic activity and boost the demand for skilled
workers, encouraging more students to attend college. Put differently, exogenous bank branch
deregulation might reduce interest rates and boost college enrollment rates, but it might not boost
college enrollments by lowering interest rates; it might boost college enrollments by increasing the
demand for skilled workers. Thus, to interpret the instrumental variable analyses as providing
information about the impact of an exogenous change in the cost of borrowing on the decision to
attend college, we separately evaluate whether demand side factors are driving the results.
Third, we assess whether an easing of credit conditions triggered by intrastate bank branch
deregulation influenced only those particular children within particular families implied by Becker’s
(1967) model of human capital accumulation. The model suggests that the impact of lowering
interest rates on attending college depends in an interactive manner on family income and the ability
of the individual child to benefit from college. This framework suggests that a reduction in interest
rates will have a larger impact on high-ability students that would benefit materially from college
but whose parents were previously unable to afford college than it will on high-ability children from
families that are unconstrained when making decisions about college. Thus, the model predicts that
the impact of a change in credit conditions will differ depending on the ability of the individual
student to benefit from college and on the ability of the family to pay for college. We are the first to
assess this prediction using both the simple reduced form analyses of education and bank
deregulation and the IV analyses that use bank deregulation as an instrument for interest rates.
To make these contributions, we primarily use the National Longitudinal Survey of Youths,
1979 (NLSY79) because of its unique characteristics. First, the NLSY79 traces individuals through

4	  	  
	  

time, so that we know the educational attainment of each person. Second, the NLSY79 contains
information on learning aptitude. It gave respondents the Armed Forces Qualifications Test (AFQT)
in 1980 when they were between the ages of 15 and 22. We use the AFQT score as a measure of
learning ability, i.e., ability to benefit from education. Third, the NLSY79 has information about
each respondent’s family, including family income in 1979 and the educational attainment of both
the mother and father. Given the tight connection between education and income and the problems
associated with measuring permanent income using only one year of data, we sometimes use
parental education as a proxy measure of the permanent income of the family instead of family
income in 1979. Fourth, the NSLY79 has information two psychometric traits, as measured in 1980
self-esteem and the degree to which the person believes that chance, fate, and luck control their
lives. Thus, in assessing the impact of changes in credit conditions on educational choices, we can
control for many individual and family characteristics. To complement the NLSY79, we use the
Current Population Survey (CPS), which surveys more people than the NLSY79 but it does not
information on learning ability, parental education, or personality traits. Thus, we use the CPS to
make broader assessments about the impact of bank deregulation on interest rates and the Mincerian
returns to education and the NLSY79 to assess how changes in credit conditions influence the
decision of individuals to attend college.
We find that intrastate bank deregulation substantially increased the probability that
individuals with particular learning abilities and family traits attended college. Specifically, bank
deregulation had no effect on students in the lower third of the distribution of learning ability, as
measured by AFQT: for students where the expected benefits of college are low, changes in credit
conditions have no appreciable effect on the probability of attending college. But, bank deregulation
did boost the probability that “able” students—students in the upper two-thirds of the AFQT

5	  	  
	  

distribution—go to college. For example, five years after a state deregulated, the probability that
able students attend college was 13 percent greater than before deregulation. Moreover, and
consistent with theory, it is the able students from families in which both parents have a relatively
low level of education (less than 12 years of completed schooling) that an easing of credit
conditions has the biggest impact. Indeed, for able students from families in which both parents
have more than 12 years of education, bank deregulation has no effect. To the extent that parental
education is an accurate signal of the family’s permanent income (or the family’s taste for
education), changes in credit conditions do not have much of an influence on the decisions highlyeducated, affluent parents to send their children to college. However, in more disadvantaged
families (as measured by parental education), bank deregulation has a large effect: five years after
deregulation, able students from disadvantaged families have an almost 20 percent greater
probability of attending college. The results are consistent with the view that credit conditions
materially influence the educational opportunities of a particular segment of society: able students
from disadvantaged families.
When dividing the sample by family income instead of parental education, we find that
easing intrastate bank deregulation boosted college enrollment rates among able students from
middle and upper-middle class families. Even among students in the upper two-thirds of the AFQT
distribution, an easing of credit conditions did not influence children from lower-income families
(below the 25th percentile of the income distribution) or high-income families (above the 90th
percentile). At these income levels, marginal changes in interest rates did not alter decisions about
college. However, for able students from families with incomes between the 50th and 75th percentile
of the income distribution, bank deregulation materially altered college decisions.

6	  	  
	  

The results are very similar when we use bank deregulation as an instrumental variable for
interest rates. Only for able students from middle and upper-middle class families is the reduction in
interest rates associated with an increase in the probability of attending college. For lower-income
families or high-income families, such changes in the cost of credit do not influence college
decisions. And, reductions in interest rates do not increase the probability of attending college
among students with AFQT scores in the bottom third of the sample. Consistent with theory,
changes in the cost of credit influence a particular, but meaningful, segment of society.
Finally, we show that our results do not simply reflect the impact of intrastate bank
deregulation on the demand for skilled labor; rather, bank deregulatory reforms boosted college
enrollment rates among able students from middle and upper-middle class families at partially by
lowering the costs of credit. In particular, a legitimate concern with our analyses is that perhaps
branch deregulation boosted economic activity (Jayaratne and Strahan, 1996) and thereby boosted
the demand for skilled labor. Perhaps, this “demand side” effect is driving the increase in college
enrollments and we have misinterpreted the findings as arising from a reduction in the “cost of
credit.” While reasonable conceptually, the “demand side” channel is not the only channel through
which bank deregulation increased college enrollments. If the results were purely a demand side
effect, then bank deregulation should boost the demand for college-educated workers and the
returns to a college education. But, we show that that bank deregulation reduced the returns to a
college education, which is fully consistent with a reduction in costs boosting the supply of collegeeducated workers. Although we do not rule out the demand-side channel as a contributing factor,
the findings suggest that the supply side mattered too, as deregulation eased credit conditions and
this boosted the supply of college-educated workers.

7	  	  
	  

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 sketches the theoretical
framework and its empirical predictions. Section 3 provides a literature review and details how we
propose to contribute to existing research. In section 4, we discuss the data on bank deregulation,
interest rates, and education. Section 5 presents the results and section 6 concludes.

2.

Theoretical Framework and Empirical Predictions
Building directly on Becker (1967) and Mincer (1974), this section first presents a

theoretical model of human capital and then details the empirical predictions emerging from the
theory. In its simplest form, the Becker (1967) model assumes that each individual i maximizes the
discounted present value of lifetime earnings, W(si), by choosing the optimal level of investment in
human capital, si, which we call “schooling” or “education” but which represents all investments in
human capital skills that boost earnings.
∞

W ( si ) =

∫ y( s ) exp(−(r − θ ))dt,
i

i

i

t =s

(1)

where y(si) denotes the annual earnings of an individual with a schooling level si, ri is the interest
rate facing individual i, which reflects her cost of capital and subjective rate of time preference, and

θi is the individual’s preference for schooling over work. For simplicity, we assume an infinite
planning horizon.
To complete the model, let earnings reflect the spot market value of a unit of human capital
(P) multiplied by the individual’s stock of accumulated human capital (H(si)):

y ( si ) = P * H ( si ).
Further, following Grilliches (1977) and more recently Card (2001), define the human capital
production function as follows:
8	  	  
	  

(2)

H ( si ) = exp(ai si −

γ
2

si2 + µi ),

(3)

where individual i’s human capital is positively related to her schooling (si), ability to benefit from
schooling ( ai ) and initial level of general skills (µi). The beneficial effects of additional schooling
face diminishing returns ( γ ), which we assume to be the same across all individuals for simplicity.
*

Solving, the optimal level of schooling for individual i ( si ) is

si* =

ai − ri + θ i

γ

.
(4)

Across individuals, differences in the optimal amount of education reflect differences in the ability
to benefit from education (ai)—modeled as the technological efﬁciency with which learning time,
effort and resources augment the value of human capital, the cost of credit (ri), and the (dis)utility
from schooling (θi). Clearly, if an individual’s marginal benefit from education in terms of future
income is relatively large (i.e., a large ai ), then this individual will tend to invest relatively more in
schooling than a low-ability person. And, if an individual’s preference for education, θi, is relatively
high, then such an individual will invest more in education than comparable individuals with
weaker tastes for schooling. The model is silent about the source of heterogeneity in the “ability to
benefit” from education (Ben Porath, 1967) and the “ability to pay.” Separating between the ability
to benefit from education and the ability to pay for it is challenging, especially since family and
community environments affect both.
While it is appropriate to model human capital as a stock and investment in human capital as
a flow, schooling—especially higher level education—is often a discrete choice. Therefore, there
are discrete educational choices, such as attending college, for which the impact of easing credit
conditions will depend on the initial conditions facing the family and individual student. For
9	  	  
	  

example, a high-ability student in a high-income family that has a strong taste for education might
have an optimal level of schooling that includes college and even a postgraduate degree. In this
case, lowering interest rates will not affect the decision to attend college. As another example, a
low-ability student from a disadvantaged family with weak tastes for education might have an
optimal level of schooling that does not even include graduating from high school. In this case,
lowering interest rates is unlikely to affect the decision to attend college. However, for some highability children from families in which initial interest rates cause the expected costs of college to
outweigh the expected benefits, an easing of credit conditions could influence the decision to go to
college. Thus, the impact of credit conditions on the decision of an individual student in a particular
family to attend college may depend materially on the student’s ability to benefit from college and
the initial financial conditions facing the family and its taste for education.

3. The Literature and Our Contribution
3.1 Debates
Why do lower-income families not invest more in the education of their children? An
enormous literature documents large disparities in high school and college graduation rates across
family income groups over the 20th century (Behrman and Taubman, 1990; Hauser, 1993; Kane,
1994; Mayer, 1997; Manski and Wise, 1983; Cameron and Heckman, 1998, 2001; Shea, 2000;
Caneiro and Heckman, 2002). Since education is so highly correlated with income, this motivates
research on the persistence of inter-income group disparities in education.
As the model highlights, there are two major, though not mutually exclusive, explanations
for why disadvantaged families invest comparatively little in the education of their children. The
first emphasizes the costs: lower-income families do not have the money to pay for more education
10	  
	  
	  

and their borrowing costs are high. These costs hinder lower-income families from providing the
same level of education to their kids as higher-income families, perpetuating intergenerational
income differences. From this perspective, lowering interest rates will lower the costs of education,
so that high-ability children from lower-income families can now afford college. Thus,
improvements in financial systems can reduce inequalities of opportunity and the inefficient
persistence of relative income differences.
The second explanation of why lower-income families do not invest more in education
stresses the benefits: the children of disadvantaged families frequently face lower expected returns
to additional education, i.e., their ai’s are low. According to this view, family, community, and
school environments affect the cognitive and non-cognitive development of children and hence the
ability of those children to benefit from a college education. That is, by the time children are
deciding about whether to work or go to college, the expected benefits of college have largely been
determined. Thus, children from disadvantaged families, which tend to provide family, community,
and school environments less conducive to the cognitive and noncognitive development of their
children, will disproportionately, and accurately, view college as a relatively low-return activity.
From this perspective, lowering interests rates will not induce lower-income families to invest much
more in sending the kids to college.

11	  
	  
	  

3.2. Existing Evidence
The evidence on whether the credit conditions influence educational choices is inconclusive. Given
the difficulties associated with measuring the credit conditions facing individuals, a large body of
research has used indirect methods— that do not require researchers to observe interest rates or
other measures of credit conditions—to draw inferences about the influence of credit conditions on
educational choices.
Numerous studies have tackled this question by studying the correlation between
educational attainment and family income (or other family characteristics). The positive correlation
between educational attainment and family income has been widely interpreted as evidence that
borrowing constraints hinder educational choices (see for example: Kane, 1994; Kane and Rouse,
1999; Ellwood and Kane, 2000; Belley and Lochner, 2007; Brown, Scholz and Seshadri, 2012).
However the step from correlation to causation is a precarious one as family income is also strongly
correlated with family resources that foster cognitive and non-cognitive traits that boost the ability
of a student to benefit from more education. The connection between family resources and the
nurturing of cognitive and noncognitive traits that increase the productivity of formal schooling has
been emphasized by Cameron and Heckman, 1998, 2001; Shea 2000; Keane and Wolpin, 2001;
Carneiro and Heckman, 2002; Heckman and Rubinstein, 2001; Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006;
Keane 2002 and Cameron and Taber, 2004.
In addition, a large literature finds that the instrumental variables (IV) estimates of the return
to schooling exceed OLS estimates (see Card, 1999, 2001). Credit conditions are one possible
source of this difference between IV and OLS estimates, a point first offered by Becker (1967). In
particular, instrumental variables estimates can be interpreted as estimating the return for those
randomly assigned to schooling by the instrument. Finding higher returns using IV is consistent

12	  
	  
	  

with the view that that those affected by the “instrument” are credit constrained (Lang, 1993; Card,
1999, 2001) and therefore consistent with interest rates curtailing the educational opportunities of
lower-income families. Similarly, Shea (2000) finds that family income matters for children’s
human capital investment in a sample of low-income families, but not for the broader population.4
Substantial work, however, challenges the methodological efficacy of these indirect methods
for drawing inferences about the impact of credit conditions on educational choices. For example,
Heckman (1995), Cameron and Heckman (1998, 2001), and Carneiro and Heckman (2002) suggest
that it is inappropriate to interpret the difference between OLS and IV estimates in the sample of
low-income families as signaling the importance of liquidity constraints, criticizing econometrically
the use of invalid instruments and pointing, economically, for alternative explanations including
sorting to schooling on comparative advantage.
Hence, larger coefficients in IV regressions of income on education might not imply the
existence and impact of interest rates on schooling. That is, without directly measuring exogenous
changes in interest rates, it is difficult to distinguish between cross-family differences in interest
rates (ri) and attitudes toward education (θi). Furthermore, Cameron and Taber (2004) question the
robustness of the instrumental variable results to using alternative instruments, and Keane and
Wolpin (2001) estimate a structural model of schooling behavior and find that relaxing interest rates
tends to increase consumption, not investment in education
A much more limited set of papers assesses the direct linkage between interest rates and
schooling decisions. As a leading example, Card and Lemieux (2001) find that changes in U.S.
interest rates over the period from 1968-1996 do not account for changes in educational choices.
There are two key limitations with direct approaches that examine the connection between national
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
4

	  Researchers also examine the impact of targeted credit programs on education, such as the CalGrant program in
California for college bound students (Kane, 2003) or Headstart.

	  
13	  
	  
	  

interest rates and educational choices. First, it is inappropriate to treat the United States as an
integrated capital market with a single interest rate, especially with regards to household loans
during the 20th century. Each state exerted a powerful regulatory role over banks until the mid1990s, so that interest rates, and their evolution over time, differ markedly by state. Second, it is
valuable to identify an exogenous source of variation in credit conditions to assess the impact of
interest rates on educational choices. Some third factor, such as aggregate economic activity, could
affect both interest rates and education decisions, creating a spurious correlation between them.
After first distributing our research in the NBER Working Paper series, we learned that Sun
and Yannelis (2013) examine the impact of bank deregulation on educational choices and
borrowing to fund education. They find a positive relationship between deregulation and both total
state college enrollment and borrowing for education. In contrast to our paper, they do not
distinguish students by their ability to benefit from additional education or by the educational and
income characteristics of their parents, which theory predicts is important for assessing how an
easing of credit conditions influences educational choices.

14	  
	  
	  

3.3. Our Contribution
We propose to contribute to existing research in the following interrelated ways. First, we
will directly examine the relationship between educational choices and credit conditions, as
measured by exogenous changes in bank regulations that lowered interest rates. This contrasts with
the large literature that draws inferences about the importance of credit conditions in explaining
educational choices through indirect methods, i.e., by examining differences between IV and OLS
coefficient estimates of the relationship between wages and education.
Second, we will assess the impact of the exogenous relaxation of regulatory restrictions on
bank branching—that lowered interest rates—on college enrollment rates. As we describe in greater
detail below, these deregulations occurred across all states in varying years during the second half
of the 20th century. Since these state-level regulatory reforms occurred in different years, we control
for all national influences by including year fixed effects. Furthermore, whereas past studies take
the United States as an integrated financial system with one interest rate, we allow interests rates to
differ at the state-year level. This is crucial for drawing accurate inferences about the relationship
between credit conditions and educational choices because state regulations heavily and
differentially influenced credit conditions across the U.S. states for much of the 20th century and
these regulations were liberalized in different years in different states.
Third, we assess the relationship between interest rates and college enrollment rates, using
exogenous cross-state, cross-year variation in bank deregulation as an instrumental variable (IV) for
interest rates. Unlike much existing work, it is valuable to use instrumental variables because
interest rates and schooling choices might be simultaneously determined. In these analyses, we
argue that bank deregulation is exogenous to educational choices, but we do not claim that bank
deregulation influences schooling only through its effect on interest rates; we do not claim that bank

15	  
	  
	  

deregulation satisfies the exclusionary restriction. In particular, bank deregulation might boost the
demand for skilled workers and thereby induce more people to attend college. Despite these
limitations, we present evidence that deregulation boosted college enrollment rates by reducing the
cost of college, not simply by increasing the demand for skilled workers.
Fourth, we provide an empirical bridge between those that focus on the costs of education
and those that focus on the benefits of education in seeking to explain why the children of lowerincome families tend to obtain less education. To do this, we will evaluate the impact of easing
credit conditions (“costs of education”) on an individual’s educational choices while differentiating
by proxies for (1) the person’s learning aptitude (“benefits of education”) and (2) the family’s initial
conditions as measured by family income and the education of the parents. Thus, we will assess
how the costs and benefits of college combine to shape an individual’s educational choices.
Furthermore, by differentiating by each individual’s cognitive abilities and the traits of each
person’s parents, the framework advertises an addition line of inquiry: Credit conditions can
influence the ability of a person to benefit from college. For example, if a reduction in interest rates
allows a family to purchase a home in a better school district and this school district enhances the
cognitive and noncognitive capabilities of the children, then interests can increase the returns from
additional education for these children: a reduction in ri can boost ai, with a concomitant increase in
education and lifetime earnings. We are pursuing this line of research in a companion paper.

16	  
	  
	  

4. Data: Bank Deregulation, Interest rates, and Education
4.1. History and timing of bank deregulation
Geographic restrictions on banks have their origins in the U.S. Constitution, which limited
states from taxing interstate commerce and issuing fiat money. In turn, states raised revenues by
chartering banks and taxing their profits. Since states received no charter fees from banks
incorporated in other states, state legislatures prohibited the entry of out-of-state banks through
interstate bank regulations. To maximize revenues from selling charters, states also effectively
granted local monopolies to banks by restricting banks from branching within state borders. These
intrastate branching restrictions frequently limited banks to operating in one city.
By protecting inefficient banks from competition, geographic restrictions created a powerful
constituency for maintaining these regulations even after the original fiscal motivations receded.
Indeed, banks protected by these regulations successfully lobbied both the federal government and
state governments to prohibit interstate banking and intrastate branching (White, 1982).
In the second half of the 20th century, however, technological, legal, and financial
innovations diminished the economic and political power of banks benefiting from geographic
restrictions. In particular, a series of innovations lowered the costs of using distant banks. This
reduced the monopoly power of local banks and weakened their ability and desire to lobby for
geographic restrictions. For example, the invention of automatic teller machines (ATMs), in
conjunction with court rulings that ATMs are not bank branches, weakened the geographical link
between banks and their clientele. Furthermore, the creation of checkable money market mutual
funds made banking by mail and telephone easier, thus further weakening the power of local bank
monopolies. Finally, the increasing sophistication of credit scoring techniques, improvements in

17	  
	  
	  

information processing, and the revolution in telecommunications reduced the informational
advantages of local bankers, especially with regards to small and new firms.
These national developments interacted with preexisting state characteristics to shape the
timing of bank deregulation across the states, which are listed in Table 1. As shown by Kroszner
and Strahan (1999), deregulation occurred later in states where potential losers from deregulation
(small, monopolistic banks) were financially stronger and had a lot of political power. On the other
hand, deregulation occurred earlier in states where potential winners of deregulation (small firms)
were relatively numerous.
Thus, unlike many types of regulatory reforms that occur at the national level, geographic
bank deregulation took place on a state-by-state basis over an extended period. Table 1 lists the
timing of these reforms across the 50 states plus the District of Columbia. For example, we often
use the number of years since a state deregulated intrastate branch banking in 1979, which has a
mean value of 3.6 and a standard deviation of 7.1, as shown in Table 2.

4.2. Interest rates
To measure the cost of credit, we use data on mortgage rates at the state-year level. Since
consumers frequently use homes as collateral, these rates provide information on general credit
conditions. The mortgage interest rate data are based on a monthly survey of major lenders that are
asked to report the terms and conditions on all conventional, single-family, fully amortized,
purchase-money loans closed in the last five working days of the month. The data excludes FHAinsured and VA-guaranteed mortgages, refinancing loans, and balloon loans. The “effective interest
rate” includes the amortization of initial fees, points, and charges over a 10-year period, which is the

18	  
	  
	  

historical assumption of the average life of a mortgage loan and is computed by the Federal
Housing Finance Board. We then deflate by the national consumer price index.

4.3. Education and other individual level data
We primarily use the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79). The NLSY79 is a
nationally representative sample of 12,686 young men and women who were 14-22 years old when
they were first surveyed in 1979. Interviewees have been surveyed annually since the initial wave of
the survey and on a biennial basis after 1994. The NLSY is made up of three subsamples: (1) a
random sample of 6,111 non-institutionalized civilian youths, (2) a supplemental sample of 5,295
youths designed to oversample civilian Hispanics, blacks, and economically disadvantaged whites,
and (3) a sample of 1,280 youths who were ages 17–21 as of January 1, 1979, and who were
enlisted in the military as of September 30, 1978. We use the random sample and the black and
Hispanic oversamples and use the weights provided by the NLSY79, so that the weighted and
analyses provided a representative sample of the U.S. population.
In the analyses, we control for information on family background, including family income
and the highest grade completed by a person's mother and father. Specifically, Mother’s Education
and Father’s Education equal the number of years of education of the mother and father
respectively; and Family Income in 1979 measures the income of the individual’s household in
1979, computed in 2010 dollars. (In the regressions we divide Family Income in 1979 by 100,000.)
As shown in Table 2, the mean value is about $62,300 and the median value is about $56,400.
There are missing values for Family Income in 1979. Consequently, when we use Family Income in
1979 as a regressor, we impute the sample mean and include a dummy variable that equals one for
observations in which Family Income in 1979 is missing. When we use Family Income in 1979 to

19	  
	  
	  

divide the sample, we do not impute a value for missing observations and instead use a smaller
sample of individuals. Therefore the number of observations is not identical in these different
specifications.
The major dependent variable is the binary indicator Attended College, which equals one if
the individual attended college and zero otherwise. This variable equals one for individuals that
attended college but did not graduate, those that graduated from college, and those that went on
graduate school. As shown in Table 2, about half of the individuals attended college. We focus on
whether the person attended college since it focuses on the decisions whether to go to college or
work, which is the central decision in the theoretical framework. The results, however, are robust to
focusing on whether the individual graduated from college or not.
Key explanatory variables are as follows:
AFQT Percentile is the individual’s AFQT (Armed Forces Qualification Test) score as a
percentile of the entire NLSY79 sample, where the AFQT Percentile is measured in 1980 and where
50 is the median of the NLSY79 sample and is 51 for our main regression sample due to missing
values on parental education. The AFQT is a weighted sum of four tests of the ten-part Armed
Services Vocational Aptitude Battery. We use the AFQT Percentile as a proxy of an individual’s
“ability to benefit from additional education.” To guarantee that AFQT test scores were not
influenced by school attendance, AFQT score is standardized by age of the individual at the time of
the test (Cameron and Heckman, 1993; Neal and Johnson, 1996; and Altonji and Pierret, 2001). We
exclude observations with missing AFQT scores, parental education, state of residency, and
education attainment.
External Locus of Control Score (computed in 1980) measures the degree to which
individuals believe that external factors, such as chance, fate, and luck control their lives relative to

20	  
	  
	  

the degree that the individual has internal control over his or her life, where values range from four
to sixteen—higher values signify more external control. The average value is 8.5
Self-Esteem Score (computed in 1980) measures the degree of approval or disapproval of
one’s self, where values range from six to 30— higher values signify greater self-approval. As
shown in Table 2, the mean value of Self-Esteem Score is about 22.6, with a standard deviation of 4.
In some specifications, we use the Census Bureau's Current Population Survey (hereafter,
CPS). We use the March Annual Demographic Survey files for the sample years 1976 to 2007,
taken from IPUMS. We use this much larger sample of individuals to compute the Mincerian
returns to education as discussed below.

5. Results
5.1. Bank deregulation and interest rates
We begin by assessing the impact of bank deregulation on interest rates using the following
specification:
!
rjt = αDjt + !"!"
+ δj + δt + ejt.

In the equation, rjt is a measure of real interest rates in state j in year t, δj and δt are vectors of state
and year fixed-effects, and ejt is the error term. The variables of interest, Djt, and !!"! , equal the
number of years since state j deregulated (and zero before state j deregulated) and the number of
years since deregulation squared. In total, we have data for 48 states plus the District of Columbia.
Consistent with the literature on bank branch deregulation, we eliminate Delaware and South
Dakota because the structure of their banking systems were heavily affected by laws that made them
centers for the credit card industry.

21	  
	  
	  

Table 2 shows that intrastate bank deregulation was associated with a substantial reduction
in interest rates when controlling for year and state effects. The significant, negative relationship
between interest rates and bank deregulation only emerges when controlling for both year and state
effects. This is consistent with the view that capital markets were segmented across the states of the
United States and that one needs to abstract of national fluctuations in credit conditions to identify
the independent impact of state-level deregulations on state interest rates.

5.2. Bank Deregulation and College: Reduced Form Results
We next assess the reduced form relationship between the removal of geographic restrictions
on banks and college enrollment, where we differentiate individuals by AFQT scores and by
parental education or family income. Since family income in one year might be a poor proxy for
permanent income and since education is highly correlated with income, parental education might
provide a more accurate signal of the family’s long-run financial situation.
Based on the theoretical framework above, consider the linear-in-the-parameters probability
model for whether a person attends college (sij):
!
sij = !! !"#$! + !!! !!,!" + !!! !!,!"
+ βXXij + εij,

where the subscript i indicates a person and j designates a state. We include one observation per
person. We use AFQT to proxy for an individual’s “ability to learn.” In many specifications, we
split the sample by AFQT score to assess whether the impact of bank deregulation on educational
choices differs by a student’s “ability to learn.” Dj,79 is the number of years since deregulation for
state j in 1979. We choose 1979 because it is the first year of the NLSY79 and it corresponds to a
period in the lives of respondents when interest rates and credit conditions are likely to influence
educational choices. Survey respondents are between the ages of 15 and 22 in 1979. By using a

22	  
	  
	  

quadratic for years since deregulation, we allow for changes in credit conditions to have nonlinear
effects on educational choices.	  	  
As additional regressors, Xij, we include the following. External Locus of Control Score
(computed in 1980) measures the degree to which individuals believe that external factors, such as
chance, fate, and luck control their lives relative to the degree that the individual has internal control
over his or her life. Self-Esteem Score (computed in 1980) measures the degree of approval or
disapproval of one’s self. Mother’s and Father’s Education measure the number of years of
education of the mother and father respectively. Family Income in 1979 measures the income of the
individual’s family in 1979, computed in 2010 dollars and divided by $100,000 (as a regressor). In
several specifications, we split the sample based on parental education or family income to assess
whether the impact of deregulation on college enrollment differs by these family characteristics.
Furthermore, in all specifications, we control for regional, racial, gender and year of birth effects,
and include a dummy variable that equals one if we imputed Family Income in 1979.
Tables 4 and 5 provide the regression results, where Table 4 provides the OLS estimates and
Table 5 gives the Probit results. In both tables, column (1) provides the results for the full sample,
columns (2) and (3) provides results splitting the sample between those with AFQT Percentile
above and below 33, respectively. The NLSY79 sample mean value of AFQT Percentile is 50. In
columns (4) and (5), we only consider individuals with AFQT scores above 33 and further split the
sample by the education of the parents: column (4) includes individuals where either parent has 12
years or less of education and column (5) includes individuals where both parents have more than
12 years of education. Since the dependent variable is binary, we focus on the results using Probit
regressions. The OLS regressions yield very similar inferences. For the Probit analyses, the reported
coefficients are the estimated marginal effects, evaluated at the mean values of the regressors. The

23	  
	  
	  

standard errors are clustered at the state level and corrected for heteroskedasticity using the HuberWhite adjustment.
Bank regulation boosted the probability that individuals with particular abilities and family
traits attend college. In particular, bank deregulation has no effect on relatively low ability people,
i.e., people with AFQT scores lower than 33 (Table 5, column 3). But, deregulation does have a
positive impact on “able” students—students with AFQT scores greater than 33 (Table 5, column
2). For instance, one year after deregulation, the probability of attending college rose by about 3.5
percent; five years after deregulation, the probability is 13 percent greater than before deregulation;
10 years after deregulation, the probability is 15 percent greater; and 15 years after, the probability
is 8 percent greater than it was before the state deregulated restrictions on intrastate branching.
Furthermore, Table 5 shows that it is the able students from families in which both parents
do not have more than 12 years of education that experience the biggest boost in the probability of
going to college from bank deregulation. In particular, bank deregulation has no effect on attending
college for individuals with AFQT scores above 33 but who are from families in which both parents
have more than 12 years of education. But, bank deregulation has a very large effect on attending
college for able students from less well-educated parents. The estimated effects are large. For
instance, one year after deregulation, the probability of attending college rises by about 4.1 percent;
five years after deregulation, the probability is 16 percent greater than before deregulation; 10 years
after deregulation, the probability is 21 percent greater; and 15 years after, the probability is 17
percent greater than it was before the state deregulated restrictions on intrastate branching.
Besides the main results on bank deregulation, the analyses also show that AFQT and
parental education are positively associated with higher college enrollment even when splitting the
sample by AFQT and parental income. Self-esteem is also a good predictor of whether an individual

24	  
	  
	  

attends college, even after conditioning on the array of individual, family, regional, and national
factors included in the regressions.
Overall, the results from Tables 4 and 5 are consistent with the theoretical model presented
above. To the extent that people with AFQT scores in the bottom third of the distribution are
unlikely to benefit from college, it is unsurprising that an improvement in credit conditions does not
influence their probability of attending college. Similarly, to the extent that able students from welleducated parents have a high probability of attending college, we would not expect bank
deregulation to influence their likelihood of attending college either. Rather, theory and the
evidence in Tables 4 and 5 indicate that changes in credit conditions influence a particular, though
significant segment of society: able students from more disadvantaged family backgrounds.
Table 6 continues these analyses by splitting the sample by different levels of Family Income in
1979, rather than by the education of the parents. In these analyses, we only consider “able”
students, i.e., students with AFQT scores above 33. We present five Probit regressions of different
samples, where we consider families with family income of (1) less than the 25th percentile of
family income in our sample, (2) more than the 25th percentile, (3) more than the median, (4) more
than the 75th percentile, and (5) more than the 90th percentile of family income in our full sample.
We simply present the probit regression. The OLS regressions yield similar results.
We find that easing credit conditions—as proxied by intrastate bank deregulation—boosted
college enrollments for able students from middle class and upper-middle class families. As shown
in Table 6, changing credit conditions had no impact on college enrollment for students with AFQT
above 33 but who come from lower-income families (families with incomes below the 25th
percentile). And, changing credit conditions had no impact on college enrollment for able students
from high-income families (families with incomes above the 90th percentile). When we consider

25	  
	  
	  

people from the middle and upper-middle of the income distribution, bank deregulation exerted a
positive effect on college enrollment rates. For families with incomes above the median, the results
from equation (3) indicate that five years after bank deregulation, an able person’s probability of
attending college are on average 20 percent greater; ten years after deregulation, they are onequarter greater; even 15 years after deregulation, the probability of an able person attending college
are 15 percent greater than they were before deregulation.

5.3. 2SLS
We now employ a two-stage least squares (2SLS) Probit estimator to examine the impact of
interest rates on the probability of attending college. That is, we estimate the following Probit
equation of whether a person attends college or not (sij):
Pr(sij =1|!"#$! , !! ,  Xij ) = Φ(!! !"#$! + !! !! + βXXij)
where Φ( ) is the cumulative distribution function of the unit-normal distribution, rj is the real
interest rate in 1979 in state j and the other variables (X) are as defined earlier. The excluded
!
instrumental variables for rj are !!,!"   and !!,!"
. Recall from Table 3 that bank deregulation helps

account for cross-state, cross-time variation in interest rates. The first stage here is different from
Table 3 because there is no time variation; there is one observation per person. However, the
coefficients estimates from the first stage correspond with those presented in Table 3. In presenting
the 2SLS Probit estimates, Table 7 uses a similar structure to that of Table 6, i.e., we split the
sample by an individual’s AFQT scores and family income.
For able students from middle and upper-middle class families, we find that a reduction in
interest rates from bank deregulation during an individual’s formative years is associated with an
increase in the probability of attending college. For the full sample of individuals, there is not a
26	  
	  
	  

significant relationship between attending college and interest rates (Table 7’s column 1). And,
there is not a significant relationship between interest rates and attending college when we only
examine able students from lower-income families (families with incomes below the 25th
percentile), or when we only examine able students from high-income families (families with
incomes above the 90th percentile). Only when we consider able students from middle-class or
upper-middle class families, i.e., when we restrict the sample to able students from families with
incomes above the median or above the 75th percentile, do we find that changes in interest rates
triggered by bank deregulation are negatively and significantly associated with college attendance.
The economic magnitude of the relationship between interest rates and college attendance is
large for the sub-sample of students with AFQT scores above 33 who are from middle and uppermiddle class families. The coefficient estimate for the sample of able students from families with
incomes above the median indicates that a reduction in real interest rates of one percentage point is
associated with an increase in the probability of attending college of almost 40 percent. For a not
inconsequential segment of society, credit conditions are importantly linked with college
attendance.
As noted earlier, we must interpret these 2SLS estimates cautiously because the instruments
are unlikely to satisfy the exclusion restriction. Although there is no evidence that educational
choices influence the timing of intrastate branch deregulation, there is evidence that intrastate
branch deregulation influenced many features of the economy. Branch deregulation accelerated
economic activity (Jayaratne and Strahan, 1996), reduced income inequality by disproportionately
helping the poor (Beck, Levine, and Levkov, 2010), and reduced discrimination against black
workers (Levine, Levkov, and Rubinstein, 2013). Thus, bank deregulation might influence college
enrollment rates through a variety of channels beyond its effect on interest rates. It could very well

27	  
	  
	  

be that deregulation boosted the demand for skilled workers and it is this “demand side” effect that
drives the increase in college enrollment, not the “cost side” effect associated with the drop in
interest rates.
Although the exclusionary restriction might not hold, two observations suggest that bank
deregulation is pushing up college enrollment rates by reducing the cost of college, not just by
increasing the demand for skilled workers. First, Beck, Levine, and Levkov (2010) show that bank
deregulation increased the demand for unskilled workers, not skilled workers. Thus, bank
deregulation does not seem to have increased the demand for skilled workers, which is the starting
point of the “demand side” story.
Second, we now assess whether bank deregulation increased or decreased the returns to
education. According to the demand side story, bank deregulation should increase the demand for
skilled labor and hence the returns to education. In contrast, the supply side view suggests that bank
deregulation lowered the costs of a college education, boosted the supply of college workers, and
thereby lowered the returns to education. We assess which prediction holds in the data.
In Table 8, we regress the Mincerian returns to education on bank deregulation over the
period from 1976 through 2002 using the following specification:

!
MRjt = αDjt + !"!"
+ δj + δt + ejt.

The dependent variable, MRjt, equals the Mincerian Returns to education in state j during year t and
is computed by regressing – by state and year - log wages on years of education and a quartic in
potential work experience and collecting the estimated coefficient on years of education. To
compute MRjt, we use the CPS March Supplements and make the computations over the years 1976
through 2002, for the sample of full-time, full-year, white males between the ages of 25 and 55, and

28	  
	  
	  

excluding people living in group quarters and working in either the military or agriculture. We use
the CPS, rather than the NLSY79, because the CPS samples a much larger cross-section of
individuals and we do not need the longitudinal nature of the NLSY79 to compute the returns to
education at the state-year level.
As shown in Table 8, bank deregulation reduced the returns to education, after controlling
for state and year effects. This is consistent with the “cost” side channel playing an important role,
whereby bank deregulation lowered the costs of education, shifted out the supply curve of skilled
workers, and reduced the returns to education. These findings are inconsistent with a purely
“demand” side story, in which bank deregulation only boosted the demand for skilled labor, shifted
out the demand curve, and increased the returns to education.
The results presented in Tables 7 and 8 suggest that by lowering the costs of a college
education, bank deregulation boosted college enrollment rates among able students from middle and
upper-middle class families. While these results do not indicate that bank deregulation only
increased college enrollment by lowering costs, the results do suggest that bank deregulation
increased college enrollments by lowering costs. Although we focus on the impact of deregulation
on interest rates, it is possible that deregulation boosted college enrollment rates by increasing
family incomes and thereby reducing the utility costs of funding a child’s college education. While
the income channel is feasible, Beck, Levine, and Levkov (2010) show that deregulation boosted
the incomes of families in the lower third of the income distribution and we find that the major
impact of deregulation on college enrollment rates occurs in families between the median and 90th
percentiles of the income distribution. Thus, while we cannot nail down the interest rate channel per
se the evidence indicates that improvements in credit conditions triggered by bank deregulation
increased college enrollment rates.

29	  
	  
	  

6. Conclusions
In this paper, we find that intrastate branch deregulation—that lowered interest rates—
boosted college enrollments among able students from families in which middle and upper-middle
class families. Our findings suggest that credit conditions, the ability of an individual to benefit
from college, and a family’s financial circumstances combine to shape decisions about attending
college. Banking reforms that ease credit conditions boost college enrollment rates among
significant proportion of the population.
The analyses suggest that the functioning of the financial system exerts a powerful influence
on shaping economic opportunities, as emphasized by Levine (2005). While many factors shape the
economic opportunities available to a child, affording a good education is one of them. The results
presented in this paper indicate that improvements in the functioning of the financial system help
make education affordable to more students.

30	  
	  
	  

References
Altonji, Joseph G. and Charles R. Pierret. 2001 “Employer Learning and Statistical Discrimination.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(1) (February): 313-350.
Beck, Thorsten, Ross Levine, and Alexey Levkov. 2010. "Big Bad Banks? The Impact of U.S.
Branch Deregulation on Income Distribution." Journal of Finance. 65(5): 1637-1667.
Becker, Gary S. 1957. The Economics of Discrimination. The University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
Becker, Gary S. 1967. Human Capital and the Personal Distribution of Income. Ann Arbor
Michigan: University of Michigan Press.
Becker, G. 1975. Human Capital, 2nd Ed., New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Becker, Gary S., and Nigel Tomes. 1979. “An Equilibrium Theory of the Distribution of Income
and Intergenerational Mobility.” The Journal of Political Economy, 87(6): 1153-89.
Becker, Gary S., and Nigel Tomes. 1986. “Human Capital and the Rise and Fall of Families.”
Journal of Labor Economics, 4(3, July): S1-39.
Behrman, Jere R., and P. Taubman (1990). The Intergenerational Correlation between Children's
Adult Earnings and their Parent's Income: Results from the Michigan Panel Survey of
Income Dynamics, The Review of Income and Wealth, 36(2), 115-127.
Belley, P., and L. Lochner (2007), The Changing Role of Family Income and Ability in
Determining Educational Achievement", Working Paper.
Benabou, Roland. 1996. "Equity and Efficiency in Human Capital Investment: The Local
Connection." Review of Economics Studies 63(2) (April): 237-264.
Ben-Porath, Yoram. 1967. “The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of Earnings.”
Journal of Political Economy 75(4) (August): 352–365.
Brown, Meta, John K. Scholz, and Ananth Seshadri. 2012. "A New Test of Borrowing Constraints
for Education." Review of Economics Studies 79(2): 511-538.
Cameron, Stephen V. and James J. Heckman. 1993. “The Nonequivalence of High School
Equivalents.” Journal of Labor Economics 11(1) (January): 1-47.
Cameron, Stephen V. and James J. Heckman. 1998. “Life Cycle Schooling and Dynamic Selection
Bias: Models and Evidence for Five Cohorts of American Males ", The Journal of Political
Economy, 106, 262-333.
Cameron, Stephen V. and James J. Heckman. 2001. “The dynamics of educational attainment for
black, hispanic and white males", The Journal of Political Economy, 109, 455-499.
Cameron, S.V., and C. Taber. 2004). Estimation of Educational Borrowing Constraints Using
Returns to Schooling", The Journal of Political Economy, 112, 132-182.
Card, D. 1999. The causal effect of education on earnings', in (O. Ashenfelter, and D. Card, eds.),
Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol 3A. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, North-Holland,
pp.1801--63.
Card, D. 2001. Estimating the return to schooling: progress on some persistent econometric
problems', Econometrica, vol. 69(5), pp. 1127--60.
31	  
	  
	  

Card, D., and T. Lemieux 2001, Dropout and Enrollment Trends in the Post-War Period: What
Went Wrong in the 1970s? in Risky Behavior among Youths: An Economic Analysis, Ed:
Jonathan Gruber, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 439-482.
Carneiro, P., and J.J. Heckman. 2002, The Evidence on Interest rates in Post-Secondary Schooling",
Economic Journal, 112, 989-1018.
Carneiro, P. and Heckman, J. 2003. Human capital policy', in (J. Heckman and A. Krueger),
Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital Policies, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Ross Levine. 2009. “Finance and Inequality: Theory and Evidence.”
Annual Review of Financial Economics 1(1) (November): 287-318.
Ellwood, D., and T. Kane (2000), \Who Is Getting a College Education? Family Background and
the Growing Gaps in Enrollment", in S. Danziger and J. Waldfogel (eds.), Securing the
Future: Investing in Children from Birth to College, Russell Sage Foundation.
Griliches, Z. 1977. "Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Some Econometric Problems,"
Econometrica, vol. 45(1): 1-22.
Hauser R. 1993. "Trends in College Attendance Among Blacks' Whites and Hispanics" in Studies
of Supply and Demand in Higher Education. C. Clotfelter and M. Rothschild eds. University
of Chicago Press.
Heckman James, J. and Rubinstein Yona. 2001. "The Importance of Noncognitive Skills: Lessons
From the GED Testing Program," American Economic Review, v91, n2, pp. 145-49.
Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. 2006. "The Effects of Cognitive and
Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior." Journal of Labor
Economics 24 (July): 411-482.
Jayaratne, Jith, and Phillip E. Strahan. 1996. "The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from Bank
Branch Deregulation." Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (August ): 639-670.
Kane, T. (1994). "College entry by blacks since 1970: the role of college costs, family background,
and the returns to education", The Journal of Political Economy, vol. 102(5), pp. 878--911.
Kane, T. (2003). A Quasi-Experimental Estimate of the Impact of Financial Aid on College-Going
NBER Working Paper No. 9703.
Kane, Thomas J. and Cecilia Elena Rouse.1999. “The Community College: Educating Students at
the Margin between College and Work.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 13(1) (Winter):
63-84.
Keane, M. (2002), Financial Aid, Borrowing Constraints, and College Attendance: Evidence from
Structural Estimates", American Economic Review, 92, 293-297.
Keane, M., and K. Wolpin (2001), The Effect of Parental Transfers and Borrowing Constraints on
Educational Attainment", International Economic Review, 42, 1051-1103.
Kroszner, Randall, and Phillip E. Strahan. 1999. "What Drives Deregulation? Economics and
Politics of the Relaxation of Bank Branching Deregulation." Quarterly Journal of Economics
114 (November): 1437-67.

32	  
	  
	  

Lang, Kevin, 1993. “Ability Bias, Discount Rate Bias, and the Return to Education,” Manuscript.
Boston: Boston University, Department of Economics.
Lang, Kevin, Michael Manove, and William Dickens. 2005. "Racial Discrimination in Markets with
Announced Wages." American Economic Review 95: 1327-40.
Levine, Ross. 2005. "Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence." In Handbook of Economic
Growth, edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, Amsterdam: North-Holland
Elsevier Publishers.
Levine, Ross, Alexey Levkov, and Yona Rubinstein. 2013. “Bank Deregulation and Racial
Inequality in America.” Critical Finance Review, forthcoming.
Manski, C., and D. Wise (1983), College Choice in America, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Mayer S. 1997. What Money Can't Buy, Harvard University Press.
Mincer, Jacob. 1974. Schooling, Experience and Earnings. New York: Columbia University Press.
Neal, Derek A., and William R. Johnson. 1996. "The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White
Wage Differences." Journal of Political Economy 104 (October): 869-895.
Shea, J. (2000). “Does parent's money matter?” Journal of Public Economics, 77(2), pp. 155--84.
Sun, Stephen Teng, and Constantine Yannelis. 2013. “Credit Constraints and Demand for Higher
Education: Evidence from Financial Deregulation.” July 31, 2013, http://mpra.ub.unimuenchen.de/48726/.
White, Eugene N. 1982. "The Political Economy of Banking Regulation, 1864-1933." Journal of
Economic History 42 (March): 33-40.

33	  
	  
	  

TABLE 1: DATES OF INTRASTATE BANK BRANCH DEREGUALTION, BY STATES
State

Date

State

Date

Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
District of Columbia
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri

1981
1960
1960
1994
1960
1991
1980
1960
1988
1983
1986
1960
1988
1989
1999
1987
1990
1988
1975
1960
1984
1987
1993
1986
1990

Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

1990
1985
1960
1987
1977
1991
1976
1960
1987
1979
1988
1985
1982
1960
1960
1985
1988
1981
1970
1978
1985
1987
1990
1988

Notes: The dates of intrastate bank branch deregulation are from Kroszner and Strahan
(1999)

TABLE 2: SUMMARY STATISTICS

Attended College
Years Since Deregulation
AFQT Percentile
External Locus of Control Score
Self-Esteem Score
Mother's Education
Father's Education
Family Income in 1979 (2010 dollars)
Interest Rate

Mean

Median

Standard
Deviation

0.52
3.65
51.30
8.48
22.57
11.68
11.83
62302
5.29

1.00
0.00
51.88
8.00
22.00
12.00
12.00
56430
5.17

0.50
7.16
28.86
2.39
4.07
2.79
3.57
42221
2.68

Notes: Attended College equals one if the individual attended college for any period of time and zero
otherwise. Years Since Deregulation equals the number of years since the state deregulated restrictions on
intrastate branch banking and is computed for the year 1979; AFQT Percentile is the individual’s AFQT
(Armed Forces Qualification Test) score as a percentile of the entire NLSY79 sample, which is measured in
1980, and where 50 is the median of the NLSY79 representative sample; External Locus of Control Score
(computed in 1980) measures the degree to which individuals believe that external factors, such as chance,
fate, and luck control their lives relative to the degree that the individual has internal control over his or her
life, where values range from four to sixteen—higher values signify more external control; Self-Esteem Score
(computed in 1980) measures the degree of approval or disapproval of one’s self, where values range from six
to 30— higher values signify greater self-approval. Mother’s and Father’s Education measure the number of
years of education of the mother and father respectively; and Family Income in 1979 measures the income of
the individual’s household in 1979, computed in 2010 dollars. In the regression tables, we divide Family
Income in 1979 by $100,000. Interest Rate is the annual real interest rate based on mortgage rates from a
monthly survey of major lenders that are asked to report the terms and conditions on all conventional, singlefamily, fully amortized, purchase-money loans closed in the last five working days of the month. The data
excludes FHA-insured and VA-guaranteed mortgages, refinancing loans, and balloon loans. The rate includes
the amortization of initial fees, points, and charges over a 10-year period, which is the historical assumption of
the average life of a mortgage loan and is computed by the Federal Housing Finance Board. We deflate by the
national CPI. For variables from the NLSY79, the reported summary statistics use the NLSY79 sample
weights.

TABLE 3: BANK DEREGULATION AND INTEREST RATES
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Years Since Deregulation

-0.007
(0.012)

-0.016
(0.013)

-0.007
(0.009)

-0.025**
(0.012)

Years Since Deregulation Squared

-0.000
(0.000)

-0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

Constant

5.17***
(0.068)

5.18***
(0.091)

2.02***
(0.052)

2.01***
(0.071)

Year Effects
State Effects

No
No

No
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Observations
R-square

1274
0.001

1274
0.009

1274
0.971

1274
0.978

Notes: This table presents the results of four regressions, where the dependent variable equals the Interest Rate, which is
computed at the state-year level. Interest Rate is the effective interest from on mortgages, which includes amortization of initial
fees, points, and charges over a 10-year period and is computed by the Federal Housing Finance Board. Consistent with previous
research the sample includes data on the District of Columbia and all states except Delaware and South Dakota, which are
dropped due to large concentrations of credit card banks. The sample covers the period from 1976 through 2002. Regressors:
Years Since Deregulation equals the number of years since the state deregulated restrictions on intrastate branch banking. This
varies at the state-year level. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and corrected using the Huber-White adjustment. The
symbols ***, **, and * signify significance at the one, five, and ten percent levels respectively.

TABLE 4: COLLEGE & BANK DEREGULATION BY ABILITY & PARENTS' EDUCATION: OLS

Sample:
Years Since Deregulation in 1979
Years Since Deregulation in 1979 Squared
AFQT Percentile
External Locus of Control Score
Self-Esteem Score
Mother's Education
Father's Education
Family Income in 1979

Observations
R-square

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
(5)
AFQT>33 and
AFQT>33 and Both
Either parent ≤ 12 parents > 12 years
years of education
of education

All

AFQT>33

AFQT<33

0.025**
(0.012)
-0.001*
(0.001)
0.008***
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.009***
(0.002)
0.014***
(0.003)
0.015***
(0.002)
0.153***
(0.046)

0.035***
(0.012)
-0.002***
(0.001)
0.009***
(0.000)
-0.003
(0.003)
0.007***
(0.002)
0.021***
(0.003)
0.018***
(0.002)
0.157***
(0.049)

0.003
(0.014)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.009***
(0.001)
0.002
(0.003)
0.014***
(0.003)
0.003
(0.004)
0.009**
(0.004)
0.021
(0.104)

0.041***
(0.012)
-0.002***
(0.001)
0.009***
(0.000)
-0.004
(0.003)
0.007***
(0.002)
0.017***
(0.004)
0.015***
(0.002)
0.258***
(0.072)

0.024
(0.014)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.005***
(0.001)
0.002
(0.005)
0.008**
(0.004)
0.006
(0.006)
0.014**
(0.006)
0.021
(0.071)

8534
0.334

4737
0.245

3797
0.133

3836
0.198

901
0.184

Notes: This table presents the results of five OLS regressions, where the dependent variable equals one if the individual attended college and zero
otherwise. There is one observation per person. Regressors: Years Since Deregulation in 1979 equals the number of years since the state deregulated
restrictions on intrastate branch banking and is computed for the year 1979; AFQT Percentile is the individual’s AFQT (Armed Forces Qualification
Test) score as a percentile of the entire NLSY79 sample, which is measured in 1980, and where 50 is the median of the NLSY79 representative
sample; External Locus of Control Score (computed in 1980) measures the degree to which individuals believe that external factors, such as chance,
fate, and luck control their lives relative to the degree that the individual has internal control over his or her life, where values range from four to
sixteen—higher values signify more external control; Self-Esteem Score (computed in 1980) measures the degree of approval or disapproval of one’s
self, where values range from six to 30— higher values signify greater self-approval. Mother’s and Father’s Education measure the number of years of
education of the mother and father respectively; and Family Income in 1979 measures the income of the individual’s household in 1979, computed in
2010 dollars and divided by $100,000. The regression includes regional, racial, and gender fixed effects, the individual’s year of birth, and a dummy
variable that equals one if we imputed Family Income in 1979 with the sample mean, due to missing values. Sample: Besides the core NLSY sample,
we also include the supplementary dataset on Blacks and Hispanics. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and corrected using the HuberWhite adjustment. The symbols ***, **, and * signify significance at the one, five, and ten percent levels respectively.

TABLE 5: COLLEGE & BANK DEREGULATION BY ABILITY & PARENTS' EDUCATION: PROBIT
(1)
Sample:

Years Since Deregulation in 1979
Years Since Deregulation in 1979 Squared
AFQT Percentile
External Locus of Control Score
Self-Esteem Score
Mother's Education
Father's Education
Family Income in 1979
Observations
R-square

All

(2)

(3)

AFQT>33 AFQT<33

(4)

(5)

AFQT>33 and
Either parent ≤ 12
years of education

AFQT>33 and Both
parents > 12 years of
education

0.031
(0.019)
-0.002
(0.001)
0.011***
(0.000)
-0.002
(0.003)
0.013***
(0.002)
0.021***
(0.005)
0.022***
(0.003)
0.264***
(0.070)

0.038**
(0.017)
-0.002**
(0.001)
0.010***
(0.000)
-0.004
(0.003)
0.009***
(0.002)
0.027***
(0.005)
0.023***
(0.003)
0.264***
(0.070)

0.003
(0.016)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.010***
(0.001)
0.002
(0.003)
0.014***
(0.003)
0.004
(0.005)
0.010***
(0.004)
0.019
(0.103)

0.047***
(0.014)
-0.002***
(0.001)
0.011***
(0.001)
-0.005
(0.004)
0.008***
(0.002)
0.020***
(0.005)
0.019***
(0.003)
0.319***
(0.090)

0.016
(0.012)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.003***
(0.000)
0.000
(0.003)
0.005***
(0.002)
0.004
(0.005)
0.011**
(0.005)
0.042
(0.051)

8534
0.29

4737
0.22

3797
0.13

3836
0.16

901
0.29

Notes: This table presents the results of five probit regressions, where the dependent variable equals one if the individual attended college and zero
otherwise, and where the reported coefficients are the estimated marginal effects, evaluated at the mean values of the independent variables. There is
one observation per person. Regressors: Years Since Deregulation in 1979 equals the number of years since the state deregulated restrictions on
intrastate branch banking and is computed for the year 1979; AFQT Percentile is the individual’s AFQT (Armed Forces Qualification Test) score as a
percentile of the entire NLSY79 sample, which is measured in 1980, and where 50 is the median of the NLSY79 representative sample; External
Locus of Control Score (computed in 1980) measures the degree to which individuals believe that external factors, such as chance, fate, and luck
control their lives relative to the degree that the individual has internal control over his or her life, where values range from four to sixteen—higher
values signify more external control; Self-Esteem Score (computed in 1980) measures the degree of approval or disapproval of one’s self, where
values range from six to 30— higher values signify greater self-approval. Mother’s and Father’s Education measure the number of years of
education of the mother and father respectively; and Family Income in 1979 measures the income of the individual’s household in 1979, computed in
2010 dollars and divided by $100,000. The regression includes regional, racial, and gender fixed effects, the individual’s year of birth, and a dummy
variable that equals one if we imputed Family Income in 1979 with the sample mean, due to missing values. Sample: Besides the NLSY sample, we
also include the supplementary dataset on blacks and Hispanics. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and corrected using the Huber-White
adjustment. The symbols ***, **, and * signify significance at the one, five, and ten percent levels respectively.

TABLE 6: COLLEGE & BANK DEREGULATION BY ABILITY & PARENTS' INCOME: PROBIT

Sample:
Years Since Deregulation in 1979
Years Since Deregulation in 1979 Squared
AFQT Percentile
External Locus of Control Score
Self-Esteem Score
Mother's Education
Father's Education
Family Income in 1979

Observations
R-square

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
AFQT>33 and AFQT>33 and AFQT>33 and AFQT>33 and AFQT>33 and
Family
Family
Family
Family
Family
Income<25% Income>25% Income>50% Income>75% Income>90%
0.036
(0.048)
-0.002
(0.003)
0.011***
(0.001)
-0.016*
(0.009)
0.006
(0.006)
0.015
(0.011)
0.021***
(0.007)
-1.238
(1.131)

0.043**
(0.019)
-0.002**
(0.001)
0.010***
(0.001)
-0.005
(0.004)
0.009***
(0.002)
0.029***
(0.005)
0.022***
(0.004)
0.365***
(0.093)

0.055***
(0.014)
-0.003***
(0.001)
0.009***
(0.001)
-0.006
(0.004)
0.007**
(0.003)
0.024***
(0.008)
0.020***
(0.004)
0.410***
(0.117)

0.048***
(0.006)
-0.002***
(0.000)
0.007***
(0.001)
-0.006
(0.006)
0.005
(0.003)
0.023**
(0.009)
0.022***
(0.004)
0.233
(0.153)

0.018
(0.014)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.005***
(0.001)
-0.007
(0.005)
0.005*
(0.003)
0.018***
(0.006)
0.007**
(0.003)
0.089
(0.119)

867
0.23

2904
0.23

1964
0.24

986
0.27

409
0.38

Notes: This table presents the results of five probit regressions, where the dependent variable equals one if the individual attended college and
zero otherwise, and where the reported coefficients are the estimated marginal effects, evaluated at the mean values of the independent variables.
There is one observation per person. When designating the sample, Family Income >X% signifies the sample is restricted to individuals for
which their Family Income levels in 1979 were above the X percentile of the sample. Regressors: Years Since Deregulation in 1979 equals the
number of years since the stat deregulated restrictions on intrastate branch banking and is computed for the year 1979; AFQT Percentile is the
individual’s AFQT (Armed Forces Qualification Test) score as a percentile of the entire NLSY79 sample, which is measured in 1980, and where
50 is the median of the NLSY79 representative sample; External Locus of Control Score (computed in 1980) measures the degree to which
individuals believe that external factors, such as chance, fate, and luck control their lives relative to the degree that the individual has internal
control over his or her life, where values range from four to sixteen—higher values signify more external control; Self-Esteem Score (computed
in 1980) measures the degree of approval or disapproval of one’s self, where values range from six to 30— higher values signify greater selfapproval. Mother’s and Father’s Education measure the number of years of education of the mother and father respectively; and Family Income
in 1979 measures the income of the individual’s household in 1979, computed in 2010 dollars and divided by $100,000. The regression includes
regional, racial, and gender fixed effects, the individual’s year of birth, and a dummy variable that equals one if we imputed Family Income in
1979 with the sample mean, due to missing values. Sample: Besides the core NLSY sample, we also include the supplementary dataset on blacks
and Hispanics. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and corrected using the Huber-White adjustment. The symbols ***, **, and *
signify significance at the one, five, and ten percent levels respectively.

TABLE 7: COLLEGE AND INTEREST RATES BY ABILITY & PARENTS' INCOME: IV PROBIT
(1)
Sample:
Interest Rate
AFQT Percentile
External Locus of Control Score
Self-Esteem Score
Mother's Education
Father's Education
Family Income in 1979
Observations

All
-0.184
(0.153)
0.027***
(0.001)
-0.007
(0.007)
0.032***
(0.005)
0.050***
(0.014)
0.054***
(0.007)
0.674***
(0.180)
6909

(2)
AFQT>33 and Family
Income<25%

(3)
AFQT>33 and Family
Income>25%

-0.049
(0.384)
0.030***
(0.003)
-0.043*
(0.025)
0.016
(0.017)
0.043
(0.029)
0.055***
(0.020)
-3.341
(3.060)
867

-0.258
(0.171)
0.028***
(0.002)
-0.015
(0.010)
0.026***
(0.007)
0.085***
(0.015)
0.065***
(0.011)
1.036***
(0.269)
2904

(4)
(5)
(6)
AFQT>33 and Family AFQT>33 and Family AFQT>33 and Family
Income>50%
Income>75%
Income>90%
-0.385**
(0.150)
0.030***
(0.002)
-0.021
(0.013)
0.024**
(0.012)
0.078***
(0.024)
0.068***
(0.014)
1.309***
(0.392)
1964

-0.465***
(0.079)
0.030***
(0.002)
-0.029
(0.025)
0.025
(0.016)
0.097**
(0.040)
0.100***
(0.016)
0.998
(0.668)
986

-0.151
(0.275)
0.038***
(0.005)
-0.062
(0.048)
0.047*
(0.026)
0.146**
(0.064)
0.064**
(0.029)
0.609
(0.908)
409

Notes: This table presents the results of six probit regressions, where the dependent variable equals one if the individual attended college and zero otherwise, and where the reported coefficients are the
estimated marginal effects, evaluated at the mean values of the independent variables. There is one observation per person. When designating the sample, Family Income >X% signifies the sample is
restricted to individuals for which their Family Income levels in 1979 were above the X percentile of the sample. Regressors: Years Since Deregulation in 1979 equals the number of years since the state,
in which the individual was living in 1979, deregulated restrictions on intrastate branch banking and is computed for the year 1979; AFQT Percentile is the individual’s AFQT (Armed Forces Qualification
Test) score as a percentile of the entire NLSY79 sample, which is measured in 1980, and where 50 is the median of the NLSY79 representative sample; External Locus of Control Score (computed in
1980) measures the degree to which individuals believe that external factors, such as chance, fate, and luck control their lives relative to the degree that the individual has internal control over his or her
life, where values range from four to sixteen—higher values signify more external control; Self-Esteem Score (computed in 1980) measures the degree of approval or disapproval of one’s self, where
values range from six to 30— higher values signify greater self-approval. Mother’s and Father’s Education measure the number of years of education of the mother and father respectively; and Family
Income in 1979 measures the income of the individual’s household in 1979, computed in 2010 dollars and divided by $100,000. The regression includes regional, racial, and gender fixed effects, the
individual’s year of birth, and a dummy variable that equals one if we imputed Family Income in 1979 with the sample mean, due to missing values. Sample: Besides the core NLSY sample, we also
include the supplementary dataset on blacks and Hispanics. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and corrected using the Huber-White adjustment. The symbols ***, **, and * signify significance
at the one, five, and ten percent levels respectively.

TABLE 8: BANK DEREGULATION AND THE RETURNS TO EDUCATION
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.0021***
(0.0006)
-0.0000**
(0.0000)
0.0733***
(0.0027)

0.0035***
(0.0003)
-0.0000**
(0.0000)
0.0618***
(0.0016)

0.0004
(0.0005)
-0.0000
(0.0000)
0.0592***
(0.0032)

-0.0010**
(0.0004)
0.0000
(0.0000)
0.0657***
(0.0025)

Year Effects
State Effects

No
No

No
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Observations
R-square

1274
0.134

1274
0.522

1274
0.370

1274
0.602

Years Since Deregulation
Years Since Deregulation Squared
Constant

Notes: This table presents the results of four regressions, where the dependent variable is Returns to Education. For each
state-year, Returns to Education is computed by regressing log wages on years of education and a quartic in potential
work experience and collecting the estimated coefficient on years of education, using data from CPS March Supplement,
over the years 1976 through 2002, for the sample of full-time, full-year, white males between the ages of 25 and 55, and
excluding people living in group quarters and working in either the military or agriculture. Consistent with previous
research the sample includes data on the District of Columbia and all states except Delaware and South Dakota, which are
dropped due to large concentrations of credit card banks. Regressors: Years Since Deregulation equals the number of
years since the state deregulated restrictions on intrastate branch banking and is computed at the state-year level. Standard
errors are clustered at the state level and corrected using the Huber-White adjustment. The symbols ***, **, and * signify
significance at the one, five, and ten percent levels respectively.

