                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  SOVEREIGN DEBT: A REVIEW

                                             Mark Aguiar
                                            Manuel Amador

                                         Working Paper 19388
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19388


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2013




Prepared for the Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 4. We thank Mark Wright and the editors
for very detailed and useful suggestions on an initial draft. We also thank Klaus Adam, Satyajit Chatterjee,
Enrique Mendoza, and Vivian Yue for helpful comments. Manuel Amador is grateful for financial
support from the NSF under grant number 0952816. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Mark Aguiar and Manuel Amador. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Sovereign Debt: A Review
Mark Aguiar and Manuel Amador
NBER Working Paper No. 19388
August 2013
JEL No. F34,F41

                                              ABSTRACT

In this chapter, we use a benchmark limited-commitment model to explore key issues in the economics
of sovereign debt. After highlighting conceptual issues that distinguish sovereign debt as well as reviewing
a number of empirical facts, we use the model to discuss debt overhang, risk sharing, and capital flows
in an environment of limited enforcement. We also discuss recent progress on default and renegotiation;
self-fulfilling debt crises; and incomplete markets and their quantitative implications. We conclude
with a brief assessment of the current state of the literature and highlight some directions for future
research.


Mark Aguiar
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
mark@markaguiar.com

Manuel Amador
Stanford University
Department of Economics
Landau Economics Building
579 Serra Mall, Room 330
Stanford , CA 94305-6072
and NBER
amador@stanford.edu
Contents

1 Introduction: Conceptual Issues                                                                      3

2 Empirical Facts                                                                                      4

3 A Benchmark Framework                                                                                7
   3.1   An Endowment Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           12
   3.2   Debt Overhang in a Production Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            18

4 Richer Notions of “Default”                                                                         25
   4.1   Equilibrium Default . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      25
   4.2   Renegotiation    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28

5 Self-fulfilling Debt Crises                                                                         30

6 Incomplete Market Models and their Quantitative Implementation                                      34

7 Concluding Remarks                                                                                  42




                                                  2
       1     Introduction: Conceptual Issues

       The defining feature of sovereign debt is the limited mechanisms for enforcement. This distin-
       guishes sovereign debt from private debt, whether domestic or international.1 A private agent
       or corporation, at least technically, is always subject to a legal authority. Sovereign nations are
       not. International bonds and bank loans are typically issued or contracted in a major financial
       center, such as New York or London. As such, they are subject to the legal jurisdiction of the
       place of issue. If a sovereign debtor fails to make a contracted payment, creditors have limited
       legal recourse, relying only on overseas legal instruments and reputational considerations. The
       mechanisms by which countries are induced to follow the terms of contracts, and the implications
       of limited enforcement for risk sharing, growth, and other macroeconomic outcomes, is a major
       theme developed in this chapter. This introductory section lays out some of the conceptual
       issues that underlie the economics of sovereign debt.
           In practice, the standard sovereign debt contract is typically non-contingent.2 That is, the
       contract specifies a pre-determined, non-state-contingent sequence of payments in a defined cur-
       rency due at defined points in time. This notional non-contingency obscures a richer contracting
       space that comes about through maturity structure, renegotiation, rescheduling, and “haircuts.”
       The question of state contingency is an important theme discussed in this chapter. In addition to
       limited enforcement, the lack of contingency may reflect asymmetric information. To the extent
       the government can manipulate the actual or reported behavior of macroeconomic aggregates,
       contracts with state-contingent payoffs may be prone to moral hazard. Even if the government
       cannot affect the outcome of the economy, the true state of the economy may not be verifiable
       to creditors.
           The contract (or the legal jurisdiction in which the bond is issued) will detail how the
       terms can be changed at some future point. For example, collective-action clauses will establish
       what fraction of bond holders must agree to change the terms of the initial debt contract.
       There are several conceptual issues involved with renegotiation. One was mentioned in the
       previous paragraph; namely, renegotiation can allow for ex post state contingency. Another
       is the normative question of which type of collective-action clauses are best. A third is that
       in practice, renegotiation is a lengthy and seemingly costly process. This raises the positive
       question of why this is so. Finally, the fact that debt may be renegotiated or rescheduled makes
   1
      Nevertheless, the lessons derived from the study of sovereign debt are often applicable to other contexts, such as
private credit markets in which enforcement is imperfect.
    2
      There are a few exceptions, including some of the Brady bond restructurings in the early 1990s and recent bonds
issued by Argentina and Greece. Such state-contingent “macro assets” have been advocated by Shiller (1993) and
others, although such markets face challenges due to asymmetric information and limited verifiability.


                                                           3
the definition of default rather subjective. One strict definition of default is failure to make the
specified payment at the required date. However, often such payments are renegotiated under
the threat of default, with creditors accepting less in place of none.
    As a rule, there is no strict seniority in sovereign debt issues (with a few “de facto” exceptions,
like credit extended by the IMF). This opens the possibility that existing creditors may see
their debt “diluted” by subsequent new bond issuances. This makes long-term sovereign debt
vulnerable to capital losses. Moreover, this incentive to dilute has implications for the payoff
to voluntary “debt buybacks,” (Bulow and Rogoff, 1991), which, as we will discuss, can be
considered a reverse dilution of existing bondholders. The lack of strict seniority also raises
the question of whether a defaulting government can treat certain creditors preferentially, for
example domestic holders of sovereign debt. The extent to which internationally issued bonds
are held by domestic residents may influence the net payoff to default. (Broner et al., 2010)
    In this chapter, we will take up the above themes. There are corollary issues related to
sovereign debt we will discuss as well. For example, given a particular contracting space, there
may be multiple equilibria, which raises the possibility of self-fulfilling debt crises. The issue of
enforcement quickly leads to the role of reputation, both in regard to debt repayment and spill-
overs to other economic activities. One important question is whether default affects private
agents beliefs about property rights more generally and the returns on private investment. Also
it is important to consider the preferences of the decision maker, which may be different from
a benevolent planner. We will discuss these issues more formally using a basic conceptual
framework introduced in Section 3, which is then extended and modified in subsequent sections.
Before introducing the framework, we first review several key empirical facts regarding sovereign
debt.



2       Empirical Facts

In this section we briefly summarize recent empirical research on default and its consequences,
the macroeconomic consequences of sovereign debt overhang, and empirical facts regarding bond
prices. There has been a recent boom in the collection and analysis of historical data on default.
This work has generated novel facts as well as guided the theoretical approach to sovereign debt
discussed in the subsequent sections (see Tomz and Wright, 2012 for a recent survey). We list
several key findings. The first four concern default and its aftermath. The fifth finding concerns
recent evidence on bond spreads. The sixth finding concerns the fact that successful growth
episodes are associated with low and declining levels of foreign indebtedness.


                                                  4
1. Default happens with regularity throughout history: As an empirical event, default is
   typically defined as a failure of a government to meet a principal or interest payment on time
   and/or a rescheduling of debt on terms less favorable to the creditors. Reinhart and Rogoff
   (2009) emphasize that most countries that are able to raise funds internationally have had
   one or several default episodes in their history, including major European economies such as
   England, France, and Germany. While England has not defaulted since the sixteenth century
   and France since the eighteenth century, such “graduation” to non-default status is extremely
   rare, even among high-income countries. Moreover, countries rarely default just once; serial
   default is the norm rather than the exception. Reinhart and Rogoff also emphasize that
   defaults happen in waves, with many countries being in default simultaneously. Recent
   episodes of multi-country debt crises include the Great Depression, the Latin American
   crisis of the 1980s, and the ongoing European debt crisis.

2. Default often occurs in bad times, but with exceptions: The fact that default happens
   most often when output is low provides a natural starting point for thinking about default.
   Using a newly constructed historical data set, Tomz and Wright (2007) conclude that defaults
   are more common in bad times than in good, but they also document that there are many
   exceptions. Specifically, Tomz and Wright document that in their sample of 175 countries,
   output is on average 1.6 percentage points below trend at the start of a default episode.
   Nevertheless, more than one-third of their 169 default episodes began when income was
   at or above trend, and countries frequently fall below trend without defaulting, indicating
   that a recession is neither necessary nor sufficient for default. Reinhart and Rogoff (2009)
   document that default crises frequently coincide with major financial crises. The pressure
   from bank failures and recession on a government’s fiscal situation combined with the fact
   that many financial institutions hold government debt on their balance sheets makes the two
   types of crises intertwined. From a historical perspective, the fact that the 2008 financial
   crisis accompanied a sovereign debt crisis in multiple countries is no outlier. In addition
   to financial crises, default often precedes a large drop in trade (Rose, 2005, Martinez and
   Sandleris, 2011), and current account reversals/capital flight (Mendoza and Yue, 2012).

3. Defaults involve a heterogeneous pattern of “haircuts”: Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer
   (2008) review debt restructuring episodes from the 1990s and 2000s in six countries and
   across a number of debt instruments. The defaults in the 1990s and 2000s frequently in-
   volved bonds, and therefore differed from the primarily bank-debt crisis of the 1980s. Bond
   restructurings typically include a public offer of exchange, allowing researchers to compute



                                               5
          the implied losses. Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer (2008) compute the difference in promised
          payments between the old and new bond offerings in each exchange. A main finding is that
          these losses varied considerably over the sample. Relative to the face value of outstanding
          debt, the restructured bonds implied losses ranging from roughly 30 percent in Uruguay
          to over 60 percent for some bond series in Argentina and Russia. The Sturzenegger and
          Zettelmeyer (2008) sample is relatively small; however, Benjamin and Wright (2008) and
          Cruces and Trebesch (2011) explore a number of additional restructurings and alternative
          methodologies and find investor losses of roughly 30 to 40 percent on-average, and again
          with considerable heterogeneity across individual default episodes.

       4. Default generates a period of lengthy renegotiation: Benjamin and Wright (2008)
          study a large sample of bank-debt and bond renegotiations ranging from 1989 through
          2005 involving seventy-three countries and ninety default episodes. In addition to the large
          and heterogeneous losses discussed above, they document that restructurings are a time-
          consuming process, taking eight years on average. Moreover, they find that the longer
          the negotiations, the larger the losses associated with the restructuring. The renegotiation
          process appears to be sensitive to the behavior of output, with large recessions generating
          somewhat longer restructurings and final settlement typically occurring when output has
          returned to trend. Benjamin and Wright (2008) also find that the median country exits
          restructuring carrying 5 percent higher debt-to-GDP loads then at the time of default.

       5. Sovereign bond spreads: Broner et al. (forthcoming) use a sample of emerging market
          bond yields from 1990 to 2009 to document several facts regarding bond yields and maturities.
          Specifically, they show that on average spreads over US bonds are higher for longer maturity
          bonds, and while all spreads increase during crises, the short-term bond spread increases
          relatively more so that the yield curve “inverts” during periods of very high average spreads.
          The authors also document that the maturity of newly issued bonds shorten during crises,
          as the issuance of debt with more than 3-year maturity declines when spreads are high.3
          A standard assumption in the theoretical literature on emerging markets is that foreign
          investors can hedge idiosyncratic country risk. However, emerging market bond yields exhibit
          significant co-movement, much more so than the often weak correlation for output. Longstaff
          et al. (2011) and Borri and Verdelhan (2011) document that global factors, like the return
          to the US stock market, US corporate bond market, or change in the VIX volatility index
          explain a large fraction of the common variation in spreads. This evidence suggests that
   3
    Arellano and Ramanarayanan (forthcoming) confirm these results for a subset of the considered countries using
data until 2011.


                                                       6
    holders of sovereign bonds are being compensated for taking on aggregate risk in addition
    to idiosyncratic default risk. This is not to say that bond spreads are not correlated with
    domestic output. Neumeyer and Perri (2005) and Uribe and Yue (2006) document that
    spreads are strongly countercyclical in emerging markets (see also Edwards, 1984).

6. Debt overhang and growth: The standard open-economy growth model predicts that
    a country with above average growth prospects should attract capital for both investment
    and consumption smoothing. The empirical pattern, at least for emerging markets since the
    opening of capital accounts in the 1970s and 1980s, is the opposite. Gourinchas and Jeanne
    (2007) document what they term the “allocation puzzle”; namely, that countries with above
    average growth rates are net exporters of capital on average. Aguiar and Amador (2011)
    show that this pattern is driven by government net foreign assets. In particular, they show
    that government’s of high-growth economies increase net public assets held abroad (foreign
    reserves minus sovereign debt), while under-performing economies increase their public in-
    debtedness. Moreover, this is not simply high-growth countries paying down a relatively
    large initial stock of debt nor is it consumption-smoothing at business cycle frequencies. On
    the other hand, Aguiar and Amador (2011) show that private capital flows accord with the
    standard intuition; that is, growth is accompanied by an increase in private net foreign lia-
    bilities. Alfaro et al. (2011) show that emerging market governments are contracting with
    other sovereigns, so the allocation puzzle involves governments on both sides of the transac-
    tions. Reinhart et al. (2012) document a negative correlation in advanced economies between
    debt-to-GDP ratios and growth. In sum, the evidence indicates that successful long-term de-
    velopment is not financed through sovereign debt, but rather is associated with a government
    paying down debt and/or accumulating net foreign assets.



3     A Benchmark Framework

In this section we introduce a benchmark limited-commitment environment. The analysis gen-
erates a rich set of implications, many of which carry over to the environments considered in
subsequent sections. The benchmark framework was initially explored in the closed-economy
models of Thomas and Worrall (1988) and Kehoe and Levine (1993). Key conceptual elements
can be found in the seminal sovereign debt paper by Eaton and Gersovitz (1982).
    Consider a small open economy populated by a representative agent and a government. Time
runs discretely and is indexed t = 0, 1, ... The economy is subject to exogenous shocks to output,
which can be considered endowment or productivity shocks, depending on the context. To set

                                                7
notation regarding shocks and histories, let st ∈ S denote the current state, which follows a
finite-state Markov chain starting from some initial state s0 . Let st = (s0 , s1 , ..., st ) ∈ S t denote
a history truncated at time t. Let π(st ) denote the unconditional probability of history st ,
where π(st+j |st ) denotes the probability conditional on history st , j ≥ 0. The notation st+j |st
indicates histories through t + j ≥ t that contain st , and st−j ∈ st indicates history st truncated
at t − j ≤ t. Similarly, π(st+1 |st ) = π(st+1 = (st , st+1 )|st ) denotes the probability period t + 1’s
state is st+1 conditional on history st . Finally, we let t≥0,st denote the summation over all
                                                               P

t ≥ 0 and histories st ∈ S t , sj ∈st denote the sum over all truncated histories contained in st ,
                              P

and τ ≥t,sτ |st denote the sum over all infinite histories following st . For an allocation series
     P

x = consumption, capital, debt, etc., we let x(st ) denote the allocation at a particular node st ,
and x ≡ {x(st )}t≥0,st = (x(s0 ), x(s1 ), ...) denote the allocation over the infinite history.
   There is an international financial market where the final good can be traded inter-temporally
using a full set of state-contingent assets. Let Q∗ (st ) = π(st )/Rt denote the international price
of a unit of consumption delivered at history st in units of period-zero consumption units, where
R = 1 + r is the gross interest rate in the international financial markets. When the economy
is small and its shocks are uncorrelated with the rest of the world’s consumption, standard
diversification arguments imply risk-neutral pricing. We also assume that international asset
markets have full commitment to financial contracts.
   Let c(st ) denote consumption of the representative agent in history st . The government’s
preferences are

                                                X
                                     U (c) =            π(st )β t u(c(st ))                           (1)
                                               t≥0,st


where u : R+ → R is a standard utility function, strictly increasing, concave and satisfying
Inada conditions. We assume that the government has sufficient instruments to control the
representative agent’s decisions, subject to the resource constraints. We postpone discussion of
alternative objective functions and how to decentralize the resulting allocation as a competi-
tive equilibrium. The representative agent is endowed with a unit of labor, which it supplies
inelastically. To ensure the small open economy’s assets remain bounded, we assume βR ≤ 1.
    The timing of investment and production is as follows. The economy enters period t with
installed capital k(st−1 ) and a portfolio of state-contingent liabilities st b((st−1 , st )). We use
                                                                          P

the notation k(st−1 ) for period-t’s capital as it is invested before st is realized, with k(s−1 )
standing for the initial period capital stock. Once st is realized, the economy hires labor n(st )
and operates a neoclassical production function F (st , k(st−1 ), n(st )). Given that labor supply


                                                        8
is inelastic, an endowment economy is nested in this formulation by dropping k as an argument.
For simplicity, we drop the labor argument in the production function when convenient. The
government then decides the consumption of the representative agent c(st ), pays liability b(st ),
issues next period’s portfolio of state-contingent liabilities and makes net investment k(st ) −
(1 − δ)k(st−1 ), where δ is the depreciation rate.
   Assuming that the value of production at international prices is finite, the resource constraint
of the small open economy can be written as:

                       X
               b0 ≤            Q∗ (st )(F (st , k(st−1 )) − c(st ) − k(st ) + (1 − δ)k(st−1 )),   (RC)
                      t≥0,st


where b0 ≡ b(s0 ) is the initial net foreign liability position. The elements of the sum on the
right hand side are net exports at each history, and balance of payments accounting requires
that initial net foreign liabilities equals the discounted sum of net exports.
   At the end of the period in history st , we can define


                                          b̃(st ) ≡ b(st ) − Rk(st−1 )


as the economy’s total liability position inclusive of domestically held wealth, where previous
period’s investment is carried forward at the world interest rate. This is the relevant wealth
position at the time decisions regarding consumption, investment, and financial trades are made.
There are no inter-temporal adjustment costs to capital, so financial assets and capital can be
exchanged at the end of a period before the next shock is realized (but once invested, capital
remains in place for a full period). As financial assets span the payouts on physical capital,
physical and financial capital are perfect substitutes at the time financial claims are settled and
new investment is made, hence we can collapse the two into a single state variable. Therefore,
the relevant state variable for the economy is foreign liabilities less installed capital, which is
the negative of total wealth held both abroad and at home.
   From the above discussion, we can start the economy before initial capital is installed, so
that b0 and k(s−1 ) are chosen simultaneously subject to b̃0 ≥ b(s0 ) − Rk(s−1 ). This exploits the
small open economy assumption to collapse debt and capital into a single state variable. Using




                                                        9
         b̃0 as the economy’s initial state, we can rewrite (RC) as

                            X                                                                    
                   b̃0 ≤            Q∗ (st ) F (st , k(st−1 )) − c(st ) − k(st ) + (1 − δ)k(st−1 ) − Rk(s−1 )
                           t≥0,st
                            X
                      =             Q∗ (st )(F (st , k(st−1 )) − c(st ) − (r + δ)k(st−1 )),                      (RC0 )
                           t≥0,st


         where the second line is a re-arranged version of the first.4
             The critical assumption is that the government has limited commitment: that is, at any
         point in time, the government can decide to change its policy. In this simple set up, this means
         that the government can decide not to repay its debt to foreigners and/or expropriate foreign-
         owned capital invested domestically. We will refer to this as “deviation,” rather than “default”
         to avoid confusion when discussing the empirical implications of the model. In particular,
         we discuss below interpretations of state-contingent debt as default with partial forgiveness or
         default with renegotiation. This is distinct from deviation, which as we shall see happens off
         the equilibrium path.5
             We let V (st , k(st−1 )) summarize the value of deviation to the government at history st with
         installed capital k(st−1 ). The fact that capital is a state variable for deviation utility reflects
         that it cannot be removed within the period. We will sometimes refer to the deviation value
         using the more evocative terminology of “punishment.” The nature of this value will be a
         key object of interest across different environments. The cases we consider require that the
         punishment utility is independent of outstanding debt at the time of deviation, and depends on
         previous equilibrium choices only through the existing capital stock. We further assume that
         V (st , k(st−1 )) is weakly increasing in k(st−1 ).
             For an allocation to be compatible with the government’s ability to deviate, it must deliver
   4
       To obtain this, we can use the fact that for a given t,
                               X ∗ t                           X                 X
                                    Q (s )k(st−1 ) = R−t                               π((st−1 , st ))k(st−1 )
                                    st ∈S t                        st−1 ∈S t−1 st ∈S
                                                              −t
                                                                      X
                                                         =R                      π(st−1 )k(st−1 )
                                                                   st−1 ∈S t−1
                                                                      X
                                                         = R−1                   Q∗ (st−1 )k(st−1 ).
                                                                   st−1 ∈S t−1

Using this equivalence in (RC) and re-arranging, we have (RC0 ).
   5
     Some authors use the term repudiation or “inexcusable” default rather than deviation, which is entirely consistent,
while others use the empirically suggestive term default, which can lead to confusion.




                                                                     10
present value utility at least as great as V (st , k(st−1 )):

                       X
                                  π(sτ |st )β τ −t u(c(sτ )) ≥ V (st , k(st−1 )) for all t, st ,   (PC)
                    τ ≥t,sτ |st


This constraint is commonly referred to as the “participation constraint” or “debt constraint.”
An allocation that satisfies the sequence of participation constraints ensures that the government
would never prefer to deviate. As noted below, this can be construed as a borrowing limit, as
the international loan market recognizes that additional debt will not be repaid.

Definition 1. A government-controlled allocation conditional on b̃0 , is defined to be non-
negative consumption and capital allocations, {c, k}, that solve the following problem

                                      X
                 V (b̃0 ) = max               π(st )β t u(c(st )) subject to (RC0 ) and (PC).       (P)
                             {c,k}
                                     t≥0,st


   Note that the solution to Problem (P) corresponds to a “self-enforcing” equilibrium in the
game between the government, owners of physical capital, and international lenders, or, in the
terminology of Chari and Kehoe (1990), a “sustainable plan.”
   The resource constraint (RC0 ) implies that V is a strictly decreasing function, assuming
we remain in the interior of the constraint set. Viewed recursively, the left-hand side of (PC)
can be viewed as the value function conditional on outstanding liabilities at history st . The
fact that this value is monotonic in b̃, which recall is the sum of net foreign liabilities minus
install capital, implies that the constraint can be viewed as an upper bound on net foreign
liabilities (conditional on installed capital) at each history. Conversely, conditional on net foreign
liabilities, the constraint implies an upper bound on domestic capital, a point that will feature
prominently in our discussion of debt overhang below.
   Before studying this problem in detail, we briefly summarize the full-commitment solution.
That is, if the government could commit to all financial contracts, the allocation would feature:
(i) Complete risk sharing, such that c(st ) = ct is constant across states at a point in time,
and satisfies βRu0 (ct ) = u0 (ct−1 ) inter-temporally; and (ii) First-best investment, such that
               t−1
                   )Fk ((st , st−1 ), k(st−1 )) = r + δ. The corresponding level of initial consumption
P
  st ∈S π(st |s

can be recovered from the resource constraint (RC0 ) given the sequence of first-best capital
stocks.




                                                          11
      3.1    An Endowment Economy

      To focus on how limited commitment impedes risk-sharing, let us assume, as a starting point,
      an endowment economy. That is, there is no capital, and F (st ) = y(st ) = yt , where yt follows
      a stationary, first-order Markov process that takes discrete values 0 < y 1 < y 2 < ... < y N . To
      make the problem more concrete, we specify V (st ). Specifically, we assume that deviation results
      in total exclusion from international asset markets. If the economy could not trade financial
      assets at all (autarky), the utility of the representative agent would be:

                                                    ∞ X
                                                    X N
                       V (y) = V Aut (y) ≡ u(y) +             β j π(yt+j = y k |yt = y)u(y k ).      (2)
                                                    j=1 k=1


      Autarky, as defined above, is the canonical punishment for deviation in the sovereign debt liter-
      ature (the classic reference is Eaton and Gersovitz (1982)). This punishment is often interpreted
      as the loss of a country’s reputation in international financial markets due to a deviation.
         In the environment under consideration, in which the government makes decisions on behalf
      of a representative agent, the autarky value represents the lowest utility for the government that
      can be sustained as a self-enforcing equilibrium. Or, as noted above, the autarky value defines
      a state-contingent upper bound on the economy’s liabilities (which, in the endowment economy,
      equals outstanding sovereign debt). The fact that a self-enforcing equilibrium at the borrowing
      limit delivers the utility associated with permanent exclusion makes the autarky value (but not
      the autarkic allocation) a re-negotiation proof punishment.6
         There are some important caveats associated with autarky as a punishment value. If we take
      the reputational interpretation literally, there remains a question of why the loss of reputation
      prevents the government from continuing to save in world financial markets. In a seminal paper,
      Bulow and Rogoff (1989b) build on this insight to construct a celebrated critique of reputational
      models of debt. In particular, Bulow and Rogoff propose an alternative deviation equilibrium
      from autarky, one in which countries can never borrow again, but are able to save. That is, they
      can buy (a sequence of) cash-in-advance insurance contracts in which they pay upfront and are
      not obligated to pay out in any state the following period. With such contracts available, an
      economy that has reached its upper bound on liabilities can choose not to repay this debt, but
      rather use the scheduled payments to buy cash-in-advance contracts. Bulow and Rogoff (1989b)
      show that this is feasible and generates higher utility, as long as the upper bound on debt is
      strictly positive. Thus the equilibrium places an upper bound of debt of zero.
  6
    See Wright (2002) and Kletzer and Wright (2000) for the case of one- and two-sided limited commitment,
respectively.


                                                       12
          This insight has spawned a large literature. We briefly summarize some of the main themes.
       A straightforward response is to rule out cash-in-advance contracts by appealing to legal en-
       forcement mechanisms in the international financial markets. That is, an unpaid creditor can
       sue to seize the debtor’s overseas assets or exports. In this environment, the legal enforcement
       implicit in the foreign market’s ability to commit to cash-in-advance contracts can also used to
       enforce the punishment. In practice, this is reflected in the heavy role of courts, lawyers, and
       legal contracts involved in adjudicating sovereign debt claims. Direct sanctions under the aus-
       pices of a foreign legal authority is the environment favored by Bulow and Rogoff themselves in
       motivating the re-contracting model discussed below (Bulow and Rogoff, 1989a). However, there
       is mixed empirical evidence regarding the effect of trade sanctions as an enforcement mechanism
       (Rose, 2005,Martinez and Sandleris, 2011).7
          Kletzer and Wright (2000) drop the commitment assumption for foreign creditors and show
       that debt can be sustained in “anarchy,” as in the absence of any legal enforcement there is
       no mechanism to ensure that foreign commitments implicit in cash-in-advance contracts are
       honored. Imperfect enforcement of foreign savings vehicles is not necessary, however. Wright
       (2002) develops an environment in which a limited number of foreign banks can commit (that is,
       the one-sided limited commitment of our benchmark), but choose not to offer cash-in-advance
       contracts that disrupt established lending relationships. Others have also appealed to non-legal
       mechanisms to sustain debt. One prominent theme is that a loss of reputation in debt markets
       spills over to other economic spheres, depressing trade, output, or investment, without the need
       for creditor-country courts per se (e.g., Cole and Kehoe, 1998).8 Relatedly, (Amador, 2012)
       argues that, if the government decisions are the result of a political game among distinct agents,
       then a tragedy of the commons may occur which renders the strategy of using cash in advance
       contracts after a deviation unsustainable, restoring the sustainability of sovereign debt.
          While Bulow and Rogoff argued that complete financial autarky may be unrealistic as a
       punishment without additional legal enforcement to prevent savings, Broner and Ventura (2011)
       and Broner et al. (2010) argue that autarky may deliver a utility payoff even worse than the
       one modeled above. Broner and Ventura (2011) note that the failure to enforce international
       obligations may be associated with a failure to enforce domestic contracts, if the residency
       of the contracting parties cannot be ascertained. Similarly, domestic residents may hold the
       government’s debt, leading to a potentially damaging redistribution of wealth across domestic
   7
    For an interesting discussion on the role of sanctions versus reputation in sustaining sovereign debt in Spain
under Philip II, see Conklin (1998) and Drelichman and Voth (2011).
  8
    See Fuentes and Saravia (2010) for evidence with regards to falls in FDI after default.




                                                       13
       agents in the event of a deviation (Broner et al., 2010). This may be particularly severe if
       domestic banks hold government bonds as assets and face net worth constraints in lending
       (Gennaioli et al., 2010). Thus, deviation may be associated with a breakdown in domestic risk
       sharing that makes the value defined in (2) an upper bound.
           That said, the key implications of the benchmark endowment model are robust to alternative
       enforcement mechanisms. Under standard monotonicity assumptions on the Markov process,
       V (y) in (2) is increasing in y. That is, a high current endowment makes deviation relatively at-
       tractive. Moreover, the deviation utility is independent of equilibrium allocations; in particular,
       it does not depend on the amount of debt outstanding at the time of deviation. As long as V (st )
       has these properties, the main implications derived below are robust to alternative punishments.
       The details of enforcement, and in particular the severity of the punishment, will determine the
       level of V , which in turn determines the equilibrium limits to debt and risk sharing.
           We now characterize the constrained-optimal allocation using Lagrangian techniques.9 Let µ
       denote the multiplier on the resource constraint (RC), and λ(st )π(st )β t denote the sequence of
       multipliers on the participation constraints. We scale each participation multiplier by a strictly
       positive number for notational convenience. Note that in the endowment economy case, the
       problem stated in (P) has an objective function that is strictly concave and the constraints are
       convex. The first-order condition for consumption in state st is:
                                                                              !
                                                X
                            βt   π(st ) +            π(st |sj )π(sj )λ(sj ) u0 (c(st )) = µQ∗ (st ).
                                            sj ∈st


       Note that π(st |sj )π(sj ) = π(st ) if sj ∈ st , that is, if sj precedes history st . We can use
       Q∗ (st ) = π(st )/Rt to simplify this first-order condition:

                                                                          !
                                                          X
                                        β R t   t
                                                     1+            λ(s ) u0 (c(st )) = µ.
                                                                      j
                                                                                                                 (3)
                                                          sj ∈st

   9
     There are many technical assumptions that lie behind the validity of Lagrangian techniques in infinite-dimensional
spaces. Given the infinite sequence of participation constraints, a natural environment is to assume that the set of
participation constraints maps allocations into the space of bounded sequences (`∞ ). This requires that utility is
bounded over the set of feasible allocations (where the difficulty usually lies in ensuring utility is bounded below at
zero, as zero consumption is typically feasible). The natural space for multipliers is the space of summable sequences,
`1 . However, the dual of `∞ is larger than `1 . Fortunately, for many environments of economic interest, it can be
shown that the Lagrange multipliers are indeed elements of `1 . See Dechert (1982) and Rustichini (1998) for details.
A final requirement is that the participation constraint set includes an interior feasible allocation (if the constraint set
is convex and we are characterizing a global optimum), or satisfies a local regularity condition (similar to the full-rank
Jacobian condition in finite dimensions) if necessary conditions for an interior optimum are the object of interest. The
standard reference is Luenberger (1969). Throughout the chapter, we assume the existence of an interior optimum
and the validity of Lagrangian techniques without further comment.




                                                                    14
           The right-hand side of (3) is the marginal value of initial assets. If the participation con-
       straints are always slack (λ(st ) = 0, ∀t), then β t Rt u0 (c(st )) is a constant. This is the full
       risk-sharing allocation, in which consumption is not state dependent and varies over time only
       to the extent that the agent is impatient relative to the world interest rate. However, when
       λ(st ) > 0, the participation constraint is binding10 and full risk-sharing is not compatible with
       limited commitment. It can be shown that across states when the constraint binds, consumption
       is strictly increasing in the current endowment, highlighting the limits to risk sharing imposed
       by limited commitment. Moreover, the summation on the left hand side of (3) is non-decreasing,
       and strictly increasing whenever λ(st ) > 0. As the right hand side is constant, this implies that
       the marginal utility of consumption is falling over time faster than βR. In particular, when
       βR = 1, consumption is non-decreasing, and strictly increasing whenever the participation
       consumption binds.
           Another view of this implication comes from the Euler Equation. Consider st+1 = (st , st+1 )
       and evaluate (3) at st and st+1 to obtain:

                                        λ(st , st+1 )
                                                       
                                 βR 1 +                     u0 (c(st , st+1 )) = u0 (c(st )),                  (4)
                                          Λ(st )

       where Λ(st ) ≡ 1+ sj ∈st λ(sj ). If the participation constraint is slack at st+1 , then βRu0 (c(st , st+1 )) =
                        P

       u0 (c(st )), which is the full-commitment Euler Equation from state st to state st+1 . When the
       participation constraint binds, λ(st+1 ) > 0, and marginal utility in st+1 is distorted down rela-
       tive to st (and consumption is distorted up). This captures that limited participation provides
       an incentive for consumption to grow over time. This feature of the optimal allocation is often
       referred to as “back loading,” as consumption is higher in the later periods.
           The intuition for back loading is as follows. The country always has the option of deviating
       and enjoying V (yt ). To ensure continued participation, the allocation at each history must
       deliver at least this utility, which requires a certain stream of consumption. Additional con-
       sumption in a particular period helps satisfy this requirement. Moreover, it also helps satisfy the
       requirement in all previous periods as well. This is because the left-hand side of the constraint
       (PC) is forward looking; it is the discounted sum of all future utility. At the margin, therefore,
       consumption in the future is preferable as it relaxes all preceding participation constraints. The
       math of the first order condition (3) reflects this feature by including the cumulative sums of
       Lagrange multipliers from all previous periods.
  10
     We use the term “binding” to indicate the constraint’s multiplier is strictly positive, which, from complementary
slackness, requires the constraint is satisfied with equality. With this usage, the constraint is not considered “binding”
if the constraint is satisfied with equality but the multiplier is zero.


                                                            15
   This is perhaps a sophisticated way of saying that limited commitment provides an incentive
to save. However, it also says more. When βR = 1, we see that consumption never declines,
regardless of the state of nature. That is, current consumption always provides a floor for future
consumption. Moreover, the fact that µ is finite implies the expression on the left hand side
of (3) converges. For βR = 1, this implies that limt→∞ λ(st ) = 0, and c(st ) converges to a
constant. In the limit, therefore, the economy achieves perfect risk sharing (see Ray (2002) for
a general statement of this result). Along the transition, consumption increases at each node at
which the participation constraint binds. As V (y) is increasing in y, it reaches a maximum at
y = y N . Once the highest endowment is realized, consumption is constant thereafter and full
risk-sharing is attained (Worrall, 1990).
   This last result requires βR = 1. When βR < 1, we have that limt→∞ β t Rt = 0, and from
equation (3), we see that the cumulative sum therefore must diverge, that is, λ(st ) is strictly
positive infinitely often. In particular, whenever the participation constraint is slack, consump-
tion is below the previous period’s due to impatience as shown by (4). However, consumption
cannot fall indefinitely, as this will eventually violate the participation constraint. When the
constraint binds, consumption’s fall is mitigated, or even reversed if the current endowment
realization is high enough. Moreover, as (PC) holds with equality when λ(st ) > 0, we see that
continuation utility is state dependent (as V (yt ) is state dependent). The combination of front
loading due to impatience and back loading due to limited commitment implies consumption
will converge to an ergodic distribution, which in general will be non-degenerate.
   The model predicts that large debt positions impede risk sharing. The resource constraint at
any history requires that the present discounted value of net exports equals outstanding debt.
Heuristically, a large stock of outstanding debt lowers the present value of consumption, making
the participation constraint relevant in more states. This generates the empirical prediction that,
all else equal, a large stock of outstanding debt is associated with more volatile consumption.
If a country is patient, it will respond to this by saving. This is a general implication of many
limited-commitment environments – the presence of a borrowing constraint provides an incentive
to save. Placed in general (world) equilibrium, this effect can be used to micro-found βR < 1.
Perhaps more important for the discussion of risk sharing, we see that borrowing today not
only requires repayment in the future (as in the full-commitment environment), it may also
generate more volatile consumption going forward due to impaired risk sharing, a form of “debt
overhang” onto consumption volatility.
   The participation constraint is also informative about net payments (the trade balance). In



                                                16
particular, suppose the constraint is binding at a particular point in time, t. Rearranging (PC),
this implies:
                                            X
                 u(yt ) − u(c(st )) =                   π(sτ |st )β τ −t [u(c(sτ )) − u(yτ )] .
                                        τ ≥t+1,sτ |st

Note that the right hand side must be greater than or equal to zero to satisfy the participation
constraint in every state at t + 1. This implies that yt ≥ c(st ). That is, the country does not
receive net inflows when its constraint is binding. Or, perhaps more intuitively, the constraint
only binds if the country is expected to make a non-negative payment – the country is never
tempted to renege when it is due payments from the rest of the world.
   This plus risk-sharing considerations imply that the participation constraint tends to bind
when the endowment is relatively high. Or, more precisely, fix a history through t − 1 and
consider two endowment realizations y j < y k at time t. If the participation constraint binds
for y j , then it also binds for y k . This reflects the fact that a high endowment makes deviation
attractive, plus the risk-sharing requirement that a high-endowment state is the time to repay
creditors (given state-contingent asset markets). While intuitive, this implication has often led
to the confusing and incorrect statement that the model predicts that “default happens in high-
endowment states.” The incentive to deviate in a high-endowment state is met, in equilibrium,
with a reduction in the amount of net exports required in those states, ensuring continued
participation. From the budget constraint, this must be balanced with lower net imports in
other states. In particular, a binding participation constraint in high-endowment states reduces
the amount of transfers the country receives in low-endowment states. That is, it acts as a
constraint on borrowing in bad times, a natural and general implication of limited commitment.
   To summarize the results so far, we see that limited commitment impedes risk sharing, and
does so particularly severely when the country is heavily indebted. The natural response to the
lack of commitment is to save, which, if the country has sufficient patience, will ultimately lead
to first-best risk sharing; otherwise, consumption fluctuates with output indefinitely. When the
country’s participation constraint binds, net exports are non-negative, implying that borrowing
is limited in other states of the world. The limited risk sharing, volatility of consumption, and
the negative consequences of indebtedness are all implications with clear counterparts in the
data.
   A natural question is whether these allocations can be implemented with realistic financial
contracts and how to interpret empirical “default” episodes. The environment admits alternative
interpretations of state-contingent contracts and default episodes. Grossman and Van Huyck
(1988) argue that the state-contingent assets can be interpreted as partial defaults that are ex-


                                                        17
       cused. That is, the lenders can observe the state and forgive a certain portion of the outstanding
       debt conditional on the state. A similar point is made by Bulow and Rogoff (1989a), who argue
       that sovereign debt can be renegotiated ex post under the threat of legal sanctions. This makes
       debt payments de facto state contingent, although the participation constraint is based on an
       explicit bargaining protocol rather than the reputational autarky value introduced above. They
       point out that the face value of debt can be set to match the highest possible payment, and
       lower payments are decentralized as default and renegotiation.11
          While these interpretations are consistent with the fact that observed defaults are not pun-
       ished severely (e.g., sovereign foreign assets are protected and economies regain access to finan-
       cial markets), they suggest that some element of default is a high-frequency occurrence. At the
       other extreme, a narrow notion of default focuses on the model’s prediction for a binding par-
       ticipation constraint in the lowest endowment state. If the constraint binds in the lowest state,
       it also binds for all continuation values. From the participation constraint, we then have that
       net exports are zero. This implies that the country is in autarky for that one period. Moreover,
       as pointed out above, the country will not exit this autarkic state until it makes a payment.
       While it refuses to make the payment, it continues to be denied net inflows and remains at
       the autarky value. This pattern predicts a punishment phase followed by partial repayment.
       However, the punishment phase lasts only until an endowment above the lowest state occurs,
       making it relatively short-lived, depending on the persistence of the endowment process. An-
       other difficulty with this interpretation of default is that if the country is relatively patient (i.e.,
       βR = 1), a binding constraint with yt = y 1 can only occur in the initial period(s), after which,
       savings (and state-contingent assets) will prevent the constraint from ever binding again in the
       low-endowment state. If the economy is impatient (βR is less than one), the economy may
       revisit this worst-outcome value due to borrowing and repeated low-endowment realizations.


       3.2    Debt Overhang in a Production Economy

       The preceding analysis concerned an endowment economy, and it contained one example of
       “debt overhang”; namely, risk-sharing is impeded by a large stock of outstanding debt. In
       a production economy, limited commitment predicts that output and growth is also adversely
       affected by debt. We should note at the start that in this subsection we consider allocations that
       are on the constrained Pareto frontier between investors/lenders and the domestic government.
  11
    In both Grossman and Van Huyck (1988) and Bulow and Rogoff (1989a) renegotiation is either not time-
consuming, or, via backwards induction, prolonged renegotiation takes place off the equilibrium path. We discuss
more realistic bargaining outcomes in Section 4.



                                                         18
There is an early literature on sovereign debt overhang, such as Sachs (1989) and Krugman
(1988), that explores Pareto inefficiencies that arise due to debt overhang. In these models,
debt is assumed to be exogenous, and debt relief is shown to enhance investment and in some
cases generate a Pareto improvement. In the analysis that follows, debt overhang arises in a
model of endogenous debt dynamics due to the limited ability of the government to commit. The
“ex post” constrained efficiency of the equilibrium allocation implies that a Pareto improvement
cannot be engineered through debt forgiveness.
   In this subsection, we assume that the economy operates the neoclassical production func-
tion F (st , k(st−1 ), n(st )), using the notation introduced at the beginning of this section. Recall
as well that capital is a state variable in the deviation utility V (st , k(st−1 )). This allows the
government to expropriate and re-distribute capital following a deviation. That is, limited
commitment extends to the protection of property located within the country. A natural bench-
mark for V (st , k(st−1 )) is the closed economy neoclassical growth model. Specifically, following
a deviation on promises to creditors or investors, the economy reverts to autarky but contin-
ues with the existing capital stock and technology. This is the deviation considered in Marcet
and Marimon (1992). A harsher alternative is that some of the expropriated capital is ren-
dered un-usuable without foreign involvement and/or the production function is operated with
less efficiency. A perhaps even tougher environment can be constructed assuming that private
(domestic) entrepreneurs are required to operate capital and can invest abroad following a de-
viation. In this case, the combination of capital flight and a government without commitment
on capital taxation prevents the economy from accumulating domestic capital. Several of these
alternatives are explored numerically in Aguiar and Amador (2011). While the precise modeling
of the deviation value matters quantitatively, the conceptual points developed below rest on the
assumption that V is strictly increasing in the domestic capital stock and is independent of
equilibrium debt.
   We consider the government-controlled allocation. The government’s problem is given by
(P) subject to (RC0 ) and (PC). We are confronted with a non-convex participation constraint
due to the presence of a choice variable k(st ) on the right hand side of (PC). In this case, there
is not a general method for addressing this issue. Thomas and Worrall (1994) and Aguiar et al.
(2009) provide some restrictions on the relative concavity of u and F that ensure the constraint
is globally convex. Nevertheless, we can gain important insights by characterizing necessary
conditions for an interior optimum without verifying their sufficiency.
   As in the endowment economy, we use Lagrangian techniques. We continue to let µ denote



                                                 19
the multiplier on the resource constraint (RC0 ) and λ(st )π(st )β t denote the multipliers on the
participation constraints (PC). The first order condition for consumption is the same as in the
endowment economy (equation 3). The first order condition for k(st ) is

           X                                                 X
                     Q∗ (st+1 ) Fk (st+1 , k(st )) − r − δ =   β t+1 π(st+1 )λ(st+1 )V k (st+1 , k(st )).
                                                          
      µ
          st+1 |st                                            st+1 |st



Dividing through by π(st ) and using the definition of Q∗ (st+1 ), we have

      X                                              X t+1 t+1
  µ          π(st+1 |st ) Fk (st+1 , k(st )) − r − δ = β R π(st+1 |st )λ(st+1 )V k (st+1 , k(st )).
      st+1                                               st+1


The left hand side is the expected marginal product of capital minus its opportunity cost, scaled
by the marginal value of period-0 resources. In a world of full commitment, this will equal zero.
The right hand side reflects the distortions of limited commitment. In particular, if λ(st+1 ) > 0
in period t + 1, then investment in period t is distorted. As V k > 0, we have that λ(st+1 ) > 0
implies that the expected marginal product of capital across states in period t + 1 is strictly
greater than the opportunity cost of capital; that is, investment is distorted down today if the
participation constraint binds in any state tomorrow. The intuition is that a large capital stock
raises the value of deviation (V k > 0), providing an increased incentive for the government to
renege on debt promises. To relax the participation constraint, the government underinvests.
This can be decentralized by a higher tax on capital income (Aguiar et al., 2009,Aguiar and
Amador, 2011), where “taxes” may take the form of statutory taxes as well as bribes, permits
and red tape, or anticipated ex post expropriations of capital income by politicians. Another
direct implication of the non-negativity of the right hand side is that capital is never greater than
the first-best level; that is, over investment in this environment never enhances commitment.
   The fact that the constraint in t + 1 matters for period t investment provides a link between
borrowing and investment volatility. Aguiar et al. (2009) explore this link in detail, and we
briefly summarize their results. Consider two alternative histories in period t, st1 and st2 with
output higher in st1 , and identical initial wealth positions so resources are greater in st1 . To
make the point in its simplest form, assume iid shocks so that the first best investment level is
independent of histories. In the low-output state st2 , the government would like to smooth the
consumption by borrowing against high states in the future. Conversely, the government in state
st1 would like to borrow less, or even use the extra output to pay down debt, raising consumption
and risk-sharing opportunities going forward. In order to relax the borrowing constraint in the
former case, the government invests less in st2 . That is, low output leads to low investment,


                                                         20
       indicating that limited commitment can prolong the impact of a transitory shock.
          Moreover, this effect is most severe when the economy is heavily indebted. In particular, an
       economy can avoid distorted investment by maintaining a sufficiently low level of outstanding
       debt. For example, take the case of βR = 1. As in the endowment case, the first order condition
       for consumption implies that the economy eventually saves to a point where the participation
       constraint no longer binds. In the production economy, this implies that investment ultimately
       achieves the first best level, but only when debt is low enough. If βR < 1, then the economy
       converges to an ergodic distribution in which investment cycles indefinitely at a level always
       strictly below the first best. The implication that high levels of sovereign debt enhances the
       cyclicality and reduces the level of investment is consistent with the empirical results on the poor
       macroeconomic performance of heavily indebted economies. A particularly striking case study
       is Argentina’s debt crisis of 2001, which coincided with the start of a sequence of government
       expropriations of private capital income.12
          The analysis thus far highlights the deleterious implications of debt overhang in a world
       of limited commitment. The efficient allocation, when the country’s government is sufficiently
       patient, addresses this by paying down debt. This begs the question of why so many countries
       stagnate in a heavily indebted state. One explanation is that some countries, due perhaps
       to demographics or mortality, discount at a relative high rate. As we saw, if βR < 1, the
       efficient allocation does not achieve a debt level low enough to support first best investment or
       risk sharing. However, assuming βR < 1 is not completely satisfactory as an explanation. For
       example, many countries eventually do pay down their debt, but do so over a very long period of
       time. In the terminology of Reinhart and Rogoff, countries do “graduate” from debt overhang,
       but the process is a prolonged one. Note that a low value of β does not necessarily imply slow
       convergence to the steady state or ergodic distribution; that is, even though a low value of β
       implies that saving is depressed, this is balanced by a reduction in the level of steady-state
       capital.
          Aguiar and Amador (2011) provide an alternative explanation for the fact that successful
       countries reduce net foreign liabilities, but the speed at which this occurs may vary across
       economies. Specifically, they propose a model of political turnover in which political actors
       rotate in and out of power according to a Markov process. Motivated by the work of Persson
       and Svensson (1989) and Alesina and Tabellini (1990), participants in the political process are
       assumed to prefer consumption during their incumbency. Specifically, an incumbent places a
  12
    Restrepo-Echavarria (2013) explores the ability of the model to explain Latin America’s “lost decade” following
the 1980s debt crisis.



                                                        21
premium θ̃ > 1 on consumption while in power. Aguiar and Amador consider an environment
in which output is deterministic, but political turnover is stochastic, isolating the frictions due
to political uncertainty. Let pt,t+j denote the probability that the incumbent in period t is also
in power in t + j. The preferences of the incumbent at period t are:

                                               X                              
                            W̃t = θ̃u(ct ) +          β τ −t pt,τ θ̃ + 1 − pt,τ u(cτ ).
                                               τ >t


Considering the simplest case in which the political turnover process is iid across political
participants (i.e., pt,t+j = p, ∀j > 0), incumbent utility becomes:

                                          W̃t                 X
                               Wt ≡               = θu(ct ) +      β τ −t u(cτ )
                                      pθ̃ + 1 − p             τ >t

                                   = θu(ct ) + βVt+1 ,


                θ̃
where θ =   pθ̃+1−p
                    ,   and we have renormalized the incumbent utility. Note that Vt+1 is the utility
of private agents in the economy.
   In this environment, the current incumbent discounts between today and tomorrow at the
rate β/θ < β, but discounts across future periods at the geometric rate β. In this sense, the
incumbent has hyperbolic or quasi-geometric preferences in the spirit of Laibson (1994). The
fact that the current incumbent discounts in a non-geometric fashion is a natural consequence
of stochastic political turnover; for the incumbent, the current period is special because it is in
power with probability one. Any future period must be down-weighted by the probability that
the current incumbent will lose office in the interim, but also reflect the fact that it may return
to power as well. The iid environment implies that the conditional probability of incumbency
is the same across any two future periods, and therefore those are weighted equally using the
undistorted discount factor β. Aguiar and Amador (2011) show how to generalize this to per-
sistent political processes. Political economy distortions are captured by θ, with θ = 1 reflecting
a benevolent government and θ > 1 reflecting an incumbent who strictly favors front-loading
consumption.
   If the incumbent makes decisions regarding debt repayment or capital taxation, the relevant
participation constraint is
                                                Wt ≥ W (kt−1 ),                                   (5)

where W (kt−1 ) is the deviation utility of the current incumbent given invested capital kt−1 .
This utility incorporates any punishment the political process may impose on deviation, as well


                                                          22
       as the consequences of financial autarky. We continue to assume that W 0 (kt ) > 0, so that
       additional capital makes deviation less costly.13 An efficient allocation in this environment is to
       maximize (P) subject to (RC0 ) and the sequence of incumbent participation constraints (5).
          The first order condition for consumption is:
                                                                      
                                                  t
                                                  X
                                    β t Rt 1 +         λj + (θ − 1)λt  u0 (ct ) = µ,                        (6)
                                                  j=0


       where λt denotes the scaled multiplier on incumbent t’s participation constraint and µ denotes
       the multiplier on the resource constraint. This condition is similar to (3), the first order condition
       absent political economy frictions, save for the presence of (θ − 1)λt on the left hand side of
       (6). This additional term reflects that for the incumbent political party, current consumption
       is particularly valued. This additional term does not overturn the implication that if βR = 1,
       then limt→∞ λt = 0, as the cumulative sum continues to imply back loading of consumption.
       However, the presence of the additional term does influence dynamics. To see this transparently,
       consider the case of βR = 1 and assume risk neutral preferences: u0 (c) = 1. (Aguiar and Amador
       (2011) show how the results extend to the general environment with βR ≤ 1 and concave utility).
       In this case, the cumulating sum on the left hand side of (6) is constant over time, implying the
       following first-order dynamics:

                                                               
                                                              1
                                                  λt+1   = 1−     λt ,                                        (7)
                                                              θ

                    µ−1
       with λ0 =     θ    ≥ 0. This implies that λt converges to zero at a rate 1/θ, so convergence is
       governed by the extent of political distortions reflected in θ.
          As in the benchmark case, the participation-constraint multiplier λ determines the distortions
       in investment, as the first order condition for capital takes the same form (absent productivity
       shocks):


                                           F 0 (kt ) − (r + δ) = λt+1 W 0 (kt ).                              (8)


       Therefore the magnitude of political economy distortions also governs the convergence of capital
       to the first best level. That is, a more politically distorted economy grows at a slower rate. The
       environment exhibits the standard implication of limited commitment that the participation
  13
     We also implicitly use the concavity assumption that (F 0 (k) − r − d)/W 0 (k) is declining in k. This is satisfied,
for example, by a broad class of deviation value functions in the neighborhood of the first best capital.




                                                             23
constraint is relaxed as the sovereign accumulates wealth. Aguiar and Amador (2011) use
this insight to generate an environment where growth occurs by reducing the government’s
net foreign liabilities, consistent with the “allocation puzzle” empirical facts discussed in 2.
However, countries experience differential growth rates depending on the extent of political
economy distortions. This is consistent with the fact that some countries experience long periods
of stagnation in which debt is high and growth is low, while other countries exhibit extremely
high levels of growth all the while serving as net exporters of capital. The model suggests
that political economy distortions do not preclude an economy from eventually achieving high-
income status, but does suggest that the process will be a long one. Moreover, Aguiar and
Amador (2011) show that the more distorted economy must achieve a lower level of steady
state debt to support the same level of capital as a less distorted economy, consistent with
the “debt intolerance” pattern documented by Reinhart et al. (2003) in which less-developed
economies encounter macroeconomic difficulties at lower levels of external debt than high-income
economies.
   We conclude our discussion of the benchmark economy with a few comments on how to
decentralize the constrained-efficient allocation as a competitive equilibrium. In regard to in-
vestment, the previous discussion highlights that the stock of physical capital may influence the
government’s incentive to renege on debt and tax promises. This can be decentralized with a tax
on the returns to investment, as discussed in Kehoe and Perri (2004) in a two-country general
equilibrium model and Aguiar et al. (2009) in a small open economy environment. Equation (8)
directly implies that the returns to capital must be distorted relative to the opportunity cost if
the participation constraint is strictly binding (whether the government is benevolent or not),
and a tax on capital income is a natural decentralization of this wedge.
   The decentralization of the endowment economy of Section 3.1 has been studied by Jeske
(2006) and Wright (2006) in an environment in which heterogeneous private agents insure endow-
ment risk with each other and with foreign financial markets. These authors assume complete
enforcement of financial contracts signed by two domestic agents, but limited enforcement of
private international contracts. If a private agent defaults on a foreign debt commitment, the
agent retains access to domestic financial markets. This is a weak punishment, as the agent can
use other domestic agents (and their continued access to foreign financial markets) to insure
its endowment shocks, and in this sense the incentives to deviate are greater for an individual
agent than they are for a benevolent government that is punished by aggregate financial autarky.
Jeske (2006) shows that the undistorted competitive equilibrium is not efficient. Wright (2006)



                                               24
shows that a subsidy to foreign borrowing can be used to decentralize the constrained efficient
allocation. The need for a subsidy reflects the fact that the competitive equilibrium’s ineffi-
ciency stems from debt constraints that are too tight. By making repayment less burdensome,
a subsidy to foreign debt allows the individual to increase its borrowing from abroad. This,
plus complete and fully-enforced domestic asset markets, allows the individuals to achieve the
constrained efficient allocation in a competitive equilibrium.



4     Richer Notions of “Default”

A drawback of the benchmark model is the modeling of “default.” In fact, there are two
concepts in the model that could be interpreted as default. In the terminology of Grossman and
Van Huyck (1988), there is excusable default as well as repudiation (or inexcusable default).
Repudiation is what occurs off the equilibrium path and delivers utility V (st ). Excusable default
is when a state-contingent payment is made, which Grossman and Van Huyck (1988) interpret
as a partial default and state-contingent haircut. In this section, we enrich both concepts. In
regard to inexcusable default, we can observe a severing of the creditor-debtor relationship in
equilibrium by introducing unobservable shocks to the outside option V . Regarding the notion
of excusable default and hair-cuts, a literature is developing on generating haircuts endogenously
after a non-trivial bargaining problem. We review some of the key concepts in Section 4.2.


4.1    Equilibrium Default

In the benchmark model, insurance contracts are rich enough that there is never a severing of
a risk-sharing relationship in equilibrium. In practice, we do see periods of limited access to
international financial markets after a failure to make a scheduled payment. As noted above, one
interpretation of the fully contingent set of contracts is a reduced form of incomplete contracts
combined with state-contingent renegotiation. In the next subsection, we take up renegotiation
more formally. In this subsection, we consider an environment where markets are incomplete
because some shocks are not observable, which can generate an endogenous separation between
creditors and debtors.
    Specifically, assume that there are unobservable (to lenders) shocks that enter as arguments
to the outside option V . Such an environment has been explored in the corporate context by
Cooley et al. (2004) and in a general setting in Hopenhayn and Werning (2008). Let st denote
the shock to productivity as before, and introduce zt as a shock to the deviation utility that
is not observable by foreign creditors. The unobserved shock could represent the economy’s

                                                25
vulnerability to direct sanctions or financial autarky (e.g., the vulnerability of the domestic
banking system to sovereign default), which is known to the government but not to lenders, or
the political consequences the incumbent faces in deciding whether to repay or deviate (e.g., the
political consequences of the wealth transfers stemming from default). In this subsection, we
use the term default to be synonymous with opting for the deviation utility V to highlight the
precise notion of default we have in mind.
   The environment follows that of the benchmark endowment economy. Let st index the
endowment, which for simplicity we assume to be iid and drawn from a discrete set S. Let
z denote an iid continuous random variable that is independent of s and has support Z. Let
V : Z × S → R denote the value of deviation as a function of the outside option shock and the
endowment shock, which we assume is strictly increasing in both arguments. Conditional on s,
the variable z indexes the government’s outside option for default. Inverting this mapping, let
Fs (v) = Pr{V (z, s) ≤ v|s} denote the probability that the realized z is such that V (z, s) ≤ v
conditional on s, and let fs (v) = Fs0 (v). This problem is relatively tractable given that z
affects the outside option only and therefore is not something that can be credibly revealed
absent separation. The problem of unobserved shocks that directly influence payoffs within the
creditor-debtor relationship is treated, for example, by Atkeson (1991), Tsyrennikov (2012), and
Dovis (2012) in the sovereign-debt context, and by Clementi and Hopenhayn (2006), DeMarzo
and Fishman (2007) and Quadrini (2004) in the corporate bond context.
   We write the problem recursively, letting the utility of the representative foreign creditor
be the objective function and the utility of the debtor be the state variable. In particular, let
B(v) denote the expected net present value of payments to the creditor(s) conditional on the
debtor enjoying utility greater than or equal to v, prior to the realization of today’s shocks. This
“inverts” the government’s strictly decreasing value function that maps promised debt payments
into discounted utility. We assume that βR = 1. The timing of default is that the decision is
made after observing s and z, but before receiving transfers from financial markets:

                                            X                                       
                B(v) =          max             π(s)Fs (v(s))) y(s) − c(s) + βB(w(s))
                         {v(s),c(s),w(s)}
                                            s

                      subject to:
                                                                               !
                           X                              Z   ∞
                                π(s) Fs (v(s))v(s) +              ṽdFs (ṽ)       =v           (9)
                            s                             v(s)

                          u(c(s)) + βw(s) = v(s).                                              (10)




                                                     26
       Equation (9) is a “promise keeping” constraint that ensures that the debtor receives v in expec-
       tation. Equation (10) reflects that we have broken up the problem into choosing state contingent
       utility v(s), and then allocating that utility over consumption today c(s) and future promises
       w(s) for notational convenience. Note the creditor receives net payments y(s) − c(s) only if
       the government decides not to default in that state, and receives zero otherwise. Therefore
       payments are discounted by Fs (v(s)) in each state. Note also that the concavity of the problem
       is not guaranteed without suitable assumptions on Fs (v).
                                                                                             π(s0 )u(y(s0 ))/(1 − β) for
                                                                                   P
          Let us assume the support Z is such that V (z, s) ≤ u(y(s)) + β               s0

       all z, s.14 Under this assumption, in an efficient allocation, if y(s) − c(s) + βB(w(s)) ≤ 0, then
       Fs (v(s)) = 1: that is, if the country in state s expects to receive a positive net present value
       from abroad, then it will not default, independenty of the realization of the shock z.
          We proceed now under the premise that B(v) is differentiable and the optimum is character-
       ized by first order conditions. Let µ denote the multiplier on the promise keeping constraint and
       π(s)γ(s) on the v(s) constraints.15 The first order conditions for v(s), c(s) and w(s), considering
       the cases where Fs (v(s)) ∈ (0, 1), are:

                                                                
                                 fs (v(s)) y(s) − c(s) + βB(w(s)) = −Fs (v(s))µ + γ(s)

                                                            Fs (v(s)) = u0 (c(s))γ(s)

                                                 −Fs (v(s))B 0 (w(s)) = γ(s).


       The envelope condition is B 0 (v) = −µ. Combining conditions and rearranging gives:


                1                     1         fs (v(st−1 , s))  t−1           t−1              t−1
                                                                                                           
                            −                 =                   y(s  , s) − c(s    , s) + βB(w(s    , s)   , (11)
         u0 (c(st−1 , s))       u0 (c(st−1 ))   Fs (v(st−1 , s))

       for all states s and all histories st−1 . In the equation above, we have used the condition that
       −B 0 (w(s)) = 1/u0 (c(s)) in period t and t−1. The left hand side is the distortion to consumption
       smoothing; absent distortions from limited commitment, this should be zero as βR = 1. On
       the right hand side is the benefit from reducing the probability of default at the margin. The
       first term is the elasticity of the probability of default with respect to promised utility, and
       this is multiplied by discounted net payments promised to creditors. In states in which this
  14
     This assumption can be interpreted as stating that the variation in the outside option is due to a random
non-negative cost of default in addition to financial autarky.
  15
     In the present context, promise keeping can be written as an inequality constraint, as the creditor can always
choose to deliver more without violating the other aspects of the problem. This ensures the multipliers are non-
negative.



                                                             27
       term is positive (that is, states s in which the country is a debtor and defaults with positive
       probability), there is an incentive to have c(st−1 , s) > c(st−1 ). That is, there is an incentive
       to distort consumption to reduce default at the margin, and in particular to shift consumption
       towards states when the probability of default is particularly elastic and net repayments are
       particularly large. Note that in states where the country is a saver, then, as discussed above,
       the country does not default for any z, and thus consumption is constant: c(st−1 , s) = c(st−1 ).
       The resulting pattern of increasing consumption is similar to the benchmark model: the economy
       has an incentive to pay down its debt and increase consumption over time. Moreover, the option
       to default distorts risk sharing across endowment states. In contrast to the benchmark model,
       there will be default with positive probability and the probability of default is greater when
       debt is high. While under suitable assumptions it is the case that default is more likely when
       y(s) is particularly low,16 the independent shock z weakens the correlation between output and
       default, consistent with the empirical facts that default is more likely in recessions, but occurs
       with some probability in booms as well.


       4.2    Renegotiation

       One of the drawbacks of the benchmark model is the treatment of the default process. As
       noted above, several papers have motivated a complete-markets asset structure with default
       and partial repayment, as in the papers of Grossman and Van Huyck (1988) and Bulow and
       Rogoff (1989a). While useful as foundations for rich risk-sharing possibilities implemented with
       non-contingent contracts, they do not speak to the delays observed in actual default episodes.
       The bargaining models of Fernandez and Rosenthal (1990) and Yue (2010), while generating
       many useful insights in regard to risk sharing and debt dynamics, have limited implications
       for endogenous delay in equilibrium. As noted in the empirical review (Section 2), the average
       default episode lasts eight years, calling for a richer model of debt renegotiation.
          We briefly review some of the recent contributions in regard to sovereign debt renegotiation.
       The models of Bi (2008a) and Benjamin and Wright (2008) share the emphasis on limited com-
       mitment that we emphasized in the benchmark model, but also emphasize the role of incomplete
       markets. In their framework, the creditor and debtor bargain over the surplus of the relationship.
       As in our benchmark environment, limited commitment prevents the debtor from fully pledging
  16
    For example, assume V (z, s) depends only on z and f (v)/F (v) is weakly decreasing in v. Assuming B(v) is
concave, differentiation of (11) implies that v(s) is increasing in y(s), or that F (v(s)) is decreasing in y(s). The
assumption that the outside option is independent of y(s) is extreme, but the intuition that imperfect risk sharing
combined with incomplete markets generates default in bad states will reappear in the quantitative models discussed
in Section 6.



                                                         28
       future income. However, in the benchmark, the debtor could make state-contingent promises
       that were self enforcing, allowing it to credibly pledge more in high states. In a state-contingent
       world, there is no incentive to delay negotiation until after output shocks are realized, as all
       payments can be made contingent on the histories of shocks. In the absence of state-contingent
       assets, the debtor can only pledge a non-contingent amount. In an incomplete-markets environ-
       ment, there is therefore an incentive to delay. In particular, the parties would like to delay until
       expectations of future output are high in order to credibly pledge these endowment streams.17,18
          Sovereign debt typically involves multiple creditors, and particularly so when debt takes the
       form of bonds rather than bank loans, which is the recent trend. Renegotiation of debt therefore
       requires some level of coordination among creditors. The difficulty involved with coordination
       may raise the costs of renegotiation and prolong debt restructuring. Pitchford and Wright
       (forthcoming) show that there is an incentive to hold out in debt negotiations, as the last to
       agree to a settlement has disproportionately large bargaining power due to its ability to veto
       the entire settlement. Limited commitment plays a role here as well, as the borrower cannot
       commit to treat hold outs more harshly than those that settle early. Pitchford and Wright
       (forthcoming) argue that this incentive to hold out can create delays in debt restructuring. One
       proposed solution to such hold outs is collective action clauses (CAC’s), in which restructuring
       can be implemented by a sub-set of bondholders (usually a super-majority). Pitchford and
       Wright (forthcoming) show somewhat paradoxically that this may serve to increase delay, as
       negotiation is costly and with only a subset of bondholders required for settlement, there is an
       incentive to free ride on negotiation costs.
          Bolton and Jeanne (2007) and Bolton and Jeanne (2009) analyze CAC’s with an eye towards
       ex ante efficiency. Making settlement more costly raises ex post restructuring costs, but may
       ease ex ante incentive problems. In particular, difficult restructuring may induce a borrower to
       repay when it otherwise would default. Thus an ex post inefficient restructuring process may
       ease the fundamental inefficiency due to limited commitment. However, Bolton and Jeanne show
       that this mechanism must be used with care as it may be taken one step too far. In particular,
  17
      Both Bi (2008a) and Benjamin and Wright (2008) have a rich model of the bargaining process, including stochastic
variation in bargaining power, and both papers include a quantitative evaluation of the respective model’s ability to
match key empirical facts. The Benjamin and Wright (2008) model also predicts the evolution of debt during the
restructuring process.
   18
      An additional explanation for why debt renegotiations or default durations are prolonged is that the parties have
asymmetric information. Two recent papers in this regard are D’Erasmo (2011) and Bai and Zhang (2012). Cole et
al. (1995) present a model in which the government’s type is not observable and varies over time; to signal a switch
to a relatively patient government, a payment is made and the country exits default. A similar spirit but a different
application than renegotiation underlies Sandleris (2008), in which the decision not to default is a signal regarding
the government’s private information on the health of the economy.




                                                          29
       there is an individual incentive for one or a group of creditors to make their bonds relatively hard
       to restructure; this is particularly relevant in a dynamic setting as the government is tempted
       to dilute existing bondholders by issuing harder-to-restructure new bonds. This could make
       some bonds de facto senior to other issues, as bonds that are more difficult to restructure have
       a greater chance for repayment. In equilibrium, this exernality generates bond issues that are
       excessively difficult to renegotiate, potentially lowering ex ante welfare.



       5     Self-fulfilling Debt Crises

       In the benchmark model of Section 3 we characterized efficient equilibria; that is, we solved a
       planning problem subject to a break-even constraint for creditors and capital owners. However,
       that model often admits other equilibria which are not on the constrained Pareto frontier. The
       multiplicity of equilibria raises the possibility of self-fulfilling debt crises in which agents “switch”
       to a Pareto-inferior equilibrium.
           We illustrate the possibility of self-fulfilling crises in a simple, two-period model and then
       discuss extensions to a dynamic setting. Consider a small open economy with constant tradable
       output endowment y. There are two periods t = 1, 2, with preferences given by u(c1 ) + βu(c2 ).
       Let β = R−1 , so that the government discounts at the world interest rate.
           The country begins period one with outstanding liabilities b. The timing is as follows:19
       the government begins the first period by issuing new bonds b0 to competitive bondholders with
       discount factor β = R−1 , given an equilibrium price schedule q : R → R+ . While the government
       takes the schedule q as given, it chooses new debt issuances b0 internalizing the shape of the
       price schedule. After selling the newly issued bonds, the country decides to repay or not the
       legacy debt b. Failure to pay the legacy debt sends the country into financial autarky, where it
       faces a reduction in endowment of amount τ every period. In particular, default in period one
       yields value:


                                    V (q(b0 )b0 ) = u(y − τ + q(b0 )b0 ) + βu(y − τ ).


       Note that the timing assumption implies that the government retains the money raised by new
  19
     We have followed the timing introduced by Cole and Kehoe (2000), which is different from the timing usually
assumed in the quantitative literature discussed in Section 6. In Cole and Kehoe, the price schedule is offered before
the government makes its default decision, wile the typical assumption in the quantitative literature is that the price
schedule is offered after the government makes its within-period default decision. The key distinction is whether the
price schedule (that is, the price as a function of newly issued debt, b0 ) is conditional or unconditional on non-default
within the period.



                                                           30
      bond issues q(b0 )b0 whether or not it defaults in the first period. In the second period, if the
      government has previously defaulted it simply consumes y − τ . If the country did not default
      in the first period, it decides whether to repay b0 ; that is, it chooses the maximum of repayment
      consumption y − b0 and default consumption y − τ .
          To summarize the optimal default decision let D2 : R → {0, 1} be the policy function for
      default in period 2. Specifically, D2 (b0 ) = 1 if b0 > τ , and equals 0 otherwise. Let D1 :
      R × R × Q → {0, 1} be the policy function for default in period 1 conditional on new debt b0 ,
      legacy debt b, and the equilibrium price schedule q ∈ Q, where Q is the set of functions mapping
      R into R+ :20

                             
                             1 if u(y + q(b0 )b0 − b) + βu (y − (1 − D2 (b0 ))b0 − D2 (b0 )τ ) < V (q(b0 )b0 )
                             
          D1 (b0 ; b, q) =
                             
                             0 otherwise.


          We define equilibrium as follows:

      Definition 2. An equilibrium given initial debt b is a price schedule, q, default policy functions
      D1 and D2 , and a debt choice b∗ such that:

        (i) Given b and q, D1 and D2 are defined by the government’s optimal default decision for
             each b0 ;

        (ii) Given b and q and the optimal default policies, the government chooses new debt optimally:


                   b∗ = argmax {(1 − D1 (b0 ; b, q))u(y + q(b0 )b0 − b) + D1 (b0 ; b, q)u(y + q(b0 )b0 − τ )
                              b0

                                    +β(1 − D1 (b0 ; b, q)D2 (b0 ))u(y − b0 ) + βD1 (b0 ; q, b)D2 (b0 )u(y − τ )} ;


       (iii) Given D1 and D2 , q satisfies q(b0 ) = β(1 − D(b0 ; b, q)) for all b0 , where D ≡ D1 × D2 ;

          The first condition of equilibrium states that the government makes its default decision in
      order to maximize utility, whether default occurs in the first period or second, and this decision
      is made after new debt issuances b0 . The second condition states that the government chooses
      new debt optimally. Note that at the time it issues new debt in the first period, the government
      cannot commit to a default decision for that period, and so recognizes that default will be
      chosen optimally ex post. The third condition states that investors break even for any bond
  20
     To streamline the exposition, we do not formally limit the debt domain to ensure consumption is non-negative
(that is, b0 ≤ y and b − q(b0 )b0 ≤ y). It should be understood that default will be chosen over negative consumption.
This decision may be relevant in equilibrium if b > y and the government cannot issue new debt at a positive price,
making default its only feasible option.



                                                              31
       issuance b0 . The fact that condition three holds for all b0 implies equilibrium satisfies a perfection
       requirement; that is, even if the government chose a sub-optimal level of debt, investors break
       even.
           The following proposition states that the model can have multiple equilibria:

       Proposition 1 (Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises). Let b be the unique value such that u(y − b) +
       βu(y) = (1 + β)u(y − τ ). Let b be the unique value such that

                                                                           
                                               b                   βb
                             (1 + β)u y −                =u y−τ +                 + βu(y − τ )
                                              1+β                 1+β

       If b ∈ (b, b], then there exists at least two equilibria, one of them with q(b0 ) = 0 for all b0 , and
       another one with an equilibrium schedule such that q(b/(1 + β)) = β.

       This proposition captures the concept of a self-fulfilling debt crisis. A price schedule q(b0 ) = 0
       for all b0 is one in which lenders are unwilling to purchase bonds of any amount. That is,
       the government is unable to issue new bonds and existing bond holders demand immediate
       repayment. For b > b, we have that u(y − b) + βu(y) < (1 + β)u(y − τ ), and so the government’s
       best response to such a roll-over crisis is to default (for any b0 ), and this confirms the zero price.
       On the other hand, there is an equilibrium which supports positive lending up to b̄. In particular,
       if lenders were willing to buy new bonds and b ≤ b < τ (1 + β), then the government would
       prefer to issue new bonds and then repay outstanding debt as long as it can issue b0 = b/(1 + β)
       at the price q(b0 ) = β and outstanding debt is below b. Issuing b0 = b/(1 + β) at a price of
       β implements the full-commitment solution and delivers a utility that favors repayment over
       default. Hence, the solution in part (iii) would be b? = b/(1 + β). The price schedule q can be
       extended to off-equilibrium debt issuances such that equilibrium conditions (i) and (ii) hold.
           In this manner, we can construct two equilibria with distinct price schedules and that gener-
       ate distinct equilibrium allocations, as long as initial debt b ∈ (b, b]. In particular, one equilib-
       rium features an inability to roll over debt and an immediate default, while the other features
       the ability to issue new bonds and avoid default. In this range of initial debt, the government
       is vulnerable to self-fulfilling expectations about its willingness to repay. Proposition 1 does
       not guarantee that b < b, so the relevant region for multiple equilibria may not always exist.
       However, there exists a τ ∗ < y such that if τ ∈ (τ ∗ , y), then b < b.21
           An important point is that while the government is vulnerable for b > b, a price schedule
  21
     To see this, note that b < τ (1 + β) and that b is increasing in τ ∈ [0, y), which can be seen from the definition of b.
Note also that b ≤ y. Define τ ∗ so that b = y, which from the definition of b must be strictly less than y. Therefore,
for τ ∈ (τ ∗ , y) we have b > y > b.



                                                             32
       of zero is not an equilibrium if b ≤ b. That is, if initial debt is low enough, the government
       is not subject to self-fulfilling crises. While b is a primitive in the two-period model, in a fully
       dynamic model debt levels are endogenous state variables. Cole and Kehoe (2000) build a
       dynamic equilibrium model that embeds the above analysis. One important modeling device is
       that as long as the government’s liability position lies in the range where a self-fulling crisis is
       possible, then there exists a constant and strictly positive probability that such a crisis occurs.
       A main result of their analysis is that the government has an incentive to save its way out of
       the crisis zone (b, b]. That is, the government responds to the vulnerability to self-fulfilling debt
       crises by reducing its debt.22
          A number of extensions to the Cole and Kehoe model have been made in the recent lit-
       erature. Conesa and Kehoe (2011) allow shocks to income. In particular, they suppose the
       economy is in recession and faces a constant hazard of recovery. In this case, saving exacerbates
       the consumption impact of the recession and the government may opt to remain in the crisis
       zone hoping that a recovery occurs before a debt crisis. They refer to this as “gambling for
       redemption.”
          A second extension concerns nominal bonds. The option to inflate away the real value of
       nominal debt provides an alternative to outright default in the event of a debt crisis. Aguiar et
       al. (2012) show that issuing nominal bonds has an ambiguous effect on vulnerability to a self-
       fulfilling debt crisis. Specifically, if the government’s commitment to low inflation is high absent
       a crisis, then nominal bonds have a desirable state-contingent feature; in good times, the real
       return is high, while in the event of a crisis, the government inflates away part of the real value
       of the bonds. As creditors prefer partial repayment to outright default, the ability to respond
       with inflation generates a superior outcome to real bonds. However, if the commitment to low
       inflation is weak even in good times, the government loses the state-contingency potentially
       allowed by nominal bonds. In particular, the government has a temptation to inflate ex post
       even in normal times, and this will be reflected in lower bond prices (or higher interest rates)
       ex ante, making repayment that much more burdensome. This effect may be large enough to
       dominate, generating a larger crisis zone for nominal bonds. Aguiar et al. (2012) use this fact to
       rationalize why many emerging markets with weak inflationary regimes issue bonds in foreign
       currency, while economies like the US, the UK, and Japan issue large amounts of domestic
       currency bonds at low nominal interest rates and seemingly without risk of self-fulfilling crises.
          Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012b) quantitatively explore the benefit of long maturity bonds
  22
    The one caveat to this result is if initial debt is so large that the transition to b may be long enough that the
government is better off remaining in the crisis zone indefinitely.



                                                         33
in an environment prone to self-fulfilling crises. The paper contrasts the temptation to dilute
existing bond holders in an incomplete markets setting (a point discussed in detail in the next
section) with the protection long-maturity bonds provide from rollover crises. The calibrated
model of Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012b) indicates that even a small likelihood of a rollover
crisis implies that a country would seek to limit its short-term debt to the point where the
probability of a rollover crisis is endogenously reduced to a small value. Moreover, the use of
long-maturity bonds, despite the costs rising from debt dilution, reduces the reliance of debt
reduction as the optimal response to potential rollover crises.



6     Incomplete Market Models and their Quantitative Im-

plementation

In this section, we discuss how well models of sovereign debt perform quantitatively as well
as some additional conceptual issues that arise in models of incomplete markets. The primary
paradigm for quantitative analysis is the model of Eaton and Gersovitz (1982). In particular, a
small open economy trades a non-contingent bond in order to insure itself against endowment
or productivity shocks. The only state contingency spanned by the asset markets is through the
option to default.
    We first introduce a simple version of the model and then discuss some of the extensions
in the literature. The model follows early quantitative versions of the Eaton-Gersovitz model
explored by Aguiar and Gopinath (2006), Arellano (2008), and Hamann (2002).
    Consider a small open economy that has a stochastic endowment stream yt , which follows
a Markov process. The government has preferences given by (1) and trades a one-period bond
with risk neutral investors. Time is discrete and the timing within a period is as follows. At
the start of period t, the government has outstanding liabilities bt . It observes the endowment
shock yt and then decides whether to repay bt or default. If it defaults, it enjoys deviation utility
V (yt ) to be defined below. If it repays, it issues new bonds bt+1 at price q(bt+1 , yt ). The price
of a bond is a stationary function of outstanding debt and the current endowment shock. As
discussed in Section 5, the literature has different timing conventions regarding whether new
bonds are auctioned before or after the current period default decision is made. The standard
assumption in the quantitative debt literature is that the bond price schedule is contingent on
no default in the current period.
    Let V N D (b, y) denote the value of choosing to repay its debts when it starts the period with



                                                 34
an amount of debt b and an income y:

                                          n                                     o
                                                    0 0               0 0
                       V N D (b, y) = max
                                       0
                                           u(y + q(b )b − b) + βE[V (b , y )|y]              (12)
                                      b



and b0 (b, y) denotes an associated optimal debt-issuance policy.
   Let V (y) be the value of default, conditional of the current income value y:


                  V (y) = u((1 − τ )y) + (1 − λ)βE[V (y 0 )|y] + λβE[V (0, y 0 )|y].         (13)


Then, V (b, y), the governments value function at the start of the period conditional on out-
standing debt due b and current endowment shock y, is the maximum of V N D (b, y) and the
default value V (y):


                          V (b, y) = max {(1 − D)V N D (b, y) + D × V (y)}                   (14)
                                    D∈[0,1]



and D(b, y) denotes an associated optimal default policy. Note that neither b0 (b, y) nor D(b, y)
may be uniquely defined.
   A few things to note in the definition of V . First, the economy is excluded from asset
markets in the period of default and suffers a loss in output τ y. This is designed to capture
direct sanctions and other output consequences from default. In equation (13), the loss is
proportional to output, which is the formulation used by Aguiar and Gopinath (2006). Arellano
(2008) allows τ to vary with the level of the endowment according to a function τ (y). A second
feature of equation (13) is that with probability λ ∈ [0, 1), the country can regain access to
financial markets, starting anew with a clean credit rating and zero debt. This is a reduced
form for the default process discussed in Section 4. In the simplest quantitative models, the
haircut is set at one hundred percent so the country emerges with zero debt.
   A few further remarks on the direct costs τ are in order. At a conceptual level, debt can
be sustained in equilibrium through financial exclusion alone, as shown by Eaton and Gersovitz
(1982). As a quantitative matter, the amount of debt that can be supported by the threat
of financial autarky is relatively small in this benchmark economy. This is related to the fact
that in a closed-economy representative-agent model, aggregate consumption fluctuations at
business cycle frequencies have relatively small welfare implications, a point made using a simple
numerical example by Lucas (1987). Aguiar and Gopinath (2006) extend the Lucas example
to show that financial autarky is not a harsh punishment in a small open endowment economy,



                                                  35
       and thus very little debt is sustainable in equilibrium. A second point is that the output costs
       of default may depend on the level of output. This is the formulation proposed by Arellano
       (2008). While default provides a crude form of state contingency, as described in previous
       sections there is a fair amount of contingency built into the renegotiation process. A simple way
       to incorporate this into an otherwise incomplete-markets environment is to assume that default
       is punished (disproportionately) less severely if it occurs in low output states. Finally, a recent
       paper by Mendoza and Yue (2012) endogenizes the link between the state-contingent output
       costs of default and the reputational costs of financial autarky using a model of trade credit.
           The break-even constraint for risk neutral lenders is

                                                         E[1 − D(b0 , y 0 )|y]
                                           q(b0 , y) =                         ,                          (15)
                                                                R

           Let us define an equilibrium:

       Definition 3. A recursive equilibrium is a price schedule q(b0 , y), value functions V (b, y),
       V N D (b, y), and V (y), and policy functions b0 (b, y) and D(b, y) such that: (i) the government
       optimizes given the price schedule, that is V (y), V (b, y), V N D (b, y) solve equations (12), (13) and
       (14) and b0 and D are the resulting policy functions; and (ii) creditors earn R in expectation
       given the government’s equilibrium policy functions, that is, equation (15) holds.

           The quantitative literature typically computes an equilibrium as follows. For clarity, assume
       that λ = 0, so that default leads to permanent financial autarky. Note that the value function
       V N D (b, y) depends on the bond-price schedule q via the budget constraint. In fact, V N D is
       weakly increasing in q for all b and y. When λ = 0, V (y) is independent of q. Therefore,
       V N D (b, y) − V is weakly increasing in q. We can construct an equilibrium by iterating on the
       following operator. Let B = [b, b] denote the state space of debt and Y the state space of y.
       Define the operator T on the space of functions that map B × Y → [0, R−1 ] by:
                                                                             
                                               Ey 1 − χ{V N D (b,y;q)<V (y)}
                                        Tq =                                   ,                          (16)
                                                           R

       where we make the dependence of V N D on q explicit. As the indicator function χ{V N D (b,y;q)<V (y)}
       is weakly decreasing in q, if q ≥ q 0 then T q ≥ T q 0 . Thus the operator is monotone. As q ≤      1
                                                                                                         1+r ? ,

       the typical algorithm starts with this upper bound and iterates on the operator until conver-
       gence to a fixed point.23 If λ > 0, then the analysis is complicated by the fact that V (b) depends
       on q through the re-entry value function V . As a computational matter, the algorithm can still
23
     For more on computational algorithms, see Hatchondo et al. (2010).


                                                            36
be used to search for a solution, although the monotonicity of the operator is not guaranteed.
   While straightforward to compute, the model yields few analytical insights without further
restrictions. The value function V is the maximum of two other value functions and in general
is not concave or differentiable. However, some intuition for the quantitative results can be
obtained by stripping the model down to a two-period decision problem. In particular, assume
the country owes b and has endowment y in the current period, and chooses b0 to be repaid in
the second period. Let F (y 0 ) denote the cdf of next period’s endowment conditional on y, which
takes values in [y, y]. In the second period, the government can repay the debt and enjoy utility
u(y 0 − b0 ), or default and enjoy utility u((1 − τ )y 0 )). The country will default if b0 > τ y.
   The government’s problem in the first period is:

                                                 b0
                                           Z     τ
                                                                                        Z    y
                           0   0
           max
            0
               u(y + q(b )b − b) + β                  u((1 − τ )y 0 )dF (y 0 ) + β               u(y 0 − b0 )dF (y 0 ).   (17)
             b                                                                              b0
                                             y                                              τ



The first order condition is:

                                                                 Z    y
                           u0 (c) (q(b0 ) + q 0 (b0 )b0 ) = β             u0 (y 0 − b0 )dF (y 0 ),                        (18)
                                                                     b0
                                                                     τ



where c = y + q(b0 )b0 − b. The default decision implies an equilibrium price schedule:

                                                                      0
                                                                          b
                                                           1−F            τ
                                             q(b0 ) =                         .                                           (19)
                                                                 R

Using this and rearranging the government’s first order condition gives:

                               q 0 (b0 )b0
                                          
                       0
                     u (c) 1 +               = βRE {u0 (y 0 − b0 )dF (y 0 )|b0 ≤ τ y} ,                                   (20)
                                 q(b0 )

where the expectation is conditional on not defaulting. The right hand side is the expected
marginal cost of repaying the debt conditional on repayment, discounted by relative impatience.
The left hand side is the marginal value of an additional unit of debt inclusive of the price
effect; that is, the marginal utility of consumption times one plus the elasticity of the bond-
price schedule with respect to new debt. The elasticity of bond price reflects that the government
internalizes the effect of new debt issues on the price it faces. This elasticity is non-positive,
and the greater in magnitude the less the government is willing to borrow at the margin.
   If the bond-price schedule is very elastic, the government has a strong desire to save (or not
borrow). This is the same effect discussed in Section 5 to describe why the government saves its



                                                            37
way out of the crisis zone in a model of self-fulfilling debt crises. While in the current context we
consider a single equilibrium price schedule, the fact that this schedule may be elastic provides
the same incentive to save.
   To replicate debt levels high enough to induce frequent default in this basic framework,
calibration typically involves βR significantly below one. This counters the incentive to save
in response to limited commitment and generates realistic debt levels. A motivation for this
assumption is that the governmental decision maker is relatively impatient due to political
turnover.
   Moreover, the elasticity is sensitive to the “marginal” probability of default as well as the
“average.” In particular, the elasticity of the price schedule can be written
                                                         0 0
                                       q 0 (b0 )b0   −f bτ bτ
                                                   =         0 ,                                 (21)
                                         q(b0 )      1 − F bτ

where f (y 0 ) = F 0 (y 0 ). A high probability of default implies a small denominator, reflecting a
large average probability of default F (b0 /τ ). The numerator reflects the pdf at the debt level
under consideration. If the variance of y 0 is relatively high (or the pdf has a fat lower tail), there
is substantial mass below the key threshold, lowering the ratio of marginal to average. Therefore,
volatility generates more frequent default. Aguiar and Gopinath (2006) build on the empirical
work of Aguiar and Gopinath (2007) to argue that emerging markets have large shocks to the
trend growth rates, which raises the probability of default in equilibrium. This rationalizes why
volatility in trend growth and frequency of default occur together in an economy.
   As noted above, Arellano (2008) generates plausible default probabilities by introducing
state-contingent punishments; that is, having τ depend on the realization of y 0 . This makes
default more responsive to output shocks and therefore relatively less responsive to outstand-
ing debt, lowering the elasticity of the bond-price schedule as well as making non-contingent
debt more attractive as an insurance option. Such an nonlinear output cost has been derived
endogenously by Mendoza and Yue (2012).
   An important property of the bond-price elasticity in the benchmark dynamic setting with
persistent shocks is that it may vary with the output shock. In particular, the quantitative
models of Aguiar and Gopinath (2006) and Arellano (2008) generate a counter-cyclical net
export process. That is, when endowment is low and absent default, the economy is a net saver
on average. This undermines risk sharing, which in an endowment economy calls for net inflows
in low-income states. The reason this occurs is that the costs of borrowing on average (q) and



                                                  38
at the margin (|q 0 |) are counter-cyclical, providing a relatively strong incentive to reduce debt
in low-endowment states.
   Note that the above example implied default in the final period if b0 > τ y; that is, the
government defaults in low endowment states conditional on debt. It may be tempting to
conclude that the fully dynamic quantitative models generate default in bad states solely due to
the fact that the output cost is increasing in endowment. Although this is true in the final-period
default decision in our example (and is an important contributing mechanism in the quantitative
models), the loss of access to credit markets is also relevant in dynamic quantitative models. In
particular, concavity of u implies that the marginal burden of net repayment of debt is higher
the smaller the current endowment, all else equal. Arellano (2008) uses this insight in an infinite
horizon environment with iid shocks to show that if default is optimal for an endowment y, it will
also be optimal for y 0 < y, holding debt constant. Note that default occurs only if the country
cannot generate a net inflow by borrowing (otherwise, it could consume more by borrowing, and
then default the next period), and it is the burden of net repayment that is more costly in low
endowment states. The fact that a country may be required to make a net payment even in
the lowest endowment states reflects the incompleteness of the asset markets. Conversely, for a
high endowment shock, the desire to smooth consumption by paying down debt (or increasing
assets) makes default less attractive, as default prevents carrying the high endowment into the
future via asset markets. The implications under persistent shocks are muddied by the fact that
the endowment realization also influences the bond prices going forward; nevertheless, in the
calibrated models popular in the literature, the consistent prediction is that conditional on b
there is a threshold endowment above which the country repays and below which the country
defaults.
   While the calibrated models of Aguiar and Gopinath (2006) and Arellano (2008) provide
quantitative insights regarding which economies may be prone to default and why, the simplicity
of the models cannot address many of the facts discussed in Section 2. Filling these gaps is an
active area of current research. We briefly summarize several innovations. Yue (2010) quantifies
a model of one-shot renegotiation, capturing the fact that default begins a bargaining process
that leads to partial repayment. Benjamin and Wright (2008) calibrates the dynamic bargaining
model discussed in Section 4, matching the key empirical relationships between length of default
and subsequent repayment.
   The single shock model cannot explain why default may occur in relatively good times
(conditional on debt levels), as it sometimes does in practice. Cuadra and Sapriza (2008) and



                                                39
       Hatchondo et al. (2009) introduce political uncertainty with heterogeneous potential incumbents
       as an additional source of volatility, similar in spirit to the model of Cole et al. (1995). A
       hybrid of the Cole et al model and the Grossman and Van Huyck (1988) complete-markets
       model is quantified in Alfaro and Kanczuk (2005). The additional shocks, particular to the
       discount factor, generate a more empirically plausible level of debt and default, highlighting the
       tension between political economy distortions and the incentive to save in response to limited
       commitment.
          A series of recent papers have relaxed the one-period-bond assumption by considering instead
       bonds with longer maturities, and have shown that the introduction of longer maturities signifi-
       cantly improves the quantitative properties of the models. Hatchondo and Martinez (2009) and
       Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012b) replace single-period bonds with bonds of longer duration
       in a tractable manner.24 In particular, Hatchondo and Martinez (2009) assume bonds pay a
       geometrically declining sequence of coupons (1, δ, δ 2 , ...) indefinitely, while Chatterjee and Eyi-
       gungor (2012b) adapt a “perpetual youth” framework to bonds, assuming that a bond matures
       next period with constant hazard λ = 1 − δ. A law of large numbers assumption generates a
       predictable stream of aggregate payments given the stock of outstanding bonds. The parameters
       δ and λ are primitives of the environment and do not vary over time. Either modeling approach
       renders bond maturity a stationary variable, allowing for longer durations without having bonds
       issued in different periods carrying heterogenous maturities.
          The equilibrium bond price schedule in this framework is no longer characterized by the
       simple operator (16). In particular, the return to a bond depends on whether the government
       defaults, as in (16), but in addition depends on the price of bonds next period absent default.
       This reflects the capital gain or loss a bond holder experiences over the life span of the bond.
       Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012b) discuss issues related to existence and computability of an
       equilibrium in this environment.25
          A key element of the long-maturity framework is that non-maturing bonds that were issued
       in previous periods are subject to dilution. That is, existing bond holders will take a capital
       loss on their bonds if the government’s subsequent decisions raise the probability of future
       default. The government lacks commitment regarding future bond issuance and bond holders
       are assumed to lack a mechanism with which to punish dilutions; in particular, the models do
       not consider trigger strategies or direct sanctions regarding bond dilutions, distinguishing them
  24
   For an earlier quantitative model of maturities see Bi (2008b).
  25
   For an alternative approach at dealing with the computational issues that arise in sovereign debt models, see
Pouzo and Presno (2012).




                                                        40
      from outright default. Moreover, mirroring actual practice, bonds issued at an earlier period are
      not senior to subsequently issued bonds. That is, otherwise identical bonds issued at different
      dates have the same legal standing in the event of default, reflecting the pari passu clause that
      is standard in sovereign bond contracts.26
          As a capital loss for existing bond holders is an implicit transfer to the government (abstract-
      ing from any deadweight loss of default costs), there is an incentive for the government to issue
      new bonds to dilute the existing bonds. This point was highlighted by Bulow and Rogoff (1991)
      in reverse; namely, Bulow and Rogoff argued it is sub-optimal for a sovereign to repurchase
      its own debt on secondary markets. A repurchase generates a capital gain for existing bond
      holders, which is an implicit transfer from the government to bond holders. This insight has
      gained renewed attention as the Greek government bought back outstanding debt at a premium
      (relative to initial market prices) in 2012.
          Long-term bonds and the associated movements in price over the life of the bond implies the
      bonds have different hedging properties than short-term debt. Arellano and Ramanarayanan
      (forthcoming) propose a quantitative model with both short-term and long-term debt. Having
      both bonds available allows richer insurance possibilities than in a one-bond model. Moreover,
      a portfolio of bonds of different maturities allows a richer enforcement mechanism. Recall that
      the benchmark model of Section 3 allowed punishment of any deviation from the equilibrium
      allocation. Deviations (depending on the decentralization) could involve failure to pay debt,
      as in the current environment, but it could also take the form of not “saving” in anticipation
      of future liabilities that may come due. In the current incomplete-markets environment, the
      government is only punished if it fails to make a debt payment. A combination of short-term
      and long-term debt can replicate a pattern of near-term and long-term payments to financial
      markets, better mimicking the complete-markets allocation.27
          Arellano and Ramanarayanan (forthcoming) exploits the spanning and incentive-provision
      possibilities of multiple-maturity bonds to rationalize the fact that countries shorten maturities
      when a debt crisis is likely. The advantages of short-term debt are greatest when default is likely
      in the short-run, generating an increase reliance on short-term debt for new issues, consistent
  26
     Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012a) explore the benefits of allowing seniority to be enforced in the environment
of Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012b), documenting that enforceable seniority would substantially reduce default and
increase equilibrium borrowing and welfare.
  27
     Alfaro and Kanczuk (2009) discusses a similarly point while introducing reserves into the model and studying the
resulting portfolio problem. Interestingly, Alfaro and Kanczuk (2009) found that the standard quantitative model
with reserves could not account for the signficant amount of reserves that countries hold in the data. More recently,
Bianchi et al. (2012) have shown that introducing long maturity bonds also helps improve the ability of the model in
this dimension.




                                                         41
with the empirical evidence of Broner et al. (forthcoming) and Arellano and Ramanarayanan
(forthcoming). Broner et al. (forthcoming) take a different view, arguing that this pattern
reflects changing risk premia on the part of the lenders, rather than hedging motives on the
part of the borrower. Both of these papers highlight the result that temporary increases in the
probability of default during a time of crisis can account for the inversion of the yield curve
observed in the data.
    Quantitative models of sovereign debt is an active area of research and has already generated
a number of important insights. We conclude with a few caveats on this literature, which can
also serve as an indicator of where future research is warranted. The quantitative models often
lack microfoundations for key assumptions. In particular, the limitations on financial contracts
are typically taken as primitives. There is a parallel literature on optimal contracting subject
to frictions such as limited enforcement and asymmetric information, as discussed in previous
sections. These models are often qualitative, and have proven difficult to map into the data and
quantify, although some attempts have been made (for example, Tsyrennikov, 2012). Bridging
this gap is an important open question in the sovereign debt literature. Secondly, while the
quantitative models are designed with empirical targets in mind, it is often not clear how to
interpret the data through the lens of the model. For example, Dias et al. (2011) highlight
that the data on debt stocks is a mixture of face values and market values, with different
maturities, durations, and coupon payments, that are difficult to aggregate into a parsimonious
set of state variables that appear in a quantitative model. More generally, when comparing
the quantitative predictions of sovereign debt models to the data, it is important that we are
comparing conceptually similar objects.



7     Concluding Remarks

This chapter has provided an overview of the economics of sovereign debt, with a particular
emphasis on the implications of limited enforcement that distinguishes this market. The set
of models reviewed offer important insights into a variety of phenomena, including: the role
of reputations versus legal enforcement mechanisms; the implication that limited commitment
generates debt overhang onto macroeconomic outcomes such as investment, growth, and volatil-
ity; the often slow process of graduation to non-frequent-defaulter status and the associated
role played by debt overhang and political economy frictions; the possibility of unobserved or
unverifiable shocks in limiting risk sharing; the vulnerability to self-fulfilling debt crises; the
difficulties in renegotiating debt in a timely and efficient manner; and the ability of theoretical


                                                42
models to quantitatively match key empirical patterns. The recent literature has generated a
substantial number of important insights along these dimensions. That said, more progress is
needed on mapping the theoretical models to the data. This includes exploring decentraliza-
tions that rely on realistic assets, legal mechanisms, and reputational concerns, combined with
a coherent theory of equilibrium selection as many models in the literature support multiple
equilibria. Any such decentralization has implications for prices that can be compared to the
growing empirical literature on bond spreads. This process will provide the microfoundations for
the growing quantitative literature that has begun to match empirical prices and quantities, but
often relying on ad hoc assumptions that restrict equilibrium objects such as financial contracts
and the output costs of default. As noted at the end of the previous section, the counterpart
to this agenda of bringing theory to data is ensuring the measured quantities from the data are
the conceptually appropriate counterparts to the model’s equilibrium objects.




                                               43
References

Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath, “Defaultable Debt, Interest Rates, and the Current
  Account,” Journal of International Economics, 2006, 69 (1), 64–83.

      and   , “Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle is the Trend,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 2007, 115 (1).

      and Manuel Amador, “Growth in the Shadow of Exproriation,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2011, 126, 651–697.

  ,     , and Gita Gopinath, “Investment Cycles and Sovereign Debt Overhang,” Review of
  Economic Studies, January 2009, 76 (1), 1–31.

  ,     , Emmanuel Farhi, and Gita Gopinath, “Crisis and Commitment: Inflation Credi-
  bility and the Vulnerability to Sovereign Debt Crises,” working paper, 2012.

Alesina, Alberto and Guido Tabellini, “A Positive Theory of Fiscal Deficits and Govern-
  ment Debt in a Democracy,” Review of Economic Studies, 1990, 57, 403–414.

Alfaro, Laura and Fabio Kanczuk, “Sovereign Debt as a Contingent Claim: A Quantitative
  Approach,” Journal of International Economics, 2005, 65.

      and   , “Optimal reserve management and sovereign debt,” Journal of International Eco-
  nomics, February 2009, 77 (1), 23–36.

  , Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych, “Sovereigns, Upstream Capital
  Flows and Global Imbalances,” NBER Working Paper 17396, 2011.

Amador, Manuel, “Sovereign Debt and the Tragedy of the Commons,” working paper, 2012.

Arellano, Cristina, “Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Economies,” Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 2008.

  and Ananth Ramanarayanan, “Default and the Maturity Structure in Sovereign Bonds,”
  Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Atkeson, Andrew, “International Borrowing with Moral Hazard and Risk of Repudiation,”
  Econometrica, 1991, 59, 1069–1089.

Bai, Yan and Jing Zhang, “Duration of Sovereign Debt Renegotiation,” Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics, 2012, 86, 252–268.

                                               44
Benjamin, David and Mark Wright, “Recovery Before Redemption: A Model of Delaysin
  Sovereign Debt Renegotiations,” UCLA Working Paper, 2008.

Bi, Ran, ““Beneficial” Delays in Debt Restructuring Negotiations,” IMF Working Paper
  WP/08/38, 2008.

  , “Debt Dilution and the Maturity Structure of Sovereign Debt.” PhD dissertation, University
  of Maryland 2008.

Bianchi, Javier, Juan Carlos Hatchondo, and Leonardo Martinez, “International Re-
  serves and Rollover Risk,” working paper, 2012.

Bolton, Patrick and Olivier Jeanne, “Structuring and Restructuring Sovereign Debt: The
  Role of a Bankruptcy Regime,” Journal of Political Economy, 2007, 6, 901–924.

   and     , “Structuring and Restructuring Sovereign Debt: The Role of Seniority,” Review of
  Economic Studies, 2009, 76.

Borri, Nicola and Adrien Verdelhan, “Sovereign Risk Premia,” MIT Sloan Working Paper,
  2011.

Broner, Fernando, Alberto Martin, and Jaume Ventura, “Sovereign Risk and Secondary
  Markets,” American Economic Review, 2010, 100, 1523–1555.

   and Jaume Ventura, “Globalization and Risk Sharing,” Review of Ec, 2011, 78, 49–82.

  , Guido Lorenzoni, and Sergio Schmukler, “Why do emerging economies borrow short
  term?,” Journal of the European Economics Association, forthcoming.

Bulow, Jeremy and Kenneth Rogoff, “A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign Debt,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 1989, 97, 155–178.

   and     , “Sovereign Debt: Is to Forgive to Forget?,” American Economic Review, 1989, 79,
  43–50.

   and     , “Sovereign Debt Repurchases: No Cure for Overhang,” Quarte, 1991.

Chari, V.V. and Patrick Kehoe, “Sustainable Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, 1990,
  98, 783–802.




                                             45
Chatterjee, Satyajit and Burcu Eyigungor, “Debt Dilution and Seniority in a Model of
  Defaultable Sovereign Debt,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper 12-14,
  2012.

   and    , “Maturity, Indebtedness, and Default Risk,” American Economic Review, 2012,
  102, 2674–99.

Clementi, GianLuca and Hugo Hopenhayn, “A Theory of Financiing Constraints and
  Firm Dynamics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121, 229–265.

Cole, Harold and Patrick Kehoe, “Models of Sovereign Debt: Partial versus General Rep-
  utations,” International Economic Review, 1998, 39, 55–70.

  and Timothy Kehoe, “Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2000,
  67, 91–116.

  , James Dow, and William English, “Default, Settlement, and Signaling: Lending Re-
  sumption in a Reputational Model of Sovereign Debt,” International Economic Review, 1995,
  36, 365–385.

Conesa, Juan Carlos and Timoth Kehoe, “Gambling for Redemption and Self-Fulfilling
  Debt Crises,” working paper, 2011.

Conklin, James, “The Theory of Sovereign Debt and Spain under Philip II,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 1998, 106 (3), pp. 483–513.

Cooley, Thomas, Ramon Marimon, and Vincenzo Quadrini, “Aggregate Consequences
  of Limited Contract Enforceability,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112, 817–847.

Cruces, Juan and Christoph Trebesch, “Sovereign Defaults: The Price of Haircuts,” CE-
  SIFO Working Paper 3604, 2011.

Cuadra, Gabriel and Horacio Sapriza, “Sovereign Default, Interest Rates and Political
  Uncertainty in Emergin Markets,” Journal of International Economics, 2008, 76, 78–88.

Dechert, W.D., “Lagrange Multipliers in Infinite Horizon Discrete Time Optimal Control
  Models,” Journal of Mathematical Economics, 1982, 9, 285–301.

DeMarzo, Peter and Michael Fishman, “Optimal Long-Term Financial Contracting,” Re-
  view of Financial Studies, 2007, 20, 2079–2128.


                                             46
D’Erasmo, Pablo, “Government Reputation and Debt Repayment in Emerging Economies,”
  University of Maryland Working Paper, 2011.

Dias, Daniel, Christine Richmond, and Mark Wright, “The Stock of External Debt:
  Can We Take the Data At ‘Face Value’ ?,” NBER Working Paper 17551, 2011.

Dovis, Alessandro, “Efficient Sovereign Default,” working paper, 2012.

Drelichman, Mauricio and Hans-Joachim Voth, “Lending to the Borrower from Hell:
  Debt and Default in the Age of Philip II*,” The Economic Journal, 2011, 121 (557), 1205–
  1227.

Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz, “Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and
  Empirical Analysis,” The Review of Economic Studies, 1982, 48 (2), 289–309.

Edwards, Sebastian, “LDC Foreign Borrowing and Default Risk: An Empirical Investigation,
  1976-80,” American Economic Review, 1984, 74, 726–734.

Fernandez, Raquel and Robert Rosenthal, “Strategic Models of Sovereign-Debt Renego-
  tiations,” The Review of Economic Studies, 1990, 57, 331–349.

Fuentes, Miguel and Diego Saravia, “Sovereign defaulters: Do international capital markets
  punish them?,” Journal of Development Economics, March 2010, 91 (2), 336–347.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Alberto Martin, and Stefano Rossi, “Sovereign Default, Domestic
  Banks and Financial Institutions,” working paper, 2010.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Olivier Jeanne, “Capital Flows to Developing Countries:
  The Allocation Puzzle,” NBER Working Paper 13602, 2007.

Grossman, Herschel and John B. Van Huyck, “Sovereign Debt as a Contingent Claim:
  Excusable Default, Repudiation, and Reputation,” American Economic Review, 1988, 78 (5),
  1088–1097.

Hamann, Franz, “Sovereign Risk and Macroeconomic Fluctuations,” Banco de la Republica
  de Colomiba Working Paper 225, 2002.

Hatchondo, Juan Carlos and Leonardo Martinez, “Long-Duration Bonds and Sovereign
  Defaults,” Journal of International Economics, 2009, 79, 117–125.




                                             47
  ,   , and Horacio Sapriza, “Heterogeneous Borrowers in Quantitative Models of Sovereign
  Default,” International Economic Review, 2009, 50, 1129–1151.

  ,   , and     , “Quantitative Properties of Sovereign Default Models: Solution Methods
  Matter,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2010, 13, 919–933.

Hopenhayn, Hugo and Ivan Werning, “Equilibrium Default,” MIT Working Paper, 2008.

Jeske, Karsten, “Private International Debt with Risk of Repudiation,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 2006, 114, 576–593.

Kehoe, Patrick J. and Fabrizio Perri, “Competitive equilibria with limited enforcement,”
  Journal of Economic Theory, November 2004, 119 (1), 184–206.

Kehoe, Timothy and David Levine, “Debt-Constrained Asset Markets,” The Review of
  Economic Studies, 1993, 60, 865–888.

Kletzer, Kenneth and Brian Wright, “Sovereign Debt as Intertemporal Barter,” American
  Economic Review, 2000, 90, 621–639.

Krugman, Paul, “Financing vs. Forgiving a Debt Overhang,” Journal of Development Eco-
  nomics, 1988, 29, 253–268.

Laibson, David, “Hyperbolic Discounting and Consumption.” PhD dissertation, MIT 1994.

Longstaff, Francis, Jun Pan, Lasse Pedersen, and Kenneth Singleton, “How Sovereign
  is Sovereign Credit Risk?,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2011, 43, 75–103.

Lucas, Robert, Models of Business Cycles, Blackwell, 1987.

Luenberger, David G., Optimization by Vector Space Methods, John Wiley and Sons, Inc.,
  1969.

Marcet, Albert and Ramon Marimon, “Communication, Commitment, and Growth,”
  Journal of Economic Theory, 1992, 58, 219–249.

Martinez, Jose Vincent and Guido Sandleris, “Is it Punishment? Sovereign Defaults and
  the Declines in Trade,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 2011, 30, 909–930.

Mendoza, Enrique and Vivian Yue, “A General Equilibrium Model of Sovereign Default
  and Business Cycles,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127, 889–946.


                                            48
Neumeyer, Pablo and Fabrizio Perri, “Business Cycles in Emerging Economies: The Role
  of Interest Rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2005, 52, 345–380.

Persson, Torsten and Lars Svensson, “Why a Stubborn Conservative would Run a Deficit:
  Policy with Time-Inconsistent Preferences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1989, 104, 325–
  345.

Pitchford, Rohan and Mark Wright, “Holdouts in Sovereign Debt Restructuring: A Theory
  of Negotiation in a Weak Contractual Environment,” Review of Economic Studies, forthcom-
  ing.

Pouzo, Demian and Ignacio Presno, “Sovereign Default Risk and Uncertainty Premia,”
  working paper, 2012.

Quadrini, Vincenzo, “Investment and Liquidation in Renegotiation-proof Contracts with
  Moral Hazard,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2004, 51 (4).

Ray, Debraj, “The Time Structure of Self-Enforcing Agreements,” Econometrica, 2002, 70
  (2), 547–582.

Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoff, This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Fi-
  nancial Folly, Princeton Univeristy Press, 2009.

  ,      , and Miguel Savastano, “Debt Intolerance,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
  2003, 2003, 1–74.

  , Vincent Reinhart, and Kenneth Rogoff, “Public Debt Overhangs: Advanced-Economy
  Episodes Since 1800,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2012, 26, 69–86.

Restrepo-Echavarria, Paulina, “Endogenous Borrowing Constraints and Stagnation in Latin
  America,” working paper, 2013.

Rose, Andrew, “One Reason Countries Pay their Debts: Renegotiation and International
  Trade,” Journal of Development Economics, 2005.

Rustichini, A., “Lagrange Multipliers in Incentive-Constrained Problems,” Journal of Math-
  ematical Economics, 1998, 29, 365–380.

Sachs, Jeffrey, “The Debt Overhang of Developing Countries,” in Jorge de Macedo and Ronald
  Findlay, eds., Debt, Growth and Stabilization: Essays in Memory of Carlos Dias Alejandro,
  Oxford: Blackwell, 1989.

                                             49
Sandleris, Guido, “Sovereign Defaults: Information, Investment and Credit,” Journal of In-
  ternational Economics, 2008, 76, 267–275.

Shiller, Robert, Macro Markets: Creating Institutions for Managing Society’s Largest Eco-
  nomic Risks, Oxford University Press, 1993.

Sturzenegger, Federico and Jeromin Zettelmeyer, “Haircuts: Estimating Investor Losses
  in Sovereign Debt Restructurings, 1998-2005,” Journal of International Money and Finance,
  2008, 27, 780–805.

Thomas, Jonathan and Tim Worrall, “Foreign Direct Investment and the Risk of Expro-
  priation,” Review of Economic Studies, 1994, 61 (1), 81–108.

   and Timothy Worrall, “Self-Enforcing Wage Contracts,” Review of Economic Studies,
  1988, 55, 541–53.

Tomz, Michael and Mark Wright, “Do Countries Default in Bad Times?,” Journal of the
  European Economics Association, 2007, 5, 352–360.

  and     , “Empirical Research on Sovereign Debt and Default,” Annual Reviews of Economics,
  2012.

Tsyrennikov, Viktor, “Capital Flows Under Moral Hazard,” working paper, 2012.

Uribe, Martin and Vivian Yue, “Country Spreads and Emerging Countries: Who Drives
  Whom?,” Journal of International Economics, 2006, 69, 6–36.

Worrall, Tim, “Debt with Potential Repudiation,” Europ, 1990, 34, 1099–1109.

Wright, Mark, “Reptuations and Sovereign Debt,” working, 2002.

  , “Private Capital Flows, Capital Controls, and Default Risk,” Journal of International Eco-
  nomics, 2006, 69, 120–149.

Yue, Vivian, “Sovereign Default and Debt Renegotiation,” Journal of International Eco-
  nomics, 2010, 80, 176–187.




                                              50
