                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      FINANCIAL ENTANGLEMENT:
A THEORY OF INCOMPLETE INTEGRATION, LEVERAGE, CRASHES, AND CONTAGION

                                        Nicolae Gârleanu
                                        Stavros Panageas
                                          Jianfeng Yu

                                       Working Paper 19381
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19381


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2013




We are grateful for comments and suggestions from Saki Bigio, Xavier Gabaix, Douglas Gale,
Michael Gallmeyer, Anna Pavlova, Alp Simsek, and as well as participants at the NBER AP, NBER
SI Macro-Finance (ME), Minnesota Macro-AP conference, Studienzentrum Gerzensee, the Cowles
Foundation GE conference, LBS Four nations cup, and the Finance Theory Group conferences, and
seminar audiences at Univ. of Alberta, Univ. of Birmingham, Columbia Business School, Erasmus
University, Hanken, HEC Paris, Univ. of Hong Kong, HKUST, INSEAD, LBS, LSE, Stanford-GSB,
Tilburg, Vanderbilt, Univ. of Washington, Yale SOM. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Nicolae Gârleanu, Stavros Panageas, and Jianfeng Yu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Entanglement: A Theory of Incomplete Integration, Leverage, Crashes, and Contagion
Nicolae Gârleanu, Stavros Panageas, and Jianfeng Yu
NBER Working Paper No. 19381
August 2013
JEL No. G01,G11,G12

                                                ABSTRACT

We propose a unified model of limited market integration, asset-price determination, leveraging, and
contagion. Investors and firms are located on a circle, and access to markets involves participation
costs that increase with distance. Despite the ex-ante symmetry of investors, their strategies may (endogenously)
exhibit diversity, with some investors in each location following high-leverage, high-participation,
and high-cost strategies and some unleveraged, low-participation, and low-cost strategies. The capital
allocated to high-leverage strategies may be vulnerable even to small changes in market-access costs,
which can lead to discontinuous price drops, de-leveraging, and portfolio-flow reversals. Moreover,
the market is subject to contagion, in that an adverse shock to investors at a subset of locations affects
prices everywhere.


Nicolae Gârleanu                                        Jianfeng Yu
Haas School of Business                                 University of Minnesota
F628                                                    321 19th Avenue South, Suite 3-122
University of California, Berkeley                      Minneapolis MN 55455
Berkeley, CA 94720                                      jianfeng@umn.edu
and NBER
garleanu@haas.berkeley.edu

Stavros Panageas
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL, 60637
and NBER
stavros.panageas@chicagobooth.edu
1     Introduction
There is a substantial body of empirical literature (described in detail in the next section)
concluding that market integration is limited and risk sharing is imperfect. In particular,
a) capital tends to stay “close” to its origin, b) reward for risk reﬂects — at least partially
— “local” factors that one would expect to be diversiﬁable, and c) reductions in capital
ﬂows and the extent of market integration tend to be associated with abrupt and substantial
increases in risk premia and drops in prices, along with sudden drops in leverage (“ﬁnancial
crises”).
    We propose a tractable theoretical framework that oﬀers a uniﬁed view of asset-price de-
termination, endogenous market fragmentation, contagion across seemingly unrelated mar-
kets, diversity of observed investment strategies, and leverage and its implications for ﬁnan-
cial crashes.
    The model features a continuum of investors and ﬁnancial markets located on a circle.
Investors are endowed with shares of a risky ﬁrm domiciled at their location and traded at
the same location. The dividends of this security are closely correlated with dividends of
securities located in nearby locations and less correlated with securities in distant locations.
Even though securities in more distant locations oﬀer greater beneﬁts from the perspective
of diversiﬁcation and risk allocation, participation in such markets involves costs that grow
with the distance from the current location. Such costs are reﬂective of the fact that infor-
mational frictions are likely to grow as investors participate in progressively more unfamiliar
markets; indeed, inside our model distance on the circle should be viewed as a broad measure
encompassing the magnitude of these frictions rather than a narrow measure of geographi-
cal distance. Alongside the risky markets, investors have access to a zero-net-supply bond
market.
    Because access to ﬁnancial markets is subject to frictions, the market equilibrium features
limited integration. Investors from nearby locations, who face similar cost structures, choose
to participate on arcs of the circle that feature a high degree of overlap. Even though there
may be many assets with no common investor, this overlap renders all markets (indirectly)
“entangled.”


                                               1
   In such a framework, we examine four sets of issues: a) the determination of asset prices
in light of limited market integration; b) the structure of optimal investment strategies, i.e.,
arcs of participation, leverage, and risky-asset positions chosen by investors; c) the eﬀect of
shocks to the ﬁnancial technology (i.e., the magnitude of market-access costs) and their role
in market crashes; and d) the propagation of “local” shocks to the ﬁnancial technology. We
summarize our ﬁndings about each of the four issues in turn.
   a) Limited market integration implies that investors are over-exposed to the risks of
locations in their vicinity. Consequently, risk premia are higher than they would be in a
frictionless world. An important aspect of the analysis is that the magnitudes of risk premia
and of portfolio ﬂows are tightly linked and reﬂect the extent of market integration.
   b) A surprising implication of the model is that, although investors in any given location
are identical in every respect, their investment strategies may be diverse (that is, feature
diﬀerent participation arcs, risky portfolios, and, importantly, leverage). Speciﬁcally, we
show that a symmetric equilibrium, i.e., an equilibrium where investors choose the same
strategies may fail to exist. Instead, a fraction of investors chooses strategies featuring high
leverage, high Sharpe ratios, and high participation fees, while another fraction of investors
chooses unleveraged, low-Sharpe ratio, and low-fee strategies. Prices are determined so that
investors are indiﬀerent between the two types of strategies; however, the amount of capital
directed to each type of investment strategy is determinate and dictated by market clearing.
   The intuition for this ﬁnding is that leverage and participation decisions are complements.
For a given level of risk premia, participating in more markets increases the maximum Sharpe
ratio attainable, which induces investors to take more leverage. Since leverage increases
the overall variance of the portfolio, it increases the marginal beneﬁt of further market
participation and diversiﬁcation. This complementarity between participation and leverage
decisions gives rise to multiple local extrema in the problem of determining the participation
arc. It is noteworthy that these multiple local extrema arise even when the participation
costs are convex.
   This implication of the model is consistent with the diversity of investment strategies
oﬀered to investors by, say, mutual funds and hedge funds. More importantly, it shows that
portfolio leverage may arise endogenously in fragmented markets, without requiring inherent

                                               2
diﬀerences between investors.
      c) An interesting situation emerges when the ability to leverage is not limitless, but rather
is subject to a margin constraint.1 In such a situation marginal variations in participation
costs may cause abrupt changes in equilibrium quantities, and even a change in the type of
equilibrium, accompanied by discontinuous drops in prices, leverage, and capital ﬂows.
      The intuition is as follows. An increase in participation costs makes investors reluctant
to continue allocating funds to the strategies that rely more heavily on costly participation.
The resulting outﬂows from these leveraged strategies reduce aggregate market integration
and push down the prices of risky securities. The drop in prices has two eﬀects. On the one
hand, it raises the Sharpe ratio and helps restore the attractiveness of high-leverage, broad-
participation strategies. On the other, via the margin constraint, it reduces the possibility of
leverage and broad participation because the collateral value of risky securities declines. By
constraining leverage below the optimal amount, this second eﬀect necessitates a price drop
larger than would obtain in the absence of the margin constraint. Furthermore, when the
eﬀect becomes suﬃciently strong, further drops in prices can no longer attract enough capital
for high-leverage, broad-participation strategies to overcome the simultaneous tightening of
the leverage constraint. At this point, a marginal increase in participation costs destroys the
pre-existing asymmetric equilibrium and triggers a transition to a new type of equilibrium,
featuring no leveraged strategies. The consequence of this transition is that prices of risky
securities, investment across locations, and the amount of leverage in the economy drop
discontinuously, despite the smooth dependence of investors’ objective functions and feasible
choices on participation costs.
      d) The fact that markets are only partially integrated may strengthen the interdependence
of the prices of risky securities in diﬀerent locations. We present an example where the
ﬁnancial technology “breaks down” (i.e., the participation costs rise to inﬁnity) only in a
subset of locations — we refer to them as the “aﬀected” locations. We show that such an
event pushes prices in almost all locations downward. This is true even for locations that
are not connected with the aﬀected locations through asset trade and also have negative
dividend correlation with them.
  1
      In Appendix D we consider alternative formulations of borrowing frictions, motivated by limited liability.


                                                        3
    The intuition for this ﬁnding is as follows. As a direct eﬀect of the shock in the aﬀected
regions, investors in aﬀected locations stop investing in risky markets in their vicinity. Con-
sequently, prices in these locations fall so as to attract demand from neighboring unaﬀected
locations. The portfolio reallocation in these neighboring locations happens away from other,
farther locations, resulting in weaker demand in these farther locations, necessitating price
drops in these locations as well, so as to attract demand from locations neighboring the
neighboring locations, etc.
    The extent of price drops required to compensate investors for tilting their portfolios to
absorb local risks depends on the extent of their overall participation in risky markets. If
the extent of their participation is small, so that their portfolio is heavily exposed to risks
in their vicinity, then a tilt towards a nearby location requires a higher compensation. By
contrast, if investors’ portfolios are invested across a broad range of locations, then they are
more willing to absorb risks in their vicinity. Hence, somewhat surprisingly, the higher the
degree of market integration, the lower the price drop in response to a local participation
shock (and vice-versa).2
    In summary, the paper oﬀers a uniﬁed framework to study several ﬁnancial-market phe-
nomena — such as leveraging, crashes, and contagion — as a result of the interplay between
equilibrium prices and (endogenous) market segmentation. Besides the applications that
we consider, we believe that the particularly tractable nature of the framework could be
useful for studying the numerous instances in economics where frictions prevent optimal risk
diversiﬁcation and capital allocation across asset classes.
    This article is related to several strands of theoretical and empirical literature. We discuss
connections to the theoretical literature here and postpone a discussion of related empirical
literature for the next section.
    Through its focus on incomplete participation by all agents, our paper is related to the
seminal contribution of Merton (1987) and the studies inspired by it. We endogenize the
degree of participation, and choose a speciﬁc asset-universe structure. Circular structures
have been repeatedly used in a variety of applications from location models in industrial
  2
    Interestingly, albeit in a completely diﬀerent setting, Allen and Gale (2000) also ﬁnds that contagion is
more severe when ﬁnancial interconnectivity — between deposit-taking institutions, in that model — is low.



                                                     4
organization (Salop (1979)) to the literature on ﬁnancial networks.3 From a technical per-
spective, our paper proposes a novel and quite tractable structure to model risky payoﬀs
continuously distributed on a circle. The paper also diﬀers from the ﬁnancial-network litera-
ture in setup and questions addressed. Speciﬁcally, we study a relatively standard Walrasian
exchange economy with (endogenously) limited participation, while that literature typically
concentrates on banking issues, network externalities, etc. Finally, our construction of an
asymmetric equilibrium is based on Aumann (1966), whose analysis covers the case of non-
concave investor-optimization problems in markets with a continuum of agents.
       Price crashes in our model are driven by the interaction of a collateral constraint and
a non-concavity in investors’ optimization problems, which leads to the adoption of diverse
strategies. There exists a vast literature analyzing the interaction between declining prices
and tightening collateral constraints — we do not attempt to summarize this literature and
simply refer to Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) for a seminal contribution. A distinguishing fea-
ture of our analysis is the following tension between two eﬀects of price adjustments. On
the one hand, as is common in papers with margin constraints, prices aﬀect feasible leverage
choices, thus restricting the set of possible trades. On the other hand, in an equilibrium fea-
turing diverse strategies prices need to adjust to keep investors indiﬀerent between strategies
associated with diﬀerent levels of leverage. This tension is most vividly illustrated in cases
of discontinuous equilibrium transitions (crashes), that is, in situations in which no price
adjustment can simultaneously satisfy the margin constraint and retain the attractiveness
of high-leverage, high-participation strategies.4
       Modeling price crashes through changes in the type of equilibrium is common in the lit-
erature, typically featuring a combination of backward-bending demand curves and multiple
equilibria (see, e.g., Gennotte and Leland (1990), Barlevy and Veronesi (2003), Yuan (2005),
Basak et al. (2008), and Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009)). Our economic mechanism is
   3
      An indicative and incomplete listing of papers studying networks, and in particular circular ones, in
ﬁnance includes Allen and Gale (2000), Freixas et al. (2000), Allen et al. (2012), Caballero and Simsek
(2012), Acemoglu et al. (2013), and Zawadowski (2013). Allen and Babus (2009) oﬀer a survey of the
literature.
    4
      Krishnamurthy (2010) discusses two important aspects of a ﬁnancial crisis: balance-sheet eﬀects and
the disengagement of investors from markets (speciﬁcally, due to an increase in Knightian uncertainty).
Balance-sheet eﬀects and declines in participation are also present in our framework, where the feasibility
and the attractiveness of alternative leverage-participation combinations are jointly determined.


                                                    5
diﬀerent from that literature. In particular, our model does not feature multiple equilibria,
noise traders, or sunspots.5 Instead, the crash obtains when prices can no longer support an
asymmetric equilibrium.
        Finally, the domino eﬀect produced by our model relates it to the vast literature on
contagion. We do not attempt to summarize this literature. Instead, we single out as a
natural counterpoint a particular mechanism proposed in many models as an explanation of
contagion. Speciﬁcally, many papers6 posit the existence of some agents, frequently of limited
risk-bearing capacity, who price all the assets and whose marginal utility therefore transmits
shocks from one asset to the price of another. In contrast, contagion in our model obtains
even though no agent participates in all markets. A shock in one area is transmitted to a
distant one by aﬀecting ﬁrst the immediately neighboring areas, which in turn aﬀect their
neighboring areas, etc. A practical implication is that there can be positive interdependence
between the prices in locations with negatively correlated dividends and no common traders.
        The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents in greater detail the empirical evi-
dence underlying and motivating this paper. Section 3 presents the baseline model. Section
4 presents the solution and the results. Sections 5 and 6 study crashes, respectively conta-
gion. Finally, extensions, proofs and further discussion on some of the model assumptions
are contained in the Appendix.



2         Motivating Facts
As a motivation for the assumptions of the model, we summarize some well-documented
facts concerning the allocation of capital. Table 1 summarizes the evidence on so-called
“gravity” equations in international ﬁnance. These gravity equations typically specify a log-
linear relation between bilateral ﬂows in various forms of asset trade (equities, bonds, foreign
direct investment, etc.) and the sizes of the countries and the geographical distance between
them.
    5
     Another possibility that does not involve multiple equilibria is evoked by Romer (1993) and Hong and
Stein (2003), who argue that small events can reveal substantial information to partially informed investors,
leading to large price changes.
   6
     See, e.g., Kyle and Xiong (2001), Cochrane et al. (2008), or Pavlova and Rigobon (2008).



                                                     6
                 Table 1: Gravity Equations in International Trade and Finance.
The table reports a survey of the literature on gravity equations in international trade and ﬁnance. Portes
and Rey (2005) uses bilateral equity ﬂow data among 14 countries from 1989 to 1996. Buch (2005) uses the
stock of assets and liabilities of banks from 1983 to 1999. Head and Ries (2008) uses bilateral FDI stocks with
30 OECD reporters and 32 partners in year 2001. Talamo (2007) uses FDI ﬂow data from 1980-2001. Aviat
and Coeurdacier (2007) uses bilateral trade data and bank asset holding data in year 2001. Ahrend and
Schwellnus (2012) uses IMF’s Consolidated Portfolio Investment Survey (CPIS) in 2005-2006, which reports
bilateral debt investment for 74 reporting countries and 231 partner countries. Typically, the regression
performed is

         log(Xi,j ) = α + β1 log(GDPi ) + β2 log(GDPj ) + β3 log(Distancei,j ) + controls + i,j

where Xi,j is the equity ﬂow, portfolio holding, FDI ﬂow, FDI stock, trade, or bank asset holdings.

          Source                                  Dependent variable              Distance   t-stat
          Portes and Rey (2005)                   Equity ﬂows                       -0.881 -28.419
          Buch (2005)                             Bank asset holdings               -0.650 -12.020
          Talamo (2007)                           FDI ﬂow                           -0.643 -9.319
          Head and Ries (2008)                    FDI stock                         -1.250 -17.361
          Aviat and Coeurdacier (2007)            Trade                             -0.750 -10.000
          Aviat and Coeurdacier (2007)            Bank asset holdings               -0.756 -8.043
          Ahrend and Schwellnus (2012)            Bond holdings                     -0.513 -4.886



       A striking and robust ﬁnding of this literature is that bilateral capital ﬂows and stocks
decay substantially with geographical distance. This ﬁnding is surprising, since countries
that are geographically distant would seem to oﬀer greater diversiﬁcation beneﬁts; hence
one would expect distance to have the opposite sign from the one found in regressions.
The literature typically interprets this surprising ﬁnding as evidentiary of informational
asymmetries that increase with geographical distance — a crude proxy for familiarity and
similarity in social, political, legal, cultural, and economic structures. Supportive of this
interpretation is the literature that ﬁnds a similar relation between distance and portfolio
allocations in domestic portfolio allocations.7
   7
    For instance, Coval and Moskowitz (1999) shows that US mutual fund managers tend to overweight
locally headquartered ﬁrms. Coval and Moskowitz (2001) shows that mutual fund managers earn higher
abnormal returns in nearby investments, suggesting an informational advantage of local investors. Using
Finnish data, Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001) shows that investors are more likely to hold and trade the
stocks of Finnish ﬁrms that are located close to the investors. Similar evidence is presented in Chan et al.
(2005): Using mutual fund data from 26 countries, and using distance as a proxy for familiarity, this paper
ﬁnds that a version of the gravity equation holds for mutual fund holdings. That is, the bias against foreign
stocks is stronger when the foreign country is more distant. In a similar vein, Huberman (2001) documents
familiarity-related biases in portfolio holdings.


                                                        7
   Further supportive evidence is provided by literature that documents how partial market
integration aﬀects the pricing of securities. Bekaert and Harvey (1995) ﬁnds that local
factors aﬀect the pricing of securities and are not driven out by global factors. An important
additional ﬁnding of Bekaert and Harvey (1995) is that the relative importance of global and
local factors is time varying, suggesting time-varying integration between markets.
   Indeed, crisis periods oﬀer an opportunity to visualize the extent of variation in market
integration. The left plot of Figure 1 reports the sum of global net purchases of foreign
assets by residents (labeled “Gross capital inﬂows”) and the sum of global net purchases
of domestic assets by foreigners (labeled “Gross capital outﬂows”). The ﬁgure also reports
cross-border bank inﬂows and outﬂows based on BIS data. The picture helps visualize that,
in the years preceding the ﬁnancial crisis of 2008, there was a large increase in gross capital
ﬂows. This expansion in capital ﬂows came to a sudden stop in the ﬁrst quarter of 2008,
as the ﬁnancial crisis took hold. In line with the patterns illustrated in the left plot of
the ﬁgure, Ahrend and Schwellnus (2012) documents a signiﬁcantly stronger coeﬃcient on
distance in cross-border gravity equations during 2008-2009. This evidence suggests that
capital becomes more concentrated “locally” during times of crisis.
   The right plot of Figure 1 provides a further illustration of capital concentration during
the crisis by focusing on readily available BIS data. It depicts the cumulative percentage
change in banks’ cross-border claims against the respective cumulative change in their lo-
cal claims for various countries between 2008Q1 - 2009Q4. Most points on the graph are
below the 45-degree line, suggesting that the liquidation of the foreign holdings of banks
was disproportionately larger than the respective liquidation of their local holdings. Direct
evidence of a “ﬂight to home” eﬀect is provided by Giannetti and Laeven (2012), which
shows that the home bias of lenders’ loan origination increases by approximately 20% if the
bank’s home country experiences a banking crisis. Giannetti and Laeven (2012) also argues
that this ﬂight to home eﬀect is distinct from ﬂight to quality, since borrowers of diﬀerent
quality are equally aﬀected.
   We note in passing that the increased portfolio concentration during times of crisis is not
limited to international data. For instance, the collapse of the (non-agency) securitization
market during the ﬁnancial crisis implied increased limitations to the ability of local issuers

                                              8
                        Capital and Bank Flows as Percentage of GDP                                                                           BIS−reporting banks claims by recipient country: local versus cross−border, 2008Q1Ò009Q4
  20                                                                                                                                           100




                                                                                        Cumulative percentage change in cross−border claims
              Gross capital inflow                                                                                                              80
  15          Gross capital outflow
              BIS bank gross inflow
              BIS bank gross outflow
                                                                                                                                                60
  10
                                                                                                                                                40

    5
                                                                                                                                                20

    0                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                                              −20
  −5

                                                                                                                                              −40
 −10
                                                                                                                                              −60

 −15
                                                                                                                                              −80

 −20                                                                                                                                          −100
   1980     1985           1990            1995            2000       2005   2010                                                               −100    −80     −60     −40      −20      0      20        40      60     80      100
                                                                                                                                                                      Cumulative percentage change in local claims




Figure 1: Reversals in global capital ﬂows. Source: Hoggarth et al. (2010). The left plot depicts
the sum of global net purchases of foreign assets by residents (labeled “Gross capital inﬂows”) and
the sum of global net purchases of domestic assets by foreigners (labeled “Gross capital outﬂows”).
The ﬁgure also reports cross-border bank inﬂows and outﬂows based on BIS data. Right plot:
Cumulative percentage in local claims held by banks against cumulative percentage change in
cross-border claims during the 2008Q1 - 2009Q4 period. Source: Hoggarth et al. (2010). based on
BIS Data on the 50 largest debtor countries by foreign liabilities. For a detailed description of the
sample of reporting countries, see Hoggarth et al. (2010).


to diversify local real-estate risk.
        In summary, the empirical evidence supports the following broad conclusions: a) Capital
stays “close” to its origin, which implies a “local” concentration of risk in investors’ portfolios.
b) The extent of market integration is time-varying. Furthermore crises are times when
ﬁnancial integration diminishes quite abruptly.



3         Model

3.1        Investors and ﬁrms

Time is discrete and there are two dates, t = 0 and t = 1. All trading takes place at
time t = 0, while at t = 1 all payments are made and contracts are settled. Investors are
price takers, located at diﬀerent points on a circle with circumference normalized to one.
We index these locations by i ∈ [0, 1). Investors have exponential utilities and maximize




                                                                                    9
expected utility of time-1 wealth

                                  
         E [U (W1,i )] = −E e−γW1,i ,                                                                   (1)


where W1,i is the time-1 wealth of an investor in location i. The assumptions that investors
only care about terminal wealth and have exponential utility are made for tractability and
in order to expedite the presentation of the results. In Appendix A.1 we extend the model
to allow for consumption over an inﬁnite horizon.
       Besides having identical preferences, investors at any given location are also identical
in terms of their endowments and their information sets. Speciﬁcally, at time t = 0 the
investors in location i are equally endowed with the total supply of shares (normalized to
one) of a competitive, representative ﬁrm, which is domiciled at the same location i. Each
ﬁrm pays a stochastic dividend equal to Di in period 1.
       We specify the joint distribution of the dividends Di for i ∈ [0, 1) so as to obtain several
properties. Speciﬁcally, we wish that 1) ﬁrms be ex-ante symmetric, that is, the marginal
                                                                     1
distribution of Di be independent of i; 2) the total dividends paid 0 Di di be constant
(normalized to one);8 3) ﬁrms with indices close to each other (in terms of their shortest
distance on the circle) experience a higher dividend correlation than ﬁrms farther apart; and
4) dividends at diﬀerent locations be normally distributed.
       To formalize these notions, we let Zi denote a standard Brownian motion for i ∈ [0, 1] ,
and we also introduce the Brownian bridge


         Bi ≡ Zi − iZ1 for i ∈ [0, 1] .


We note that — by construction — the Brownian Bridge B(i) satisﬁes B0 = B1 = 0. Using
these deﬁnitions, we let Di be deﬁned as
                                   1       
         Di ≡ 1 + σ B i −                Bj dj ,                                                        (2)
                                 0

   8
    This assumption is made purely for ease of exposition. It is straightforward to introduce aggregate risk
by adding a common, normally distributed disturbance to dividends in all locations, without aﬀecting our
results.


                                                    10
where σ > 0 is a constant controlling the volatility of the dividend process. Since the
speciﬁcation (2) plays a central role in our analysis, we show ﬁrst that Di satisﬁes properties
1–4 mentioned above, and then we provide a graphical illustration of these properties to
build intuition.

Lemma 1 Di satisﬁes the following properties.

  1. (Symmetry and univariate normality) The marginal distribution of Di is the same for
                                                                                          σ2
      all i. Speciﬁcally, Di is normally distributed with mean 1 and variance             12
                                                                                             .
                             1
  2. (No aggregate risk)       0
                                   Di di = 1.

  3. (Continuity on the circle) Let d (i, j) ≡ min(|i − j| , 1 − |i − j|) denote a metric on the
      interval [0, 1). Then Di is continuous (a.s.) on [0, 1) if the interval [0, 1) is endowed
      with the metric d.

  4. (Joint normality and distance-dependent covariance structure) For any vector of loca-
      tions i = (i1 , i2 , . . . , iN ) in [0, 1), the dividends (Di1 , . . . , DiN ) are joint normal, with
      covariances given by
                                                                                 
                                            1   d (in , ik ) (1 − d (in , ik ))
            cov (Din , Dik ) = σ   2
                                              −                                       .                 (3)
                                           12                  2

   It is easiest to understand the properties of Di by using a graphical illustration. The left
plot of Figure 2 provides an illustration of the interval [0, 1) “wrapped” around as a circle
with circumference one. The metric d (i, j) can be thought of as the length of the shortest
arc connecting i and j, as the right plot of Figure 2 illustrates. Figure 3 illustrates a path
of Zi and the associated paths of Bi and Di .
   A remarkable property of the dividend structure (2) is that the covariance, and there-
fore correlation, of dividends in any locations i and j depend exclusively on the distance
d (i, j) between the two locations, but not the locations themselves. Equation (3) gives an
explicit expression for the covariance of the dividends at diﬀerent locations. The associated




                                                          11
                                                                    
                                                                               


                                                                            



                                    

Figure 2: The left plot depicts a circle with circumference 1. The bold arc on the right plot
depicts the notion of the shortest distance on the circle d(i, j) between points i and j that we use
throughout.


correlations follow immediately as


      corr (Di , Dj ) = 1 − 6d (i, j) (1 − d (i, j)) .                                          (4)


   Equation (4) implies that the correlation between Di and Dj approaches one as the
distance d (i, j) approaches zero, and is minimized when d (i, j) = 12 , i.e., when the two ﬁrms
are located diametrically opposite each other on the circle.


3.2    Financial markets and participation costs

Investors in location i can trade claims to the stock of ﬁrms located in every location j ∈ [0, 1)
on the circle. Motivated by the evidence presented in Section 2 — speciﬁcally the fact
that capital tends to stay close to its origin — we assume that participation in ﬁnancial
markets is costly, and the more so the farther away a ﬁnancial market is from an investor’s
location. Gârleanu et al. (2013) provides one potential motivation behind this assumption
by introducing informational asymmetries that grow with distance, impact expected returns,
and can be overcome by incurring a distance-dependent cost. We provide further details on
this motivation in Appendix C, and proceed with our analysis taking the participation costs
as given.
   We next propose a mathematical structure for the participation costs. The participation


                                                   12
                           Brownian Motion Z(i)                                          Brownian Bridge B(i)
            2                                                           1.5

           1.5
                                                                         1

            1
                                                                        0.5
           0.5

                                                                         0
            0

          −0.5                                                         −0.5
                 0   0.2      0.4       0.6       0.8         1               0   0.2       0.4          0.6           0.8         1
                                    i                                                              i

                              D(i) when σ=1                                             D(i) (polar coordinates)
            2

                                                                         2
           1.5

                                                                         1
            1


           0.5                                                           0
                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                  0                                          0.1
                                                                                                                   0
            0                                                                                             −0.1
                 0   0.2      0.4       0.6       0.8         1                           −0.2    −0.2
                                    i




Figure 3: An illustration of the construction of the dividend process Di . The two plots at the top
depict a sample Brownian path Zi , and the associated path of a Brownian bridge Bi . The two
bottom plots depict the associated sample path of Di , when the indices i ∈ [0, 1) are aligned on a
line and when the same interval is depicted as a circle with circumference one.


decision of investors consists of choosing a subset of all markets [0, 1) in which to invest.
To avoid unnecessary complications, we restrict attention to subsets of [0, 1) that can be
represented as a ﬁnite union of disjoint intervals with midpoints ai,n and lengths Δi,n . Hence,
the participation-cost function is a mapping from such subsets of [0, 1) to the set of positive
real numbers. For instance, if an investor in location i chooses to participate in Ni such
                                                    i
intervals with midpoints ai,n and total length Δi ≡ N n=1 Δi,n , she incurs costs equal to


                                                        Ni
      Fi ({ai,1 , . . . , ai,Ni }, Δi ) = κ bNi               f (d(ai,n , i)) + g (Δi ) ,                                                    (5)
                                                        n=1


where κ > 0, and f : (0, 12 ] → R and g : [0, 1) → R are positive, non-decreasing, diﬀerentiable,
and convex functions. We assume that f has a discontinuity at zero in the sense that
limx→0 f (x) > 0, while f (0) = 0. Also, g(0) = 0 and g  (0) = 0. Finally, bNi is positive and


                                                                  13
                                                                                             




Figure 4: Illustration of participation choices under diﬀerent assumptions on the participation
costs Fi ({ai,1 ; ..; ai,Ni }, Δi ).


non-decreasing in Ni ; we set b1 = b2 = 1 without loss of generality.9
       We make several remarks on speciﬁcation (5). First we note that Fi ({i}, 0) = 0, so that
participating only in the local market is costless. Second, the fact that f is increasing implies
that investing in markets that are farther away (in the sense that the distance d(ai,n , i) from
one’s location is larger) is more costly than participating in markets that are close by. Third,
increasing the total mass of markets in which the investor participates (Δi ), while keeping
the number (and midpoints) of intervals the same, incurs incremental rather than ﬁxed costs.
This captures the idea that expanding participation to contiguous markets is substantially
less costly than participating in a market that is not adjacent to any of the markets where the
investor has already decided to participate. Fourth, the fact that participation costs depend
on the location of the investor implies that investors in diﬀerent locations on the circle face
diﬀerent costs of participating in a given market j, depending on their proximity to that
market. Finally, for technical convenience and ease of exposition, the costs of expanding the
total measure of the interval are speciﬁed as independent of the structure of the midpoints
and the lengths of the subintervals. This assumption is not crucial and can be easily relaxed.10
       Even though one can specify more elaborate participation-cost structures, the one given
by (5) is suﬃciently ﬂexible for our purposes. To better understand this cost structure
it is useful to consider some special cases. In the ﬁrst special case, the investor can only
participate in an arc centered at her home location (depicted in the left plot of Figure 4).
   9
      Since f (0) = 0, the ﬁrst mid-point that an investor chooses is always her home location. Hence b1 can be
chosen arbitrarily, as b1 f (0) = 0. Similarly, b2 = 1 is without loss of generality, since we can always re-deﬁne
f ∗ = b2 f and b∗N = bbN2 without changing the total cost Fi .
   10
                                                  Ni
      Indeed, if one were to replace g(Δi ) with n=1     g (Δi,n ), that would introduce additional reasons for the
cost structure to be non-convex, strengthening some of the conclusions of the paper.


                                                        14
This outcome follows from (5) if one sets bN f (x) = ∞ and g(y) < ∞ for any x > 0,
y > 0, and N > 1, so that the participation cost reduces to F (Δi ) = κg(Δi ). We note
that in this special case the participation-cost structure is convex (unlike when the investor
participates in disjoint intervals, which carries ﬁxed costs). This convexity is quite attractive
for illustrating some of the results of the paper, and therefore this special case will play an
important role in our analysis. A second special case corresponds to situations in which an
investor only participates on discrete points (middle plot of Figure 4). This outcome obtains
from (5) if bN f (x) < ∞ and g(y) = ∞ for any y > 0. In the general case bN f (x) < ∞ and
g (y) < ∞, the participation decision involves choosing the number of points Ni , the location
of the midpoints ai,n , and the length of the intervals Δi,n at each location. This situation is
depicted in the right plot of Figure 4.
       Besides the markets for risky shares, there is a market for zero-net-supply riskless bonds
that pay one unit of wealth at time 1. Participation in the bond market is costless for
everyone.
       The participation costs act as deadweight costs that are paid out (i.e., reduce consump-
tion) at time 1.
       We remark in passing that our results would not be aﬀected if, instead of making the
participation decisions themselves, agents invested through frictionless and competitive in-
termediation. That is, we could introduce a competitive sector of intermediaries who incur
the participation costs, choose optimal portfolios for their clients, and then charge them
competitive fees to cover the participation costs.11


3.3       Individual maximization and equilibrium

To formalize an investor’s decision problem we let Pi denote the price of a share in a market
                                           (i)
i, PB ≡      1
            1+r
                  the price of a bond, dXj the mass of shares in market j bought by an investor
  11
    In a previous version of the paper, we consider such a model. Speciﬁcally, in this model a) investors
don’t have direct access to markets, but rather have to hire (competitive) intermediaries in their location
to gain access to distant markets, b) the intermediaries attract clients by oﬀering portfolios that maximize
their welfare, and c) intermediaries charge clients fees to cover the participation costs that they incur. Not
surprisingly, the lack of frictions between investors and intermediaries implies that the allocations and the
prices in the two models are equivalent.



                                                     15
                                       (i)
located in i,12 and XB the respective number of bonds. Then, letting
                          1
                                           (i)     (i)
         W0,i ≡                Pj dXj + PB XB
                       0


denote the total ﬁnancial wealth of an investor in location i, the budget constraint of an
investor can be expressed as W0,i = Pi .
       We are now in a position to formulate the investor’s maximization problem as


                max         →
                            −
                                     E [U (W1,i )] ,                                                                             (6)
         wif ,G(i) ,Ni ,−
                        →
                        a i, Δ i


subject to the budget constraint, and
                                                                         1              
                                                                                    (i)
         W1,i = W0,i                 wif   (1 + r) + 1 −   wif                 Rj dGj         − Fi ,                             (7)
                                                                       0


where wif is the fraction of W0,i invested in the risk-free security by an agent in location i,
 (i)                                        1 (i)
Gj is a bounded-variation function with 0 dGj = 1, which is constant in locations where
                                                                 (i)                                                (i)
the investor does not participate (i.e., dGj =0 in these locations), so that dGj captures the
fraction of the risky component of the portfolio 1 − wif W0,i invested in the share of stock
j by a consumer located in i. Finally, Ri ≡                                    Di
                                                                               Pi
                                                                                    is the realized gross return on security i at
time 1. We do not restrict G to be continuous, that is, we allow investors to invest mass
points of wealth in some locations.
       The deﬁnition of equilibrium is standard. An equilibrium is a set of prices Pi , a real inter-
est rate r, and participation and portfolio decisions wif , G(i) , Ni , and {ai,1 , . . . , ai,Ni , Δi,1 , . . . , Δi,Ni }
for all i ∈ [0, 1] such that: 1) wif , G(i) , Ni , and {ai,1... ai,Ni , Δi,1... Δi,Ni } solve the optimization
                                                                                                              (i)
problem of equation (6), 2) ﬁnancial markets for all stocks clear: Pj = i∈[0,1] 1 − wif W0,i dGj ,
                                         
and 3) the bond market clears, i.e., i∈[0,1] W0,i wif di = 0.
       By Walras’ law, we need to normalize the price in one market. Since in the baseline
model we abstract from consumption at time zero for parsimony, we normalize the price of
the bond to be unity (i.e., we choose r = 0). We discuss consumption at more dates than
  12                           (i)                                                                           (i)
    The function Xj has ﬁnite variation. We adopt the natural convention that Xj                                   is continuous from
the right and has left limits.


                                                                           16
time one and an endogenously determined interest rate in Appendix A.1.



4     Solution and Its Properties
We solve the model and illustrate its properties in a sequence of steps. First, we discuss
a frictionless benchmark, where participation costs are absent. Second, in order to build
intuition we discuss the special case where the investor can only participate in an arc centered
at her location, so that her participation decision amounts to choosing the length of that arc
(the special case depicted on the left panel of Figure 4). We consider the general case, which
allows for both contiguous and non-contiguous participation choices, in Appendix A.2.


4.1    A frictionless benchmark

As a benchmark, we consider ﬁrst the case without participation costs: Fi = 0. In this case,
the solution to the model is trivial. Every investor i participates in every market j. The ﬁrst
order condition for portfolio choice is


      E [U  (W1,i ) (Rj − (1 + r))] = 0.                                                   (8)


With the above ﬁrst-order condition in hand, one can verify the validity of the following
                                             (i)
(symmetric) equilibrium: wif = 0, and Gj = Gj = j for all (i, j) ∈ [0, 1) × [0, 1) — i.e.,
investors in all locations i choose an equally weighted portfolio of every share j ∈ [0, 1].
                     1
Accordingly, W1,i = 0 Dj dj = 1. Since in this equilibrium W1,i = 1, the Euler equation (8)
implies that


      E(Rj ) = 1 + r.                                                                       (9)

                                            Dj
Combining (9) with the deﬁnition Rj =       Pj
                                                 implies

             E (Dj )    1
      Pj =           =     = 1,                                                            (10)
              1+r      1+r



                                                   17
where the last equation follows from the normalization r = 0. The equilibrium in the
frictionless case is intuitive. Since there are no participation costs, investors hold an equally
weighted portfolio across all locations. Since — by assumption — there is no risk in the
aggregate, the risk of any individual security is not priced.


4.2       Symmetric equilibria with participation costs

To facilitate the presentation of some of the key results, we focus on the special case depicted
in the left plot of Figure 4, i.e., the case where the investor’s participation choice amounts
to choosing the length Δ of an arc centered at her location. The associated participation
cost is κg(Δ).
       To make the investor’s problem well-deﬁned and interesting, we assume that the costs of
participation increase suﬃciently fast (and thus become inﬁnite) as Δ approaches one:

Assumption 1 limΔ→1 g  (Δ) (1 − Δ)4 = ∞.

Assumption 1 helps ensure that an optimal Δ less than one exists for every investor.13
       Before presenting results, we introduce a convention to simplify notation.

Convention 1 For any real number x, let x denote the ﬂoor of x, i.e., the largest integer
weakly smaller than x. We henceforth use the term “location x” (on the circle) to refer to
the unique point in [0, 1) given by x mod 1 ≡ x − x.

With this convention we can map any real number to a unique location on the circle with
circumference one. For example, this convention implies that the real numbers -0.8, 0.2,
and 1.2 correspond to the same location on the circle with circumference one, namely 0.2.
An implication of this convention is that any function h deﬁned on the circle extends to a
function ĥ on the real line that is periodic with period one, i.e., ĥ(x) = ĥ(x + 1) = h(x
  13
    If P < 1, so that there is a risk premium, the limiting case Δ = 1 is not well deﬁned, since both the
costs and the beneﬁts of participation diverge to inﬁnity as Δ → 1. Assumption 1 along with an application
of L’Hôpital’s rule ensures that the cost component dominates the beneﬁt component as Δ → 1, resulting in
an optimal (interior) choice of Δ ∈ [0, 1). We also note that, if we introduce aggregate risk, then Assumption
1 can be replaced with the weaker limΔ→1 g (Δ) = ∞. Finally, no assumption is necessary in the presence
of a leverage constraint, as in Section 5 (except that g(Δ) > 0 for some Δ ∈ (0, 1)).




                                                     18
mod 1). From now on, we adopt the convention that when we refer to a function h on the
circle, we also refer to its extension to the real line.
   We next introduce two deﬁnitions.

                                                                   (i)
Deﬁnition 1 The standardized portfolio associated with Gj is the function Lj deﬁned by
       (i)
Lj = Gi+j .

   The notion of a standardized portfolio allows us to compare portfolios of investors at
diﬀerent locations on the circle. For example, if all investors choose portfolios with weights
that only depend on the distance d between their domicile and the location of investment,
and these distance-dependent weights are the same for all investors, then these investors
hold the same standardized portfolio.

Deﬁnition 2 A symmetric equilibrium is an equilibrium in which all agents choose the same
participation interval Δ, the same leverage wf , and the same standardized portfolio.

   Due to the symmetry of the problem, it is natural to start by attempting to construct a
symmetric equilibrium.

Proposition 1 For any Δ ∈ (0, 1) deﬁne
              ⎧
              ⎪
              ⎪           if j ∈ [− 12 , − Δ2 )
              ⎪
              ⎨
                0
      L∗j ≡     j+   1
                          if j ∈ [− Δ2 , Δ2 )                                            (11)
              ⎪
              ⎪      2
              ⎪
              ⎩ 1         if j ∈ [ Δ2 , 12 )

and
                           1             
                                                   σ2
      ω (Δ) ≡ V ar               Dj dL∗j       =      (1 − Δ)3 .                         (12)
                         0                         12

Finally, let Δ∗ denote the (unique) solution to the equation

                    γ
      κg  (Δ∗ ) = − ω  (Δ∗ )                                                           (13)
                    2



                                                           19
and also consider the set of prices


          Pi = P ≡ 1 − γω (Δ∗ ) .                                                                                            (14)


Then, assuming that a symmetric equilibrium exists, the choices Δ(i) = Δ∗ , wif = 0, and
dGj = dL∗j−i constitute an equilibrium supported by the prices Pi = P .
   (i)




   Proposition 1 gives simple, explicit expressions for both the optimal portfolios and par-
ticipation intervals. To understand how these quantities are derived, we take an individual
agent’s wealth W1,i from (7) and we assume that prices for risky assets are the same in all
                                                                     Dj
locations. Then, using W0,i = Pi = P , r = 0, Rj =                   P
                                                                        ,   and Fi = κg (Δ) , we express W1,i as

                                   1          
                        f        f          (i)
          W1,i   = P w i + 1 − wi      Rj dGj     − κg (Δ)
                                    0
                                   1          
                       f        f           (i)
                 = P w i + 1 − wi      Dj dGj     − κg (Δ) .
                                                   0


Because of exponential utilities and normally distributed returns, maximizing EU (W1,i ) is
equivalent to solving
                                              1                                              1              
                                                         (i)   γ            2
                                                                                                         (i)
         max      P wif   + 1−   wif               EDj dGj −     1 − wif        V ar                Dj dGj         − κg (Δ) . (15)
         (i)
   dGj ,Δ,wif                              0                   2                            0



   Noting that EDj = 1, inspection of equation (15) shows that (for any wf and Δ) the opti-
mal portfolio is the one that minimizes the variance of dividends in the participation interval
Δ. Since the covariance matrix of dividends is location invariant, the standardized variance-
minimizing portfolio is the same at all locations. Solving for this variance-minimizing port-
folio Lj is an inﬁnite-dimensional optimization problem. However, because of the symmetry
of the setup we are able to solve it explicitly, and equation (11) provides the solution. The
optimal portfolio, L∗j , corresponds to the distribution that minimizes the sum of the vertical
                                                  
distances to the uniform distribution on − 12 , 12 , subject to the constraints that Lj = 0 for
j ∈ [− 12 , − Δ2 ) and Lj = 1 if j ∈ [ Δ2 , 12 ). The resulting optimized variance is given by ω (Δ),
where ω (Δ) is deﬁned in (12).


                                                               20
Figure 5: Illustration of the determination of Δ∗ when a symmetric equilibrium exists. The ﬁgure
illustrates that Δ∗ increases when κ2 < κ1 .


    Accordingly, the agent’s problem can be written more compactly as

                                             γ           2
       V = max P wif + 1 − wif −               1 − wif       ω (Δ) − κg (Δ) .                  (16)
                Δ,wif                        2

The ﬁrst-order conditions with respect to wif , respectively Δ, are


         1 − P = γ 1 − wif ω (Δ)                                                               (17)
                        γ           2
       κg  (Δ) = −       1 − wif       ω  (Δ) .                                              (18)
                        2

Since in a symmetric equilibrium market clearing requires wif = 0, equation (17) becomes
identical to (14) and (18) becomes equivalent to (13).
    Equation (13) makes explicit the resolution of the tradeoﬀ between participation costs
and risk taking. Speciﬁcally, the participation interval is determined as the point where
the marginal cost of participation, κg  (Δ), is equal to the marginal beneﬁt of participation,
− γ2 ω  (Δ).
    Figure 5 illustrates this tradeoﬀ by plotting the marginal cost from increasing Δ, namely
κg  (Δ), against the respective marginal beneﬁt − γ2 ω  (Δ) . Since g(Δ) is convex, g  (Δ) is up-
                                                                                       2
ward sloping. By contrast, the marginal beneﬁt is declining, since −ω  (Δ) = − σ2 (1 − Δ) <
0. Since g  (0) = 0, limΔ→1 g  (Δ) = ∞, −ω  (0) > 0, and ω  (1) = 0, the two curves intersect
at some point Δ∗ ∈ [0, 1).
    Proposition 1 helps capture the economic mechanisms that underlie our model. Consider,


                                                     21
for instance, its implications for a reduction in the cost of accessing markets (i.e., a reduction
in κ). As Figure 5 illustrates, such a reduction increases the degree of participation Δ and
promotes portfolio ﬂows across diﬀerent locations. In turn, this increased participation im-
proves risk sharing across diﬀerent locations, which leads to higher prices of risky securities,
P = 1 − γω (Δ), and accordingly lower risk premia. By contrast, an increase in the costs of
accessing risky markets leads to a lower Δ and a higher degree of concentration of risk. The
resulting decline in the extent of risk sharing leads to a drop in the prices of risky assets and
an increase in risk premia.
   These mechanisms of the model capture the stylized facts summarized in Section 2. We
highlight one aspect of our analysis: the extent of market integration and cross-location
portfolio ﬂows, on one hand, and the magnitude of risk premia, on the other, are intimately
linked. By contrast, representative-agent approaches to the determination of risk premia are
— by their construction — limited in their ability to explain the empirically prevalent joint
movements in risk premia and portfolio movements, since the representative agent always
holds the market portfolio and prices adjust so as to keep the agent content with her holdings.
   We conclude this section by noting that in Appendix A.1 we extend the results obtained
so far to an intertemporal version of the model with recurrent shocks to participation costs.
That extension strengthens the comparative statics conclusions established above by showing
that, in a dynamic setting with participation-cost shocks, the model produces a) a negative
correlation between capital ﬂows and excess returns, b) time variation in excess returns that
is unrelated to expected dividend growth, aggregate output etc., and c) return correlation
across locations that exceeds the respective correlation of dividends. Furthermore, the addi-
tional risk caused by variation in the participation costs is priced, resulting in an increased
expected excess return.
   Next we turn our attention to a central issue of our analysis, pertaining to the existence
of a symmetric equilibrium.




                                               22
4.3    Asymmetric, location-invariant equilibria: Leverage and the
       diversity of ﬁnancial strategies

Proposition 1 contains the premise that a symmetric equilibrium exists. Surprisingly, despite
the symmetry of the model setup, a symmetric equilibrium may fail to exist. Instead, the
market equilibrium may involve diﬀerent choices (leverage ratios, portfolios of risky assets,
wealth allocations, etc.) for agents in the same location, even though these agents have
the same preferences and endowments and are allowed to make the same participation and
portfolio choices.
   These claims are explained by the observation that the necessary ﬁrst-order conditions
resulting in the prices Pi = P = 1−γω (Δ∗ ) are not generally suﬃcient. We now take a closer
look at whether a symmetric equilibrium exists. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁx the price P = 1−γω (Δ∗ )
of Proposition 1 and investigate whether (and under what conditions) the choices wf = 0
and Δ = Δ∗ are indeed optimal for the investor.
   To answer this question, we consider again the maximization problem (16). Taking
P = 1 − γω (Δ∗ ) as given, substituting into (17), and re-arranging implies that if investors
allocate their wealth over a participation interval Δ (potentially diﬀerent from Δ∗ ), then

                 ω (Δ∗ )
      1 − wf =           .                                                                 (19)
                 ω (Δ)

   Equation (19) contains an intuitive prediction. An investor allocating her wealth over a
span Δ > Δ∗ is facing the same average returns, but a lower variance ω (Δ), and hence a
higher Sharpe ratio compared to an investor allocating her wealth over an interval of size Δ∗ .
Accordingly, the former investor ﬁnds it optimal to leverage her portfolio. This is reﬂected
                                                  
in equation (19), which states that wf < 0 wf > 0 whenever Δ∗ < Δ (Δ∗ > Δ) .
   An interesting implication of (18) is that the marginal beneﬁt of an increased participation
interval becomes larger with leverage. This is intuitive since increased leverage implies a more
volatile wealth next period and hence a higher marginal beneﬁt of reducing that variance by
increasing Δ. In short, the choices of Δ and of leverage 1 − wf are complements.
   This complementarity can lead to an upward sloping marginal beneﬁt of increased par-



                                              23
                                      κ g' ( Δ)
                                                                                                       κ g' ( Δ)

                γ                                                                   γ                               γ
               − ω '(Δ)                                                            − ω '(Δ)                        − (1− w f (Δ;Δ* ))2 ω '(Δ)
                2                                                                   2                              2
                                         γ
                                        − (1− w f (Δ;Δ*))2 ω '(Δ)
                                         2                                                         

                                                                         
                                                                         
                          Δ*                      Δ                          Δ1*              Δ*          Δ*2       Δ

                                                                                      2
                                                                               ω(Δ∗ )
Figure 6: Illustration of the marginal beneﬁt curve − γ2                        ω(Δ)    ω  (Δ) , the marginal cost curve
κg  (Δ) and the marginal beneﬁt curve − γ2 ω  (Δ)                  restricting wf = 0. The left plot illustrates a case
where a symmetric equilibrium exists whereas the right plot illustrates a case where a symmetric
equilibrium fails to exist.


ticipation. Indeed, with our cash-ﬂow speciﬁcation, substituting (19) into (18) gives

                                           2
                   γ          ω (Δ∗ )
         κg (Δ) = −                               ω  (Δ) .                                                                             (20)
                    2          ω (Δ)

                                                                                                                                   2
                                 σ2                                                                                     ω(Δ∗ )
Using the fact ω (Δ) =           12
                                      (1 − Δ)3 , the right hand side can be expressed as − γ2                           ω(Δ)
                                                                                                                                       ω  (Δ) =
γσ 2                           −4
 8
       (1 − Δ∗ )6 (1 − Δ)        , which is increasing in Δ.
   Figure 6 helps illustrate these notions. The ﬁgure depicts the marginal cost curve κg  (Δ),
                                               2                   ∗) 2
the marginal beneﬁt curve − γ2 1 − wf (Δ; Δ∗ ) ω  (Δ) = − γ2 ω(Δ ω(Δ)
                                                                          ω  (Δ), and also the
curve − γ2 ω  (Δ) , i.e., the marginal beneﬁt of participation ﬁxing wf = 0. The point where all
three curves intersect corresponds to the point Δ = Δ∗ . The left plot of Figure 6 illustrates
a case where a symmetric equilibrium exists, whereas the right plot illustrates a case where
a symmetric equilibrium fails to exist. The diﬀerence between the two plots is the shape of
g  (Δ). In the left plot g  (Δ) intersects the marginal beneﬁt curve only once, namely at Δ∗ .
For values smaller than Δ∗ , the marginal beneﬁt of participation is above the marginal cost
and vice versa for values larger than Δ∗ . Hence, in this case Δ∗ is indeed the optimal choice
for the investor.
       This is no longer the case in the right plot. Here the marginal beneﬁt curve intersects the
marginal cost curve three times (at Δ∗1 , Δ∗ , and Δ∗2 ). Since the marginal beneﬁt is below the


                                                                    24
                                                                        l ( P1 )


                                                                      l ( P2 )

                                              κ g' ( Δ)
                                                                   l ( P3 )
                                                          

                                   
                                   
                                       Δ1**                   Δ**
                                                               2
                                                                                 Δ



Figure 7: Illustration of an asymmetric equilibrium involving mixed strategies. The price adjusts
so that area A is equal to area B. Accordingly, an investor is indiﬀerent between Δ∗∗     ∗∗
                                                                                   1 and Δ2 .
Here, P3 < P2 < P1 < 1.


marginal cost for values of Δ that are smaller and “close” to Δ∗ , while the marginal beneﬁt
is larger than the marginal cost for values of Δ that are larger and “close” to Δ∗ , Δ∗ is a
local minimum, and hence a suboptimal choice. By contrast the points Δ∗1 and Δ∗2 are local
maxima. (In this particular example the point Δ∗1 is the global maximum, since the area A
is larger than the area B.) The fact that Δ∗ is not a maximum implies that there does not
exist a symmetric equilibrium, since in a symmetric equilibrium it would have to be the case
that wf = 0.
   The fact that there does not exist a symmetric market equilibrium implies that one should
look for equilibria where investors in the same location make diﬀerent choices, even though
they have the same preferences, endowments, and information. Figure 7 presents a simple
graphical illustration of such an equilibrium in the context of the example depicted on the
right plot of Figure 6.
   Speciﬁcally we illustrate the construction of an equilibrium that features the same price
Pi = P for all markets, but where a fraction π of investors in every location i choose (w1f , Δ1 ),
while the remaining fraction (1 − π) of agents choose (w2f , Δ2 ). We introduce a function l
that captures the marginal beneﬁt of participation as a function of Δ and P :
                                                                       2
                   γ             2           γ              1−P                ω  (Δ)
      l (Δ, P ) ≡ − 1 − wf (Δ, P ) ω  (Δ) = −                                           ,    (21)
                   2                           2               γ                 ω 2 (Δ)


                                                   25
where the last equation follows from (17).
      Figure 7 depicts the function l (Δ, P ) for three values P1 < P2 < P3 < 1. A ﬁrst
observation is that as P declines from P3 to P1 , the curve l (Δ, P ) shifts up. Moreover
there exists a level P2 and associated values Δ∗∗     ∗∗
                                               1 and Δ2 for which the area “A” equals

the area “B”, so that investors are indiﬀerent between choosing Δ∗∗     ∗∗
                                                                 1 and Δ2 . Fixing these

values of P, Δ∗∗       ∗∗                                  f      f
              1 , and Δ2 , we can determine the values of w1 and w2 from (17). As part

of the proof of Proposition 2 (in the appendix), we show that these values of w1f and w2f
satisfy 1 − w1f < 1 < 1 − w2f . In order to clear the bond market, π has to be so that
                                          w2f
πw1f + (1 − π)w2f = 0, i.e., π =        w2 −w1f
                                         f        ∈ (0, 1).14 We also show in the appendix that for this
value of π all markets for risky assets clear as well.
      The next proposition generalizes the insights of the above illustrative example. It shows
the existence of an asymmetric equilibrium, when a symmetric equilibrium fails to exist.

Proposition 2 When the cost function g is such that a symmetric equilibrium fails to ex-
ist, there exists an asymmetric equilibrium. Speciﬁcally, there exist (at least) two tuples
                                                            
  Δk , wkf , k ≥ 2, and πk > 0 with k πk = 1 and k πk 1 − wkf = 1, such that in every
location i a fraction πk of agents choose the interval, leverage, and portfolio combination
                 
  Δk , wkf , dL(k) , where dL(k) is the measure given in (11) for Δ = Δk .

      Hence, the model predicts that the complementarity between leverage and the incentive to
increase participation in risky markets may result in a non-concave objective function for the
determination of Δ. In such situations a symmetric equilibrium can fail to exist. Instead, the
market equilibrium features a diverse set of ﬁnancial strategies, with some investors pursuing
high-cost, high-Sharpe-ratio, high-leverage strategies and some investors pursuing low-cost,
low-Sharpe-ratio, no-leverage strategies. The ﬁrst type of strategies is akin to the sort of
strategies oﬀered by hedge funds, while the second type of strategies is akin to those oﬀered
by mutual funds. It is useful to underscore that this diversity of ﬁnancial strategies obtains
despite the facts that investors are identical and participation costs are convex.
      When the costs of participation are non-convex (for instance, because investors may
choose non-contiguous participation locations, as in Appendix A.2), there is an additional
 14
      π ∈ (0, 1) since w2f < 0 and w1f > 0.


                                                        26
and conceptually distinct reason why the investor’s objective is non-concave, leading to the
adoption of diverse ﬁnancial strategies.15
       In summary, this section has established that the non-concavities in investors’ objective
functions introduce diversity in the optimal participation-leverage combinations chosen by
diﬀerent investors. Importantly, the equilibrium price plays a key role in determining the
participation-leverage combinations that keep investors indiﬀerent between diﬀerent strate-
gies. In the next section we identify a tension that arises when we introduce collateral con-
straints, so that the price simultaneously aﬀects investors’ indiﬀerence relations and their
feasible leverage-participation combinations.



5        Collateral Constraints and Price Crashes
The previous section shows that equilibrium outcomes may feature heterogeneous investment
strategies in every location despite the fact that investors are identical. An important aspect
of these heterogeneous strategies is that they require diﬀerent degrees of leverage. Even
though in the model leverage can be chosen freely, in reality leverage is limited by collateral
constraints. In this section we discuss the implications of such constraints. We present
a simple example to show that even small increments in participation costs may lead to
an abrupt drop in prices, along with a sudden reversal in cross-location capital ﬂows and
de-leveraging.
       To model collateral constraints, we let χ ∈ [0, 1) denote a “haircut” parameter and require
                         1                 
                                    (i)           (i)
             (1 − χ)           Pj dXj     − Fi + XB ≥ 0.                                                 (22)
                       0


Equation (22) stipulates that the borrowing capacity of an investor (the ﬁrst term — inside
the square brackets — of (22)) do not exceed the amount the investor actually borrows (the
second term of (22)). The investor’s borrowing capacity is computed as the market value of
  15
    A classic example, which also features diﬀerent choices by ex-ante identical investors, due to ﬁxed (hence
non-convex) information costs, is Grossman and Stiglitz (1980). A diﬀerence between Grossman and Stiglitz
(1980) and our setup, which becomes pertinent in the next section, is that the price adjusts to keep investors
indiﬀerent between diﬀerent combinations of leverage and participation, while in Grossman and Stiglitz
(1980) investors decide on paying information acquisition costs before observing the price.


                                                           27
the collateral net of the haircut and of the obligation the investor has already assumed by
committing to pay the participation costs in period 1.
       The collateral constraint (22) is pervasive in reality, extensively used in the literature,
and analytically convenient for our purposes. Therefore, we focus on the implications of this
constraint in the body of the paper. In Appendix D we analyze an alternative, endogenous
version of the constraint (22) motivated by the desire to prevent default in all states of
nature. We show that the key insights of the present section remain the same.
       To further streamline the exposition, in this section we use a stylized speciﬁcation of
participation costs that allows analytical computations. Speciﬁcally, we postulate the cost
function depicted in the middle graph of Figure 4. In that case, the optimal participation
choice amounts to choosing the location of the points ai and the number of the discrete points
N .16 To keep computations as simple as possible, we assume furthermore that bN = ∞ for
N > 2, so that only choices involving N ≤ 2 are feasible.17 Accordingly, an investor’s
problem comes down to choosing N = 1 (and paying no participation costs) or N = 2 and
the distance d from her home location, resulting in participation costs equal to κf (d). (See
Appendix A.2 for an extension to multiple locations.) In an eﬀort to further streamline the
analysis, we assume that f  (d) = 0. In that case the investor faces only a ﬁxed cost of κf (0)
when choosing N = 2, but can choose d freely (i.e., without incurring additional cost).
       We start by analyzing equilibrium prices in this economy when we don’t impose the
constraint (22) on investors’ decisions.

Proposition 3 Assume that the borrowing constraint is not imposed on investors’ decisions,
                                                           1 γσ 2            1 γσ 2
and also assume that κ ∈ (κ1 , κ2 ), where κ1 ≡           128 f0
                                                                  ,   κ2 ≡   8 f0
                                                                                    .   Then there exists an
asymmetric equilibrium in which a fraction π > 0 of the investors choose N = 1, while the
  16
     Recall that in this case there is a minimum “ﬁxed” cost that one needs to pay for every new location
that she chooses given by κbN limx→0 f (x) > 0.
  17
     The condition bN = ∞ can be substantially weakened. Indeed all that is needed for N = 1 or N = 2
to be the only feasible choices is that κbN limx→0 f (x) > 1 for N > 2. To see this, use the normalization
                                                                  1      (i)    (i)           1     (i)
PB = 1 along with the budget constraint to obtain Pi = W0,i = 0 Pj dXj + XB = (1 − χ) 0 Pj dXj −
       (i)         1      (i)           1    (i)
Fi + XB + Fi + χ 0 Pj dXj ≥ Fi + χ 0 Pj dXj , where the inequality follows from (22). Noting that Pj ≤ 1
and f is non-decreasing, the only feasible choices are N = 1 or N = 2 if κbN limx→0 f (x) > 1 for N > 2.




                                                   28
rest choose N = 2 and d = 12 . The equilibrium price in all locations is
                         
                             γκf0
         P (κ) = 1 − σ            ,                                                                  (23)
                              18

and the choices wif satisfy w1f > 0 and w2f < 0. Finally,

         dP      f0
            =− f       < 0.                                                                          (24)
         dκ   w1 − w2f

       For values of κ smaller than κ1 or larger than κ2 equilibria are symmetric with everyone
                                      1
choosing N = 2 and d =                2
                                          or everyone choosing N = 1, respectively. Hence, without
imposing the constraint (22), the left plot of Figure 8 gives a visual depiction of P (κ),
which is a continuous function of κ. Even though investors make essentially discrete choices,
the fraction of investors choosing each type of strategy is continuous in κ, rendering the
equilibrium price continuous.
       When imposing the constraint (22), however, a diﬀerent situation arises, depicted in the
right plot of Figure 8. The downward-sloping dotted line graphs the price P (κ) that would
obtain in the absence of the constraint (22), i.e., it is identical to the solid line of the left
plot. The upward-sloping dotted line depicts the locus (κ, P ) for which


         κf0 = P 1 − χ(1 − w2f ) ,                                                                   (25)


where w2f (P ) is given by (50). For these points the constraint (22) binds with equality.18
       For values of κ and P that lie above and to the left of the upward-sloping dotted line, the
constraint (22) is not binding; hence the equilibrium price (the solid line) coincides with the
downward-sloping dotted line for values of κ smaller than the value marked as κc in Figure
8. However, for values of κ greater than κc , the downward-sloping dotted line no longer
describes the equilibrium price.
       The following Lemma characterizes the behavior of P as a function of κ.

  18
    Combining the investor’s budget constraint with (22) and repeating the same steps as in footnote 17
                   1       (i)
gives W0,i ≥ Fi + χ 0 Pj dXj . Evaluating this inequality with Pi = Pj = P = W0,i , PB = 1, Fi = κf0 , and
1
 0
   dXj = 1 − wf gives (25).


                                                       29
         0.95

                                                                                                            Locus of points
          0.9                                                                            0.9                where the
                                                                                                            constraint just
                                                                                                            binds
         0.85                                                                           0.85


          0.8                                                                            0.8

                                                                                                                                               Actual Price
  P(g)




                                                                                 P(g)
         0.75                                                                           0.75
                                                                                                                                                 Price ignoring the constraint
          0.7                                                                            0.7


         0.65                                                                           0.65


          0.6                                                                            0.6


         0.55                                                                           0.55                                      gc
                0    g1    1         2      3       4   5        6 g2   7                      0        1      2              3            4       5           6            7
                                                g                                                                                      g




Figure 8: The left plot depicts the price P (κ) assuming the leverage constraint is not binding.
The downward-sloping dotted line on the right plot plots the same quantity, along with the actual
price (solid line) and the locus of points such that the leverage constraint is just binding (upward
sloping line). Hence for points above and to the left of the upward sloping line the constraint is not
binding, whereas it is binding for points below and to the right. Parameters used in this example:
γ = 5, f0 = 0.1, χ = 0.2, σ = 1.


Lemma 2 Let λ ≥ 0 denote the Lagrange multiplier associated with the constraint (22).
Then assuming that

                                          
                w1f − w2f − λ 1 − χ 1 − w2f > 0,                                                                                                                          (26)


we have that

                    dP             (1 + λ) f0
                       =−                          < 0.                                                                                                                 (27)
                    dκ     f    f                f
                          w1 − w2 − λ 1 − χ 1 − w2

                                                                                                   dP
         Comparing (24) with (27) shows that the slope                                             dκ
                                                                                                        in the presence of a constraint is
steeper than the respective expression in the absence of the constraint (22), since

                                          (1 + λ) f0             f
                −                                         <− f 0 f.
                     w1f       −   w2f                  f
                                         − λ 1 − χ 1 − w2     w1 − w2

                                                            dP
         An important assumption for                        dκ
                                                                  to be well-deﬁned (in the presence of the constraint) is
contained in equation (26). This assumption is always satisﬁed in an asymmetric equilibrium
as long as the Lagrange multiplier λ is suﬃciently close to zero, since in any asymmetric


                                                                            30
equilibrium we must have w1f > 0 and w2f < 0. Hence, condition (26) holds as long as κ is
suﬃciently close to κc , the minimal value of κ for which the leverage constraint binds.
      As κ keeps increasing above κc , the constraint becomes progressively more binding, and
possibly up to the point where (26) doesn’t hold. In that case there may be no marginal
change in P that can keep investors indiﬀerent between the alternative ﬁnancial strategies
and P (κ) can exhibit a discontinuity, accompanied by a change in the nature of equilibrium
(from asymmetric to symmetric).
      Figure 9 helps illustrate such a discontinuity in the context of the numerical example
of Figure 8. For each subplot we ﬁx a value of κ. Given that value of κ, the line denoted
“Indiﬀerence” in each subplot depicts combinations of P and possible choices of 1 − w2f
such that the indiﬀerence relation V1 = V2 holds.19 Similarly, the line denoted “Constraint”
depicts combinations of P and 1 − w2f such that the constraint (25) holds as an equality.
Accordingly, all the points that lie above that line are admissible combinations of P and
1 − w2f . Finally, the line denoted “FOC” depicts the combination of points that satisfy the
(unconstrained) ﬁrst-order condition for leverage


        1 − P = γ 1 − w2f ω (N =2) ,

                     σ2
where ω (N =2) =     48
                          is the minimal variance attainable for an investor choosing to participate
in N = 2 locations.
      The intersection of the lines “Indiﬀerence” and “FOC” corresponds to the unconstrained
equilibrium price (and the associated leverage w2f ) of equation (23). The left plot depicts the
case κ = κc . In that case the constraint just becomes binding, and all three lines intersect
at the same point. For (moderately) higher values of κ, illustrated in the middle panel, the
constraint binds actively. The intersection of “Indiﬀerence” and “FOC” no longer depicts
an equilibrium. Instead, investors pursuing high leverage strategies reduce the magnitude
of their risky positions, and equilibrium prices drop to the point where the constraint is
satisﬁed (i.e., up to the point where the line “Indiﬀerence” intersects the line “Constraint”).
      The right-most plot shows a case in which κ is large enough that there is no point of
 19
      See equation (49) in the appendix for a formal statement of the indiﬀerence relation.


                                                      31
                            g                                g                                            g  
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                             
                                                              
                                                                                            
                                                      
                                                                                                     
                                          
                                                                                                      
                                                      
   




                                                 




                                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
                                                      
                                                                                                   
                                                      
                                                                                                   

                                                                                                 

                                                                                                
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                       
                                ï                                ï                                              ï




Figure 9: For three diﬀerent values of the cost parameter κ, the three plots depict combinations
of price (P ) and leverage (1 − w2f ) so that (i) investors are indiﬀerent between adopting no- and
high-leverage strategies (line labeled “Indiference”); (ii) investors’ choices of leverage (1 − w2f )
are (unconstrained) optimal given P (line labeled “FOC”); and (iii) the leverage constraint just
binds (line labeled “Constraint”). In each plot, points to the left and above the line labeled
“Constraint” are admissible. The intersection of the lines “FOC” and “Indiﬀerence” corresponds
to the combination of P and 1 − w2f that would prevail in an equilibrium without the leverage
constraint. Similarly, the intersection of the lines “Indiﬀerence” and “Constraint” characterize an
asymmetric equilibrium with a binding leverage constraint (if one exists). Parameters are identical
to Figure 8.


intersection between the lines “Indiﬀerence” and “Constraint”. At that point there can be
no asymmetric equilibrium. The equilibrium becomes symmetric, i.e., the price drops to the
level that obtains when everyone chooses N = 1 and wf = 0.
   This example illustrates that — when the leverage constraint binds — the price in an
asymmetric equilibrium may drop discontinuously to the level associated with a symmetric
equilibrium, even in response to incremental changes in the cost parameter κ.
   To understand intuitively why prices react so abruptly, it is helpful to start from the
basic mechanism at play when κ increases and the constraint (22) isn’t binding: At existing
prices, an increase in κ induces investors to walk away from high-leverage, increased-market-
participation, high-cost strategies. The resulting loss in aggregate participation lowers prices,
which restores the relative attractiveness of high-cost, high-leverage strategies. The end
result is a marginally lower price level.
   However, when the constraint binds, the decline in prices may not have the same beneﬁcial
eﬀect on the attractiveness of levered strategies, since it also lowers the value of collateral
that investors are endowed with. This necessitates reductions in leverage, which results in

                                                                  32
even smaller overall participation in risky markets, further reductions in prices, etc. These
mutually reinforcing eﬀects can lead to a rapid drop, and eventually a discontinuous jump, in
prices, whereby investors de-leverage abruptly and cross-location investment drops to zero.



6     Reduced Participation in a Subset of Locations, En-
      tanglement, and Contagion
In the previous sections we assumed the same cost structure for all investors, regardless
of location. This allowed us to focus on (potentially asymmetric but) location-invariant
equilibria, which entail the same price in all locations. In this section we relax this assumption
in order to study the eﬀect of an adverse shock to ﬁnancial participation in a subset of
locations. The challenge in analyzing the model with location-speciﬁc costs is that an entire
price function on [0, 1) has to be computed, rather than a single value. To present the key
insights of the model with location-speciﬁc costs, we restrict ourselves to a speciﬁc setup
that is suﬃciently simple to analyze, yet rich enough to illustrate how a reduction in market
participation in a subset of risky markets can propagate across all markets.
   Speciﬁcally, we consider the following stylized setup: for some positive k < 1 market
                            
access in locations − k2 ; k2 “breaks down”. Speciﬁcally, we assume that in these “aﬀected”
locations the cost parameter κ becomes inﬁnite, so that investors choose to participate only
in the bond market and the market for the local risky claim, but not in other markets. In the
rest of the locations investors choose to participate in a single interval of length Δ̄, centered
at their “home location” — this would be the outcome of a cost structure in these locations
involving, e.g., κ < ∞, bN = ∞ for N > 1, g  (Δ̄) = 0 for Δ < Δ̄, and g  (Δ) suﬃciently large
for Δ > Δ̄.
    We solve this heterogeneous-participation-costs version of the model in the appendix.
First, we calculate analytically the optimal demand of every investor given a price function
(Lemma 4), and then aggregate the demands to solve for prices. We are unable to ﬁnd a
closed-form solution for the prices, but we can characterize the solution in terms of a linear
integro-diﬀerential equation with delay, which can be solved numerically as easily as a matrix


                                               33
                          0.79
                                     Δ=0.2, k=0
                          0.78

                          0.77                         Negatively correlated markets
                                                      without overlapping participation
                          0.76       Δ=0.2, k=0.2
               Price Pj   0.75

                          0.74

                          0.73

                          0.72

                          0.71
                                 0     0.1     0.2   0.3    0.4      0.5     0.6     0.7   0.8   0.9   1
                                                                  Location j


Figure 10: Contagion eﬀects. The price function Pj depicts the price in diﬀerent locations when
k = 0 and k = 0.2. We set the length of the participation arc of “unaﬀected” investors to Δ =
Δ̄ = 0.2. The locations between the arrows feature both negative correlation
                                                                           of dividends and no
overlap between the participants in these markets and the set A = − k2 , k2 .


inversion problem.
   To obtain a visual impression of the solution, Figure 10 depicts the price Pj for j ∈ [0, 1]
                                                               
and compares it with the (symmetric) equilibrium price P ∗ Δ̄ that would prevail if all
agents in all locations chose a participation interval with length equal to Δ = Δ̄. There are
                                                                                              
several noteworthy facts about Figure 10. As one might expect, prices in the set A ≡ − k2 , k2
                     
are lower than P ∗ Δ̄ . The more important fact is that prices in all other markets are
                                                                                             
aﬀected, as well. This holds true even in markets in the interval B ≡ k2 + Δ̄, 1 − k2 − Δ̄ ,
i.e., in locations that are at a larger distance than Δ̄ from the set A, so that agents in the
set A would not be directly trading risky assets with agents in the set B, even if they were
allowed to choose the same participation interval Δ̄ as everyone else. A third observation is
                                                          
that the prices in almost all markets are lower than P ∗ Δ̄ . Indeed, this reduction in price
can happen even in markets with dividends that have a zero or negative correlation with the
dividends of any risky security in A, as the ﬁgure illustrates.
   The intuition behind Figure 10 is the following. By assumption, investors in the set A
concentrate all their demand for risky assets in their home location. Hence, compared to
the case in which everyone participates in an interval of length Δ̄ centered at their location,
there is now lower demand for risky securities in locations neighboring the set A. The
lower demand for risky securities in these locations leads to lower prices, which attracts

                                                                  34
demand from locations adjacent to the neighborhood of A. By tilting their portfolio towards
these locations, investors remove demand for risky securities in locations even farther from
A. Accordingly, prices in these farther locations need to drop in order to attract investors
from locations adjacent to the neighbourhood of the neighbourhood of A, who also tilt their
portfolios and so on.
       This chain reaction implies that all locations are aﬀected in equilibrium. In fact, even
some prices in locations close to point 12 , the farthest from A, drop, as the following result
states.20

Proposition 4 Assume Δ̄ + k < 1 and that 12 = arg maxj∈[ 1 −Δ̄, 1 +Δ̄] Pj . Then there exists
                             1                           2    2
                                                                     
a positive-measure subset D ⊂ 2 − Δ̄; 2 + Δ̄ such that P (x) < P ∗ Δ̄ for all x ∈ D.
                                      1



       Proposition 4 helps formalize the notion that the drop in prices caused by restricting
market access for investors in the set A can permeate even a neighborhood of radius Δ̄
around the maximal-price location.
       The extent of the change in risk premia in the various locations depends on the distance
from the arc A, the length of the arc A, and most interestingly, on the length of the participa-
tion arc Δ̄. Figure 11 illustrates these statements. If Δ̄ is small, so that investors’ portfolios
are heavily exposed to risks in their vicinity, then even a small portfolio tilt towards a nearby
location requires a relatively high risk compensation. By contrast, if investors’ portfolios are
invested across a broad range of locations, then they are more willing to absorb risks in their
vicinity.
       In summary, a surprising result of our analysis is that contagion occurs due to limited,
rather than excessive, integration of risky markets. Indeed, contagion may become stronger
the weaker the integration of risky markets. Finally, in model simulations not reported here
due to space limitations, we have also considered the eﬀect of local participation shocks when
investors participate in multiple disjoint intervals, obtaining similar conclusions.21
  20
     It is easy to show that, in the general case when a subset of investors are limited to a smaller investment
set than the original arc of length Δ̄, and therefore in the setting of this section, the average risky-asset price
in the economy declines.
  21
     In such situations, the direct impact of a local shock to participation is felt not only in the neighboring
locations of the aﬀected locations, but also in the other subintervals where the aﬀected investors used to
participate. This sets oﬀ multiple “waves” of contagion across the circle (i.e., Figure 11 features more than
two local minima).


                                                        35
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                ) 

                                                                                                             
                                                                               ) N 
                                                                                                                              N 
                                                                                                          
                                   ) N 

                                                                                                              
                                                                               ) N 
                                                                                                                      N 
           3ULFH3 M




                                                                                                 3ULFH3 M
                                   ) N                                                               


                                                                                                          

                                                                               ) N 
                                                                                                                          N 

                                  ) N 
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                              N 
                                                                                                             


                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                              
                                                        0DUNHWM                                                                                  0DUNHWM




Figure 11: Contagion eﬀects for various choices of Δ̄ and k. In the ﬁgures j denotes a speciﬁc
market, k controls the length of the region with restricted access to markets, while Δ refers to Δ̄,
that is the length of the participation arc for investors who can participate in “distant” markets.


7     Conclusion
We introduce a novel, location-invariant, and tractable structure of shocks on a circle that
allows us to model the tradeoﬀs between integration and risk diversiﬁcation on the one
hand and participation costs on the other. The focus of the analysis is on the private
incentives to incur costs to participate in various asset markets, and on the interdependence
(“entanglement”) of markets in the presence of limited integration.
    Our main ﬁndings can be grouped in three broad categories. First, participation decisions
and leverage decisions are complements. Investors who choose to participate in a large
number of markets also choose high degrees of leverage. The interaction between leverage
decisions and participation routinely makes an investor’s optimization problem non-concave.
Such non-concavities may imply a heterogeneous market structure. Despite the fact that all
investors are identical, and even when participation costs are convex, some investors may
opt for non-levered, low-participation investment strategies with others opting for levered,
high-participation strategies.
    Second, the non-concavity of an investor’s participation problem can lead to an abrupt
change in the nature of equilibrium. Even small variations in participation costs can lead to
rapid drops in leverage, prices and market integration when the ability to leverage is limited
by the availability of collateral.


                                                                                            36
   Third, asset markets exhibit increased interdependence despite — in fact, because of —
limited market integration. Limitations to market access in one subset of locations propa-
gates across markets. Surprisingly, the impact of these local shocks on other markets may
be strengthened when markets are less integrated. In an intertemporal version of the model,
the joint determination of market integration and equilibrium prices implies price and return
correlations that exceed those of the underlying dividends.




                                             37
References
Acemoglu, D., A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2013). Systemic risk and stability in
  ﬁnancial networks. Working Paper, MIT.

Ahrend, R. and C. Schwellnus (2012). Do investors disproportionately shed assets of distant
 countries under increased uncertainty? evidence from the global ﬁnancial crisis. Working
 Paper, OECD Economics Department.

Allen, F., A. Babus, and E. Carletti (2012). Asset commonality, debt maturity and systemic
  risk. Journal of Financial Economics 104, 519–534.

Allen, F. and D. Gale (2000). Financial contagion. Journal of Political Economy 108, 1–33.

Aumann, R. J. (1966). Existence of competitive equilibria in markets with continuum of
 traders. Econometrica 34, 1–17.

Aviat, A. and N. Coeurdacier (2007). The geography of trade in goods and asset holdings.
 Journal of International Economics 71, 22–51.

Barlevy, G. and P. Veronesi (2003). Rational panics and stock market crashes. Journal of
  Economic Theory 110, 234–263.

Basak, S., D. Cass, J. M. Licari, and A. Pavlova (2008). Multiplicity in general ﬁnancial
  equilibrium with portfolio constraints. Journal of Economic Theory 142, 100–127.

Bekaert, G. and C. Harvey (1995). Time-varying world market integration. Journal of
  Finance 50, 403–444.

Brunnermeier, M. K. and L. H. Pedersen (2009). Market liquidity and funding liquidity.
  Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201–2238.

Buch, C. M. (2005). Distance and international banking. Review of International Eco-
  nomics 13 (4), 787–804.

Caballero, R. J. and A. Simsek (2012). Fire sales in a model of complexity. forthcoming,
  Journal of Finance.

Chan, K., V. Covrig, and L. Ng (2005). What determines the domestic bias and foreign
 bias? evidence from mutual fund equity allocations worldwide. Journal of Finance 60 (3),
 1495–1534.

Cochrane, J. H., F. A. Longstaﬀ, and P. Santa-Clara (2008). Two trees. Review of Financial
  Studies 21, 347–385.

Coval, J. D. and T. J. Moskowitz (1999). Home bias at home: Local equity preference in
  domestic portfolios. Journal of Finance 54, 1695–1704.



                                            38
Coval, J. D. and T. J. Moskowitz (2001). The geography of investment: Informed trading
  and asset prices. Journal of Political Economy 109, 811–841.

Freixas, X., B. Parigi, and J.-C. Rochet (2000). Systemic risk, interbank relations and
  liquidity provision by the central bank. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 32, 611–
  638.

Gârleanu, N., S. Panageas, and J. Yu (2013). Impediments to ﬁnancial trade: Theory and
  measurement. Working Paper.

Gennotte, G. and H. Leland (1990). Market liquidity, hedging and crashes. American
 Economic Review 80, 999–1021.

Giannetti, M. and L. Laeven (2012). The ﬂight home eﬀect: Evidence from the syndicated
  loan market during ﬁnancial crises. Journal of Financial Economics 104, 23–43.

Grinblatt, M. and M. Keloharju (2001). How distance, language, and culture inﬂuence
  stockholdings and trades. Journal of Finance 56 (3), 1053–1073.

Grossman, S. J. and J. E. Stiglitz (1980, June). On the impossibility of informationally
  eﬃcient markets. American Economic Review 70 (3), 393–408.

Head, K. and J. Ries (2008). FDI as an outcome of the market for corporate control: Theory
  and evidence. Journal of International Economics 74, 2–20.

Hoggarth, G., L. Mahadeva, and J. Martin (2010). Understanding international bank capital
 ﬂows during the recent ﬁnancial crisis. Financial Stability Paper No. 8, Bank of England.

Hong, H. and J. C. Stein (2003). Diﬀerences of opinion, short-sales constraints, and market
 crashes. Review of Financial Studies 16, 487–525.

Huberman, G. (2001). Familiarity breeds investment. Review of Financial Studies 14 (3),
 659 – 680.

Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore (1997). Credit cycles. Journal of Political Economy 105, 211–248.

Krishnamurthy, A. (2010). Ampliﬁcation mechanisms in liquidity crises. American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (3), 1–30.

Kyle, A. S. and W. Xiong (2001). Contagion as a wealth eﬀect. Journal of Finance 56 (4),
 1401 – 1440.

Merton, R. C. (1987). A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incompletel infor-
 mation. Journal of Finance 42, 483–510.

Pavlova, A. and R. Rigobon (2008). The role of portfolio constraints in the international
  propagation of shocks. Review of Economic Studies 75, 1215–1256.



                                            39
Portes, R. and H. Rey (2005). The determinants of cross-border equity ﬂows. Journal of
  International Economics 65, 269–296.

Romer, D. (1993). Rational asset-price movements without news. American Economic
  Review 83, 1112–1130.

Salop, S. C. (1979). Monopolistic competition with outside goods. Bell Journal of Eco-
  nomics 10, 141–156.

Talamo, G. (2007). Institutions, FDI, and the gravity model. Working Paper, Universita de
  Palermo.

Vila, J.-L. (1989). Simple games of market manipulation. Economics Letters 29 (1), 21–26.

Yuan, K. (2005). Asymmetric price movements and borrowing constraints: A rational ex-
  pectations equilibrium model of crises, contagion, and confusion. Journal of Finance 60,
  379–412.

Zawadowski, A. (2013). Entangled ﬁnancial systems. Review of Financial Studies 26, 1291–
  1323.




                                           40
                                                       Appendix

A      Extensions
A.1       An inﬁnite horizon version of the baseline model
In this section we develop an intertemporal version of the model. The intertemporal version allows
us to extend the intuitions of our comparative statics exercises to a framework where the shocks to
the participation technology are recurrent.
    Speciﬁcally, we keep the key assumptions of the baseline model (Section 4.2), and in particular
the assumption that investors only participate in an arc surrounding their home location. However,
we assume that investors maximize expected discounted utility from consumption
            ∞
                             
      −         β t E0 e−γct,i ,
          t=0

where t denotes (discrete) calendar time. We assume that dividends at location i ∈ [0, 1) are given
by
                            t
      Dt,i = (1 − ρ)               ρt−k εk,i ,                                                (28)
                          k=−∞

where ρ < 1,
                                       1        
                    (t)                       (t)
      εt,i ≡ 1 + σ Bi −                      Bj dj ,                                          (29)
                                     0

      (t)
and Bi denotes a family of Brownian Bridges on [0, 1] drawn independently across times t ∈
{−∞, . . . , 1, 2, . . . , ∞}.
    We make a few observations about this dividend structure. First, we note that equation (29)
                                              1
coincides with equation (2). Accordingly, 0 εt,i di = 1, and therefore, equation (28) implies that
1
 0 Dt,i = 1 for all t, so that the aggregate dividend is always equal to one. Second, dividends at
individual locations follow AR(1) processes, since equation (28) implies

      Dt,i = (1 − ρ) εt,i + ρDt−1,i .                                                         (30)

Moreover, since (29) coincides with (2), the increments of two dividend processes at two locations
i and j have the covariance structure of equation (3).
    In terms of participation decisions, we keep the same cost assumption as in the baseline model
                                                                                    (i)
and further assume that investors participate in a single interval of length Δt centered at their
“home” location. Participation costs are paid period by period in advance of trading. Speciﬁcally,
an investor’s intertemporal budget constraint is given by
                          1                           1
                   (i)              (i)         (i)                        (i)        (i)
      ct,i + Ft Δt +         Pt,j dXt,j + PB,t XB,t =     (Pt,j + Dt,j ) dXt−1,j + XB,t−1 .   (31)
                                0                              0

We note that in equation (31) we allow the entire cost function Ft (Δ) = κt gt (Δ) to be diﬀer-

                                                          41
ent across diﬀerent periods in order to capture the eﬀect of repeated shocks to the participation
technology.
     This intertemporal version of the model presents a challenge that is absent in a static framework:
If the interest rate varies over time, then the value function of an agent is not exponential in wealth.
In fact, a closed-form expression for the value function most likely does not exist. Furthermore,
once the value function is no longer exponential, portfolios are no longer independent of wealth,
and hence the entire wealth distribution matters — an inﬁnite-dimensional state variable.
     In order to maintain the simple structure of the solution, therefore, we make necessary as-
sumptions to achieve a constant interest rate in the presence of random participation costs, while
safeguarding market clearing for bond markets, risky-asset markets, and consumption markets.22
The following proposition states that it is possible to achieve this outcome by judiciously specifying
the distribution of the participation costs. The main thrust of the proposition, however, concerns
the expression for the risky-asset prices.

Proposition 5 There exist an interval [Δl , Δu ], a (non-trivial) distribution function Ψ (·) on
[Δl , Δu ], and a cost function F (·; Δt ) : [Δl , Δu ] → R+ such that, if Δt is drawn in an i.i.d.
fashion from Ψ, then
(i) investors optimally choose Δ = Δt , thus incurring cost F (Δt ; Δt );
(ii) the risk-free rate is constant over time and given as the unique positive solution to
                         γ2      2             
                                r
                                      (1−ρ)2 ω(Δ)
       1 = β (1 + r) E e 2 1+r−ρ                    ,                                         (32)

where the expectation is taken over the distribution of Δ;
(iii) the risky-asset prices equal
                                            1
       Pt,j (Δt , Dt,j ) = φ (Dt,j − 1) +     − Φ1 ω (Δt ) − Φ0                                       (33)
                                            r
             ρ
with φ ≡   1+r−ρ   and

               r(1 − ρ)2
       Φ1 = γ                                                                                         (34)
             (1 + r − ρ)2
                   γ2        2                   
                     2
                           r
                         1+r−ρ
                                  (1−ρ)2 ω(Δ)
               E e                            ω (Δ)
            Φ1
       Φ0 =          γ2          2                > 0.                                            (35)
            r            2
                               r
                             1+r−ρ
                                      (1−ρ)2 ω(Δ)
                  E e

Furthermore, investors’ optimal portfolios of risky assets are given by (11).

    Equation (33) decomposes the price of a security into three components. As in all CARA models,
one of these components equals the expected discounted value of future dividends, φ(Dt,j −1)+r−1 .
The other two capture the risk premium. The term Φ1 ω(Δt ) is the risk premium associated with
the realization of time-t + 1 dividend uncertainty, to which each investor is exposed according to
  22
    Alternatively, in the interest of simplicity, we could ﬁx the interest exogenously to the model and let
aggregate lending adjust accordingly.



                                                       42
the breadth Δt of her time-t portfolio. Finally, Φ0 equals the sum of the expected discounted value
of risk premia due to future realizations of dividend innovations and Δt .
    We emphasize that the risk premium decreases with Δt and is common for all securities. Alter-
natively phrased, increases in capital movements across locations are correlated with higher prices
for all risky securities (and hence lower expected excess returns). Importantly, these movements in
the prices of risky securities are uncorrelated with movements in aggregate output or the interest
rate, which are both constant by construction.
    A further immediate implication of equation (33) is that the presence of repeated shocks to
participation costs introduces correlation in security prices that exceeds that of their dividends.
Indeed, taking two securities j and k, and noting that V ar (Dt,j ) = V ar (Dt,k ) , we can use equation
(33) to compute

                              V ar(Φ1 ω (Δt )) + φ2 cov (Dt,j , Dt,k )   cov (Dt,j , Dt,k )
      corr (Pt,j , Pt,i ) =                                            >                    = corr (Dt,j , Dt,i ) .
                                V ar(Φ1 ω (Δt )) + φ2 V ar (Dt,j )         V ar (Dt,j )

    The intuition is that movements in market integration cause common movements in the pricing
of risk which make prices more correlated (and volatile) than the underlying dividends.
    We collect some basic properties of the price due to the randomness in Δt in the following
proposition.

Proposition 6 (i) Pt,i increases with Δt , and therefore corr(Pt,i , Δt ) > 0;
(ii) Et [Pi,t+1 − (1 + r)Pi,t ] decreases with Δt ;
(iii) corr(Pt,i , Pt,j ) > corr(Dt,i , Dt,j );
(iv) Φ0 is higher (and hence the unconditional expected price is lower) than the one obtaining for
Δt constant and equal to E[Δ].


A.2      Multiple arcs on the circle
The baseline model assumes that investors participate in markets spanning a single arc of length Δ
around their “home” location. Extending the results to the general case where investors can choose
to participate on multiple, disconnected arcs (as illustrated on the right-most graph of Figure 4)
is straightforward and involves essentially no new insights. In this section we brieﬂy sketch how
to extend the results of the baseline model to this case and we show that allowing for this extra
generality introduces an additional source of non-concavity into an investor’s optimization problem.
    To start, we introduce the function
                                   1            
                                              (i)
          v(I) =     min
                       →
                       −
                             V ar      Dj dGj
                   Ni ,−
                       →           (i)
                       a i , Δ i ,Gj             0

                                 Ni
      s.t.   I≥F         −
                         →
                         a i,         Δi,n   .
                                n=1

In words, the function v(I) is the minimal variance, per share purchased, of the portfolio payoﬀ
that can be obtained by an investor who is willing to spend an amount I on participation costs.
Proceeding similarly to Section 4.2 under the assumption that Pj = P for all j, the facts that U is
exponential and all Dj are normally distributed imply that maximizing utility over the choice of



                                                          43
                                             0.085

                                              0.08

                                             0.075

                                              0.07
                        Minimized variance
                                             0.065

                                              0.06

                                             0.055

                                              0.05

                                             0.045

                                              0.04
                                                     0     0.01         0.02     0.03         0.04   0.05   0.06       0.07   0.08   0.09   0.1
                                                                                                       I



Figure 12: Numerical example to illustrate that v(I) is non-convex. The ﬁgure depicts two (dotted)
lines and the minimum of the two lines (solid line). The ﬁrst dotted line starts at I = 0 and depicts
the minimal variance that can be attained when participation costs are equal to I and the investor
chooses to participate only on a single arc centered at her home location. The second dotted
line starts at I = 0.05, i.e. at the minimum expenditure required to invest in two distinct arcs.
This second dotted line depicts the minimal variance that can be attained when participation
costs are equal to I and the investor can participate on two separate arcs with locations and
lengths chosen so as to minimize variance. The function v(I) (the minimum of the two dotted       
                                                                                             −6
lines) is given by the solid                example we chose σ = 1, g(x) = 0.1 × (1 − x) − 1 ,
                         1 line.−2 For 1this
f (y) = 0.05 + 0.005 × ( 2 − y) − 0.25 . (For I > 0.1 the function v(I) would in general exhibit
further kinks at the critical values IN , N ≥ 2, where the investor is indiﬀerent between N and
N + 1 distinct arcs.)

                                                                               (i)
Ni , {ai,1 ; ..; ai,Ni }, {Δi,1 ; ..; Δi,Ni }, Gj , and wif is equivalent to solving23
                                                                   1
                                                                                        (i)      γ                 2
       max      P wif   + 1−                         wif                E[Dj ]dGj −                1 − wif             v (I) − I.                 (36)
       wif ,I                                                   0                                2
  23
    To ensure that the optimization problem (36) has a solution it is convenient either to impose a collateral
constraint such as (22) or to introduce some (potentially small but positive) aggregate risk in dividends.
Either of these assumptions coupled with the additional assumption limΔ→1 g (Δ) = ∞ suﬃces to ensure
the existence of a solution to (36). Alternatively, one can ensure that (36) has an interior solution by
requiring that, upon plugging in the optimal value of wif , the maximand in (37) tends to negative inﬁnity
as I goes to inﬁnity. Given the lower bound on P provided by the autarky equilibrium, it suﬃces that
          2 2 γ
limI→∞ σ12 v(I)    − I = −∞. This condition may be harder to verify than Assumption 1, since it is not
readily expressed in terms of primitive parameters.




                                                                                                     44
Given that E[Dj ] = 1, equation (36) can be rewritten as

                                                                           γ                      2
          V = max P wif + 1 − wif −                                          1 − wif                  v(I) − I.                                                  (37)
                       I,wif                                               2

    In the baseline version of the model (Section 4.2), where the investor chooses to invest in a single
arc around her home location, v is a convex function of the total cost I.24 In the general case where
investors’ portfolios are invested on disconnected arcs, the function v (I) is in general non-convex
with kinks at the expenditure levels In where it becomes optimal to invest in n + 1 rather than n
distinct arcs. Figure 12 provides an illustration. This non-convexity of v (I) , which may arise when
(and only when) investors participate in markets located on multiple distinct arcs, constitutes an
additional reason for the maximization problem (37) to be non-concave. This reason is distinct
from the non-concavity arising from the interaction between leverage and participation decisions
that we identify in Section 4.3, and strengthens the conclusion that a symmetric equilibrium may
not exist.


B          Proofs
Proof of Lemma 1. Property 2 follows immediately from integrating (2). To show property 3,
note that, for any i ∈ (0, 1), limd(i,j)→0 Dj = limj→i Dj = Di a.s. by the continuity of the Brownian
motion. Continuity at 0 follows from the fact that B0 = B1 .
    We turn now to property 1. Since E(Bi ) = 0 for all i ∈ [0, 1], E(Dj ) = 1. To compute
cov(Di , Dj ) we start by noting that cov (Bs , Bt ) = E(Bs Bt ) = s (1 − t) for s ≤ t. Therefore, for any
t ∈ [0, 1],
                 1                                     t                                  1
                      E (Bt Bu ) du =                        u(1 − t)du +                        t(1 − u)du                                                      (38)
              0                                      0                                   t
                                              1           1             t (1 − t)
                                             = (1 − t)t2 + (1 − t)2 t =           .
                                              2           2                 2
       Accordingly,
                                                                              2                                                         
                                 1                                     1                                         1                        1
          V ar                       Bu du       =E                        Bu du                 =E                  Bu du                    Bt dt              (39)
                             0                                     0                                         0                        0
                                                            1  1                                                1
                                                                                                                         t (1 − t)     1
                                                 =                         E(Bu Bt )du dt =                                        dt = ,
                                                         0         0                                             0           2         12

where the second line of (39) follows from Fubini’s Theorem and (38). Combining (39) and (38)
  24                                                                   ω  (Δ)                                            I 
        To see this, note that v  (I) =                               κg  (Δ) ,   where Δ (I) = g −1                     κ   . Diﬀerentiating again gives v  (I) =
                                  
1 ω (Δ)g (Δ)−ω (Δ)g (Δ) 
κ        (g  (Δ))2
                       Δ                         (I) > 0.




                                                                                                   45
gives
                                              1                         1        
        1
           V ar (D t ) = V  ar (B t ) + V ar      B u du   − 2cov    B t ,     B u du                 (40)
        σ2                                     0                            0
                                               1
                                        1                          1
                       = t (1 − t) +      −2      E(Bt Bu )du = .
                                       12      0                  12

   This calculation ﬁnishes the proof of property 1. For property 4, take any s ≤ t and use (38)
and (39) to obtain
                                   1              1       
      cov (Ds , Dt )
                     = cov Bs −        Bu du, Bt −     Bu du                                (41)
           σ2                       0                0
                                        1                  1 
                                                                          1
                     = E(Bs Bt ) − E Bs        Bu du − E Bt      Bu du +
                                            0                  0          12
                                   s (1 − s) t (1 − t)      1
                     = s (1 − t) −          −           +
                                       2           2       12
                       (s − t)(1 + s − t)     1
                     =                     + .
                                2            12
This establishes property 4.
   Proof of Proposition 1. We start by establishing the following lemma.

Lemma 3 The (bounded-variation) function L with L− Δ − = 0 and L Δ = 1 that minimizes
      Δ                                              2                2
       2
V ar     Δ−
            Dj dLj is given by (11). Moreover, the minimal variance is equal to ω (Δ) .
         −2


    Proof of Lemma 3.             To simplify notation, we prove a “shifted” version of the lemma,
namely ﬁnding the minimal-variance portfolio on [0, Δ] rather than [− Δ           Δ
                                                                              2 , 2 ]. The two versions are
clearly equivalent, since covariances depend only on the distances between locations, rather than
the locations themselves.
    We start by deﬁning q (d) = 12   1
                                       − d(1−d)
                                            2   and
                                                    therefore q  (d) = − 12 + d. In light of (3), q(d) =
 1                                                  u
σ2
   cov (Di , Dj ) whenever d (i, j) = d. If Lu = 0− dLu is a variance-minimizing portfolio of risky
assets, it must be the case that the covariance between any gross return Rs = DPs for s ∈ [0, Δ] and
               Δ           Δ
the portfolio 0− Ru dLu = 0− DPu dLu is independent of s. Thus, the quantity
                    Δ               s                         Δ                   
        1                          1
           cov Ds ,     Du dLu = 2          cov (Ds , Du ) dLu +      cov (Ds , Du ) dLu =            (42)
        σ2           0−           σ      0−                        s
                                   s                    Δ
                                =      q (s − u) dLu +       q (u − s) dLu
                                          0−                     s

is independent of s. Letting L̃ (s) = 1 − L (s) and integrating by parts we obtain
        s                                                s
                                              −
           q (s − u) dLu = L (s) q (0) − L 0 q (s) +          Lu q  (s − u) du                       (43)
        0−                                                 0−
        Δ                                                     Δ
           q (u − s) dLu = L̃ (s) q (0) − L̃ (Δ) q (Δ − s) +       L̃u q  (u − s) du.                (44)
         s                                                           s



                                                         46
Using (43) and (44) inside (42) and recognizing that q (0) =                                                  1
                                                                                                              12 ,   L (0− ) = 0, and L̃ (Δ) = 0, we
obtain that (42) equals
                               s                                          Δ
              1                            
      Q(s) ≡    +                     Lu q (s − u) du +                         L̃u q  (u − s) du.                                                   (45)
             12                 0−                                      s

This expression is independent of s ∈ [0, Δ] if and only if Q (s) = 0. Diﬀerentiating (45) and setting
the resulting expression to zero yields
                     s                                        Δ
                                
      Q (s) =              Lu q (s − u) du −                        L̃u q  (u − s) du + Ls q  (0) − L̃s q  (0)
                   0−                                       s
                   Δ
                                                                    1
             =             Lu du − Δ + s − Ls +                       = 0,                                                                            (46)
                      0−                                            2

where we used q  (0) = − 12 , q  = 1, and L̃ (s) = 1 − L (s). Since (46) needs to hold for all s ∈ [0, Δ],
it must be the case that Ls = A + s for an appropriate constant A. To determine A, we subsitute
Ls = A + s into (46) and solve for A to obtain

             1−Δ
      A=         .
              2
    It is immediate that the standardized portfolio corresponding to the solution L we computed
is L∗ of (11).
    Using the variance-minimizing portfolio inside (45), implies after several simpliﬁcations, that
                                    Δ
Q = 121
         (1 − Δ)3 and hence cov Ds , 0− Du dLu = Qσ 2 = ω (Δ) . Accordingly,
                Δ                                 Δ                           Δ                        Δ                  Δ         
      V ar            Du dLu              = cov             Ds dLs ,                     Du dLu       =              cov Ds ,            Du dLu dLs
               0−                                   0−                              0−                        0−                    0−
                                                    Δ
                                          = ω(Δ)            dLs = ω (Δ) .
                                                       0−


     With Lemma 3 in hand it is possible to conﬁrm that the allocations and prices of Proposition
1 constitute a symmetric equilibrium — assuming that one exists. We already argued that all
agents choose the same standardized portfolio (as agent Δ     2 ). Furthermore, since in a symmetric
equilibrium all agents must hold the same allocation of bonds, clearing of the bond market requires
wif = 0 for all i. By equation (17), wif = 0 is supported as an optimal choice for an investor only if
Pi = P is given by (14). Similarly, in light of (18), equation (13) is a necessary optimality condition
for the interval Δ∗ . Since the values of P and Δ∗ implied by (14) and (13) are unique, they are
necessarily the equilibrium values of P and Δ∗ that characterize a symmetric equilirium.
     Existence of a symmetric equilibrium implies that wif = 0 is optimal, and so are the choices
Δ∗ and Gi+j = L∗j given prices Pi = P. It remains to show that markets clear. We already ad-
             (i)

dressed bond-market clearing. To see that the stock markets clear, we start by noting that, since
                                                                                    (i)
Pi = W0,i = P for all i, the market clearing condition amounts to i∈[0,1) dGj = 1. We have
           (i)          ∗
                                          ∗
  i∈[0,1) dGj = i∈[0,1) dLj−i = j∈[0,1) dLj = 1.

    Proof of Proposition 2. Let w∗ (P ) denote the set of optimal wif solving the maximization

                                                                                     47
problem (16) when the price in all markets is P. We ﬁrst note that the assumption that no symmetric
equilibrium exists implies that there exists no P such that 0 ∈ w∗ (P ). (If such a P existed, then
we could simply repeat the arguments of Proposition 1 to establish the existence of a symmetric
equilibrium with price Pi = P, and interval choice Δi = Δ∗ (P )).
    We next show that since there exists no P such that 0 ∈ w∗ (P ), it follows that w∗ (P ) cannot
be single-valued for all P. We argue by contradiction. Suppose to the contrary that w∗ (P ) is
single-valued. Since the theorem of the maximum implies that w∗ (P ) is a upper-hemicontinuous
correspondence, it follows that w∗ (P ) is actually a continuous function. Inspection of (16) shows
that w∗ (1) = 1. Moreover, as P → −∞, the optimal solution to (16) becomes negative: w∗ (−∞) <
0. Then an application of the intermediate value theorem gives the existence of P such that
w∗ (P ) = 0, a contradiction.
    Combining the facts that a) there exists no P such that 0 ∈ w∗ (P ), b) w∗ (P ) is multi-valued for
at least one value of P , and c) w∗ (P ) is upper-hemicontinuous, implies that there exists at least one
P such that {w1 , w2 } ∈ w∗ (P ) with w1 > 0 and w2 < 0. An implication of the necessary ﬁrst-order
condition for the optimality of the interval choice Δ∗ (P ) is that Δ∗ (P ) is also multi-valued with
Δ1 < Δ2 . Furthermore, since prices in all locations are equal, the (standardized) optimal portfolio
of an agent choosing Δk is the variance-minimizing portfolio of Proposition 1, denoted L∗,k .
    From  this point       onwards,
                                   an equilibrium      can be constructed as follows. By deﬁnition, the
tuples Δ1 , w1 , dL     ∗,1   and Δ2 , w2 , dL ∗,2   are optimal. Hence it only remains to conﬁrm that asset
markets clear. Deﬁne π ≡ − w1w−w      2
                                           ∈  (0, 1). By construction, πw1 + (1 − π) w2 = 0 and, therefore,
                                        2                    
if
 in every ∗,2  location
                           π agents choose Δ1 , w1 , dL∗,1 and the remaining fraction (1 − π) choose
   Δ2 , w2 , dL     , then the bond market clears by construction. To see that the stock markets clear,
we start by noting that, since Pi = W0,i = P , the market clearing condition for stock i amounts to
                                   
                    ∗,1
         π       dLj−i + (1 − π)        dL∗,2j−i = 1,
          [0,1]                    [0,1]


which holds because L∗,k
                     j for k ∈ {1, 2} is a measure on the circle.

Remark 1 The existence proof of an asymmetric equilibrium (when a symmetric equilibrium fails
to exist) obtains also in the presence of the leverage constraint (22) that we introduce in Section 5.

   Proof of Proposition 3. Conjecture ﬁrst that in equilibrium Pj = P for all j and let
π ∈ [0, 1] denote the fraction of funds invested in the local market. Assuming that a given investor
chooses N = 2 (that is, chooses to invest in her own location and another location at distance d),
equation (3) allows the computation of the minimal portfolio variance:
                                                                         
                                      2   1                  1   d (1 − d)
       (d) = σ min
      ω         2
                          π + (1 − π)
                           2
                                             + 2π (1 − π)      −                                (47)
                   π                      12                12       2
                                   
                     1    1
             =σ 2
                       − d (1 − d) .
                    12 4

    The optimal distance d for an investor choosing N = 2 satisﬁes a ﬁrst-order condition similar
to equation (18), namely

          γ          2     (d)
                         ω
      −     1 − wf               = κf  (d) .                                                          (48)
          2               2 (d)
                         ω


                                                    48
    Since ω   (d) = 0 when and only when d = 12 , and f  (d) = 0, it follows that d = 12 is optimal for
an investor choosing N = 2. Hence the minimal portfolio variance of an investor choosing N = 1
                          2
is equal to ω    (0) = σ12 , while the minimal portfolio variance for an investor choosing N = 2 is
  1        2
 2 = σ48 . Assuming that the equilibrium is of the asymmetric, location-invariant type, we can
ω
use equation (16) to express the indiﬀerence between the choices N = 1, respectively N = 2 and
d = 12 , as
                                                                                         
            f           f      γ        f
                                          2
                                                       f          f      γ        f
                                                                                    2     1
       P w1 + 1 − w 1 −           1 − w1 ω   (0) = P w2 + 1 − w2 −          1 − w2 ω        − κf0 . (49)
                               2                                         2                2

   Using the ﬁrst-order conditions for leverage
                             
                       f     1
     1 − P = γ 1 − w2 ω         = γ 1 − w1f ω   (0)                                                 (50)
                             2

inside (49) yields — after some simpliﬁcations — the equilibrium price (23).
    To verify that the postulated equilibrium is indeed an equilibrium, we proceed as in the proof
of Proposition 2. For P (κ) to be an equilibrium price in all locations, it must also be case that
                                                     w2f
1 − w1f ≤ 1 ≤ 1 − w2f , so that setting π =                   > 0 ensures market clearing (of bond markets
                                                   w2 −w1f
                                                    f

                                                                         f            f
and all
     risky asset markets). 1  In light of (50), the requirement 1 − w1 ≤ 1 ≤ 1 − w2 is equivalent to
P ∈ 1 − γω                2 . This requirement is satisﬁed as long as κ ∈ (κ1 , κ2 ).
            (0) , 1 − γ ω
   Finally, (24) follows from (49), upon applying the implicit function theorem and utilizing the
envelope theorem.

   Proof of Lemma 2. In an asymmetric equilibrium the value functions of the agents who
pursue the strategy of setting N = 1 (respectively N = 2) are given by

                                            γ           2
      V1 = max P w1f + 1 − w1f −              1 − w1f        (0) ,
                                                            ω                                         (51)
              w1f                           2
                                                               
                                            γ           2      1
      V2 =    max P w2f   + 1−      w2f   −   1 − w2f       
                                                            ω     − κf0 ,                             (52)
               w2f                          2                  2

where the second maximization is subject to the constraint (22), and ω      (d) is given by equation
(47). Indiﬀerence requires that V1 = V2 , and hence dκ − dκ = 0.
                                                    dV1    dV2

    Attaching a Lagrange multiplier λ ≥ 0 to the constraint (25), solving the resulting maximization
problem, and utilizing the envelope theorem implies
      dV1 dV2                               dP
         −    = w1f − w2f − λ 1 − χ 1 − w2f      + (1 + λ) f0 ,                                       (53)
      dκ   dκ                                 dκ
                     
          1−P −γ 1−w2f ω ( 12 )
with λ =            χP             ≥ 0. Setting the right-hand side of (53), equal to zero and re-arranging
gives (27).

                                                         
Lemma 4 Consider an investor located at i ∈    / − k2 ; k2 , and therefore investing in markets [i −
2 , i + 2 ]. Suppose that P (x) is continuously diﬀerentiable everywhere on [i − 2 , i + 2 ]. With
Δ̄      Δ̄                                                                          Δ̄    Δ̄




                                                        49
   (i)
dXl      the number of shares purchased on the account of an investor at i in market l and j ≡ i − Δ̄
                                                                                                   2,
                                                     j+Δ̄      
           (i)      1          1 − Δ̄            
         Xj+Δ̄ =      1−              Pj + Pj+Δ̄ −        Pu du .                               (54)
                 γω Δ̄           2                    j

Furthermore, the function X is given by
                            
          (i)              Pj+l                 (i)       1 − Δ + 2l     1 Pj+Δ − Pj
         Xj+l         =                  + Xj+Δ̄                     +               .                                                        (55)
                            γσ 2                              2        1 − Δ̄ γσ 2

If an investor is located at i ∈ [− k2 , k2 ] and only invests in market i then the respective demand for
risky asset i is given by

          (i) =            1
         X i                     (1 − Pi ) .                                                                                                  (56)
                          γω (0)

      Proof of Lemma 4. Notice that optimization problem of agent i is equivalent to
                                    j+Δ̄                                                 j+Δ̄
                                                            γ
         max Pi +                            (1 − Pu ) dXu − V ar                                 Du dXu                                      (57)
             X                      j−                      2                             j−

Thus, the ﬁrst-order condition requires that
                                        j+Δ̄
         γ cov Ds ,                             Du dXu               = 1 − Ps                                                                 (58)
                                        j−

                    
for all s ∈ j, j + Δ̄ . Letting q (d) be deﬁned as in Lemma 3 we can rewrite (58) as
                                                     
                 s                                            j+Δ
                                                                                           1 − Ps
                     q (s − u) dXu +                                q (u − s) dXu =               .                                           (59)
             j−                                           s                                  γσ 2
                     
Let X (s) = X j + Δ̄ − X (s) and integrating by parts we obtain
         s                                            s
                                            −
            q (s − u) dXu = X (s) q (0) − X j q (s) +     Xu q  (s − u) du                                                                   (60)
                     j−                                                                               j
                                                                                                          
                 j+Δ                                                                                             j+Δ̄
                          q (u − s) dXu = X (s) q (0) − X Δ̄ q (Δ − s) +                                                  Xu q  (u − s) du   (61)
             s                                                                                                 s
                                                                                                
Substituting (60) and (61) into (59), recognizing that q (0) = 12  1
                                                                     , X (j − ) = 0, and X j + Δ̄ = 0,
we obtain
                      s                      j+Δ̄
       1                                                               1 − Ps
         X j + Δ̄ +      Xu q  (s − u) du +        Xu q  (u − s) du =          .                 (62)
      12               j                      s                            γσ 2

      Since this relation must hold for all s, we may diﬀerentiate both sides of (62) to obtain
                                                         
                 s
                           
                                                                  j+Δ̄
                                                                                                                                    Ps
                     Xu q (s − u) du −                                   Xu q  (u − s) du + Xs q  (0) − Xs q  (0) = −                .    (63)
             j                                                s                                                                     γσ 2

                                                                                          50
                                                                                                   
This equation holds for all s ∈ (j, j + Δ̄). Noting that q  = 1, q  (0) = − 12 , X (s) = X j + Δ̄ −
X (s), and using (63) to solve for Xs yields
                                                  
                         j+Δ̄
                                               1             P
      Xs =                      Xu du + s − j + − Δ̄ X j + Δ̄ + s 2 .                                              (64)
                     j                         2               γσ
                                                                             j+Δ̄
Integrating (64) from j to j + Δ̄ and solving for                            j       Xu du leads to
                                                                         
              j+Δ̄
                               1                 1 − Δ̄     P j + Δ̄ − P (j)
                     Xu du =         X j + Δ̄ Δ̄            +                    ,                                 (65)
          j                  1 − Δ̄                  2              γσ 2

so that
                                                          
              1                 1 − Δ̄      P j + Δ̄ − P (j)
      Xs =          X j + Δ̄ Δ̄            +                     +
           1 − Δ̄                   2               γσ 2
                         
                     1                P
             s − j + − Δ̄ X j + Δ̄ + s 2 .                                                                         (66)
                     2                     γσ

   Evaluating (62) at s = j + Δ̄, and noting that q  (s) = − 12 + s leads to
                                                                       
      1                                    j+Δ̄
                                                              1            1 − Pj+Δ̄
         X j + Δ̄ +                                 Xu       − + Δ̄ − u du =           .                           (67)
      12                                 j                    2                 γσ 2

                                                   P  −P              
    An implication of (64) is that Xu = Xj + uγσ2 j + X j + Δ̄ u. Using this expression for
Xu inside (67), carrying out the requisite integrations and using integration by parts to express
 j+Δ̄ Pu         Pj+Δ̄            Pj      j+Δ̄ Pu
 j     γσ 2
            u du = γσ 2 (j + Δ̄) − γσ 2 j − j     γσ 2
                                                       du, leads (after some simpliﬁcations) to

                                                                                          j+Δ̄
           1     Δ̄3 Δ̄2                             Δ̄ 1 − Δ̄         Pj      Pj+Δ̄ − Pj          Pu − Pj
X j + Δ̄        +     −                              −              Xj −        −            +                du
            12      6   4                                  2             γσ 2        2γσ 2      j −     γσ 2
         1 − PΔ̄
       =         .                                                                                                 (68)
           γσ 2

   Finally, evaluating (64) at j gives
                                                                      
               Pj                           j+Δ̄
                                                                    1             
          Xj −                   =                  Xu du +           − Δ̄ X j + Δ̄ .                              (69)
               γσ 2                      j                          2

    Equations (65), (68), and (69)
                                are three linear equations in three unknowns. Solving for X(j+Δ̄)
and using the deﬁnition of ω Δ̄ leads to (54). Equation (66) simpliﬁes to (55). Finally, (56) is a
direct consequence of (58) when Δ̄ = 0.




                                                                           51
                                                                                   k         
   Proof of Proposition 4. For any j ∈                                                    1
                                                                                       2, 2       and l ∈ − Δ̄  Δ̄
                                                                                                            2 , 2 , we have from Lemma 4:

                                                   P           Pj− Δ̄ − Pj+ Δ̄
                                     (j)           j− Δ̄
                                                       2                   2                  2
                                                                                                          1 − Δ (j)
                            X                  =            +                                     +            X Δ̄
                                    j− Δ̄
                                       2           γσ 2              γσ 2 (1       − Δ)                     2   j+ 2
                                                     
                                                    Pj+l
                                      (j)                             (j)
                            dXj+l =                         +X                      dl
                                                    γσ 2              j+ Δ̄
                                                                         2

                                                    P               Pj− Δ̄ − Pj+ Δ̄
          (j)            (j)                            j+ Δ̄                                                 1 − Δ (j)
      X           −     X Δ̄ −               =−           2
                                                                −              2                  2
                                                                                                          +        X Δ̄ .
        j+ Δ̄
           2              j+ 2                          γσ 2           γσ 2 (1      − Δ)                        2   j+ 2



Specialize the ﬁrst equation to j =                              1
                                                                 2   +     Δ
                                                                           2,      the second to j =                     1
                                                                                                                         2   − l for all l ∈ − Δ̄  Δ̄
                                                                                                                                               2 , 2 , and the
third to j =       1
                   2    −   Δ
                            2       and aggregate to obtain the total demand for asset 12 :
                                                                                       Δ̄                               P 1        P 1 −Δ̄ + P 1 +Δ̄ − 2P 1
         1 − Δ ( 12 + Δ̄2 ) 1 − Δ ( 12 − Δ̄2 )                                          2             ( 12 −l)               2          2         2          2
      1=      X 1 +Δ̄ +          X1            +                                              X 1 −l+ Δ dl +                     Δ+                              .
           2    2             2   2                                                    − Δ̄           2          2       γσ 2               2γσ 2 (1 − Δ)
                                                                                         2

                                                                                    1                
   Suppose now that Pj ≥ 1 − γω(Δ̄) on                                                 2   − Δ, 12 + Δ , with strict inequality on a positive
                                                                                                              (j)
measure set. It then follows from equation (54) that Xj+ Δ ≤ 1, so that
                                                                                                                     2


                P 1               P 1 −Δ̄ + P 1 +Δ̄ − 2P 1
                   2                  2                 2              2
      0<                Δ+                                                 .
                γσ 2                       2γσ 2 (1 − Δ)

This inequality contradicts the assumption that P is maximized at 12 .

   Proof of Proposition 5. We adopt a guess-and-verify approach. We start by noting that the
                                                                  1                      (i)    (i)
beginning-of-period wealth of investor i at time t + 1 is Wt+1,i ≡ 0 (Pt+1,j + Dt+1,j ) dXt,j + XB,t .
We then conjecture that, as long as
                                                           2
              M   γ                              r
      F (Δ) =   +                                                (1 − ρ)2 ω (Δt )                                                                                    (70)
              γ   2                            1+r−ρ
                                2                   2
for some M > − γ2 1+r−ρ r
                              (1 − ρ)2 ω (Δu ), (ii) and (iii) obtain. We show at the end that the
function F can be chosen to ensure (i).
                                                                            (i)                (i)
    We also conjecture and verify that investors’ holdings of risky assets Xt,j coincide with Gt,j of
Proposition 1, and that their bond holdings equal
          (i)
      XB,t = Wt,i − (1 + r) P t,i − rΦt ,                                                                                                                            (71)
             1        (i)
where P t,i ≡ 0 Pt,j dXt,j is the average price that investor i pays for her portfolio. Here, to simplify
notation, we deﬁned Φt ≡ Φ1 ω(Δt ) + Φ0 .
    We ﬁrst ensure that with these postulates markets clear. Clearly, all risky markets clear,
since the holdings of risky assets are the same as in Proposition 1. To show that bond markets
clear, we proceed inductively. First we note that investors are endowed with no bonds at time


                                                                                           52
               1 (i)                           1              1
zero. Hence 0 XB,−1 di = 0 and therefore 0 W0,i di = 0 (P0,i + D0,i ) di. Next we postulate that
 1 (i)                    1            1             1                                        (i)
 0 XB,t−1 di = 0, so that 0 Wt,i di = 0 Pt,i di + 0 Dt,j dj. Integrating our postulate (71) for XB,t
across all investors, we obtain
       1             1                    1
             (i)
           XB,t di =     Wt,i di − (1 + r)     P t,i di − rΦt .                                 (72)
       0               0                               0
                                         1                                               1
We next note that that (a) 0 Dt,j dj = 1, by construction of the dividend process; (b) 0 Wt,i di =
1          1                                                                            1
   Pt,i di+ 0 Dt,j dj = r−1 −Φt +1, using the induction hypothesis, (33), and (a); and (c) 0 P t,i di =
1
 0
               −1 − Φ . Using these three facts, it follows immediately that the right-hand side of
 0 Pt,i di = r        t
(72) is zero, so that the bond market clears.
    If investors set their bond holdings according to (71), then their budget constraint implies a
consumption of
                        1   (i)
      ct,i = Wt,i −        X − P t,i − Ft .                                                       (73)
                      1 + r B,t
Using the deﬁnition of Wt,i and market clearing condition for bond holdings inside (73), and inte-
                                                                      1
grating across i implies that the market for consumption goods clears: 0 ct,i di = 1 − Ft .
    Having established market clearing given the postulated policies and prices, we next turn to
optimality. Equation (73) implies
                                        1       (i)      (i)                
      ct+1,i − ct,i = Wt+1,i − Wt,i −        XB,t+1 − XB,t − P t+1,i − P t,i − (Ft+1 − Ft )
                                    1+r
                         r                          r
                    =          (Wt+1,i − Wt,i ) +      (Φt+1 − Φt ) − (Ft+1 − Ft ) ,              (74)
                        1+r                        1+r

where the second line follows from (71). We next use the deﬁnition of Wt,i and (71) to obtain
                                  1
                                                             (i)     (i)
      Wt+1,i − Wt,i =                  (Pt+1,j + Dt+1,j ) dXt,j + XB,t − Wt,i
                               0
                                  1
                                                             (i)
                      =                (Pt+1,j + Dt+1,j ) dXt,j − (1 + r) P t,i − rΦt .           (75)
                               0

    Substituting (75) into (74) and using (33) and (71) leads to
                                 1                           1               
                    r                           (i)                        (i)
  ct+1,i −ct,i =           (1 + φ)     Dt+1,j dXt,j − (1 + r) φ     Dt,j dXt,j − 1 −(Ft+1 − Ft ) . (76)
                   1+r              0                            0

                                                                       ρ
Next use the fact Dt+1,j = ρDt,j + (1 − ρ) εt+1,j along with φ = 1+r−ρ    , (1 + φ) ρ = (1 + r) φ, and
(1 + φ) (1 − ρ) = (1 − rφ) inside (76) to arrive at
                                         1
                          r                                  (i)
      ct+1,i − ct,i =             (1 − ρ)     (εt+1,j − 1) dXt,j − (Ft+1 − Ft ) .                  (77)
                        1+r−ρ              0

   Having established (77), the dynamics of agent i’s consumption under our postulate, we next




                                                               53
turn attention to the Euler equations, starting with the bond Euler equation

      1 = β (1 + r) Et e−γ(ct+1,i −ct,i ) .                                                                             (78)
                                                                1                       (i)
Substituting (77) into (78) and noting that                      0   (εt+1,j − 1) dXt,j is normally distributed with mean
zero and variance ω (Δt ) gives
                                          2
                          γ2         r
                                                (1−ρ)2 ω(Δt )−γFt           
      1 = β (1 + r) e      2       1+r−ρ
                                                                    Et eγFt+1 .                                         (79)

Now suppose that for any r and a given desired distribution Ψ (Δ) we set
                                                       2
                    M   γ                  r
      Ft (Δt ; r) =   +                                      (1 − ρ)2 ω (Δt ) .                                         (80)
                    γ   2                1+r−ρ
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                    γ2
                                                                                     2
                                                                                               r
                                                                                             1+r−ρ
                                                                                                          (1−ρ)2 ω(Δ)
Then equation (79) can be written as (32). Since (1 + r) Ee                       is equal to 1 when
r = 0 and increases monotonically to inﬁnity as r increases, it follows that there exists a unique
positive r such that equation (32) holds. For that value of r, all investors’ bond Euler equations
are satisﬁed.
     Finally, we need to determine Φt so as to ensure that the Euler equations for risky assets hold,
i.e., that
                                                       
        Pt,j = βEt e−γ(ct+1,i −ct,i ) (Pt+1,j + Dt+1,j ) .                                       (81)


   To that end, we use (33) and (30) to express (81) as
                                                                                             
 1                          −γ(ct+1,i −ct,i ) 1
   −Φt +φ(Dt,j −1) = βEt e                       − Φt+1 + (1 + φ) (ρDt,j + (1 − ρ) εt+1,j ) − φ . (82)
 r                                             r

We next note that
                                          (1 + φ) ρ
     βEt e−γ(ct+1,i −ct,i ) (1 + φ) ρDt,j =           Dt,j = φDt,j                                                      (83)
                                              1+r
using (78). Equation (83) simpliﬁes (82) to
                                                                             
      1                   −γ(ct+1,i −ct,i ) 1
        − Φt − φ = βEt e                       − Φt+1 + (1 + φ) (1 − ρ) εt+1,j
      r                                      r
                       1                                        1
                 =           − βEt e−γ(ct+1,i −ct,i ) Φt+1 +          (−φ + (1 + φ) (1 − ρ))                            (84)
                    r(1 + r)                                   1+r
                                                                       
                   + (1 + φ) (1 − ρ) βEt e−γ(ct+1,i −ct,i ) (εt+1,j − 1) .

                                                                    1                       (i)
Using (77), Stein’s Lemma, the fact that cov                         0   (εt+1,j − 1) dXt,j , εt+1,j = ω (Δ) (see Proposition
1), and (78) implies
                                                  1 − γ 1+r−ρ
                                                            r
                                                                (1 − ρ) ω (Δt )
               −γ(ct+1,i −ct,i )
      βEt e                        εt+1,j =                                          .                                  (85)
                                                                 1+r

                                                                         54
Substituting (85) into (84) gives linear equations in Φ0 and Φ1 , solved by (34), respectively (35).
    To complete the proof of the claim that Δt is chosen optimally, we provide an explicit example
of a family of functions for Ft (Δ) that has the desired properties. To start, we compute the value
function of an investor adopting the policies of Proposition 5. Equation (78) along with (77) imply
that
                          1                  1                    t                   
       V (Wt,i , Δt ) = −    β t Et e−γct,i = − e−γc0,i    β t Et e−γ m=0 (ct+1,i −ct,i )
                          γ                    γ
                              t≥0                                  t≥1
                           1                                 1
                        = − e−γc0,i           (1 + r)−t   = − e−γc0,i .
                           γ                                 γr
                                        t≥0

In turn equations (71), (73), and (80) imply that
                           1 − 1+r
                                γr
                                   Wt,i +z(Δt )
        V (Wt , Δt ) = −      e                 ,                                                (86)
                           γr
                                    2              2
where zt (Δt ) ≡ 1+r
                  rΦt
                      − M + γ2 1+r−ρ
                                   r
                                          (1 − ρ)2 ω (Δt ) .
     Next we suppose that we no longer impose that the investor choose Δ = Δt , (where Δt is
the time-t random draw of Δ that we imposed in Proposition 5). Instead Δ is chosen optimally.
However, prices are still given by Pt,j (Δt , Dt,j ) from equation (33). We will construct a function
κt gt (Δ) that renders the choice Δ = Δt optimal at the total cost speciﬁed in (80).
                            (i)
     Throughout we let X t (Δ; Δt ) denote the optimal number of total risky assets chosen by
investor i, and assuming that that investor chooses Δ and prices are given by Pt,j (Δt , Dt,j ) . For
future reference, we note that by construction of the price function Pt,j (Δt , Dt,j ) it follows that
  (i)
X t (Δt ; Δt ) = 1. Using (86) the ﬁrst order condition characterizing an optimal Δ is

        Ft (Δ) = h (Δ; Δt ) ,

where
                                                  2
                          1 γ             r                        (i)          2
        h (Δ; Δt ) = −                                  (1 − ρ)2 X t (Δ; Δt )       ω  (Δ) .    (87)
                         1+r2           1+r−ρ

    Next we ﬁx a value of Δt and we simplify notation by writing h (Δ) rather than h (Δ; Δt ) . We
also let q (x) denote some continuous function with q (0) = 1 and q (x) > 1 for x > 0. Let η ∈ [0, 1],
take some positive (small) ε < Δ2t , and consider the function
                    ⎧
                    ⎪
                    ⎪
                        Δ
                        ε ηh (ε)                                    for   Δ≤ε
                    ⎨
                      ηh (Δ)                                        for   Δ ∈ (ε, Δt − ε]
        Ft (Δ) =                                                                           .    (88)
                    ⎪
                    ⎪ ηh (Δt − ε) Δtε−Δ + h (Δt ) Δ−Δε t +ε         for   Δ ∈ (Δt − ε, Δt ]
                    ⎩
                      h (Δ) q(Δ)                                    for   Δ > Δt + ε.

    By construction, Ft (0) = 0 and Ft (Δ) is continuous and increasing in Δ. More importantly,
Ft (Δt )= h (Δt ) , and hence Δ = Δt satisﬁes the necessary ﬁrst order condition (87). Moreover,
since Ft (Δ) < (>)h (Δ) for Δ < (>)Δt , it follows that Δ = Δt is optimal for any ε > 0 and




                                                             55
η ∈ [0, 1]. Finally,
                   Δt                         Δt
       lim               Ft (Δ)   =η                h (x) dx > 0.                                                 (89)
       ε→0 0                                0

Now suppose that nature draws Δt = Δu > 0. By choosing M that is suﬃciently close to
           2            
− γ2 1+r−ρ
       r
             (1 − ρ)2 ω Δ it follows that
                                                2                               Δu
          M   γ                    r                         2
       0<   +                                         (1 − ρ) ω (Δu ) <                 h (x) dx.                  (90)
          γ   2                  1+r−ρ                                         0

   Combining equations (89) and (90) it follows that for suﬃciently small ε > 0 there exists some
η ∈ [0, 1] so that
              Δu                                               2
                                   M   γ                   r
                    Ft (x) dx   =   +                                (1 − ρ)2 ω (Δu ) > 0.                        (91)
           0                       γ   2                 1+r−ρ

   Hence, when Δt = Δu the cost function κt gt (Δ) renders Δ = Δu , while also satisfying (80).
The same argument implies that for any value of Δt that satisﬁes
                                                2                             Δt
          M   γ                    r                         2
       0<   +                                         (1 − ρ) ω (Δt ) <               h (x) dx,                    (92)
          γ   2                  1+r−ρ                                       0

there exists η ∈ [0, 1] and suﬃciently small ε > 0 such that the optimal Δ coincides with Δt , and
                                            Δ
(80) holds. Continuity of ω (Δt ) and of 0 t h (x) dx in Δt implies that as long as Δ is suﬃciently
close to Δu , there always exists η ∈ [0, 1] and ε > 0 (both depending on the random draw Δt ) such
that Δ = Δt is optimal and (80) holds.

   Proof of Proposition 6.                            Parts (i)–(iii) are proved in the main body of the text. Part (iv)
comes down to noticing that

       cov (ez , z) > 0                                                                                            (93)

for any random variable z — in particular, for z = ω(Δ). The second statement of (iv) follows
from the ﬁrst and Jensen’s inequality applied to the convex function ω.


C       An interpretation of participation costs
Throughout the paper we maintain the assumption that participation in “distant” markets in-
curs participation costs. In this appendix we discuss how these costs could arise as information-
acquisition costs that permit an investor to avoid the lower net returns earned by an investor
unfamiliar with the asset class. Indeed, we wish to re-emphasize that we do construe the notion
of distance broadly, as a stand-in for the level of familiarity of investors in one location with all
aspects of the ﬁnancial environment in another.
    We start by summarizing the set-up in Gârleanu et al. (2013), on which the interpretation is
based. While we could simply refer the reader to this paper, we take this route in the interest of
staying self-contained and keeping the eﬀort required of the interested reader to a minimum.


                                                                        56
    Just as in the present model, investors are aligned on a circle. In each location of the circle,
investors are of two types: a) “common” investors, who are endowed with local “regular” stocks that
pay an exogenous, location-speciﬁc dividend, with the same properties as in the present paper; and
b) “inside” investors, endowed with “fraudulent” ﬁrms in that location. Fraudulent ﬁrms produce
lower dividends than regular ﬁrms — for simplicity it is assumed that they produce a dividend of
zero. However, if insiders choose to, they can manipulate the earnings of their ﬁrms — for instance
by diverting their personal funds into the company to boost the ﬁrm’s dividends. This assumption
ensures that the insider always makes a trading proﬁt by trading in her ﬁrm, irrespective of whether
she buys or sells stock in her ﬁrm.25
    Similar to the present paper, investors see an incentive to invest in distant locations for di-
versiﬁcation reasons. However, when investing in a location other than her own, an incompletely
informed investor does not know which stocks are regular and which are fraudulent. Investors re-
ceive a signal about the type of every ﬁrm in every location. The quality of this signal deteriorates
with the distance separating the investor from the ﬁrm. Hence, even though diversiﬁcation beneﬁts
increase with distance, so does the informational disadvantage.
    Gârleanu et al. (2013) shows that there exists an equilibrium in which insiders strategically
manipulate the prices of the stocks they are endowed with, so that the prices of all risky securities
in a given location are equal. The ability of insiders to manipulate the earnings of their ﬁrms implies
that no trade with such an insider can be proﬁtable for any other investor. This deters local short
sellers from shorting the stock of the fraudulent ﬁrms.26 Since prices are the same for fraudulent
and regular securities, investors use only their private information in weeding out potential insiders
and avoiding trading with them.
    Because the ability to distinguish fraudulent from regular securities declines with distance,
investors prefer to invest close to their own location and forego diversiﬁcation opportunities. Indeed,
in a special case where investors receive a (perfectly informative) signal for a subset of locations,
and an uninformative signal for the rest, they choose to invest only in locations where they are
informed, similar to the present paper.
    Gârleanu et al. (2013) assumes that investors are simply endowed with their signals and doesn’t
consider the possibility of incurring costs to expand the set of informative signals (and by implication
the participation interval on which the investor chooses to invest.) By contrast, the focus of the
present paper is to study investors’ incentives to to expand, by paying appropriate costs, the set of
locations in which they can participate. Indeed, the endogeneity of the participation decision is at
the core of many results in this paper, since it is responsible for the emergence of non-convexities,
the diversity of ﬁnancial strategies, the emergence of endogenous leverage, the vulnerability of the
market equilibrium to sudden reversals in participation, etc.


D      An alternative formulation of the leverage constraint
In this section we elaborate further on the interaction between borrowing constraints and high price
sensitivity to participation costs. Speciﬁcally, we introduce a “limited-liability” constraint that
  25
     Vila (1989) shows the possibility of proﬁtable manipulation, when the payoﬀs of a security can be
manipulated.
  26
     The model assumes that local investors only observe prices, and not the demands expressed by “distant”
investors for local fraudulent ﬁrms. Hence, if they sold short they would not know whether they were trading
against less informed investors or the insider.



                                                    57
places an endogenous bound on borrowing, and show that it plays a similar role to constraint (22)
in the text. In particular, we recover the conclusions of Section 5.
     Before formalizing and analyzing the constraint, we provide a new dividend structure. An
important novel feature of this structure is that all dividends are non-negative, so that the notion
of limited liability is economically meaningful. Speciﬁcally, let Γj be a Gamma process on [0, 1), so
that for u > s we have
                                      Γu − Γs ∼ Γ (k (u − s) ; ν) .
Extending dΓ to the entire real line as before — that is, via dΓs = dΓs mod 1 — we deﬁne
                        j+ 12
         Dj = μ +                ws−j dΓs                                                                            (94)
                      j− 12

for some μ ≥ 0 and weights wi ≥ 0 periodic with period 1 and symmetric around 0. In the interest
of concreteness, in our numerical illustration below we deﬁne wi = 1 if i ∈ [− 14 , 14 ] and wi = 0
otherwise. Conveniently, for this choice of w, Dj and Dj+ 1 are independent.
                                                          2
    More important, speciﬁcation (94) generally implies that dividends are positive and the joint
distribution of the dividends in any n locations depends exclusively on the distances on the circle
between the locations.
    An agent located in location i maximizes utility over end-of-period wealth W1,i net of partici-
pation costs, that is, she maximizes
          1
         − E0 e−γ(W1,i −Fi ) ,
          γ
where Fi refers to the participation costs incurred by the agent, depending on her participation
choices. For the participation costs we adopt the same structure as in Section 5. Speciﬁcally we
assume that by paying a cost κ, an investor can participate not only in her location but also in
the location diametrically “opposite” hers on the circle. Otherwise the investor can only invest in
the risky asset in her own location. Proceeding as in Section 5, the indiﬀerence of agent i between
investing exclusively in location i and incurring the cost κ to participate also in location i+ 12 means
                                                                
                                                                                                          
                    −γ    1
                          2
                                 1−w2f               1 (Dj −P )−κ
                                              j=i,i+ 2                              −γ        1−w1f (Di −P )
         max −Ee                                                        = max −Ee                                ,   (95)
         1−w2f                                                           1−w1f

where we have used the deﬁnition of an agent’s objective and her budget constraint. Note that
1 − w2f , respectively 1 − w1f , is the leverage choice of an agent who decides to invest across the two
locations, respectively only in her own location.
    In the absence of any constraint on leverage, the implicit function theorem applied to equation
(95) yields

         dP      1
            =− f       < 0,                                                                                          (96)
         dκ   w1 − w2f

exactly as in Section 5.27
   Now suppose that, due to the no-recourse nature of lending contracts, borrowing is restricted so
  27
       It is possible to show that there exist values of κ for which only asymmetric equilibria exist.


                                                                        58
          0.8                                                             0.8
                                            No constraint                                                  No constraint
                                            Constraint                                                     Constraint

         0.75                                                            0.75
 Price




                                                                 Price
          0.7                                                             0.7



         0.65                                                            0.65



          0.6                                                             0.6
                0.05    0.1          0.15         0.2                           0.05   0.1          0.15         0.2
                              Cost (κ)                                                       Cost (κ)


Figure 13: The ﬁgure illustrates the higher sensitivity of the price to the diversiﬁcation cost in
the presence of the constraint. In the left panel, the price decreases continuously to the value
obtaining with no diversiﬁcation. In the right panel, the price jumps to this value when κ = μ. In
either case, the slope of the solid line (the price in the presence of a leverage constraint) exhibits a
steeper decline then the dotted line (the price in the absence of a leverage constraint). The common
parameters used here are k = 20, v = 10, and γ = 10; in the left panel μ = 0.13, while in the right
one μ = 0.11.



as to ensure that there is no default in equilibrium.28 Thus, borrowing is subject to the constraint
                          
       X2S Dmin + X2B − κ ≥ 0,                                                                  (97)

where Dmin is the smallest possible dividend in period 1, X2S is the number of shares chosen by
investor a, and −X2B is the amount borrowed by the investor. Using the time-zero budget constraint
and noting that Dmin = μ and X2S − 1 = −w2f , equation (97) becomes

            −w2f (P − μ) ≤ μ − κ.                                                                                      (98)

   Equation (98) is key to the assertion that modeling the constraint in the way we do here
induces small changes in κ to translate into larger drops in the price than would obtain absent the
constraint. Repeating the steps in Section 5 we get
            dP       1+λ             1
               =− f           f
                                <− f       < 0.                                                                        (99)
            dκ   w2 − (1 + λ)w1   w2 − w1f

    The intuition for the increased price sensitivity, captured by (99), is quite immediate: An
increase in κ not only requires the price to decrease in order to avoid a decrease in V2 relative to
V1 (the eﬀect behind equation (96)); it also pushes the price down to counteract the direct eﬀect
  28
     Richer contracts, through which the borrower and lender share some risk, can be envisaged. Note,
however, that such a contract would allow an agent (partial) diversiﬁcation across locations at zero cost, and
thus run counter to the central friction of the paper.



                                                            59
of tightening of the constraint (decreasing the right-hand-side of (98)).
    Depending on the parameters, the price may even drop discontinuously to the value obtaining
in the no-diversiﬁcation equilibrium. The point is made most starkly in the case κ = 0 and μ = 0.
At these values there is diversiﬁcation, and no leverage. Any increase in κ, on the other hand,
drives the price discontinuously down to the no-diversiﬁcation value. More generally, it can happen
that, as κ approaches μ, enough agents continue to diversify — even if their leverage is virtually
zero — for the price to be above the no-diversiﬁcation value that obtains when κ > μ. However,
once κ exceeds μ the price drops discontinuously, as the right panel of Figure 13 illustrates.
    To conclude, even if one modeled borrowing limitations as resulting from a no-default require-
ment, the price function is steeper in κ than when the constraint is absent, and can even be
discontinuous.




                                                60
