                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               FINANCIAL MARKET SHOCKS AND THE MACROECONOMY

                                      Avanidhar Subrahmanyam
                                          Sheridan Titman

                                         Working Paper 19383
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19383


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2013




We are grateful to Pietro Veronesi (the editor) and an anonymous referee for insightful and constructive
comments. We also thank Rajesh Aggarwal, Ravi Anshuman, Michael Brennan, Charles Calomiris,
Larry Glosten, Wei Jiang, Charles Jones, Jayant Kale, Andrea Prat, Raghu Rau, Pedro Saffi, Tano
Santos, Dick Stapleton, Alex Taylor, Paul Tetlock, and seminar participants at Columbia University,
Indian Institute of Management (Bangalore), the University of Cambridge, and the University of Manchester,
for valuable comments. All errors are solely ours. Part of this work was completed when Subrahmanyam
was a Pembroke Visiting Scholar at Judge Business School, University of Cambridge. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Avanidhar Subrahmanyam and Sheridan Titman. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Market Shocks and the Macroeconomy
Avanidhar Subrahmanyam and Sheridan Titman
NBER Working Paper No. 19383
August 2013
JEL No. E3,G12,G14

                                             ABSTRACT

Feedback from stock prices to cash flows occurs because information revealed by firms’ stock prices
influences the actions of competitors. We explore the implications of feedback within a noisy rational
expectations setting with incumbent publicly traded firms and privately held new entrants. In this setting
the equilibrium relation among stock prices and both future dividends and aggregate output depends
on the strategic environment in which these firms operate. In general, under reasonable conditions,
the relations between prices, dividends, and economic output in our framework are consistent with
empirical evidence in the macroliterature. We also generate new, potentially testable, implications.


Avanidhar Subrahmanyam
Anderson School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza C402
Los Angeles, CA 90095
subra@anderson.ucla.edu

Sheridan Titman
Finance Department
McCombs School of Business
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712-1179
and NBER
titman@mail.utexas.edu
Macroeconomic forecasts, such as the NBER macroforecast, typically use stock re-

turns as a leading economic indicator. This is intuitive. Stock prices are forward

looking and should thus reflect expectations of future economic activity. Indeed, a re-

lation between stock returns and expectations of future economic activity is a central

feature of the recent literature on consumption-based asset pricing (e.g., Bansal and

Yaron (2004)). Papers by Fama (1990) and Schwert (1990) are prominent examples

that provide evidence on the link between stock returns and industrial output.1


       Although the “forward-looking” interpretation of the stock returns/economic ac-

tivity relation is intuitive, it is not really complete. Stock returns are not claims, for

example, on industrial production, which they do predict, but are claims on future

dividends. The rationale for the forward-looking view is that returns predict aggre-

gate economic activity because dividends tend to grow when the economy grows. As

Cochrane (2011) and others have emphasized,2 however, the return on the market

does not predict future changes in dividends on the market portfolio.3 If we believe

that stock returns predict aggregate economic activity because they are forward look-

ing, then the fact that they do not predict changes in future dividends is somewhat

puzzling.4
   1
     See also Choi, Hauser, and Kopecky (1999). Barro (1990) and Farmer (2012) relate stock prices
to aggregate investment and unemployment, respectively. The Conference Board (www.conference-
board.org/data/bci/index.cfm?id=2160) uses the stock market return as a leading indicator for the
overall macroeconomy.
   2
     See also Campbell and Shiller (1989) and Cochrane (1996).
   3
     See, for example, page 1053 (Table III) in Cochrane (2011). Although dividends have been
the focus of the predictability literature, the findings of Larrain and Yogo (2008) suggest that the
ability of stock returns to predict shifts in net payouts (defined as dividends plus interest plus net
repurchases of equity and debt) is also quite limited (see their Table 4).
   4
     In a back-of-the-envelope calculation to confirm the results of Fama (1990), Schwert
(1990), and Cochrane (2011), we retrieve data on the industrial production index from
http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/data/INDPRO.txt and retrieve S&P 500 index levels and divi-
dend levels from www.econ.yale.edu/˜shiller/data/ie data.xls for the period January 1919 to March



                                                  1
    The lack of correlation between stock returns and dividends indicates that a sub-

stantial portion of observed stock market volatility is due to changes in discount

rates.5 Thus, if an increase in stock prices does not reflect an increase in expected

dividends, then it must necessarily reflect a decline in the discount rate. Given that

discount rate changes can have economic consequences (e.g., through changes in in-

vestment choices), it is possible that stock returns are a leading economic indicator

because they cause, rather than just predict, macroeconomic change.


    Although this story is intuitive, it is also incomplete. Specifically, it does not ex-

plain why discount rates (or risk premia) can change without shocks to economic fun-

damentals. Moreover, in addition to a rationale for exogenous discount rate changes,

a complete story requires that we establish a causal relation between stock prices

and economic activity and finally, a reason why the profits and dividends of public

corporations are only imperfectly correlated with aggregate economic activity.6


    To address these issues, we develop a model that includes a publicly traded firm,
2013. We then regress quarterly growth in industrial production and in dividends, in turn, on con-
temporaneous and lagged values of the quarterly return on the S&P 500 index. (The forecasting
horizon accords with the quarterly returns used in Fama (1990) and Schwert (1990).) In the re-
gression for dividend growth, the coeﬃcient of the lagged S&P 500 return is insignificant with a
t-statistic of −1.41. In the regression for the growth in industrial production, the lagged S&P 500
return is significant with a t-statistic of 4.78. This simple calculation confirms the findings suggested
by Fama (1990) and Cochrane (2011), that is, a significant link between aggregate output growth
and stock returns, but a very tenuous link between dividend growth and stock returns.
    5
      Using a variance decomposition approach, Campbell (1991) finds that cash flow news and dis-
count rate news contribute equally (one-third each) to stock return volatility, with the balance
attributable to the covariance between the two types of news.
    6
      There is a large class of models in which discount rates change as a function of shocks to
consumption and expected consumption. See for example, Campbell and Cochrane (1988) and
Bansal and Yaron (2004). Researchers, however, have questioned whether these preferences can
explain the magnitude of the observed volatility of risk premia (e.g., Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008);
Hansen and Sargent (2007); Marakani (2009)), and no distinction is drawn between consumption
and dividends in these models of changing discount rates.




                                                   2
which represents existing incumbent firms, and also private firms, which represent

potential new entrants. Because public stock prices convey information, the invest-

ment choices of these entrants are influenced by the public firm’s stock prices.7 For

tractability reasons, we assume that all new investment comes from the entrants rather

than from the existing public firms. However, because the public firms compete with

the new entrants, a higher stock price, which increases investment by the entrants,

can reduce the public firm’s cash flows. To understand this, consider the situation

faced by incumbent computer firms like IBM and Digital Equipment Corporation,

that faced competition from emerging entrants like Microsoft, Apple, and Dell in the

1980s. It is plausible that the bull market in the 1980s facilitated investment in per-

sonal computer and operating system technology by the entrants, thereby ultimately

reducing the profitability of the incumbent mainframe technology.


       In addition to including two types of firms, the model includes two types of in-

vestors, informed and uninformed, and two types of shocks. The first, a technology

shock observed by the informed investors, aﬀects the productivity of both the public

and private firms. The second type of shock, which exogenously aﬀects the overall

demand for traded shares, may be interpreted as a shock to the participation of un-

modeled “noise traders,” and will be henceforth described as a “participation shock.”

These shocks can be generated by technological innovations, such as the internet and

web-based trading, and policy changes, such as a shift from defined benefit to defined

contribution pension funds, which can aﬀect the flow of funds into and out of the
   7
    See Goldstein and Guembel (2008), Goldstein, Ozdenoren, and Yuan (2013), Ozdenoren and
Yuan (2008), Subrahmanyam and Titman (2001), and Fishman and Hagerty (1989) for other models
in which there is feedback from stock prices to cash flows via corporate investment. Chen, Goldstein,
and Jiang (2007) show that real investment is more sensitive to stock prices when proxies for informed
trading are higher, supporting an implication of these models.


                                                  3
stock market.


   Because of the trades of the informed investors, stock prices reflect information

about the future earnings of the public firms. The information content of the prices,

however, is muddled by the shock to market participation that adds noise to the

prices. Nevertheless, prices are still a useful input into the investment choices of

the private firms. But because the uninformed investors and the nontraded sector

cannot discern the extent to which a high price is due to informed trade or a high

realization of the participation shock, equilibrium levels of capital investment by the

private firms are sensitive to both the technology and participation shocks.


   Further, because new entrants use the stock prices of the public firms as an in-

dication of future demand, a participation shock that increases the stock prices of

public firms increases aggregate investment by the new firms. Moreover, because

these new firms compete with the existing public firms, the increased investment due

to the positive participation shock can reduce the profits of public firms. This last

component of our model, which implies that there can be negative feedback from the

prices of public stocks to their future dividends, dampens the relation between public

stock returns and future dividends. Overall, our key observation is that the relation

between stock prices and dividends is not always positive, as would be suggested

by casual intuition, but depends on the strategic environment in which public firms

operate.


   Under the assumption of constant absolute risk aversion (CARA preferences) the

model can be solved in closed form, and it generates, at least qualitatively, the three


                                          4
observations that we mentioned at the outset. In particular, the model can generate

a positive relation between public stock prices and both aggregate economic activity

and investment, but a zero or even negative correlation between the public stock

prices and the earnings and dividends of the public companies. In addition, our

model generates an explicit relation between shocks to stock market participation

and future economic activity, illustrating that activity in the financial markets can

cause, as well as reflect, expectations about future aggregate output.


   In summary, a combination of information asymmetries about technology and

stochastic participation generates our results. Although changes in participation can

lead to changes in discount rates and investment choices in settings with symmet-

ric information, the interaction between asymmetrically observed technology shocks

and unobserved participation amplifies the participation shocks. Indeed, as we show,

shocks to participation have a larger eﬀect on the real economy when the volatility of

the technology shocks is larger. We also show that overconfidence of informed agents

increases their trading aggressiveness and magnifies the impact of negative feedback

on asset prices. Finally, we demonstrate that beliefs about the magnitude of partic-

ipation shocks can influence their eﬀect on the macroeconomy. Specifically, stronger

priors about market eﬃciency (i.e., that price changes are generated primarily from

cash flow news rather than participation shocks) result in magnified price volatility

because of greater feedback from participation shocks to the macroeconomy.


   Although our model is motivated by a puzzle from the macrofinance literature,

it draws on other literature as well. For example, the idea that innovations from

emerging firms can push out existing technologies has been around since Schumpeter

                                          5
(1911), but we believe that we are the first to consider how this activity is influenced

by activities in the public capital markets. In addition, we draw on the noisy rational

expectations literature started by Grossman (1976) and Grossman and Stiglitz (1980),

who describe the inference problem that arises when there are shocks to supply and

shocks to expected cash flows. This literature and extensions to the literature have

been applied to issues that relate to market microstructure, i.e., studies of stock mar-

ket liquidity, insider trading, and selling versus trading on information (viz. Holden

and Subrahmanyam (1996); Leland (1992); Admati and Pfleiderer (1986)).8 In this

literature, supply shocks and information tend to be interpreted as being very short

in duration and aﬀecting individual securities. In contrast, our model is based on the

idea that there can be systematic and longer term changes to the demand and supply

of stocks (for example, because of financial innovations and policy shifts) that may

take a while before their eﬀects are readily apparent to market participants. Whereas

these innovations and policy changes may be observable, their implications for the

asset allocation choices of investors may not be apparent until much later.


       The plan of our paper is as follows. Section 1 presents the setting with public and

private firms.9 Section 2 presents an analysis of the equilibrium. Section 3 presents

our central results by analyzing the relation between cash flows and market prices.
   8
      In more recent work, Amador and Weill (2012) discuss the notion that public signal releases can
crowd out private signal acquisition to such an extent that agents may be less informed of public
releases of information in the long run. Hassan and Mertens (2011) suggest that small, but common,
errors made by households in their optimal investment policies may amplify in the aggregate and
crowd out the information content of prices. Angeletos, Lorenzoni, and Pavan (2010) argue that if
financial markets look to entrepreneurs’ investment to set prices and entrepreneurial signal errors
are correlated, rationally entrepreneurs will want to overinvest relative to that warranted by their
investment of fundamentals in order to obtain a favorable price for their capital.
    9
      We present our results in the setting that most simply conveys our intuition. In an internet
Appendix, we include various extensions and microfoundations for some of our assumptions.




                                                 6
Section 4 maximizes total output in the economy and contrasts with the noncoop-

erative Nash outcome. Section 5 discusses how the risk aversion of the informed

investors, which may diﬀer from the risk aversion of the uninformed investors, aﬀects

our results. As we show in this section, changing the risk aversion of informed in-

vestors aﬀects our results in a similar way as changing the variance of participation

shocks. Section 6 discusses ways in which the eﬀects of participation shocks can be

amplified, and Section 7 concludes. All proofs, unless otherwise stated, appear in the

Appendix.



1.     The Economic Setting


Our model includes a public firm (that represents all listed firms), privately held

new entrants, and a riskless and unlimited storage technology. The entrants have

no assets at the time of entry, but possess a technology that provides the option to

invest. Their actual investment choice is influenced by the information conveyed by

the public firm’s stock price, and because the investments can complement or compete

with the public firm, there is “feedback” from the public firm’s stock price to its cash

flows. We also assume that the public firm consists of an asset in place but no growth

opportunities.




                                           7
1.1    The public firm


The public firm is born at date 0, investors trade the stock at date 1 at a price P ,

and its cash flows, which are realized at date 2, are expressed as follows:


                                    F = θ + + kµ.                                    (1)


The variables θ and    represent exogenous technology shocks;      is not revealed until

date 2, but θ can be observed by informed investors at date 1. These variables

have zero mean and are mutually independent and normally distributed. The term

kµ, where µ ≡ E(θ|P ), reflects the impact of the public firm’s cash flows from the

investment choices of the private firms, conditional on the market price P . We allow

the parameter k to take on any value on the real line and model it as a function of

the private firms’ investment choices in Section 2.


   Following Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), we assume there is a mass m of informed

agents and 1 − m of uninformed agents, each with negative exponential utility with

risk aversion R. Informed agents learn the realization of the technology shock θ

perfectly after date 0 and prior to trade at date 1. We also assume that there is an

exogenous shock that influences participation of unmodeled “noise traders” in the

financial market, and, in turn, aﬀects the supply of shares available to the informed

and uninformed investors that we model. As we discussed in the introduction, these

shocks may be caused, for example, by financial innovations in the brokerage business

and policy changes (e.g., online trading, the rise of defined contribution pension plans,

and the advent of ETFs). We represent this additional per capita demand by z (or

supply by −z), which is normally distributed with mean zero and is independent of

                                           8
all other random variables.10 Throughout the paper, we denote the variance of any

generic random variable, η, by vη .



1.2       The private firms


The model includes two private entrants that complement and compete with the

incumbent public firm. They are both endowed with technologies as well as with

a suﬃcient quantity of an asset that can be either transformed into the investment

asset or stored to generate a risk-free cash flow at date 2 (the rate of return on the

storage technology is normalized to zero without loss of generality). Each risk-neutral

private firm i (i = 1, 2) invests a level of capital in a nontraded growth opportunity.

The amount of capital invested by firm i is denoted by Ki .


      Let πi , i = 1, 2 denote the profit of firm i. We postulate that the profit of firm 1

depends on the technology shock θ and the level of investment through the function


                       π1 = C1 + C2 θ + C3 K1 θ − 0.5(K12 − 2C4 K1 K2 ).                       (2)


Similarly, the profit of firm 2 is given by


                      π2 = D1 + D2 θ + D3 K2 θ − 0.5(K22 − 2D4 K1 K2 ).                        (3)


We assume that all of the constants are positive (i.e., Ci > 0, Di > 0 ∀i = 1, . . . , 4),

and C4 + D4 < 1 (the last assumption is to ensure an optimum). The expressions in

(2) and (3) thus model the notion that profits depend positively on the technology

shock θ and that the marginal productivity of capital is positively related to θ. The
 10
      The analysis is unchanged if we model z as an shock to the informed agents’ endowment.


                                                 9
term that involves the product of K1 and K2 in each profit function captures the

strategic complementarity between the two firms, because we have assumed that C4

and D4 are positive.


   The modeling of two entrants (as opposed to a single private firm) and their strate-

gic complementarity is not needed for most of our results. Indeed, our main result,

that public stock returns can be positively related to future aggregate output but un-

related to future dividends, holds in a slightly simpler model with just one entrant that

competes with the public incumbent firm. However, by modeling two entrants with

complementary investment expenditures we can illustrate how such complementarity

magnifies feedback, and address how participation shocks can sometimes mitigate

the underinvestment problem that arises from the coordination problem that arises

in such a setting (Cooper and John 1988) (see Section 4).


   In our setting, firms maximize their expected profits conditional on their informa-

tion set at date 1 in a Nash equilibrium. This information set consists of the price

of the publicly listed firm; the price provides noisy information about the technology

shock θ. We wish to capture the notion that there are emerging firms in the private

sector with products that can either complement or substitute for the products pro-

duced by established firms in the public sector. For example, a firm may improve the

quality of an input to the traded firm (like a better operating system to a computer

manufacturer), thereby raising the cash flow of the latter firm. Or a nontraded firm

may increase the quality of a diﬀerentiated, but related, good (like a diﬀerent brand

of smartphone) by greater investment, thus reducing the cash flow of the traded firm.

We model this by postulating that firm 1’s product is complementary to that of the

                                           10
traded firm, whereas firm 2’s product is a diﬀerentiated substitute. Each unit of cap-

ital invested in firm 1 increases the cash flow of the public firm by G1 units, whereas

each unit of capital invested in firm 2 reduces the cash flow of the public firm by G2

units. Thus, the feedback component of cash flow is given by G1 K1 − G2 K2 , where

G1 > 0 and G2 > 0. In the next section, we show that K1 and K2 are linear in µ, so

that the feedback has the form assumed in (1).



2.    Equilibrium


We first solve for an equilibrium in the market for the public firm’s shares taking

the cash flows in (1) as given. Subsequently we model the feedback as a function of

optimal real investment by the private firms.



2.1    Equilibrium in the market for the public firm


We conjecture that prices are normally distributed, and confirm the conjecture in

equilibrium. Let the subscripts I and U denote the informed and uninformed, re-

spectively. Further, let Wi and φi , i = {I, U }, respectively, denote the wealth and

information sets of the two classes of agents. Each agent solves


                              max E[−exp(−RWi )|φi ].


Let xi denote the demand of agent i and P the market price. Then Wi = (F − P )xi .

It follows from the standard mean-variance objective in our CARA-normal setting



                                          11
that the demand of each informed agent is

                                  E(F |θ, P ) − P   θ + kµ − P
                           xI =                   =            ,
                                  R var(F |θ, P )       Rv

and that of each uninformed agent is

                                  E(F |P ) − P   (1 + k)µ − P
                           xU =                =               .
                                  R var(F |P )    R var(F |P )

Denote v ≡ var(F |P ) = v + var(θ|P ). The market clearing condition is

                         θ + kµ − P           (1 + k)µ − P
                     m              + (1 − m)              + z = 0.                       (4)
                             Rv                    Rv


   The rational expectations equilibrium of the model, derived in the Appendix,

proves the following:



Lemma 1. The closed-form expression for the price P is given by

                                      P = H1 θ + H2 z,                                    (5)

where

        m[kmvθ (m2 vθ + mR2 v vθ vz + R2 v 2 vz ) + {mvθ + R2 v vz (v + vθ )}{m2 vθ + R2 v 2 vz }]
H1 =
                         (m2 vθ + mR2 v vθ vz + R2 v 2 vz )(m2 vθ + R2 v 2 vz )
                                                                                       (6)

and

                                      H2 = Rv H1 /m.                                      (7)

Further,

                                  µ = E(θ|P ) = a1 θ + a2 z,                              (8)

where
                                                m2 vθ
                                    a1 =                                                  (9)
                                           m2 vθ + R2 v 2 vz

                                               12
and

                                    a2 = Rv a1 /m.                                  (10)



   Note that H1 , the coeﬃcient of the information variable θ in the equilibrium price,

can be positive or negative in equilibrium. Specifically, H1 is positive if and only if
                    ^                                        
                     R2 v 2 vz {m2 vθ + R2 v vz (v + vθ )}
             k >− 1+                                        ≡ −[1 + ν].             (11)
                     mvθ (m2 vθ + mR2 v vθ vz + R2 v 2 vz )

Thus, H1 is positive if 1+k exceeds −ν, where ν is a positive constant. The ambiguity

in the sign of H1 leads to an interesting feature of our model: that the price P can

be negatively correlated with θ, the variable representing private information. This

“perverse” case, which can arise when high θ is bad news for the public firm, happens

when H1 < 0, that is, when (11) does not hold, which implies that the negative

feedback is so intense that it more than oﬀsets the direct eﬀect of the higher θ on the

public firm’s output. Because ν is increasing in R and vz , the bound on the right-

hand side of (11) decreases (becomes more negative) as R and vz increase. Thus, the

perverse case (which occurs to the left of the bound) obtains in a narrower parameter

range when informed agents are more risk averse or the variance of the participation

shock is higher. Higher risk aversion or a higher variance of the participation shock

make the price less informative and the “perverse” negative feedback less intense,

reducing the tendency for the perverse case to obtain. Although an occurrence of

this phenomenon is interesting, within the context of our model, the perverse case, in

which good news for the economy is bad news for public companies, does not generate

any of our main results.




                                           13
2.2    Equilibrium real investment


Up to this point, we have just assumed the feedback eﬀect from price to cash flows

of the public company (via the term kµ, where µ ≡ E(θ|P ) in (1)). This subsection

formally characterizes this feedback eﬀect by characterizing the capital investments of

the two private firms, which are determined within the context of a Nash equilibrium.

Specifically, the private firms maximize the expected value of πi (conditional on the

publicly traded firm’s price P ), taking the other firm’s investment choice as given.

Taking conditional expectations of (2) and (3), firm 1’s objective is

                    max C1 + C2 µ + C3 K1 µ − 0.5(K12 − 2C4 K1 K2 ),
                     K1


whereas firm 2’s objective is

                   max D1 + D2 µ + D3 K2 µ − 0.5(K22 − 2D4 K1 K2 ).
                    K2


Performing the maximizations indicated above, and solving for K1 and K2 in terms

of exogenous parameters yields,

                                         µ(C3 + C4 D3 )
                                  K1 =                  ,                           (12)
                                           1 − C4 D4

and
                                         µ(D3 + D4 C3 )
                                 K2 =                   .                           (13)
                                           1 − C4 D4
Thus, real investment is linear in µ, the expectation of the technology shock condi-

tional on the market price.


   Substituting for K1 and K2 from (12) and (13) into π1 and π2 , we have

                  (C3 + C4 D3 )[2µθC3 (1 − C4 D4 ) + µ2 {C4 D3 + C3 (2C4 D4 − 1)}]
 π1 = C1 +θC2 +                                                                    , (14)
                                           2(1 − C4 D4 )2

                                            14
and

                     (D3 + D4 C3 )[2µθD3 (1 − C4 D4 ) + µ2 {D4 C3 + D3 (2C4 D4 − 1}]
  π2 = D1 + θD2 +                                                                    .
                                             2(1 − C4 D4 )2
                                                                                   (15)

The realized profits vary both with θ and µ, the latter because the capital invested is

a linear function of µ. It easily can be shown that the expected profits conditional on

the public firm’s stock price P are positive and increasing in the constants C3 , D3 , C4 ,

and D4 , where the former two and the latter two parameters measure the marginal

productivity of capital and the degree of strategic complementarity, respectively.


   Recalling from Section 1.2 that the feedback component of cash flow is G1 K1 +

G2 K2 , from (12) and (13), we have that the feedback parameter k is given by:

                             G1 (C3 + C4 D3 ) − G2 (D3 + D4 C3 ]
                        k=                                       .                    (16)
                                         1 − C4 D4

Whether the feedback is negative or positive then depends on the relative sizes of

G1 and G2 . Rather than interpreting (16) in full generality, to gain some intuition,

consider the special case in which C3 = D3 and C4 = D4 , so that the right-hand side

of (16) reduces to [(G1 − G2 )C3 ]/(1 − C4 )]. The absolute value of this expression is

increasing in C3 and C4 . Thus, in this instance, the sign of the feedback is determined

by the sign of G1 − G2 , whereas its absolute magnitude is increasing in the marginal

productivity of capital and the strategic complementarity between the private firms;

these are intuitive results. Because the right-hand side of (16) is comprised entirely

of exogenous variables, we will continue to denote the feedback parameter as k in

many places for convenience. Implicitly, however, from this point on, k means the

right-hand side of (16).


                                            15
3.      The Relation between Cash Flows and Market
        Prices


In this section, we turn to the central issues, namely, the correlations among prices

and total output as well as the public firm’s cash flows (“dividends”). We show that

the correlation between dividends and prices can be weak or even negative in certain

parameter ranges, owing to the negative feedback eﬀect. However, because the private

firms’ output is positively correlated with the technology shock, total output in these

parameter ranges exhibits a strong positive relation with stock prices.


     We first turn to the correlation between the realized cash flow of the public firm

and the market price. Noting that µ ≡ a1 θ + a2 z, and using expressions for a1 and

a2 in (9) and (10), respectively, the covariance cov(F, P ) can be written as

 cov(F, P ) = cov(θ+ +kµ, H1 θ+H2 z) = (1+ka1 )H1 vθ +ka2 H2 vz = H1 (1+k)vθ . (17)

The above covariance can be negative only if H1 and 1 + k are of opposing signs.

Because the right-hand side of (11) (the bound on k below which H1 is negative) is less

than −1, 1 + k and H1 cannot be simultaneously positive and negative, respectively.

Thus, we immediately have the following proposition, stated without proof.



Proposition 1. The covariance between the public firm’s cash flows and the equi-

librium price, cov(F, P ), is negative if and only if k < −1, and H1 > 0.



The idea that the cash flow and price of the publicly traded firm can be negatively

correlated is somewhat counterintuitive and arises from a combination of the par-

                                           16
ticipation shocks and the feedback. The feedback parameter has to be in a certain

negative range, that is, −1 > k > −(1+ν), where ν is defined in (11), for the negative

correlation to obtain. That is, for cov(F, P ) to be negative, k must be negative but

not so negative that the “perverse case” (where P is negatively correlated with θ)

obtains.


       To understand the intuition, consider the case in which the feedback parameter is

less than zero but not too negative, that is, greater than −1. In this case, a positive

“shock” (i.e. positive realization of z and/or θ) increases the price, and increases real

investment, but the negative feedback from the real investment to the public firm’s

cash flows is not strong enough to negate the “normal” positive relation between prices

and cash flows. On the other hand, suppose the feedback parameter is extremely (or

“perversely”) negative. Then the increase in real investment due to an initial positive

shock is so strong that it decreases both the cash flows and the market price of the

public firm. However, if k is between −1 and −(1 + ν), then a positive shock tends

to increase market prices, raise investment, and decrease final cash flows.


       Interestingly, so long as k < −1, greater risk aversion of agents or a greater vari-

ance of the participation shock narrows the parameter space under which the perverse

case obtains and increases the parameter range over which cov(F, P ) is negative. This

occurs because −(1+ν) is decreasing in R and vz (as noted in the discussion following

Lemma 1); higher R or vz lower the information content of the price, thus making the

“perversely negative” feedback less intense, and increasing the range of k over which

cov(F, P ) is negative.11
  11
       Provided k < −1, as R and vz become unboundedly large, the covariance between F and P


                                              17
    Note also that the correlation between prices and the public firm’s cash flows

(i.e., the correlation between future “dividends” and current stock prices) is exactly

zero at two levels of feedback, when k equals −1, and when k equals −(1 + ν) (i.e.,

when H1 = 0). At these points the eﬀect of the negative feedback exactly cancels the

standard eﬀect that high prices signal higher future cash flows.


    We now analyze the correlation between the stock price of the public firm and

total cash flows in the economy. From (1), (14), and (15), the following proposition

can be derived.



Proposition 2. Provided that H1 > 0, the correlation between public stock prices

and the economy’s total cash flows is positive if and only if


                                     k > −(1 + C2 + D2 ).



Under the above proposition’s premise, the more sensitive are the private firms’ profits

to the technology shock θ (i.e., the higher are C2 and D2 ), the greater is the tendency

for these profits to covary positively with the public firm’s stock price. In turn, the

higher are C2 and D2 , the greater is the range of k over which the total output in the

economy covaries positively with stock prices.


    The following proposition on the correlations among prices, total cash flows, the

cash flows of the public firm, and investment, which is our central result, can also be

derived from the preceding analysis.
remains negative, but the corresponding correlation goes to zero because the price becomes increas-
ingly less informative.


                                                18
Proposition 3. Suppose that H1 > 0, and −1 > k > −(1 + C2 + D2 ). Then, in

equilibrium, (1) the correlation between the traded firm’s cash flow and its stock price

is negative, that is, corr(F, P ) < 0, (2) the correlations between aggregate investment

and the public stock price, and between aggregate cash flow and the public stock

price are both positive, that is, corr(K1 + K2 , P ) > 0 and corr(F + π1 + π2 , P ) > 0.



Another way of representing the proposition is that total output and real investment

are positively correlated with stock prices, and dividends are negatively correlated

with stock prices, as long as −1 > k > −(1 + C2 + D2 ) > −(1 + ν). These conditions

together guarantee that the conditions in Propositions 1 and 2. are simultaneously sat-

isfied. Thus, our model is consistent with both a low or negative correlation between

future dividends and current stock prices, and a positive correlation between future

economic output and current stock prices. The economic intuition behind Propo-

sition 3 is as follows. Higher prices stimulate greater investment by the nontraded

sector, generating competition from the nontraded firms that can lead to a negative

relation between the traded sector’s cash flows and its stock prices. In the overall

economy, the eﬀect of greater investment in the nontraded sector dominates the eﬀect

of increased competition in the publicly traded sector, so that the combined (aggre-

gate) cash flow of the traded and the nontraded sector (i.e., the aggregate output) is

positively correlated with prices.




                                           19
3.1    Implications


This section describes some potentially testable implications of our analysis. Broadly

speaking, an interesting area of future research is on how the informational eﬃciency

of the stock market influences the relation between stock market returns and future

economic output and capital investment expenditures. Specifically, we consider the

eﬀect of more volatile participation shocks, which make stock prices less informative,

and a higher concentration of informed investors, which makes prices more informa-

tive. The following proposition, which considers regressions of aggregate output and

investment expenditures on stock prices, is proven in the appendix.



Proposition 4. Let βT ≡ cov(F +π1 +π2 , P )/var(P ) and βK ≡ cov(K1 +K2 , P )/var(P ),

respectively, represent the sensitivities of aggregate output and real investment ex-

penditures to stock market prices. Then under the conditions of Proposition 3, for

i = {T, K}, we have that βi > 0, dβi /dvz < 0, dβi /dv < 0, and dβi /dm > 0.



   As the above proposition demonstrates, the sensitivities of aggregate output and

real investment expenditures to stock market prices are positive and declining in

the variance of participation shocks vz and the risk borne by the informed v , and

increasing in the mass of informed investors m. The intuition is that prices reflect

more information when informed trading is more intense (higher m or lower v ) and

the noise in market prices (vz ) is not too high, and this increases the sensitivity of

investment as well as output to prices.



                                          20
   Also, in our model the correlation between stock prices and dividends is weakened

by negative feedback from the privately held firms, so a large private sector that can

potentially compete with the public firms is a necessary condition for a weak correla-

tion between stock prices and dividends. This last observation can be potentially used

to generate implications on the relation between stock returns and dividend changes

across industries. Specifically, the correlation between stock prices and dividends is

likely to be relatively low for those industries in which higher stock prices result in

more competition from new entrants and is likely to be relatively high in those in-

dustry sectors that do not face competition from new entrants or, alternatively, may

attract entrants with complementary investments that positively aﬀect the profits of

the public firms.


   The above observations can be potentially tested by looking at the relation be-

tween stock returns and investment expenditures as well as economic output. Specifi-

cally, the preceding discussion suggests the following implications (the preceding ma-

terial in parentheses indicates the signs of derivatives from Proposition 4 or specific

propositions or model features that suggest the implications):



 (1) (dβi /dvz < 0, dβi /dm > 0) Aggregate output and capital investment are likely

     to be less sensitive to stock prices in economies with a larger mass of unso-

     phisticated (e.g., retail) investor participation and a smaller mass of informed

     investors (e.g., institutional).

 (2) (dβi /dm > 0) In general, economies with institutions that facilitate the dissem-

     ination of information should exhibit a stronger relation between stock prices


                                          21
       and aggregate output. For example, the relation between total economic output

       and stock market prices will be greater for economies with an active community

       of equity analysts.

  (3) (dβi /dv < 0) Economies with greater inherent uncertainty (due, for example,

       to political risk) will have weaker links between total output and stock prices.

  (4) (Proposition 1) At the industry or sector level, our analysis implies that indus-

       tries with entrants that compete with public incumbents will tend to exhibit

       weaker links between stock prices and dividends than other industries with

       either greater entry barriers, or with entrants that tend to complement the

       incumbents.12

  (5) (Existence of an emerging private sector) The relation between stock prices and

       future dividends is likely to be weaker in countries with an emerging private

       sector with investment expenditures that are either directly or indirectly funded

       by the stock market. For example, the association between stock returns and

       dividends may be weaker in countries with an active venture capital industry

       and an active IPO market.13
  12
      An empirical measure of whether two firms are complements or substitutes is developed by
Sundaram, John, and John (1996). They first measure the marginal profit of a firm (the sensitivity
of a firm’s profit to its sales). Their metric then is the correlation of the marginal profit to the output
(sales) of other firms. A positive (negative) correlation indicates complementarity (substitutability).
   13
      See Michelacci and Suarez (2004) for a model that links the funding of emerging firms by venture
capitalists to activities in the stock market and the market for IPOs.




                                                    22
3.2    Numerical simulations


In this section, we provide simulations to illustrate our central results numerically.

Consider the parameter values C1 = D1 = 0, C2 = D2 = C3 = 1, and D3 =

C4 = D4 = 0.4. Also suppose that the exogenous variances (vθ , v , and vz ) and the

risk aversion coeﬃcient R all equal unity and the mass of informed agents m = 0.5.

Because we use this parameter set in the next two sections as well (and vary k through

the exogenous parameters G1 and G2 ), we will conveniently denote the set as Ω.


   To illustrate the diﬀerent signs and magnitudes of corr(F, P ) and corr(F + π1 +

π2 , P ) as a function of the level of feedback, we use the parameter set Ω, and let

G1 = 1, while varying G2 from 2 to 3, implying a variation in k from −0.52 to −1.48.

We use one million Monte Carlo draws of the triplet [θ, , z] to simulate the model.

Figure 1 demonstrates how the correlation between traded cash flows and prices,

corr(F, P ), switches from positive to negative as k decreases, but the correlation

between total cash flows and prices, corr(F + π1 + π2 , P ), is positive throughout this

range of k.


   Although a full-fledged calibration of our model is beyond the scope of this paper,

within the context of this numerical exercise, we can roughly gauge the magnitudes

of the regression coeﬃcients our model is able to generate. We can then compare

the regression coeﬃcients generated from this exercise to regressions of dividends and

industrial production on stock prices that are estimated by Cochrane (2011), Fama

(1990), and Schwert (1990). We consider the parameter set Ω, and let G1 = 1, and

G2 = 2.4. For these parameter values, the regression coeﬃcient of F on P (“divi-

                                          23
dends” on market prices) is 0.035. The coeﬃcient of 0.035 compares favorably with

Cochrane’s (2011) coeﬃcient of 0.04 when future dividend growth rates are regressed

on current dividend yields (see his Table III, right panel). Keeping all parameters

except m fixed and varying m from 0.1 to 0.6 makes the regression coeﬃcient of F on

P vary from 0.01 to 0.04, whereas the coeﬃcient of total cash flows on market price

(βT ) varies in a much higher range: from 0.11 to 0.79. The range for βT spans the

0.12—0.46 range obtained by Schwert (1990) for coeﬃcients of lagged returns when an-

nual and quarterly growth rates in industrial production are the dependent variable.

Similar magnitudes obtain for a wide range of parameter values other than in the set

Ω. Whereas the empirical studies forecast growth rates in dividends and industrial

production using returns and/or dividend yields, and are not directly comparable to

our model, which uses levels of cash flows and prices, our numerical example suggests

that a calibration of parameters (possibly via detailed empirical studies of feedback)

can potentially replicate the relations found in the data.



4.      The Eﬀect of Participation Shocks on Total Out-
        put


This section examines how participation shocks aﬀect the overall output in an econ-

omy. Our intuition illustrated in this section, is that positive participation shocks,

which lead to increased investment by the private entrants, can increase total output

if investment expenditures by private firms are suﬃciently complementary.


     We start by comparing the level of investment that maximizes the total output


                                          24
in the economy to the Nash equilibrium described in the previous section. We do

this by first examining whether the investment expenditures in the Nash equilibrium

are above or below the levels that maximize total output in the case with complete

information. We then compare the Nash equilibrium with noisy rational expectations

to the full revelation level of investment that maximizes total output. We particularly

focus on a case in which the Nash equilibrium generates underinvestment when the

participation shock is exactly zero. When this is the case, a small positive participa-

tion shock results in higher investment and increases the economy’s cash flows, thus

moving investment expenditures closer to the level that maximizes total output. In

this case, a small negative participation shock has the opposite eﬀect, but a suﬃ-

ciently large positive participation shock can lead to overinvestment relative to the

level that maximizes total output.


       To illustrate these results, we consider a planner who maximizes the sum of the

firms’ conditional expected profits.14 Thus, the planner solves


max E(F + π1 + π2 |P ) = max µ [C3 K1 + D3 K2 ] − 0.5[K12 + K22 − 2(C4 + D4 )K1 K2 ],
K1 ,K2                         K1 ,K2

                                                                                                  (18)

where we define C3 ≡ C3 + G1 and D3 ≡ D3 − G2 . Setting the partial derivatives of

the above expression with respect to K1 and K2 to zero yields


                                  K1 = µC3 + (C4 + D4 )K2                                         (19)
  14
     It can be easily shown that the profits of the informed and uninformed and the losses of noise
traders (with demand z) do not depend on the level of feedback and, in turn, on the level of
investment. The feedback-dependent part of the wealth is kµ − P = (ka1 − H1 )θ + (ka2 − H2 )z. The
losses of the noise traders are (F − P )z = (ka2 − H2 )z 2 . From (6), (7), (9), and (10), ka1 − H1 and
ka2 − H2 do not involve k. Therefore, the expected utilities of the agents who trade the public claim
do not form part of the social objective. So the total optimum is identical to the social optimum.



                                                  25
and

                                   K2 = µD3 + (C4 + D4 )K1 .                                         (20)

Substituting for K2 from (20) into (19), yields15

                                           µ [C3 + (C4 + D4 )D3 ]
                                   Ko1 =                          ,                                  (21)
                                              1 − (C4 + D4 )2

and similarly
                                           µ [D3 + (C4 + D4 )C3 ]
                                   Ko2 =                          ,                                  (22)
                                              1 − (C4 + D4 )2
where the additional subscript o denotes maximization of total output.


       Comparing (12) to (21) and (13) to (22), we know that if G2 = 0, so that there is

no negative feedback, then µ−1 [Koi − Ki ] > 0 ∀i = 1, 2.16 That is, without negative

feedback, there is underinvestment in the Nash equilibrium relative to the levels of

investment that maximize total output (too little investment in good scenarios with

positive µ and too little divestment in bad scenarios with negative µ). But, with

negative feedback, for any µ > 0, the planner may choose investment levels lower

than the Nash outcome to mitigate the impact of such feedback on the publicly

traded firm’s cash flow. In this scenario, there will still be underinvestment as long

as the feedback is not too negative and the strategic complementarity between the

private firms is suﬃciently high.17
  15
     We readily verified that the assumption C4 + D4 < 1 ensures the negative definiteness of the
Hessian matrix, guaranteeing a maximum.
  16
     To see this, first note that the denominators in (21) and (22) are smaller than their respective
counterparts in (12) and (13). If G2 = 0, then the terms multiplying µ in the numerators of (21)
and (22) are greater than the corresponding terms in (12) and (13).
  17
     Comparing (12) to (21), the coeﬃcient of µ in the latter is less than that in the former if
                                      C (C +D )2 +C42 D3 (C4 +D4 )+G1 (1−C4 D4 )+D3 D4
and only if the inequality G2 < 3 4 4              (C4 +D4 )(1−C4 D4 )                 is satisfied. As the
complementarity parameters C4 and D4 approach their upper bound of unity from below, the right-
hand side becomes ever larger, increasing the tendency for this inequality to hold. An analogous
argument holds for the comparison of (13) to (22).

                                                    26
   From (1), (2), and (3), the total cash flows of the economy, denoted by πo , are

then given by


           πo = C1 + D1 + + ko µ + (1 + C2 + D2 + C3 Ko1 + D3 Ko2 )θ
                                                         =
                       2     2
                − 0.5 Ko1 + Ko2 − 2(C4 + D4 )Ko1 Ko2 ,


where ko ≡ G1 Ko1 −G2 Ko2 . Note that when θ is publicly revealed prior to investment,

µ = θ. Denote the right-hand side of the above expression when µ = θ as πf o (θ),

where the subscript f denotes full revelation of θ. Further, for a given level of µ and

z, denote the final cash flow of the privately held and publicly traded firms at the

Nash equilibrium level of capital as πn (µ|z) and Fn (µ|z), respectively. We then have

the following proposition.



Proposition 5. Suppose that θ > 0 and


                          πf o (θ) > πn (µ|z = 0) + Fn (µ|z = 0).                 (23)


Then, relative to a Nash equilibrium with a zero participation shock, an arbitrar-

ily small participation shock z = zc > 0 increases real investment and causes the

economy’s total cash flow to increase.



   The above proposition illustrates a positive element of participation shocks that

can inflate stock prices above “fundamental values.” In our model, because the pri-

vate firms’ investments complement each other, they tend to underinvest relative to

the social optimum. Hence, on the margin, a participation shock that increases their

investment expenditures increases total output. This eﬀect is likely to be especially


                                            27
important when the investments of private entrants tend to be more innovative. In-

deed, Bill Gates, when asked about the Internet bubble at the 1999 World Economic

Forum in Davos, is quoted by Friedman (2005) as having said something to the eﬀect

of “Look, you bozos, of course they’re a bubble, but you’re missing the point. This

bubble is attracting so much new capital to this Internet industry, it is going to drive

innovation faster and faster.”


       We now demonstrate via a numerical example how participation shocks can move

investment expenditures closer to the levels that maximize total output under full

revelation. Consider the parameter set Ω of the previous section with G1 and G2

fixed at 1 and 2, respectively, and assume that θ = 1 and                  = 2. For this set of

parameters, in the full revelation, total optimum case, we have Ko1 = 2.1, Ko2 = 1.3,

and πf o (θ) = 6.39. In the Nash equilibrium with z = 0, however, we have K1 = 0.28,

K2 = 0.19, and πn (µ|z = 0) + Fn (µ|z = 0) = 5.33. In the Nash equilibrium with

z = 0.5, K1 = 0.55, K2 = 0.38, and πn (µ|z = 0.5) + Fn (µ|z = 0.5) = 5.59. Thus,

a positive participation shock shifts the economy’s output higher, and moves real

investment closer to the level that maximizes total output under full revelation.18
  18
    As mentioned at the beginning of this section, too high a participation shock can reverse this
result. For example, if z = 8, πn (µ) + Fn (µ) becomes 0.79, a figure lower than the total optimum of
6.39. Similarly, a large negative participation shock will also drop output below that chosen by the
planner under full revelation.




                                                 28
5.      The Roles of Risk Aversion and the Variance of
        Participation Shocks


Up to now, the analysis assumes that the uninformed and informed agents are equally

risk averse. In this section we relax this assumption and focus on how changes in the

risk aversion of the informed agent, holding the risk aversion of the uninformed agent

constant, aﬀects the predictions of our model. This section also considers the eﬀect

of changing the variance of participation shocks, which has a similar eﬀect on our

model’s predictions.


     We start by relaxing our assumption that the agents are equally risk averse, and

we describe the equilibrium in which the risk aversion coeﬃcients of the informed

and uninformed diﬀer. Let the risk aversion coeﬃcient of the uninformed agents be

denoted by RU , and let R continue to denote the risk aversion of the informed. The

market clearing condition (4) now becomes:

                        θ + kµ − P           (1 + k)µ − P
                    m              + (1 − m)              + z = 0.               (24)
                            Rv                   RU v

We show in the Appendix that in this case, the equilibrium price P can be written

as H1 θ + H2 z, where the coeﬃcient H1 is given by

                                                 A
                                        H1 ≡       ,                             (25)
                                                 B

where


A ≡ m[kmvθ {m3 vθ (R − RU ) − m2 Rvθ + mR2 v vz (Rv − RU (v + vθ )) − R3 v 2 vz }

      + (m2 vθ + R2 v 2 vz ){m2 vθ (R − RU ) − mRvθ − R2 RU v vz (v + vθ )}]


                                            29
and


B ≡ (m2 vθ +R2 v 2 vz )[m3 vθ (R−RU )−m2 Rvθ +mR2 v vz {Rv −RU (v +vθ )}−R3 v 2 vz ].


Further, the coeﬃcient H2 is given by


                                        H2 = Rv H1 /m.                                (26)



      Interestingly, the diﬀerence between H1 and H1 does not depend on k. Indeed,

suppose that RU = ρR. Then, from (6) and (25), we have

                          (ρ − 1)(1 − m)mR2 v 2 vz [m2 vθ + R2 v 2 vz (v + vθ )]
                H1 − H1 =                                                        ,    (27)
                                                 B

where


            B     ≡ [mρ{m2 vθ + R2 v vz (v + vθ )} + (1 − m)(m2 vθ + R2 v 2 vz )]

                  × [m2 vθ + mR2 v vθ vz + R2 v 2 vz ] > 0.


As can be seen, the right-hand side of (27) does not involve k. Thus, because H1 − H1

and H2 − H2 are both invariant to k,19 the diﬀerence between equilibrium prices when

RU = R and RU = R does not depend on k for given realizations of θ and z. Both

cash flows and price involve k, and k aﬀects these quantities and, in turn, the demands

of the agents in a way that the price as a function of RU (for a given R) is invariant

to k. Also note from (27) that if ρ > 1, that is, if R < RU , H1 > H1 . The intuition is

that if the informed agents are less risk averse than the uninformed ones, they trade

more aggressively on their information, and this increases the loading of the price on

their information θ.
 19
   Note that H2 = Rv6 H1 /m and H2 = Rv6 H1 /m, so that if H1 − H1 is invariant to k, so is
H2 − H2 .

                                               30
   Using the above results, we now present numerical comparative statics associated

with corr(F, P ), the correlation between prices and cash flows of the traded firm.

We use the parameter set Ω, for every exogenous parameter, except the one being

varied for the comparative static, and assume RU = 1, G1 = 1, and G2 = 3. Figures

2 and 3, respectively, demonstrate that the correlation becomes progressively less

negative as the risk aversion of the informed decreases relative to the uninformed,

and as the postdate 1 risk of the informed, v , decreases. The reason is that the

initial price response to a participation shock, which causes the negative correlation

via negative feedback, depends on the trading aggressiveness of the informed, which

in turn depends inversely on the risk aversion of and the risk borne by the agents.


   Figure 4 demonstrates that the correlation between the public firm’s stock price

and the public firm’s cash flow also becomes less negative as the variance of the

participation shock increases. An increase in this variance (vz ) decreases the signal-

to-noise ratio in the market price, making the price less responsive to a liquidity shock,

and thus decreasing the eﬀect of negative feedback on the traded firm’s cash flows. Of

course, in Figures 2 through 4, the level of feedback is such that corr(F, P ) is negative.

If instead we consider k > −1, which is a range for k such that corr(F, P ) is positive,

then increasing R relative to RU will make corr(F, P ) less positive. In fact, numerical

simulations indicate that [corr(F, P )]2 goes to zero as R becomes large relative to

RU . This is because as R/RU becomes unboundedly large, informed traders trade

increasingly less aggressively, reducing the extent of learning by the uninformed, so

that the price becomes increasingly less informative, and the absolute value of the

correlation between cash flows and prices becomes vanishingly small.



                                            31
6.        Amplification of Participation Shocks


Up to this point we have presented a simple model that can be solved in closed

form; it generates a number of qualitative results that are consistent with the empir-

ical macrofinance literature. In particular, the model can generate zero correlation

between stock returns and subsequent dividend changes but a positive correlation be-

tween stock prices and aggregate economic activity. In addition, the model generates

negative serial correlation in aggregate stock returns (or equivalently the predictabil-

ity of returns with price scaled ratios). Within the context of our model, a crucial

attribute that determines the strengths of these relations is the participation shock,

suggesting that the observed magnitude of predictability in the data requires large

and uncertain participation shocks.


       In this section we consider channels that might amplify the eﬀect of participation

shocks.20 We first consider the possibility that informed investors are overconfident

about the precision of their information. As we show, overconfidence amplifies the

participation shock, thereby increasing the strength of the relation between aggregate

output and market prices. We then briefly discuss parameter uncertainty, specifically

how our results may be altered if the variance of the participation shock is unknown.
  20
    Some other recent papers also address amplification of liquidity shocks and signal errors in
financial markets. Albagli (2012) argues that because households liquidate assets during crises,
intermediaries face tighter financing constraints as a result, and trade less aggressively, lowering the
information content of prices. Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2009) model the notion that in recessions,
consumers are liquidity constrained and spend less, thus magnifying the reduction in output due to
the recession.




                                                  32
6.1     Overconfident investors


We first consider the possibility that informed investors are overconfident.21 Specifi-

cally, they believe that their information about the technology shock is more precise

than it really is, that is, they underestimate v to be vc < v . We assume that the over-

confidence of the informed is common knowledge to all the noninformed participants

in the model. Overconfidence makes the informed agents more aggressive, which in

turn makes the price more sensitive to participation shocks. Thus, an increase in the

level of overconfidence amplifies the eﬀect of feedback and increases the magnitude of

the correlation between the public firm’s cash flows and stock prices.22 The Appendix

proves the following proposition.



Proposition 6. Consider a scenario in which informed agents rationally assess all

the model’s parameters. As one moves away from this setting to one of increasing

overconfidence, that is, vc , the estimate of v is progressively lowered, the absolute

magnitude of corr(F, P ), the correlation between the traded cash flows and the stock

price, increases.



6.2     Parameter uncertainty


As we show in the previous subsection, participation shocks can be amplified if in-

formed investors are overconfident. In this section we describe how uncertainty about
  21
     See Odean (1998) for an excellent review of the extensive literature that documents the pervasive
overconfidence bias.
  22
     Ko and Huang (2007) derive an analogous result by showing that overconfidence causes informed
agents to acquire information more aggressively, leading to greater pricing eﬃciency.


                                                 33
the expected magnitudes of participation and technology shocks can also amplify

participation shocks. Because the model cannot be solved in closed form without

common knowledge about the magnitude of these shocks, we provide intuition, that

is, conjectures, in a stylized setting.


   Consider, for example, a setting in which the true volatility of the participation

shock is drawn from a distribution of possible volatilities. Although this distribution

is common knowledge, the actual volatility that is drawn is not observed by market

participants. We conjecture that in this setting, the volatility of prices increases with

the volatility of the participation shock that is drawn.


   Unfortunately, solving a model in which agents draw parameter values from a

prior distribution is quite challenging because in this case, the linearity of conditional

expectations formed by the uninformed would be lost (this linearity holds only when

variances and unconditional means are nonstochastic). Our intuition comes from the

following proposition.



Proposition 7. If investors irrationally believe that the variance of the participation

shock is lower than its actual value, then the volatility of the equilibrium price will

be greater relative to the rational setting.



   Intuitively, prices are more volatile when investors underestimate the volatility of

the participation shock because they tend to underweight the possibility that price

changes reflect changes in risk premia rather than changes in expected cash flows,

and hence reduce the extent to which they take actions that oﬀset the participation

                                           34
shocks, that is, buying the stock when the supply is higher and vice versa.23 The

above proposition should be viewed as “suggestive;” because it considers an investor

prior that is a point estimate but also is wrong, and such a belief is inconsistent with

rationality.24



7.        Conclusion


Motivated initially by the equity premium puzzle described by Mehra and Prescott

(1985), researchers have struggled with a number of features of the data that relate

financial market prices to the macroeconomy. In addition to the magnitude of the

equity premium, researchers have developed models to address the time-series prop-

erties of default-free interest rates and expected equity returns and to understand

how they relate to dividends and aggregate consumption. To a large extent, the goal

of this research has been to identify a plausible characterization of preferences that

are consistent with the data.


       This paper takes an alternative approach to previous research by exploring a sub-

set of the issues considered in the macrofinance literature with a very diﬀerent type
  23
      This result is analogous to the result in Jacklin, Kleidon, and Pfleiderer (1992) and Gennotte
and Leland (1990), who find that if agents underestimate demand because of hedging or portfolio
insurance, prices become more susceptible to sudden crashes.
   24
      Solving an equilibrium in which the degree of uncertainty about participation shocks are drawn
from a distribution creates considerable challenges within our setting because prices in this setting are
no longer normally distributed. But it is likely that the above intuition can be captured numerically
in a simpler setting with specific numerical values. For example, consider the case in which the
investor prior distribution is that the standard deviation of the participation shock is 1 with a
probability of 0.99 and 10 with a probability of 0.01 but for which the actual standard deviation of
the participation shock is 10. We conjecture that the equilibrium price in this setting is very close
to that in the ad hoc equilibrium described in Proposition 7.




                                                   35
of model: noisy rational expectations with asymmetric information. In particular,

we extend Grossman and Stiglitz’s work (1980) to evaluate how stock price move-

ments caused by uninformed participation shocks can influence the profits of public

companies as well as overall economic activity. Within the context of this model, we

endogenously generate the positive correlations between stock returns and aggregate

economic activity, and stock returns and investment, which are observed in the data,

as well as the lack of correlation (or even negative correlation) between stock returns

and dividends.


   Our key contribution is showing that the equilibrium relation between cash flows

and prices can be strong or weak, depending on the strategic environment of firms.

Specifically, investment by private firms allows private firms to better compete with

publicly traded firms. Because these investments tend to increase with the stock

price of the traded firm, the investments reduce the cash flows of publicly traded

firms, generating a weak or even negative correlation between the public firms’ cash

flows and public firms’ stock prices. In this setting the correlation between aggre-

gate output and stock prices remains positive, because the nontraded sector’s cash

flows are positively related to the technology shocks, which are also reflected in stock

prices. Our results are thus consistent with the documented insignificant relation

between cash flows and dividends discussed, for example, in Fama and French (1988),

Campbell and Shiller (1988) and Cochrane (2011), as well as a significantly positive

relation between aggregate macroeconomic production and stock prices. We develop

additional implications that relate proxies for informational eﬃciency to the strength

of the relation between stock prices and total output.



                                          36
       At this point, our research agenda is much less ambitious than the preference-

based macrofinance literature. In particular, we address fewer facts, and our focus

is on qualitative results based on a closed-form model with CARA preferences. As a

result, we only provide a preliminary evaluation of economic magnitudes. Nonetheless,

our analysis looks promising, and our results identify various levers that may help

future researchers who are interested in exploring the quantitative relation between

stock returns and aggregate economic activity.


       In addition to the parameters that we explicitly consider in our model, our analysis

suggests potential adaptations of the model that may help future researchers match

the observed moments in the data. For example, our analysis suggests that over-

confident informed investors react more aggressively to information, increasing the

correlation between stock prices and economic output. In addition, the volatility of

stock prices is influenced by the beliefs of the uninformed investors about the volatility

of participation shocks. Thus, when uninformed investors believe that participation

shocks are less volatile than they really are, stock prices will be more volatile. Finally,

the volatility and serial correlation of returns are likely to be amplified if investors have

preferences that make them more risk averse when they are less wealthy.25 Whether

or not deviations from rational expectations or changes in preferences can be ex-

ploited to yield economic moments that match the moments observed in the data is

a challenge that warrants future research.




  25
       Unfortunately, a closed-form solution of our model requires CARA preferences.

                                                 37
                                     References



Admati, A., and P. Pfleiderer. 1986. A monopolistic market for information. Journal

of Economic Theory 39:400—38.


Albagli, E. 2012. Amplification of uncertainty in illiquid markets. Working Paper,

University of Southern California.


Amador, M., and P. Weill. 2012. Learning from private and public observations of

others’ actions. Journal of Economic Theory 147:910—40.


Angeletos, G., G. Lorenzoni, and A. Pavan. 2010. Beauty contests and irrational

exuberance: A neoclassical approach. Working Paper, Northwestern University.


Bansal, R., and A. Yaron. 2004. Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of

asset pricing puzzles. Journal of Finance 59:1481—509.


Barro, R. 1990. The stock market and investment. Review of Financial Studies

3:115—31.


Campbell, J. 1991. A variance decomposition for stock returns. Economic Journal

101:157—79.


Campbell, J., and R. Shiller. 1988. Stock prices, earnings, and expected dividends.

Journal of Finance 43:661—76.


Chen, Q., I. Goldstein, and W. Jiang. 2007. Price informativeness and information

                                         38
sensitivity to stock price. Review of Financial Studies 20:619—50.


Choi, J., S. Hauser, and K. Kopecky. 1999. Does the stock market predict real

activity? Time series evidence from the G-7 countries. Journal of Banking and

Finance 23:1771—92.


Cochrane, J. 1996. A cross-sectional test of a production-based asset pricing model.

Journal of Political Economy 104:572—621.


––. 2011. Presidential address: Discount rates. Journal of Finance 66:1047—108.


Cooper, R., and A. John. 1988. Coordinating coordination failures in Keynesian

models. Quarterly Journal of Economics 103:441—63.


Fama, E. 1990. Stock returns, expected returns, and real activity. Journal of Finance

45:1089—108.


Fama, E., and K. French. 1988. Dividend yields and expected stock returns. Journal

of Financial Economics 22:3—25.


Fishman, M., and K. Hagerty. 1989. Disclosure decisions by firms and the competi-

tion for price eﬃciency. Journal of Finance 44:633—46.


Friedman, T. 2005. The world is flat: A brief history of the twenty-first century. New

York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux.


Gennotte, G., and H. Leland. 1990. Market liquidity, hedging, and crashes. American


                                         39
Economic Review 80:999—1021.


Goldstein, I., and A. Guembel. 2008. Manipulation and the allocational role of prices.

Review of Economic Studies 75:133—64.


Goldstein, I., E. Ozdenoren, and K. Yuan. 2013. Trading frenzies and their impact

on real investment. Journal of Financial Economics 109:566—82.


Grossman, S. 1976. On the eﬃciency of competitive stock markets where trades have

diverse information. Journal of Finance 31:573—85.


Grossman, S., and J. Stiglitz. 1980. On the impossibility of informationally eﬃcient

markets. American Economic Review 70:393—408.


Guerrieri, V., and G. Lorenzoni. 2009. Liquidity and trading dynamics. Economet-

rica 77:1751—90.


Hansen, L., J. Heaton, and N. Li. 2008. Consumption strikes back? Measuring long

run risk. Journal of Political Economy 116:260—302.


Hansen, L., and T. Sargent. 2007. Fragile beliefs and the price of model uncertainty.

Working Paper, University of Chicago.


Hassan, T., and T. Mertens. 2011. The social cost of near-rational investment.

Working Paper, University of Chicago.


Hellwig, M. 1980. On the aggregation of information in competitive markets. Journal


                                         40
of Economic Theory 22:477—98.


Holden, C., and A. Subrahmanyam. 1996. Risk aversion, liquidity, and endogenous

short horizons. Review of Financial Studies 9:691—722.


Jacklin, C., A. Kleidon, and P. Pfleiderer. 1992. Underestimation of portfolio insur-

ance and the crash of October 1987. Review of Financial Studies 5:35—63.


Ko, J., and Z. Huang. 2007. Arrogance can be a virtue: Overconfidence, information

acquisition, and market eﬃciency. Journal of Financial Economics 84:529—60.


Larrain, B., and M. Yogo. 2008. Does firm value move too much to be justified by

subsequent changes in cash flow? Journal of Financial Economics 87:200—26.


Leland, H. 1992. Insider trading: Should it be prohibited? Journal of Political

Economy 100:859—87.


LeRoy, S., and R. Porter. 1981. The present-value relation: Tests based on implied

variance bounds. Econometrica 49:555—74.


Marakani, S. 2009. Long run consumption risks: Are they there? Working Paper,

Northwestern University.


Michelacci, C., and J. Suarez. 2004. Business creation and the stock market. Review

of Economic Studies 71:459—81.


Mehra, R., and E. Prescott. 1985. The equity premium: A puzzle. Journal of


                                         41
Monetary Economics 15:145—61.


Odean, T. 1998. Volume, volatility, price, and profit when all traders are above

average. Journal of Finance 53:1887—934.


Ozdenoren, E., and K. Yuan. 2008. Feedback eﬀects and asset prices. Journal of

Finance 63:1939—75.


Schumpeter, J. 1911. A theory of economic development. Cambridge: Harvard Uni-

versity Press.


Schwert, W. 1990. Stock returns and real economic activity: A century of evidence.

Journal of Finance 45:1237—57.


Subrahmanyam, A., and S. Titman. 2001. Feedback from stock prices to cash flows.

Journal of Finance 56:2389—413.


Sundaram, A., T. John, and K. John. 1996. An empirical analysis of strategic

competition and firm values: The case of R&D competition. Journal of Financial

Economics 40:459—86.




                                       42
                                        Appendix



Proof of Lemma 1: As part of their optimization, the uninformed agents solve a

filtration problem that infers θ from the price P , which is a linear combination of θ

and z. Let
                                            mθ
                                     τ≡        + z.
                                            Rv
Note that (4) can be solved for P and written as

           P = [mv + (1 − m)v ]−1 [Rvv τ + µ{kmv + (1 − m)(1 + k)v }] .            (A1)

Because µ and v are nonstochastic from the uninformed’s perspective, P is observa-

tionally equivalent to τ . Thus, we have

                                                  Rmvθ v
                           µ = E(θ|τ ) =                       τ,                  (A2)
                                             m2 vθ + R2 v 2 vz

and
                                                   m2 vθ2
                            v = v + vθ −                        .                  (A3)
                                              m2 vθ + R2 v 2 vz
Note that µ can be written as

                                    µ = a1 θ + a2 z,                               (A4)

where
                                              m2 vθ
                                 a1 =                                              (A5)
                                         m2 vθ + R2 v 2 vz
and
                                            Rmvθ v
                                 a2 =                      .                       (A6)
                                         m2 vθ + R2 v 2 vz
Note that the bigger is vθ , the bigger are the coeﬃcients a1 and a2 . Thus, a given

informational or participation shock has a bigger impact on cash flows if the volatility

of the information variable is higher.

                                             43
Solving for P from (4), we have

                      Rvv z + mvθ + µ[k{m(v − v ) + v } + v (1 − m)]
                P =                                                  .
                                     m(v − v ) + v


Substituting for µ and v from (A2) and (A3), respectively, we have the expressions

for H1 and H2 in (6) and (7).


Proof of Proposition 2: The covariance of total cash flows with price is cov(F +

π1 +π2 , P ). Note that the expressions for π1 and π2 in (14) and (15), respectively, have

some terms that are quadratic forms of normal random variables. These quadratic

forms do not aﬀect the covariance, however. To see this first note that µ is a lin-

ear function θ and z, so that µ2 is a quadratic form in θ and z. Then, observe that

cov(µ2 , P ) = cov(µθ, P ) = 0, because θ2 , θz, and z 2 are all uncorrelated with P , which

is a linear combination of θ and z. For example, cov(θz, θ) = E(θ2 z)−E(θz)E(θ) = 0,

because θ and z are independent, as are θ2 and z (functions of independent ran-

dom variables are also independent), and both θ and z have zero mean. Simi-

larly, cov(θ, θ2 ) = E(θ3 ) − E(θ)E(θ2 ) = 0, because the normal distribution has zero

skewness and θ has zero mean. Analogous calculations can be done to show that

cov(θz, z) = cov(z, z 2 ) = 0. This shows that the covariances of the quadratic forms

of normals in (14) and (15) with P are zero. We thus have


         cov(F + π1 + π2 , P ) = cov[θ(1 + C2 + D2 ) + + kµ, H1 θ + H2 z]

                                 = (1 + C2 + D2 + ka1 )H1 vθ + ka2 H2 vz

                                 = H1 (1 + k + C2 + D2 )vθ .                          (A7)


The proposition thus follows.

                                            44
Proof of Proposition 3: Note that H1 > 0 and k < −1 imply that corr(F, P ) < 0

(from Proposition 1). Also observe from (A7) that if k > −(1 + C2 + D2 ), corr(F +

π1 + π2 , P ) > 0. Then, from (8) and (5) we have that

                                   cov(µ, P ) = a1 H1 vθ + a2 H2 vz .                           (A8)

From (9), (10), and (6) the right-hand side of (A8) equals

mvθ [kmvθ (m2 vθ + mR2 v vθ vz + R2 v 2 vz ) + {mvθ + R2 v vz (v + vθ )}{m2 vθ + R2 v 2 vz }]
                                                                                              ,
                   (m2 vθ + mR2 v vθ vz + R2 v 2 vz )(m2 vθ + R2 v 2 vz )

which is positive if H1 > 0 (from (6)). The proposition thus follows.


Proof of Proposition 4: From Lemma 1, the variance of the price P can be written

as
                                                                           =
                        var(P ) = H12 vθ + H22 vz = H12 vθ + m−2 R2 v 2 vz .                    (A9)

Now, it follows from (6), (A7), and (A9) that

                      mvθ (1 + k + q)(m2 vθ + mR2 v vθ vz + R2 v 2 vz )
βT =                                                                                           .
       kmvθ (m2 vθ + mR2 v vθ vz + R2 v 2 vz ) + [mvθ + R2 v vz (v + vθ )](m2 vθ + R2 v 2 vz )
                                                                                      (A10)

Now, let
               
     L ≡           kmvθ (m2 vθ + mR2 v vθ vz + R2 v 2 vz ) + m3 vθ2 + m2 R2 v vθ vz (v + vθ )
                                                   =2
           + mR2 v 2 vθ vz + R4 v 3 vz2 (v + vθ ) .

We then have

 dβT                                      
         = −mR2 v 2 vθ (1 + k + q) m4 vθ2 + 2m2 R2 v vθ vz (v + vθ )
 dvz
                                                             =
         + mR4 v 2 vθ vz2 (v + vθ ) + R4 v 3 vz2 (v + vθ ) /L,
 dβT                                          
         = −mR2 v 2 vθ vz (1 + k + q) 2m4 vθ2 + m3 R2 v vθ2 vz + m2 R2 v vθ vz (4v + 3vθ )
 dv

                                                  45
                                                              =
        + mR4 v 2 vθ vz2 (3v + 2vθ ) + R4 v 3 vz2 (2v + vθ ) /L, and
  dβT                              
        = R2 v 2 vθ vz (1 + k + q) m4 vθ2 + m2 R2 v vθ vz (2v + 3vθ )
  dm
                                                          =
        + 2mR4 v 2 vθ vz2 (v + vθ ) + R4 v 3 vz2 (v + vθ ) /L.


Because L > 0, and, under the conditions in Proposition 3, 1 + k + q > 0, the first two

derivatives are negative, and the third is positive. Also, note that βT > 0, because

the denominator of the right-hand side of (A10) is identical to the denominator of (6),

which is required to be positive for H1 > 0 (a positive H1 is a premise of Proposition

3).


We now turn to βK . Let

                                   C3 + D3 + C3 D4 + C4 D3
                             ∆≡                            .
                                         1 − C4 D4

From (12) and (13), and noting that P = H1 θ + H2 vz , and that µ = a1 θ + a2 z, we

have that
                                        ∆(a1 H1 vθ + a2 H2 vz )
                               βK =                             .
                                           H12 vθ + H22 vz
Now, observing from Proposition 1 that H2 = (Rv /m)H1 , and substituting for H1 ,

a1 , and a2 from (6), (9), and (10), respectively, we find that

                                                 βT ∆
                                       βK =               .
                                              (1 + k + q)

Now, ∆ > 0, and, as noted above, the conditions in Proposition 3 imply that 1+k+q >

0, indicating that βK > 0. Further, ∆ and 1 + k + q do not involve vz , v , or m. So,

the signs of the derivatives of βK with respect to vz , v , and m, are the same as the

corresponding ones for βT . This proves the proposition.



                                               46
Proof of Proposition 5: Note that (14) can be written as
                                                 ^
                                             (C3 + C4 D3 )[2µθC3 (1 − C4 D4 )
            π1 = C1 + θC2 + (C3 + C4 D3 )
                                                     2(1 − C4 D4 )2
                                                 
                   µ2 {C4 D3 + C3 (2C4 D4 − 1)}]
               +                                   .                                 (A11)
                           2(1 − C4 D4 )2

Now observe that µ = a1 θ + a2 z, and from (9) and (10), a1 and a2 are positive. For

an arbitrarily small shock z = zc , the term involving µ2 = a21 θ2 + a22 zc2 can be ignored;

further, the coeﬃcient of µθ = a1 θ2 + a2 θzc in (A11) is positive. Thus, a small shock

z = zc > 0 increases the right-hand side of (A11) relative to the case in which z = 0.




Proof of Equations (25) and (26): Solving for the price P from (24), we have

            RRU vv z + kµ[Rv − m(Rv + RU v)] + m(RU θv − µRv ) + µRv
      P =                                                            .               (A12)
                               Rv − m(Rv − RU v)

Note that since v and τ do not depend on the risk aversion of the uninformed, they

remain unchanged (as does µ) relative to their algebraic representations in Section

1 and the proof of Proposition 1. Substituting for v and µ from (A3) and (8),

respectively, into (A12) above yields (25) and (26).


Proof of Proposition 6: Under overconfidence, the variable τ = θ +Rvc z/m. Thus,

the analogs of (9) and (10) become

                                              m2 vθ
                                  a1 =                                               (A13)
                                         m2 vθ + R2 vc2 vz

and
                                            Rmvθ vc
                                  a2 =                   .                           (A14)
                                         m2 vθ
                                             + R2 vc2 vz



                                             47
Using techniques similar to that used for Proposition 1, we find that the price P takes

the firm

                                         P = H1o θ + H2o z

where H1o = Ao /Bo , with


   Ao ≡ m(kmvθ (m3 vθ (Rvc − RU v ) − m2 Rvc vθ + mR2 v vz (Rvc − RU (v + vθ ))

          − R3 vc v 2 vz ) + m4 vθ2 (Rvc − RU v ) − m3 Rvc vθ2 + m2 R2 v vθ vz (Rvc v

          − RU (vC2 + v (v + vθ ))) − mR3 vC v 2 vθ vz − R4 RU vC2 v 2 vz2 (v + vθ ))


and


Bo ≡ (m2 vθ +R2 vc2 vz )(m3 vθ (Rvc −RU v )−m2 Rvc vθ +mR2 v vz (Rvc −RU (v +vθ ))−R3 vc v 2 vz ).


Further, H2o = (Rvc H1o )/m. Note that the covariance


                  cov(F, P ) = H1o (1 + ka1 )vθ + H2o ka2 vz = H1o (1 + k)vθ .


We also have that

                                    var(P ) = H1o2 vθ + H2o2 vz

and

                             var(F ) = (1 + ka1 )2 vθ + v + k 2 a22 vz .

All this implies that

                                              m sgn(H1o )(1 + k)vθ
             corr(F, P ) =                                                              .
                             [k 2 m2 vθ2 + 2km2 vθ2 + (v + vθ )(m2 vθ + R2 vc2 vθ )]0.5

The absolute magnitude of the above correlation increases as vc decreases, because the

absolute value of the numerator does not involve vc and the denominator is increasing

in vc .

                                                 48
Proof of Proposition 7: Suppose that the true variance of participation shocks is

vz whereas uninformed agents estimate it to be vz . The volatility of the price is

                                                  I         I
                                varI (P ) = H12 vθ + H22 vz ,


and when the true volatility of z is vz , the volatility of the price is

                                              I         I
                                 var(P ) = H12 vθ + H22 vz ,


where the subscripts I denotes irrationality. Now, substituting for H1 from (25), and

using (26), we have

                           varI (P ) − var(P ) = (vz − vz )γ1 /γ2 ,

where


γ1 ≡ R2 v 2 m2 [kmvθ {m3 vθ (R − RU ) − m2 Rvθ + mR2 v vz (Rv − RU (v + vθ )) − R3 v 2 vz }

      + (m2 vθ + R2 v 2 vz ){m2 vθ (R − RU ) − mRvθ − R2 RU v vz (v + vθ )}]2


and


γ2 ≡ m2 (m2 vθ + R2 v 2 vz )2 [m3 vθ (R − RU ) − m2 Rvθ + mR2 v vz {Rv − RU (v + vθ )}

      − R 3 v 2 vz ] 2 .


Because γ1 and γ2 are positive, the volatility of the price is therefore higher when the

volatility of the participation shock is underestimated (vz < vz ).




                                             49
                     Figure 1: Correlation between total cash flows and cash flows of the traded asset, as a
                                              function of the feedback parameter, k
              0.9


              0.8


              0.7


              0.6


              0.5


              0.4
Correlation




                                                                                                Correlation between traded
              0.3                                                                               cash flows and price
                                                                                                Correlation between total
                                                                                                cash flows and price
              0.2


              0.1


                0


              -0.1


              -0.2
                  -1.6            -1.3                 -1         -0.7            -0.4


                                         Feedback parameter, k
                                                       Figure 2: Correlation between cash flows and the market price as a function of the feedback
                                                                                              parameter, k


                                                                                                                0.5




                                                                                                                0.4




                                                                                                                0.3
Correlation between cash flows and market price




                                                                                                                0.2




                                                                                                                0.1




                                                                                                                  0
                                                  -4     -3.5       -3        -2.5        -2           -1.5           -1   -0.5      0         0.5   1


                                                                                                               -0.1




                                                                                                               -0.2
                                                                                               Feedback parameter k
                                     Figure 3: Correlation between cash flows and the market price as a function of the risk borne
                                                                       by the informed agents


                        0.6


                        0.5


                        0.4


                        0.3
Corr(Price,Cash Flow)




                        0.2


                        0.1


                          0
                               0.8          0.85          0.9          0.95              1              1.05         1.1    1.15     1.2

                        -0.1


                        -0.2


                        -0.3


                        -0.4
                                                                    Post-date 1 risk of the informed, var(epsilon)
                                            Figure 4: Correlation between cash flows and the market price as a function of the risk
                                                                       aversion of the informed agents


                        0.5


                        0.4


                        0.3


                        0.2
Corr(Price,Cash Flow)




                        0.1


                          0
                               0.8   0.85        0.9          0.95            1             1.05      1.1          1.15          1.2

                        -0.1


                        -0.2


                        -0.3


                        -0.4
                                                                Risk aversion of the informed, R
