NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EQUILIBRIA IN HEALTH EXCHANGES:
ADVERSE SELECTION VS. RECLASSIFICATION RISK
Benjamin R. Handel
Igal Hendel
Michael D. Whinston
Working Paper 19399
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19399
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013

We thank conference discussants Gautam Gowrisankaran, Bruno Jullien, Kei Kawai, Pierre-Thomas
Leger, and Neale Mahoney for their detailed advice and comments on this paper. We also thank the
participants in seminars at AEA Annual Meetings (2012), Berkeley, Berkeley-Stanford IO Fest (2011),
Bureau of Economic Analysis, Carnegie Mellon Heinz, Duke Applied Microeconomics Jamboree
(2012), Harvard, Montreal HEC, Montreal HEC Health-IO Conference, M.I.T., NBER Health Care
Summer Institute (2013), NYU, Northwestern-Toulouse IO Conference, Robert Wood Johnson SHPR
Annual Meeting (2012), Stanford SITE: Theory-Based Modeling (2012), Toulouse Network for IT
Annual Meeting (2011), University of Arizona, University of Chicago, UCL, University of WisconsinMilwaukee, Utah Winter Business Economics Conference (2013), Wharton Health Exchanges Conference,
and Yale. All authors are grateful for support from NSF grant SES-1259770 and Whinston also thanks
prior support from NSF and the Toulouse Network for Information Technology. We thank Jorge Lemus
and Fernando Luco for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Benjamin R. Handel, Igal Hendel, and Michael D. Whinston. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Equilibria in Health Exchanges: Adverse Selection vs. Reclassification Risk
Benjamin R. Handel, Igal Hendel, and Michael D. Whinston
NBER Working Paper No. 19399
September 2013
JEL No. D82,G22,I11,I13,I18
ABSTRACT
This paper studies regulated health insurance markets known as exchanges, motivated by their inclusion
in the Affordable Care Act (ACA). We use detailed health plan choice and utilization data to model
individual-level projected health risk and risk preferences. We combine the estimated joint distribution
of risk and risk preferences with a model of competitive insurance markets to predict outcomes under
different regulations that govern insurers' ability to use health status information in pricing. We investigate
the welfare implications of these regulations with an emphasis on two potential sources of inefficiency:
(i) adverse selection and (ii) premium reclassification risk.
We find that market unravelling from adverse selection is substantial under the proposed pricing rules
in the Affordable Care Act (ACA), implying limited coverage for individuals beyond the lowest coverage
(Bronze) health plan permitted. Although adverse selection can be attenuated by allowing (partial)
pricing of health status, our estimated risk preferences imply that this would create a welfare loss from
reclassification risk that is substantially larger than the gains from increasing within-year coverage,
provided that consumers can borrow when young to smooth consumption or that age-based pricing
is allowed. We extend the analysis to investigate some related issues, including (i) age-based pricing
regulation (ii) exchange participation if the individual mandate is unenforceable and (iii) insurer risk-adjustment
transfers.
Benjamin R. Handel
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
508-1 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
handel@berkeley.edu
Igal Hendel
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
igal@northwestern.edu

Michael D. Whinston
Sloan School of Management
and Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
100 Main St
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
whinston@mit.edu

1

Introduction

Health insurance markets almost everywhere are subject to a variety of regulations designed to encourage the e¢ cient provision of insurance. In the United States, the A¤ordable Care Act (ACA),
passed in 2010, de…nes a class of regulated state-by-state markets, called exchanges, in which insurers
must o¤er annual policies that comply with speci…c federal rules related to insurance contract design
and pricing. Relative to the private individual insurance markets that existed prior to the A¤ordable
Care Act, the exchanges remove almost entirely the ability of insurers to price based on consumers’
health conditions, heavily regulate both …nancial and non-…nancial contract dimensions, require all individuals to have insurance, and organize and present information with the intent to facilitate informed
consumer decision-making.1 While state exchange regulators will have some ‡exibility to implement
their own market designs, all exchanges will share these common characteristics when they begin, or
continue to, insure consumers in 2014. While there has certainly been a great deal of public discussion
concerning the desirability of this reform, there has been surprisingly little formal analysis of the likely
outcomes in these exchanges and the welfare impacts of alternative designs that were considered but
not implemented.
This paper sets up and empirically investigates a model of insurer competition in a regulated
marketplace, motivated by these exchanges. We focus on the issue of premium regulation and ask
how di¤erent insurer pricing restrictions would impact consumer welfare. Speci…cally, we start with
pure community rating as a default, and then investigate a range of alternative regulations that allow
insurers greater ‡exibility in pricing individual-speci…c characteristics such as pre-existing medical
conditions.2 Relative to these alternative regulations, the ACA prohibition on pricing nearly all preexisting conditions can directly impact two distinct determinants of consumer welfare: adverse selection
and re-classi…cation risk.3 Adverse selection is present when there is individual-speci…c information
that can’t be priced, and sicker individuals tend to select greater coverage.4 Reclassi…cation risk,
on the other hand, arises when insurance contracts are of limited duration and changes in health
status lead to changes in premiums. In our setting, reductions in the extent to which premiums can
be based on pre-existing conditions are likely to increase the extent of adverse selection, but reduce
the reclassi…cation risk that insured individuals face. For example, when pricing based on pre-existing
conditions is completely prohibited (which is close to the case in the current regulation), reclassi…cation
1 For

example, in all states, insurers must o¤er the same premium to di¤erent indivduals of the same age (subject

to some minor caveats), and premiums to individuals of di¤erent ages cannot di¤er by more than a 3:1 ratio. Federal
regulations govern the minimum actuarial standards for contracts nationwide, while states have some leeway both to
further restrict these …nancial standards and to determine what medical procedures insurers must cover. As we discuss
below, the ACA also bans pricing based on nearly all pre-existing conditions.
2 See, e.g., Bhattacharya et al. (2013) or Capretta and Miller (2010) for policy-oriented discussions that advocate
relaxing the pricing restrictions present in the ACA (subject to some complementary market design changes).
3 Each of these phenomena is often cited as a key reason why market regulation is so prevalent in this sector in the
…rst place.
4 See Akerlof (1970) and Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) for seminal theoretical work.

2

risk is eliminated but adverse selection is likely to be present. At the other extreme, were unrestricted
pricing based on health status allowed, adverse selection would be completely eliminated. We would
then expect e¢ cient insurance provision conditional on the set of available contracts, although at a
very high price for sick consumers.5 Thus, in determining the degree to which pricing of pre-existing
conditions should be allowed, a regulator needs to consider the potential trade-o¤ between adverse
selection and re-classi…cation risk.
To study the impact of the ACA and alternative regulations we develop a stylized model of an
insurance exchange that builds on work by Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976), Wilson (1977), Miyazaki
(1977), Riley (1985) and Engers and Fernandez (1987) who all modeled competitive markets with
asymmetric information. In the model, the population is characterized by a joint distribution of risk
preferences and health risk and there is free entry of insurers. We assume that individuals are forced
to buy insurance in the marketplace, as a result of a fully-enforced individual mandate (we relax this
in an extension). Throughout the analysis, we …x two classes of insurance contracts that each insurer
can o¤er.6 The more comprehensive contract has 90% actuarial value and mimics the most generous
coverage allowed under the ACA, while the less comprehensive contract has 60% actuarial value and
mimics the least generous coverage allowed under the ACA.7 These contracts are required to be annual,
as in the current legislation. The model abstracts away from horizontal insurer di¤erentiation from,
e.g., di¤erent access to medical providers and treatments.8
The challenges in conducting this analysis are both theoretical and empirical. From the theoretical
perspective, the analysis of competitive markets under asymmetric information, speci…cally insurance
markets, is delicate. Equilibria are di¢ cult to characterize, can be sensitive to the contracting assumptions, and are often fraught with non-existence. On the empirical side, any prediction of exchange
outcomes must naturally depend on the extent of information asymmetries, that is, on the distribution
of risks and the information in the hands of insurees. Thus, a key empirical challenge is identifying
these distributions.
To deal with the Nash equilibrium existence problems highlighted by Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976)
we focus on another concept developed in the theoretical literature: Riley equilibria [Riley (1979)].
Under the Riley notion, …rms consider competitors’reactions so that deviations rendered unpro…table
by subsequent reactions are not undertaken. The main roles of the theoretical analysis are (i) to prove
the existence and uniqueness of Riley equilibrium in our context and (ii) develop algorithms to …nd
5 This

abstracts away from liquidity concerns that could be present in reality, especially for low income populations.
our model allows insurers to o¤er both kinds of insurance contracts simultaneously. In the ACA,

6 Importantly,

insurers are required to o¤er at least two policies, in the 80% (gold) and 70% (silver) actuarial equivalence classes [see,
e.g., Fernandez and Mach (2012)].
7 Actuarial value re‡ects the proportion of total expenses that an insurance contract would cover if the entire population
were enrolled. In addition to the contracts we study, the ACA permits insurers to o¤er two classes of intermediate contracts
with 70% and 80% actuarial value respectively. In the legislation, 90% is referred to as “platinum”, 80% “gold”, 70%
“silver”, and 60% “bronze.”
8 While such horizontal di¤erentiation could be important for choice / pricing in practice, here we focus on the …nancial
role of insurance in risk protection and the subsequent trade-o¤ between adverse selection and reclassi…cation risk.

3

both the Riley equilibrium and any Nash equilibria, should they exist.9 As an extension in Section 6,
we study an alternative equilibrium notion, Wilson equilibrium [Wilson (1977)], which places di¤erent
restrictions on possible equilibrium deviations.
We use the outputs of this equilibrium market analysis (premiums and consumers’ plan choices)
as inputs into a long-run welfare model that integrates year-to-year premium risk, conditional on
the pricing regulation and underlying health transition process. This model evaluates welfare from
the perspective of an ex-ante unborn individual, and follows an individual through many consecutive
one-year markets characterized by the static model. We evaluate lifetime welfare under two di¤erent
scenarios. On the one hand, we consider …xed income over time, which is a reasonable assumption when
borrowing is feasible. Alternatively, to capture potential borrowing frictions, we also evaluate welfare
under the observed income pro…le. One bene…t of pricing health conditions is that the population is
healthier at younger ages, when their income is lower. Pricing pre-existing conditions, which results in
lower premiums early in life, can therefore be bene…cial for steep enough income pro…les.
To simulate the market we need a population of potential insureds for whom we know the joint
distribution of ex ante health status and risk preferences. We obtain this information using individuallevel health plan choice and health claims data for the employees of a large …rm and their dependents.
We leverage several unique features of the data to cleanly identify risk preferences including (i) a year
where all employees made active, non-default choices, due to a menu change and (ii) the fact that
the plans available di¤er …nancially, but not in terms of provider availability. We develop a structural
choice model, that generalizes Handel (2013), to quantify risk preferences.10 In particular, we estimate
a distribution of heterogeneous risk preferences that is allowed to depend on an individual’s ex ante
health status since prior work on insurance markets [see e.g. Finkelstein and McGarry (2006) or Cohen
and Einav (2007)] reveals that correlation between health risk and risk preferences can have important
implications for market outcomes (e.g., the extent of adverse selection).
To model health risk perceived by employees at the time of plan choice, we use the methodology
developed in Handel (2013), which characterizes both total cost health risk and plan-speci…c out-ofpocket expenditure risk. The model incorporates past diagnostic and cost information into individuallevel and plan-speci…c expense projections using both (i) sophisticated predictive software developed
at Johns Hopkins Medical School and (ii) a detailed model of how di¤erent types of medical claims
translate into out-of-pocket expenditures in each plan. This cost model outputs an individual-plantime speci…c distribution of predicted out-of-pocket expenditures that we incorporate into the choice
model under the assumption that consumer beliefs about future health expenditures conform to our
cost model estimates.
We use the estimates to study market equilibria and long-run welfare in counterfactual market
9 We

study Nash equilbria for two cases: (i) when insurers can o¤er both policies at once and (ii) when insurers are

restricted to o¤ering only one policy.
1 0 While we incorporate consumer inertia in estimation to correctly estimate risk preferences, as in Handel (2013), our
subsequent exchange equilibrium analysis studies a static marketplace where consumers make active non-inertial choices.

4

environments. While we realize that our sample, coming from one large …rm, is not an externally
valid sample on which to base a policy conclusion, the depth and scale of the data present an excellent
opportunity to illustrate our methodology. In Section 6, we re-run our main analyses with a re-weighted
sample that matches our population to that in the nationally representative Medical Expenditure Panel
Survey (MEPS) on key demographic dimensions. This analysis yields, in general, similar results to those
from our primary sample.
For the static market with pure community rating (no price discrimination) our results show substantial within-market adverse selection. The Riley equilibrium results in full unravelling, with all
consumers purchasing a 60% plan at a premium equal to plan average cost for the entire population.
There is still full unravelling in each age cohort once we allow for age-based pricing, though the premiums for each age group re‡ect the plan average costs conditional on age. High-risk consumers have
large price externalities on healthier ones, leading to extremely expensive, and essentially unavailable,
90% plans. This suggests that the Minimum Creditable Coverage in terms of actuarial value, regulated
to 60% in the ACA, could be a pivotal determinant of consumer welfare in the exchanges.11
We study alternative policies where insurers can price pre-existing conditions to some extent. For
illustrative purposes, we consider the case where insurers can price based on ex ante health status
quartiles: here the Riley equilibria across quartiles result in less adverse selection in the sense that
both the 60% and 90% plans have positive market share (though for some quartiles the market still
fully unravels). We then study pricing based on …ner partitions of health-status, all the way up to the
case of full risk-rating, where insurers can use all available information to price policies. As insurers
can price on more and more health-relevant information the market share of consumers enrolled in the
90% policy increases, implying reduced adverse selection. In all cases, Nash equilibria coincide with
the Riley outcomes if …rms o¤er only one policy [as in Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976)], while for most
cases Nash equilibria fail to exist when …rms can o¤er multiple policies.
Though greater ability to price health-status information reduces adverse selection, our long-run
welfare results illustrate the extent to which such policies exacerbate reclassi…cation risk. Under the
case of …xed income from age 25 to 65, welfare is highest when health-status pricing is banned. For
example, from an ex ante perspective an individual with median risk aversion would be willing to pay
$3,082 each year from 25-65 to be in a market with pure community rating relative to the case of
pricing based on health-status quartiles, though the latter yields greater within-year coverage. This is
approximately …ve times the $619 welfare loss that occurs from adverse selection under pure community
rating (conditional on the restricted set of available contracts), and roughly half of the average annual
medical expenses in the population. Thus, the welfare losses due to reclassi…cation risk, even for
fairly limited pricing of health status, can be quantitatively large. Moreover, as the ability to price
on health-status becomes greater, the welfare loss becomes larger. Finally, when we change the …xed
1 1 Interestingly,

the market unravelling we …nd under community rating (with or without age-based pricing) is somewhat

consistent with experience in the Massachusetts exchange, where most buyers opted for the Bronze (60%) plan in the
early years of this ACA-like exchange [see, e.g., Ericson and Starc (2013)].

5

lifetime income assumption and allow for increasing income pro…les the losses from reclassi…cation risk
are attenuated because health-status based pricing decreases premiums earlier in life when income is
lower (and thus serves the purpose of smoothing income over time). This e¤ect is eliminated, however,
if age-based pricing is allowed (as in the ACA).
We study several extensions to address issues of particular interest under the ACA. In addition to
investigating age-based pricing, discussed above, we use our framework and estimates to quantify the
subsidies necessary to guarantee di¤erent levels of participation in the exchange. This links directly to
the issue of whether individuals will adversely select into the exchange based on health status. We …nd
that, absent subsidies or penalties, approximately 26% of the population would opt out of the exchange
when the pricing of pre-existing conditions is prohibited. Those who opt out are mostly younger and
healthier individuals: about half of the 30 to 35 year old population would prefer to opt out. As the
healthier types opt out premiums increase, leading to further desertions. With no subsidies or penalties,
premiums in the market are approximately 30% higher than in the case of full participation. A subsidy
of over $3,000 per person/year is required to decrease the percentage opting out to 10%.12
We also study an extension that allows for risk-adjustment transfers between insurers, as stipulated in the ACA. These transfers are designed to subsidize insurers who take on higher risks and,
consequently, ameliorate adverse selection. We use the model to evaluate the impact of the adjustment
formula proposed by the Federal government [see, e.g., Dept. of Health and Human Services (2012a) or
Dept. of Health and Human Services (2012b)]. While in practice risk adjustment can lead to a number
of problems, such as insurers up-coding enrollees to qualify for larger transfers, we abstract from such
issues and assume that the government can perfectly observe the health status of each enrollee. The
Riley equilibrium with this insurer risk-adjustment has 49% of the population in the 90% policy, as a
result of reduced adverse selection.
This paper builds on related work that studies the welfare consequences of adverse selection in
insurance markets by adding in a long-term dimension whereby price regulation induces a potential
trade-o¤ with re-classi…cation risk. Relevant work that focuses primarily on adverse selection includes
Cutler and Reber (1998), Cardon and Hendel (2001), Carlin and Town (2009), Lustig (2010), Einav
et al. (2010c), and Bundorf et al. (2012). Handel (2013) and Einav et al. (2013) study the welfare
consequences of adverse selection in the contexts of inertia and moral hazard respectively. Ericson and
Starc (2013) and Kolstad and Kowalski (2012) study plan selection and regulation in the Massachusetts
Connector health insurance exchange. These papers all focus on welfare in the context of a shortrun marketplace. There is more limited work studying reclassi…cation risk and long-run welfare in
insurance markets. Cochrane (1995) studies dynamic insurance from a purely theoretical perspective
in an environment where fully contingent long-run contracts are possible. Herring and Pauly (2006)
studies guaranteed renewable premiums and the extent to which they e¤ectively protect consumers
1 2 Age-based

pricing increases voluntary participation, as younger individuals do not have to subsidize older ones, but on

average participation does not increase by much. Only 77% of the population would voluntary participate with age-based
pricing without a mandate.

6

from reclassi…cation risk. Hendel and Lizzeri (2003) and Finkelstein at al. (2005) study dynamic
insurance contracts with one-sided commitment, while Koch (2010) studies pricing regulations based
on age from an e¢ ciency perspective. Bundorf et al. (2012), while focusing on a static marketplace,
also analyze reclassi…cation risk in an employer setting using a two-year time horizon and subsidy and
pricing regulations relevant to their large employer context. To our knowledge, there is no similar work
that empirically studies the long-run welfare consequences of reclassi…cation risk and adverse selection
in an equilibrium setting as a function of price regulation.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: In Section 2 we present our model of insurance exchanges
and characterize Riley and Nash equilibria in the context of our model. Section 3 describes our data
and estimation. In Section 4 we analyze exchange equilibria for a range of regulations on health statusbased pricing. Section 5 analyzes the long-run welfare properties of these equilibria, while Section 6
discusses extensions of our main analysis. Section 7 concludes.

2

Model of Health Exchanges

In this section, we describe our health exchange model and provide a set of characterization results.
These results provide the algorithm for identifying equilibria using our data, which we do in Section 4.
Throughout the paper, we focus on a model of health exchanges in which two prescribed policies
are traded. In our basic speci…cation, these policies will cover roughly 90% and 60% respectively of an
insured individual’s costs. As such, we refer to these as the “90 policy” and the “60 policy.” Within
each exchange, the policies o¤ered by di¤erent companies are regarded as perfectly homogeneous by
consumers; only their premiums may di¤er. There is a set of consumers, who di¤er in their likelihood
of needing medical procedures and in their preferences (e.g., their risk aversion). We denote by
[ ; ]

2

R+ a consumer’s “type,” which we take to be the price di¤erence at which he is indi¤erent

between the 90 policy and the 60 policy. That is, if P90 and P60 are the premiums (prices) of the two
policies, then a consumer whose
P90

is below P90

P60 prefers the 90 policy, and one with
Note that consumers with a given

P60 prefers the 60 policy, a consumer with
= P90

above

P60 is indi¤erent.

may have di¤erent underlying medical risks and/or preferences,

but will make identical choices between policies for any prices. Hence, there is no reason to distinguish
among them in the model. Keep in mind, as we de…ne below the costs of insuring type

buyers, that

those costs represent the expected costs of insuring all of the — possibly heterogeneous — individuals
characterized by a speci…c :
Throughout our main speci…cation, we assume that there is an individual mandate that requires
that individuals purchase one of the two policies. (But see Section 6.2 for an analysis of participation.)
The costs of insuring an individual of type
the price di¤erence is
>

P = P90

under policy k are Ck ( ) for k = 90; 60. Recall that if

P60 , those consumers with

<

P prefer policy 60, while those with

P prefer policy 90. Given this fact, we can de…ne the average costs of serving the populations

7

who choose each policy for a given

P to be
AC90 ( P )

E[C90 ( )j

P]

AC60 ( P )

E[C60 ( )j

P ]:

and

We also de…ne the di¤erence in average costs between the two policies, conditional on a price di¤erence
P 2 [ ; ], to be

AC( P )

AC90 ( P )

AC60 ( P ).

We make the following two assumptions:
Assumption 1: C90 ( ) and C60 ( ) are continuous increasing functions, with C90 ( ) > C60 ( ) for
all .
has a continuous distribution function F .

Assumption 2:

The assumption that C90 ( ) > C60 ( ) for all

simply says that the 90 policy covers more of a

consumer’s expenses (in expectation) than does the 60 policy.13 The …rst part of Assumption 1, on the
other hand, is an adverse selection assumption: those consumers who are willing to pay more for the
greater coverage in the 90 policy are also the most costly to insure. Since the consumers who choose
the 90 policy are those in the set f :

P g, the assumption implies that

AC90 ( P ) > C90 ( P ) > C60 ( P ) > AC60 ( P )
at any
in

P at which both policies are chosen; i.e., at any

P 2 ( ; ), and that ACk ( P ) is increasing

P for k = 60; 90. It will also be convenient to de…ne for each policy k = 60; 90 the largest and

smallest possible average costs: AC k

ACk ( ) and AC k

ACk ( ). Assumption 2 ensures that the

function ACk ( ) is continuous for k = 90; 60.
In summary, with these assumptions we have the following Adverse Selection Property upon which
our results will hinge:
Adverse Selection Property AC90 ( ) and AC60 ( ) are continuous monotone functions that are
strictly increasing at all

P 2 ( ; ), with AC90 ( ) > AC60 ( ) for all .

We refer to the lowest prices o¤ered for the 90 and 60 policies as a price con…guration. We next
de…ne the pro…ts earned by the …rms o¤ering those prices.

Speci…cally, for any price con…guration

(P90 ; P60 ) de…ne
90 (P90 ; P60 )

1 3 In

8
< [P
90
:

AC90 ( P )][1
0 if

F ( P )] if
P >

P

9
=
;

our empirical work, the 90 policy will in fact dominate the 60 policy in its coverage levels.

8

and
60 (P90 ; P60 )

8
< [P
60
:

AC60 ( P )]F ( P ) if
0 if

P

9
=
;

P <

:

as the aggregate pro…t from consumers who choose each of the two policies. Let
(P90 ; P60 )

90 (P90 ; P60 )

+

60 (P90 ; P60 )

be aggregate pro…t from the entire population. The set of break-even price con…gurations, which lead
each policy to earn zero pro…ts, is P
P

BE

denote the lowest break-even

f(P90 ; P60 ) :

90 (P90 ; P60 )

=

60 (P90 ; P60 )

= 0g. We also let

P with positive sales of the 60 policy. This is the lowest price

di¤erence among all break-even price con…gurations with positive sales of the 60 policy, de…ned formally
as:
P BE

minf P : there is a (P90 ; P60 ) 2 P with

P = P90

P60 > g:

(1)

Note that the price con…guration (P90 ; P60 ) = (AC 60 + ; AC 60 ), which results in all consumers purchasing the 60 policy, is a break-even price con…guration (i.e., it is in set P), as is the “all-in-90”price
con…guration (P90 ; P60 ) = (AC 90 ; AC 90

). There may also be “interior” break-even price con…gur-

ations, at which both policies have a positive market share. The price di¤erence

P BE will play a

signi…cant role in our equilibrium characterizations below.

2.1

Equilibrium Notions and Characterizations

The literature on equilibria in insurance markets with adverse selection started with Rothschild and
Stiglitz (1976). Motivated by the possibility of non-existence of equilibrium in their model, follow-on
work by Riley (1979) [see also Engers and Fernandez (1987)] and Wilson (1977) proposed alternative
notions of equilibrium in which existence was assured in the Rothschild-Stiglitz model. These alternative
equilibrium notions each incorporated some kind of dynamic reaction to deviations [introduction of
additional pro…table policies in Riley (1979), and dropping of unpro…table policies in Wilson (1977)],
in contrast to the Nash assumption made by Rothschild and Stiglitz. In addition, follow-on work also
allowed for multi-policy …rms [Miyazaki (1977)], in contrast to Rothschild and Stiglitz’s assumption
that each …rm o¤ers at most one policy.
Our model di¤ers from the Rothschild-Stiglitz setting in three basic ways. First, the prescription
of health exchanges limits the set of allowed policies. Figure 1, for example, shows the set of feasible
policies in the Rothschild-Stiglitz model (in which each consumer faces just two health states: “healthy”
and “sick”) with two exchanges, one for a 90% policy and the other for a 60% policy. These lie on
lines with slope equal to 1 since a decrease of $1 in a policy’s premium increases consumption by $1
in each state. Second, in our model consumers face many possible health states.

Third, while the

Rothschild-Stiglitz model contemplated just two consumer types, we assume there is a continuum of
types of consumers.14
1 4 To

our knowledge, no existing work analyzes equilibria in insurance markets with these features. Einav and Finkelstein

9

Csick

Full insurance line

90% policies

60% policies

endowment

Chealthy

Figure 1: The solid lines with slope equal to 1 indicate the possible consumptions arising with 90% and
60% policies in a two-state (Rothschild-Stiglitz) model of insurance
In our main analysis we focus on the Riley equilibrium (“RE”) notion, which we show always exists
and is unique in our model.15 We also discuss how these compare to Nash equilibria (“NE”), which
need not exist. (In addition, we consider Wilson equilibria in Section 6.6.) In what follows, the phrase
equilibrium outcome refers to the equilibrium price con…guration and the shares of the two policies.
Finally, to simplify the statement of the results, we restrict attention to equilibria with a price di¤erence
P 2 [ ; ]: Equilibria with

P <

(resp.

P >

) exist if and only if one exists with

P =

(resp.

P = ), and yield identical market shares, utilities, and pro…ts.
2.1.1

Nash Equilibria

We consider Nash equilibria with both single-policy and multi-policy …rms (“sp-NE” and “mp-NE”,
respectively). The following result characterizes these equilibria in our model (all proofs are contained
in the Appendix):

Proposition 1. With either single-policy or multi-policy …rms, any NE price con…guration (P90 ; P60 )
must have …rms break even on all policies that are sold in equilibrium.

If

60 (AC 90 ; P60 )

0 for

(2011) analyze a model with the latter two characteristics but just one policy type using a graphical price-theoretic
approach.
1 5 The Riley notion is also known as a “reactive equilibrium.”

10

Figure 2: The …gure shows

P BE , the lowest price di¤erence in any break-even price con…guration

that has positive sales of the 60 policy. It also shows a situation in which all-in-90 is not an equilibrium
outcome, because

AC( ) > .

all P60 (i.e., if there is no pro…table entry into the 60 policy given that the 90 policy is priced to break
even), then the unique NE outcome has all consumers buying the 90 policy at price P90 = AC 90 . If
this condition does not hold [which necessarily is the case when
con…guration (P90 ; P60 ) must have price di¤ erence

P

=

P

BE

AC( ) > ], then any NE price
, the lowest break-even

P with

positive sales of the 60 policy. Such a price con…guration (P90 ; P60 ) is a NE for:
(i) single-policy …rms if there is no pro…table entry opportunity in the 90 policy; i.e., if
0 for all Pb90 P ;

b

90 (P90 ; P60 )

90

(ii) multi-policy …rms if there is no pro…table entry opportunity that slightly undercuts P60 and undercuts P : i.e., if max b
(Pb90 ; P ) = 0.
90

P90 P90

60

The result says that all consumers buying the 90 policy can be a NE only if that outcome is immune

from deviations that “cream skim,” lowering P60 to attract the healthiest consumers to the 60 policy.
If a cream-skimming deviation does break the all-in-90 outcome, then any NE must involve the price
di¤erence

P BE . That price di¤erence is illustrated in Figure 2, which plots

di¤erences at interior break-even price con…gurations are the
curve crosses the

AC( P ). The price

P 2 ( ; ) at which the

P line. The …gure also illustrates a situation in which

AC( P )

AC( ) > , implying that

all-in-90 is not a Nash equilibrium.
The di¤erence noted between single-policy and multi-policy deviations in parts (i) and (ii) of Proposition 1 arises because a price cut in P90 makes the 60 policy earn positive pro…ts by attracting away

11

its highest cost consumers. Thus, when an entrant can o¤er multiple policies it will want to slightly
undercut P60 in order to retain the consumers who still buy the 60 policy.
2.1.2

Riley Equilibria

We use (a slightly modi…ed version of) the de…nition provided in Engers and Fernandez (1987):
De…nition 1. A Riley equilibrium (RE) is a pro…table market o¤ ering S, such that for any nonempty set S 0 (the deviation), where S [ S 0 is closed and S \ S 0 = ;, if S 0 is strictly pro…table when

S [ S 0 is o¤ ered then there exists a set S 00 (the reaction), disjoint from S [ S 0 with S [ S 0 [ S 00 closed,

such that:
(i) S 0 incurs losses when S [ S 0 [ S 00 is tendered;
(ii) S 00 does not incur losses when any market o¤ ering Sb containing S [ S 0 [ S 00 is tendered (we then
say S 00 is “safe” or a “safe reaction”).

A deviation S 0 that is strictly pro…table when S [S 0 is o¤ ered, and for which there is no safe reaction

S 00 that makes S 0 incur losses (with market o¤ ering S [ S 0 [ S 00 ), is a pro…table Riley deviation.

In our setting, a market o¤ering is simply a collection of prices o¤ered for the two policies. De…nition
1 says that a set of o¤ered prices is a Riley equilibrium if no …rm, including potential entrants, has
a pro…table deviation that also never leads it to incur losses should other …rms introduce additional
“safe”price o¤ers (where a “safe”price o¤er is one that would never incur losses were any further price
o¤ers introduced).16
Our result for Riley equilibria is the following:
Proposition 2. There is a unique Riley equilibrium. Moreover:
(i) If

60 (AC 90 ; P60 )

0 for all P60 (i.e., if there is no pro…table entry into the 60 policy given that the

90 policy is priced to break even), it involves everyone buying the 90 policy at price P90 = AC 90 .
(ii) Otherwise, it involves the break-even price con…guration (P90 ; P60 ) with price di¤ erence
P

BE

, the lowest break-even

P

=

P with positive sales of the 60 policy.

Propositions 1 and 2 imply that all consumers buying the 90 policy is the unique equilibrium
outcome at price P90 = AC 90 under the exact same circumstances with both the NE and RE concepts.
Where they di¤er is in what happens when this is not true. In both NE and RE any equilibrium must
then involve price di¤erence

P BE , the lowest break-even

P with positive sales of the 60 policy.17

However, under RE, this is always an equilibrium when all-in-90 is not an equilibrium. Under the two
1 6 In

fact, it su¢ ces to restrict attention to deviations by potential entrants.
also that the outcome associated with P BE then Pareto dominates the outcome associated with any other

1 7 Observe

break-even price con…guration that has positive sales of the 60 policy, as average costs, and hence prices, are lower.

12

NE concepts, however, an equilibrium may fail to exist, with the exact conditions for this depending on
whether there are single-policy or multi-policy …rms. The break-even price con…guration with price
di¤erence

P BE can be a RE when it fails to be a NE because under the RE concept a pro…table

Nash deviation can be rendered unpro…table by additional pro…table (and “safe”) entry once the initial
deviation occurs.
Recall that there are always break-even price di¤erences that result in all consumers buying the 90
policy or all buying the 60 policy, while there may be (several) interior break-even price di¤erences as
well. Proposition 2 identi…es the relevant one.

3

Data and Estimation

To simulate equilibria in health insurance exchanges we need a population of insurees, their preferences,
and health status measures. This section describes the data that we use to obtain these ingredients,
our empirical model, and the estimates. While the estimation is based on Handel (2013) we expand on
that empirical model in several ways. Most importantly, we model consumer risk preference heterogeneity more ‡exibly by allowing for correlations with health risk, and include additional dimensions of
observable heterogeneity, such as income and job type. These additional features are motivated by the
empirical literature on adverse selection and insurance plan choice, which illustrates that correlations
between risk preferences and risk can have important implications for equilibrium outcomes [see, e.g.,
Finkelstein and McGarry (2006), Cohen and Einav (2007), and Einav et al. (2013)].

3.1

Data

Our analysis uses detailed administrative data on the health insurance choices and medical utilization
of employees (and their dependents) at a large U.S.-based …rm over the time period from 2004 to 2009.
These proprietary panel data include the health insurance options available in each year, employee
plan choices, and detailed, claim-level employee (and dependent) medical expenditure and utilization
information. While the employees at the …rm are not ‘representative’ of any speci…c policy-relevant
exchange population, the data are well-suited to estimate the ingredients necessary to illustrate equilibrium in exchanges. Later in the paper (Section 6) we perform an analysis that matches our sample
to the nationally representative MEPS data, which we …nd is similar to our sample on a variety of
dimensions and leads to similar results. We describe the data at a high-level in this section: for a more
in-depth description of di¤erent dimensions see Handel (2013).
The …rst column of Table 1 describes the demographic pro…le of the 11,253 employees who work
at the …rm for some period of time within 2004-2009 (the …rm employs approximately 9,000 at one
time). These employees cover 9,710 dependents, implying a total of 20,963 covered lives. 46.7% of
the employees are male and the mean employee age is 40.1 (median of 37). The table also presents
statistics on sample income, family composition, and employment characteristics.

13

Sample Demographics
All Employees

PPO Ever

Final Sample

N - Employee Only

11,253

5,667

2,023

N - All Family Members

20,963

10,713

4,544

40.1
(37)

40.0
(37)

42.3
(44)

46.7%

46.3%

46.7%

Tier 1 ( < $41K)

33.9%

31.9%

19.0%

Tier 2 ($41K-$72K)

39.5%

39.7%

40.5%

Tier 3 ($72K-$124K)

17.9%

18.6%

25.0%

Tier 4 ($124K-$176K)

5.2%

5.4%

7.8%

Tier 5 ( > $176K)

3.5%

4.4%

7.7%

1

58.0 %

56.1 %

41.3 %

2

16.9 %

18.8 %

22.3 %

3

11.0 %

11.0 %

14.1 %

4+

14.1 %

14.1 %

22.3 %

Manager (%)

23.2%

25.1%

37.5%

White-Collar (%)

47.9%

47.5%

41.3%

Blue-Collar (%)

28.9%

27.3%

21.1%

12.8%

13.3%

20.7%

7.2
(4)

7.1
(3)

10.1
(6)

Mean Employee Age (Median)
Gender (Male %)
Income

Family Size

Sta¤ Grouping

Additional Demographics
Quantitative Manager
Job Tenure Mean Years (Median)

Table 1: This table presents summary demographic statistics for the population we study. The …rst column
describes demographics for the entire sample whether or not they ever enroll in insurance with the …rm. The
second column summarizes these variables for the sample of individuals who ever enroll in a PPO option, the
choices we focus on in the empirical analysis. The third column describes our …nal estimation sample, which
includes those employees who (i) are enrolled in PPO

1

through at least t1 .

14

at t

1

and (ii) remain enrolled in any plan at the …rm

Our analysis focuses on a three-year period in the data beginning with a year we denote t0 : For
t0 , which is in the middle of our observational period, the …rm substantially changed the menu of
health plans that it o¤ered to employees. At the time of this change, the …rm forced all employees to
leave their prior plan and actively re-enroll in one of …ve options from the new menu, with no default
option. These …ve options were comprised of three PPO options, which shared the same broad provider
network, and two HMO options, which led to some cost savings through di¤erent, narrower, provider
networks. Our analysis focuses on choice among the three PPO options, which approximately 60%
of health plan enrollees chose. We focus on this subset of the overall option set because (i) we have
detailed claims data for PPO enrollees but not for HMO enrollees and (ii) the PPO options share the
same doctors / cover the same treatments, eliminating a dimension of heterogeneity that would have
to be identi…ed separately from risk preferences. Analysis in Handel (2013) reveals, reassuringly, that
while there is substitution across options within the set of PPO options, and across the set of HMO
options, there is little substitution between these two subsets of plans, implying there is little loss of
internal validity when considering choice between just the set of PPO options.
Within the nest of PPO options, consumers chose between three non-linear insurance contracts
that di¤ered on …nancial dimensions only. We denote the plans by their individual level deductibles:
PPO250 , PPO500 , and PPO1200 . Post-deductible, the plans have coinsurance rates ranging from 10%
to 20%, and out-of-pocket maximums after which the family spends no more out-of-pocket as total
medical expenditures increase. PPO250 is the most comprehensive plan (i.e., provides the most …nancial protection) and thus has the lowest deductible, coinsurance, and out-of-pocket maximums (which
depend on income as well as the number of dependents covered). PPO1200 is the least comprehensive
plan on all …nancial dimensions. In terms of actuarial equivalence value (the proportion of expenditures
covered for a representative population), PPO250 is approximately a 90% actuarial equivalence value
plan while PPO1200 is approximately a 73% actuarial equivalence value plan (PPO500 is about halfway
between PPO250 and PPO1200 ). The plans have (subsidized) up-front premiums that are highest for
PPO250 , lowest for PPO1200 , and depend on both income and the family members covered.18 Over
the three-year period that we study, t0 to t2 , there is substantial variation in the premiums for these
plans; this variation is helpful for identifying risk preferences separately from consumer inertia. For
more details on the respective plan designs, and the evolution of premiums, see Handel (2013).
We restrict the …nal sample used in choice model estimation to those individuals / families that (i)
enroll in one of the three PPO options and (ii) are present in all years from t

1,

the year before the

19

The reasons for the

menu change, through at least to t1 , one year before the end of our study period.
1 8 PPO

1200

also has a linked Health Savings Account (HSA) option that allows consumers to deposit funds that can

be used for medical expenditures on a pre-tax basis. This bundled account may be attractive due to tax-savings but
unattractive because of increased hassle costs. We account for this feature in the estimated choice model. See Handel
(2013) for a further discussion.
1 9 We model plan choice in a given year based on the number of family members enrolled at the beginning of the
year. We don’t model changes to the number of dependents during a given year (or potential resulting changes to plan
enrollment), since this occurs rarely and would complicate the analysis. For new dependents with no past health data

15

…rst restriction are discussed above. The second restriction, to more permanent employees, is made to
leverage the panel nature of the data, especially the temporal variation in premiums and health risk, to
more precisely identify risk preferences. Moreover, this more permanent population is simpler to model
in the sense that their choices are always for the full year in advance and we always observe full past
years of medical histories. Column 2 in Table 1 presents the summary statistics for the families that
choose one of the PPO options, while Column 3 presents the summary statistics for the …nal estimation
sample, incorporating the additional restriction of being present from t

1

to at least t1 . Comparing

the second column to the …rst column reveals little selection on demographic dimensions into the PPO
options, while comparing the third column to the others reveals some selection based on family size
and age into the …nal sample, as expected given the restriction to longer tenure.

3.2

Health Status

We use detailed medical and demographic information together with the “ACG” software developed
at Johns Hopkins Medical School to create individual-level measures of predicted expected medical
expenses for the upcoming year at each point in time.20 We denote these ex ante predictions of the
next year’s expected medical expenditures by

and compute these measures for each individual in our

observed sample (including dependents as well as employees). We refer to

it

as individual i’s “health

status” at time t. We use these health status measures as inputs into our cost model, described in the
next section and in Appendix B, to model uncertainty in health expenses for the upcoming year at the
time of plan choice.
Health Status Descriptives
Figure 3 presents the distribution of

for individuals in the data, as predicted for year t1 ; for

individuals (including dependents) present at both t0 and t1 . The …gure presents predicted health
status (i.e., expected expenses) normalized by average predicted yearly expenditures of $4,878 for these
individuals for t1 . As is typical in the health care literature, the distribution is skewed with a large right
tail (the chart truncates this right tail at 5 times the mean, though this is not done in our analysis).
As we show later in Section 6, the distribution of expenditures in our population, both conditional and
unconditional on age, is similar to that in the nationally representative MEPS survey data.
Table 2 describes health status transitions in the population over one and two year time horizons.
This illustrates, from a short-run perspective, the potential for reclassi…cation risk if premiums are
allowed to depend, at least to some extent, on health status. The table studies transitions from year to
year for quartiles of

in the population: thus we see whether an individual transitions from one quartile

of the health status distribution to another.21 For this table, an observation for a one-year transition
we take the typical health expenditure distribution for someone of that age and gender.
2 0 The program, known as the Johns Hopkins ACG (Adjusted Clinical Groups) Case-Mix System, is one of the most
widely used and respected risk adjustment and predictive modeling packages in the health care sector. It was speci…cally
designed to use diagnostic claims data to predict future medical expenditures.
2 1 Note that this case of quartile transitions is directly relevant to the pricing case we study in the next sections, where

16

Figure 3: This …gure presents the distribution of

predicted for t1 ; for all individuals in the data

(including dependents) present during both t0 and t1 . Predicted expected expenses are normalized by
the average in the population of $4,878 (thus equal to 1 in this chart). The distribution presented is
truncated at 5 times for this chart, but not in estimation / analysis.
is an individual in our data present over a given two-year time period (for the two-year transitions,
it is any individual present over any given three-year period). Thus an individual present over four
consecutive years will count as three observations in the one-year transition table.
The table reveals that there are real transition risks even for the fairly short one and two year time
horizons: for example, 32% of the individuals in the healthiest quartile in year t

1 transition to one of

the other three quartiles at year t (42% transition away from this quartile over a two-year period). To
illustrate the potential for premium reclassi…cation, the bottom section of the table presents average
and median ex post cost by quartile grouping, indicating an increase in expected expenditures from
$1,812 for quartile 1 to $15,199 for quartile 4. Note that since the table studies an aging population
(not a steady state population) there is a trend towards higher health expenditures in these transitions.

3.3

Cost Model

The health status measure

measures expected total health expenses. However, to evaluate the expec-

ted utility for consumers from di¤erent coverage options we need to estimate an ex ante distribution
of out-of-pocket expenses for each family j choosing a given health plan k, not just their mean out-ofpocket expense. We utilize the cost model developed in Handel (2013) to estimate these distributions,
insurers are allowed to price based on health status quartile.

17

1 Year Transition
t-1 / t

Quartile 1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Quartile 1

0.68

0.18

0.08

0.06

Quartile 2

0.12

0.46

0.25

0.17

Quartile 3

0.05

0.15

0.39

0.41

Quartile 4

0.03

0.05

0.17

0.75

Q2

Q3

Q4

2 Year Transition
t-2 / t

Quartile 1

Quartile 1

0.58

0.22

0.09

0.11

Quatile 2

0.10

0.35

0.29

0.26

Quartile 3

0.03

0.14

0.28

0.56

Quartile 4

0.03

0.05

0.10

0.82

Quartile

Avg. Cost

Median Cost

Q1

1,812

302

Q2

3,544

1,107

Q3

5,543

2,542

Q4

15,199

6,831

Cost Pro…le ($)

Table 2: This table describes health status transitions in the population over one and two year time
horizons. For the table, we group employees into ex ante health quartiles using . The top two sections
describe these transitions, while the …nal section describes costs as a function of quartile.

18

denoted Hk (Xjt j

22
jt; Zjt ).

Here,

jt

is the vector of

it

for all i in family j, Zjt are family demo-

graphics, and Xjt are out-of-pocket medical expenditure realizations for family j in plan k at time
t. The model o¤ers a parsimonious method to non-parametrically link health risk to expected future
expenditures by combining the ACG software’s predictive health risk measures with observed cost data.
We describe the details of the cost model in Appendix B; here we provide a broad overview of the
methodology. The model has the following primary components:
1. For each individual and time period, we generate predictive mean expenditure measures for four
categories of medical expenditures: (i) hospital/inpatient (ii) physician o¢ ce visits (iii) mental
health and (iv) pharmacy.
2. We next group individuals into cells based on mean predicted future utilization. For each expenditure type and risk cell, we estimate an expenditure distribution for the upcoming year
based on ex post observed cost realizations. Then we combine the marginal distributions across
expenditure categories into joint distributions using empirical correlations and copula methods.
3. Finally, we construct the detailed mappings from the vector of category-speci…c medical expenditures to plan out-of-pocket costs for each plan k. This includes plans in the actual data, to generate
the distributions for choice model estimation, as well as candidate plans for the counterfactual
simulations in Sections 4-6. For the plans in the observed data that we use for choice model estimation, this mapping inputs individual total expense projections and outputs family out-of-pocket
expense projections taking into account family-level plan characteristics.
The output from this process, Hk (Xjt j

jt; Zjt );

represents the distribution of out-of-pocket expenses

associated with plan k used to compute expected utility in the choice model (and counterfactuals).
The cost model assumes both that there is no individual-level private information and no moral
hazard (total expenditures do not vary with k). While both of these phenomena have the potential
to be important in health care markets, and are studied extensively in other research, we believe that
these assumptions do not materially impact our estimates. Because our cost model combines detailed
individual-level prior medical utilization data with sophisticated medical diagnostic software there is
less room for private information (and selection based on that information) than in prior work that
uses coarser information to measure health risk.23 For moral hazard, Chandra (2010) presents a recent
review of the experimental and quasi-experimental literature, where the price elasticity for medical
2 2 We

note that the cost model leverages a multi-dimensional vector of health status measures, corresponding to risk for

di¤erent types of medical expenditures (e.g., pharmacy, mental health, hospital). This allows for a richer / more precise
model of Hjkt , and is described in detail in Appendix B.
2 3 Pregnancies, genetic pre-dispositions, and non-coded disease severity are possible examples of private information
that could still exist. Cardon and Hendel (2001) …nd no evidence of selection based on private information with coarser
data while Carlin and Town (2009) use claims data that are similarly detailed to ours and also argue that signi…cant
residual selection is unlikely.

19

care generally falls in the range -0.1 to -0.4.24 Online Appendix C in Handel (2013) illustrates that
incorporating projected price elasticities for medical spending larger than these found in the literature
has only a minor impact on the estimates of a choice model similar to ours.

3.4

Risk Preferences: Choice Model

We estimate risk preferences with a panel discrete choice model where choices are made by each household j at time t, conditional on their household-plan speci…c ex ante out-of-pocket cost distributions
Hk (Xjt j

jt; Zjt ):

Speci…cally, the utility of plan k for household j at time t is:
Ujkt =

Z

1

uj (Wj ; Xjt ; Pjkt ; 1jk;t

1 ; Zjt )Hk (Xjt j jt; Zjt )dXjt

0

(2)

Here, uj is the v-NM or “Bernoulli” expected utility index that measures utility conditional on a
given ex post realized state Xjt from the expenditure distribution Hk : Wj denotes income and Pjkt is
the premium contribution for plan k at time t, which as described earlier depends both on how many
dependents are covered and on employee income. 1jk;t

1

is an indicator that equals one if plan k is the

household’s incumbent plan (default option) at choice year t. We use this variable to model consumer
inertia, which is present for years with a default option (t1 and t2 ). Given that inertia is an important
determinant of choices in those years, as shown in Handel (2013), we include this here to ensure that
we appropriately identify risk preferences separately from this inertia. Zjt are other individual-level
observables (described shortly).
We assume that households have constant absolute risk aversion (CARA) preferences, leading to
the utility index:
uj (Mjkt ) =

1
A;
(Z
j
j

j)

e

A
j (Zj ;

j )Mjkt

(3)

Here, Mjkt is the e¤ective consumption for a household given their ex post realization of health
expenditures Xjt from distribution Hk and equals:
Mjkt = Wj

Pjkt

Xjt + (ZB
j )1jk;t

1

+

j (Aj )11200

+ HT Cj;t

1 1250

+ "jkt (Aj )

(4)

Thus, consumption for a given health state realization equals household wealth, minus the up-front
premium for plan k at time t, minus the out-of-pocket health expenditures Xjt . In addition, we model
inertia, as a function of observable heterogeneity in demographics ZB
j , similarly to a tangible switching
cost: consumption for every ex post state Xjt is the equivalent of $ lower if the plan chosen is not
the same as the default option (i.e., the consumer has to incur cost

to switch).25

j (Aj )

is a random

coe¢ cient, with distribution estimated conditional on family status Aj (single or covering dependents),
2 4 Recent

work by Einav et al. (2013), with data from a large employer, …nds an implied elasticity of -0.14. The

well-known RAND experiment has an oft-cited elasticity estimate of -0.18.
2 5 See Handel (2013) for an extended discussion of this model for inertia, and how it relates to other potential microfoundations for inertia (i.e., other than a tangible switching cost / transaction cost).

20

that captures permanent horizontal preferences for PPO1200 arising from the Health Savings Account
linked to this plan option.

captures preferences for very high-expenditure consumers, who almost

exclusively choose PPO250 even when that option is not attractive …nancially (HT Cj;t
26

top 10% of the distribution of expected total costs).

1

= 1 for the

The utility of each option k for family j at t

is also a¤ected by a mean zero idiosyncratic preference shock "jkt known to the decision-maker, with
variance
j

"

to be estimated conditional on Aj .

is a household-speci…c CARA risk preference parameter unobserved by the econometrician that

depends on observed demographics ZA
j and expected household expenditures (the sum of
j

i

over

j ).

determines the curvature of uj (Mjkt ) and, consequently, household risk aversion with respect to the

lottery over consumption Mjkt induced by the distribution of out-of-pocket health expenditures Hk .
We estimate a random-coe¢ cient distribution of
normally distributed variance
through a shift in

2

j

that is assumed to have mean

j)

=

, while the level of unobserved heterogeneity measured by

0+ 1

log(

j)

and be

. Note that observable heterogeneity impacts risk preference estimates

for the entire population. We use the following speci…cation for

(ZA
j ;

(ZA
j ;

i j i )+ 2 agej + 3

log(

i j i)

agej +

In addition to expected household health expenditures (

(ZA
j ;

2

is assumed constant

j ):

4 1mj + 5 1mj bmj + 6 1nmj bnmj

i j i ),

(5)

risk preferences depend on max-

imum household age, denoted agej , and the interaction between health risk and age. 1mj is an indicator
variable that denotes whether the employee associated with the household is a “manager”(i.e., a highlevel employee) at the …rm. 1nmj is the complement of 1mj . bmj is a measure of ability, and is computed
as the residual to the following regression, run only on the sample of managers in the population:
Incomejt =

0

+

1 agejt

+

2
2 agejt

+

jt

(6)

The residual bnmj is computed from the corresponding regression for non-managers.

Regarding identi…cation, risk preferences are identi…ed separately from inertia by leveraging the

…rm’s insurance menu re-design for year t0 : Households in that year chose plans from a new menu of
options with no default option, while in subsequent years they did have their previously chosen option
as a default option. Conditional on this choice environment, changing prices and health status over time
separately identify inertia from risk preference levels and risk preference heterogeneity. The di¤erent
components of risk preference heterogeneity are identi…ed by using exogenous price di¤erences across
both income tiers and coverage tiers (number of family members covered) and over time, as well as
2 6 See

Handel (2013) for a further discussion of both the Health Savings Account feature, linked only to P P O1200 (a

“high-deductible” health plan), as well as the choice patterns of high-cost consumers. That paper discusses the potential
for horizontal di¤erentiation caused by the Health Savings account, and illustrates the importance of modeling this given
observed choices and costs. In addition, it shows that, even in cases where P P O250 is dominated by the other two plan
options, very high-cost consumers choose that plan with high frequency, perhaps because of a heuristic to choose the
most comprehensive plan available. We abstract from this e¤ect in our counterfactual simulations.

21

changes to household expenditure distributions over time. Prices change substantially across income
tiers and family tiers, while across these tiers households can have similar expenditure risk distributions.
Changes over time in health status and premiums, assuming risk preferences are constant over time,
also provide identifying variation for risk preferences. Finally, consumer preference heterogeneity for
the high-deductible plan option with the linked health savings account (HSA) is distinguished from risk
preference heterogeneity by comparing choices between the two other plans to those between either of
those plans and the high-deductible plan.
We estimate the choice model using a random coe¢ cients simulated maximum likelihood approach
similar both to that summarized in Train (2009) and to that used in Handel (2013). The likelihood
function at the household level is computed for a sequence of choices from t0 to t2 , since inertia implies
that the likelihood of a choice made in the current period depends on the previous choice. Since
the estimation algorithm is similar to a standard approach, we describe the remainder of the details,
including the speci…cation for heterogeneity in inertia, in Appendix C.

3.5

Preference Estimates

Table 3 presents our choice model estimates. The …rst column presents the estimates of our primary
speci…cation while the second through fourth columns present robustness analyses to assess the impact
of linking di¤erent types of observable heterogeneity to risk preferences. The table presents detailed risk
preference estimates, including the links to observable and unobservable heterogeneity. Since we don’t
use any other estimated parameters in the upcoming exchange equilibrium analyses (except for

" ),

for simplicity we present and discuss the rest of the estimated parameters in Appendix C (e.g., inertia
estimates, P P O1200 random coe¢ cients, "jkt standard deviations, and income regressions). Parameter
standard errors, which are generally quite small, are also presented in Appendix C.
For the primary speci…cation, the population mean for
given unobserved heterogeneity, is 4:39 10

4

, the household mean risk-aversion level

. The standard deviation for

in risk preferences based on observable heterogeneity) equals 6:63 10
unobservable heterogeneity in risk preferences) equals 1:24 10

4

5

.

(or the standard deviation
(the standard deviation of

. In terms of observable heterogeneity,

risk preferences are negatively correlated with health risk: a one point increase in log( ) reduces
by 8:10

10

5

for a 30-year old.27 This suggests that there should be less adverse selection in the

simulated markets that we study relative to the case in which risk preferences are independent of
health risk. Managers and those with higher ability are slightly more risk averse. With a log expected
total health spending value of 9 (around the median for a household) risk aversion is increasing in age
by 4:69 10

6

per year. The speci…cations in the second through fourth columns in the table, which

investigate robustness with respect to the inclusion of and speci…cation for health status / income
2 7 The

coe¢ cient on health risk is more negative than this, while the interaction between age and risk preferences has

a positive coe¢ cient, indicating some reduction in the negative relationship between risk preferences and health risk as
one becomes older.

22

Empircal Model Results
Parameter / Model

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Primary Model

Robustness 1

Robustness 2

Robustness 3

Risk Preference Estimates
- Intercept,
- log(
- age,
- log(

i j i ),

1

2
i j i)

- Manager,

3

1:21 10

0

age,

5

- Non-manager ability ,
- Nominal Income,

4

5:21 10

6

1:10 10

3

4

- Manager ability,

1:14 10

6

7

1:63 10

4

3:60 10

6

6

-

4:3 10

5

7:45 10

5

1:4 10

5

4:49 10

5

7:5 10

6

3:24 10

5

-

-

1:06 10

3

-1:21 10

4

-4:69 10

6

1:01 10

6

5:3 10

5

2:54 10

4

3:99 10

6

5:4 10

5

3:0 10

5

-

- Population Mean

4:39 10

4

3:71 10

4

4:33 10

4

4:73 10

4

- Population

6:63 10

5

7:45 10

5

8:27 10

5

6:30 10

5

-

1:24 10

4

1:14 10

4

1:40 10

4

1:20 10

4

standard deviation

Gamble Interp.:
Mean

693

728

696

676

Mean + 25th Quantile

736

772

748

717

Mean + 75th Quantile

653

688

651

640

Mean + 95th Quantile

604

638

596

593

Table 3: This table presents the our choice model estimates. The …rst column presents the results from our
primary speci…cation described in Section 3. The second through fourth columns present robustness analyses
that assess the impact of linking preferences to health status and our measure of income earning ability. For
each model, we present the detailed risk preference estimates, including the links to observable and unobservable
heterogeneity. The rest of the parameters (inertia estimates, PPO1200 random coe¢ cients, and "jkt standard
errors) are provided in Appendix C. The bottom of the table interprets the population mean risk preference
estimates: it provides the value X that would make someone indi¤erent about accepting a 50-50 gamble where
you win $1000 and lose X versus a status quo where nothing happens. The population distributions of risk
preferences are similar across the speci…cations, even though the additional links between health risk / income
and risk preferences add richness.

23

in risk preferences, estimate similar means and variances for risk preferences relative to our primary
speci…cation.
The bottom rows in Table 3 interpret the mean of the average estimated risk aversion
well as several quantiles surrounding that average

, as

. We present the value X that would make

a household with our candidate risk aversion estimate indi¤erent between inaction and accepting a
simple hypothetical gamble with a 50% chance of gaining $1000 and a 50% chance of losing $X. Thus,
a risk neutral individual will have X = $1000 while an in…nitely risk averse individual will have X
close to zero. For the population mean of

from the primary model we have X = $693 while for the

25th, 75th, and 95th quantiles of unobserved heterogeneity around that mean X is $736, $653 and $604
respectively (these values are decreasing because they decrease as

increases). While the estimates

in the literature span a wide range, and should be interpreted di¤erently depending on the di¤erent
contexts being studied, our estimates generally fall in the middle of the range of prior work on insurance
choice, while the extent of heterogeneity we estimate is somewhat lower in magnitude [see, e.g., Cohen
and Einav (2007)]. Interestingly, the negative estimated correlation between expected health risk and
risk preferences is consistent with that association in Finkelstein and McGarry (2006) but the opposite
sign of the e¤ect found in Cohen and Einav (2007).

3.6

Simulation Sample

For the choice model we estimate, it is necessary to estimate choice at the family level because that is the
unit that actually makes choices in the data. For our counterfactual insurance exchange simulations, we
focus on individuals to simplify exposition. In actual insurance exchanges this could be an appropriate
model if family costs and premiums are aggregated from the individual level and family members are
not required to enroll in the same plan. We note that the framework could easily be extended to allow
for separate markets for individuals and families covering dependents, as is typical in practice.
The sample used in the simulations contains individuals between the ages of 25 and 65 who are
present in our data. Thus, our simulations include both individuals with single coverage in the data,
and individuals who are members of families with family coverage in our data. For the purposes of our
simulation, individuals with family coverage in the data choose any individual coverage plan. Since
we simulate static equilibria, but observe multiple years of health status and demographic variable
realizations for individuals in our data, we include a given individual in our data multiple times in our
simulation sample, based on their tenure in the actual data. For example, if an individual is present
in our data for three full years, for example from ages 26 to 28, they are included as three separate
individuals for the purposes of our simulation: a 26 year old individual, a 27 year old individual, and
a 28 year old individual. Each of these simulated individuals has potentially di¤erent predicted health
status, income, etc. based on their actual data for the relevant year in question. To ensure that the data
for a given individual are complete, we require a given simulated individual to be present for at least

24

eight months in each of two consecutive years.28 The data from the …rst year are used to predict health
status while the presence in the second year is used to ensure the individual was a relevant potential
participant in the …rm’s bene…t program for that year. This ensures that the simulation sample re‡ects
to some extent the presence / longevity of the choice model estimation sample. For risk preferences,
some of the variables used in estimation are de…ned at the family level rather than the individual level
(e.g., income, manager status of the employee in the family). Every individual that comes from a given
family is assigned the relevant family value for these variables when simulating risk preferences for that
individual in the exchange counterfactuals.
Table 4 describes some key descriptive numbers for this pseudo-sample of 10,372 individuals used
for the insurance exchange simulations. Importantly, the distribution of risk preferences in this sample
is very similar to that in the estimation sample, implying it is not highly selected on this dimension.
Similarly, the distributions of income and health expenditures are similar to those of the main estimation
sample and the population overall. The proportion female is also similar. Finally, as shown below,
the simulation sample covers the range of ages from 25-65 fairly evenly, which is re‡ective of this
characteristic in our data in general. This is relevant to our upcoming welfare analysis, which assumes
that the population is in a steady state.
Quantile

0.05

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

0.95

Age

26

28

33

37

41

45

49

52

56

60

62

We now turn to our primary analysis of insurance exchange market equilibrium and welfare as a
function of di¤erent underlying regulations.

4

Results: Equilibria

We use the estimates from our choice and cost models to study the e¤ects of regulations that restrict
the information insurers can use to price their policies.29 As noted in Section 2, we mimic the exchange
structure set forth in the ACA (see, e.g., Kaiser (2010)) and study a market in which insurers can o¤er
one of two policies that cover either 90% or 60% of expenditures in the population, on average (recall,
this is a simpli…cation of the four classes of policies allowed under the ACA of 60%, 70%, 80%, and 90%
average coverage). While there are a variety of potential non-linear contract designs that would imply
these coverage levels, here we follow the discussion of such policies in Consumers Union (2009) and
2 8 For

individuals whose past year of cost data is less than one year (between eight months and one year) we assume

that this past data represents one full year of health claims for the purposes of constructing their health status

: We

assume in all of the simulations that individuals buy a plan expecting to be in that plan for the full year (this is not an
issue in choice model estimation, where the sample is restricted to those present for full years). The cost model estimation
is done only for individuals with full years of cost data and these full-year distributions are the ones used in our analysis.
2 9 We could also use our framework to investigate trade-o¤s the regulator faces when choosing the permissible contract
space (in terms of plan cost-sharing features). One advantage of studying pricing regulation is that the contracts we
observe in our data are similar to those used in our equilibrium simulations, which might not generally be the case if
studying a wide range of contract design options.

25

Simulation Sample
Simulation Sample
N - Families

-

N - Individuals 25-65

10,372

Mean Age

44.5

Median Age

45

Gender (Male %)

45

Income
Tier 1 ( < $41K)

20%

Tier 2 ($41K-$72K)

40%

Tier 3 ($72K-$124K)

24%

Tier 4 ($124K-$176K)

8%

Tier 5 ( > $176K)

8%

Predicted Mean Total Expenditures
Mean

$6,559

25th quantile

$1,673

Median

$3,675

75th quantile

$8,354

90th quantile

$13,937

95th quantile

$18,638

99th quantile

$33,835

Risk Preferences
Mean

4:28 10

4

Standard Deviation

7:50 10

5

Table 4: This table presents descriptive statistics for the pseudo-sample of individuals used in our insurance
exchange simulations. The sample has risk preference means and standard deviations that are similar to those
of the choice model estimation sample. Moreover, the distributions of income and health status are similar to
those in the estimation sample and general population.

26

assume that the 90% policy has no deductible, a 20% coinsurance rate post-deductible, and a $1500
out-of-pocket maximum (all at the individual level we study here) while the 60% policy has a $3,000
deductible, a 20% coinsurance rate post-deductible, and a $5,950 out-of-pocket maximum. These two
plans cover 91% and 62% of expenditures for our entire simulation population on average, suggesting
that these are appropriate plans for our analysis and that our population is similar on average to the
representative population considered in this policy document.30
The estimated model contains three sources of heterogeneity that we use in this analysis: risk
type, risk aversion, and an idiosyncratic preference shock. For each individual in the population we
compute, based on their demographics and prior diagnostics, the risk type

discussed in the previous

section. Given that , we take 100 draws from the estimated distribution of

conditional on

and

the other demographics modeled in equation (5), creating 100 “pseudo-individuals” for each actual
individual in our sample. Doing so for each individual in the sample generates a joint distribution
of risk preferences and risk type. For each of the two plan designs we study, we adapt the cost
model described in Section 3 to estimate the person-plan speci…c distribution of out-of-pocket expenses
Hk ( j

it ; Zit )

where individuals are indexed by i and the two plans by k:31 With these objects, we

compute the expected utility of each (pseudo) individual for each plan, and use them to …nd CE90 and
CE60 (gross of premiums), as described in Section 2. Willingness to pay for the extra coverage of the
90% plan is

= CE90

CE60 + ", where " is distributed N (0;

2
" ).

Thus, as in equation (4), there

is a random shock to a consumer’s preference between the two plans. For the simulations that follow
we use

"

= 525, which is the estimated standard deviation of " for the single population for PPO1200

relative to PPO250 .32 As we report below, our results are robust to medium-sized changes in

".

The sample population and the estimated distributions determine F ( ): Costs to each plan k, Ck ( )
for k = 90 and 60, are computed using expected plan costs

it

E[Hk ( j

it ; Zit )],

aggregating over all

individuals associated with each , while AC90 ( ) and AC60 ( ) are determined by aggregating these
costs over the

that select a given plan.

The Adverse Selection Property introduced in Section 2, upon which our theoretical results hinge,
can be veri…ed in our sample: Figure 4 shows that AC90 and AC60 are increasing in
and that AC90 exceeds AC60 at all
3 0 We

P for each policy,

P.

also note that states can regulate the space of permissible non-linear contract designs for a given actuarially

equivalence value (e.g., 90%). In practice, many states have chosen to allow insurers only a very restricted space of
contracts within each class, making our assumption of one contract not very restrictive relative to reality. See, e.g.,
Ericson and Starc (2013) for a discussion of this regulation in Massachusetts.
3 1 Recall, as described in Section 3, for these analyses we use individuals, not families, hence the notation i for individual
rather than j for family as in the choice model.
3 2 We choose these two plans because they are closest in our observed plan set to the 90% and 60% plans we study in
our exchange analysis.

27

Figure 4: Plot of average costs vs. the price di¤erence
di¤erence, and are larger for the 90 policy at each

P . Average costs are increasing in this price

P , consistent with the assumption maintained to

derive our theoretical results.

4.1

No Pricing of Pre-Existing Conditions

We start by considering the case of pure community rating, where insurers must price everyone in the
whole population identically. We follow the theoretical results of Section 2 as a roadmap to …nding
equilibria.
The …rst step towards …nding equilibria involves checking whether all consumers pooling in the 90
plan, the highest level of coverage, is an equilibrium. For a 90 policy to break even covering all of the
population, the premium P90 must equal AC 90 : Such a policy is an equilibrium if

60 (AC 90 ; P60 )

0

for all P60 . If that inequality holds, Propositions 1 and 2 guarantee that all-in-90 is both a Nash and
a Riley equilibrium, and that equilibrium is unique.
Figure 5, which plots

AC( P ), shows that

AC( ) >

which guarantees that there is a pro…table

60 deviation from all-in-90 by targeting the healthiest customers. Thus, in our population all-in-90 is
not an equilibrium and the equilibrium must involve purchases of the 60 policy.
The second step towards …nding either Riley or Nash equilibria involves …nding the lowest breakeven
P =

P,

P BE ; i.e., the lowest interior

otherwise. This is then the RE

P at which

P = AC90 ( P )

AC60 ( P ); if any exist, or

P , and is the only candidate for NE, should a NE exist.

Figure 5 shows that, for the case of pure community rating, there is no interior equilibrium. Namely,
there is no pair of premiums at which both policies have positive market shares and both break even:
for any premium gap between 60 and 90 coverage, the gap in costs due to adverse selection into 90 is
larger than the gap in premiums. The market must fully unravel.

28

Figure 5: Plot of plan average costs as a function of their price di¤erences.
The third, and …nal, step involves checking whether all-in-60 is an NE (Proposition 2 guarantees
the existence of an RE, so having ruled out all candidates with positive 90 sales we know all-in-60 must
be the RE). Unlike RE, the existence of an NE is not guaranteed.
Figure 6 shows the pro…ts from both single-policy and multi-policy deviations starting with all
consumers buying the 60 policy at the price P60 = AC 60 , namely,
P; AC 60

") for

P

. As the lower curve shows,

90 (AC 60

90 (AC 60 +

+

P; AC 60 ) and (AC 60 +

P; AC 60 ) is never positive. The

worst risks, attracted into the 90 plan, are more costly than the premium they pay. Thus, pooling in
the 60 plan is an sp-NE as well as an RE.
The higher total pro…ts curve shows that a multi-policy deviation from all-in-60 is pro…table. For
such a deviation, while the 90 customers are not pro…table by themselves, the pool left in the 60 plan,
which can be attracted with P60 = AC 60

", more than compensates for the losses on consumers

shifting to the 90 plan.
The top section of Table 5 summarizes these …ndings for the case of a pure community rating pricing
regulation.

4.2

Pricing Pre-existing Conditions

We now investigate the e¤ects of allowing pricing of some health status information. Speci…cally, we
consider the case in which consumers are classi…ed into quartiles based on their ex ante predicted total
expenditures

: e.g., the …rst quartile contains all of the healthiest consumers, while the last contains

all of the sickest consumers. Insurers can target each quartile with di¤erent prices as they see …t. We
later present results that vary the …neness of information insurers can price on, ranging from pure

29

Figure 6: Investigation of pricing deviations from "All-In 60" candidate equilibrium.

Equilibria without Pre-existing Conditions
Equilirium Type

P60

Sh60

AC60

P90

Sh90

AC90

Riley

4,051

100.0

4,051

–

0

–

Single-policy Nash

4,051

100.0

4,051

–

0

–

Multiple-policy Nash

Does not exist

Equilibria with Health Status-based Pricing
Market

Equilibrium Type

P60

Sh60

AC60

P90

Sh90

AC90

Quartile 1

RE/sp-NE/mp-NE

289

64.8

289

1,550

35.2

1,550

Quartile 2

RE/sp-NE

1,467

100.0

1,467

-

0

-

Quartile 3

RE/sp-NE

4,577

100.0

4,577

-

0

-

Quartile 4

RE/sp-NE

9,802

100.0

9,802

-

0

-

Table 5: The top section of this table presents the equilibrium results for the case of pure community rating
(no pricing of pre-existing conditions). The bottom section presents the equilibrium results for the case where
insurers can price based on health status information in the form of health status quartiles. The equilibrium
results are presented for each health status quartile, which act as separate markets under this regulation.

30

Figure 7: Potential deviations from candidate equilibrium where all consumers pool in the 90 plan.
community rating all the way up to the case of unrestricted risk rating / price discrimination. These
alternative regulations are meant to be illustrative of potentially more subtle regulations seen in realworld insurance markets that increase the ability of insurers to price discriminate (e.g., pricing based
on speci…c pre-existing medical conditions). We follow the same steps as in the previous subsection to
…nd equilibria, but now for each market segment separately.
The implications of this pricing regulation for adverse selection are seen directly when examining
the pricing equilibrium for quartile 1, the healthiest quartile of consumers. For quartile 1, there is an
interior NE that survives multi-policy deviations and, thus, coincides with the RE. The …rst step, as
described above, is to check whether all-in-90 is an equilibrium. Figure 7 shows that, as in the pure
community rating case,

AC( ) > , implying that all-in-90 is not an equilibrium.

The second step is to look for interior equilibrium candidates. Figure 7 shows two interior breakeven

P s. By Propositions 1 and 2 only the lowest

P; the one with the largest share of customers in

the 90 plan is the RE and is the only candidate for a NE. Figure 8 displays the pro…tability of single
and double deviations for the equilibrium associated with the lower break-even
policy nor multi-policy deviations from this candidate

P are pro…table, this

P . As neither singleP is both a single- and

multiple-policy NE.
In contrast, equilibria in quartiles 2, 3 and 4 are qualitatively identical to the equilibrium under pure
community rating. The sp-NE is all-in-60 and coincides with the RE. An mp-NE does not exist. We
omit the graphs, which look similar to Figures 5 and 6. The bottom section of Table 5 summarizes the
…ndings for the four quartiles under health status-based pricing. The table also highlights the potential
for reclassi…cation risk when moving from the static equilibrium analysis to the analysis of long-run
consumer welfare: if insurers can price based on health status quartiles, buyers will …nd themselves

31

Figure 8: Pro…tability of deviations from interior equilibrium candidate with health status pricing.
paying premiums as low as $289 or as high as $9,802, corresponding to the di¤erent quartiles, as their
health evolves over time. However, under these pricing regulations, many of the healthiest consumers
in the population obtain a greater level of insurance coverage, and thus are less impacted by adverse
selection.
To more completely analyze the trade-o¤ between adverse selection and re-classi…cation risk, we next
consider a range of pricing regulations that allow insurers to price based on health status information
with varying degrees of speci…city. The second column in Table 6 describes the RE/sp-NE share in the
60 policy when insurers instead can price based on 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 20, or 50 health status partitions, as
well as the case of full risk-rating (labeled 1). Adverse selection is reduced as the insurers are able to
price on …ner information: with 4, 10, and 50 partitions the 60 plan has 90%, 83%, and 63% market
shares respectively, while with full risk-rating 73% of consumers choose to enroll in the 90 plan.33 (The
welfare numbers in columns 3-5 of Table 6 will be discussed in Section 5.)

5

Results: Welfare

Our aim in this section is to evaluate the expected utility of an individual starting at age 25 from
an ex-ante (“unborn”) perspective; that is, before he knows the evolution of his health. The unborn
individual faces uncertainty about how his health status will transition from one year to the next, and
thus what policies he will purchase and what premiums he will pay. Since individuals di¤er in their
risk aversion, we will calculate this expected utility separately for di¤erent risk aversion levels.
3 3 With

no " preference shock, with full risk-rating all consumers would enroll in the 90% plan. Here, with the estimated

" standard deviaiton incorporated, the …rst-best allocation has 73% of consumers in the 90% plan, since some prefer the
60% plan due to this preference shock.

32

Equilibria Welfare Loss from Health Status-based Pricing: Varying Regulation
yx;no
# of ACG Groups

yx;no

pre

yx;no

pre

Non-Manager Income path

pre

Sh60

Fixed Income

Manager Income Path

2

100.0

1,920

710

-102

4

90.0

3,082

1,821

-886

6

82.0

3,951

2,377

-232

8

85.1

4,649

2,084

-1,510

10

83.2

5,357

2,269

-1,364

20

81.4

8.590

4,621

-393

50

63.2

11,578

7,302

2,359

1

27.0

14,733

9,944

2,399

Table 6: Equilibria and long-run welfare comparison between the pricing regulations that allow some
pricing based on health status and the case where no pricing on health status is allowed. The table
shows the share of consumers choosing the 60 policy for each pricing regime. It also presents the values
for yx;no

pre ,

the annual payment required under regime x to make consumers indi¤erent between x

and no risk-rating. The regimes x listed in column 1 correspond to how targeted pricing can be over
the range of health status: e.g., 4 corresponds to the case of quartile pricing while 1 is full risk rating.
The results presented are for Riley Equilibria and

= 0:0004.

To be more speci…c, suppose we have pricing rule x (e.g., no pre-existing conditions) and equilibrium
concept e (e.g., Riley equilibrium).

The analysis in the previous section tells us what policy each

individual will choose as a function of their health status ( ) and risk aversion ( ), and the premium
they will pay. Given this information, we can compute the certainty equivalent CEx;e ( ; ) of the
uncertain consumption that this individual of type ( ; ) will face within a year because of uncertainty
over his health realization.
To compute expected utility starting at age 25 from an ex ante perspective, we need to know how
health status will transition over time for an individual with a given risk aversion

at age 25. To do

so, we assume that our sample represents a steady state population in which the distribution of health
types at each age corresponds to the ex-ante distribution that any (unborn) individual faces. before
learning his risk preferences and health outcomes.34 Recall that our estimates imply that health and
risk aversion are correlated, with more risk averse individuals being healthier on average. We assume
that this correlation re‡ects di¤ering stochastic processes for health conditional on an individual’s
innate risk aversion at age 25. To identify the stochastic health outcomes a 25-year old with a given
risk aversion

foresees at any given future age t, we isolate those individuals in our simulation sample

(comprised of the 100 pseudo-individual versions of each person) of age t whose risk-aversion
3 4 Recall

t

that the age distribution in our sample is close to uniform, as it should be in a steady state population.

33

falls

Average Costs at Various Ages
Conditional on Age 25 Risk Aversion
30-35

45-50

55-60

0:0002

5,586

7,196

10,857

0:0003

4,212

6,390

10,319

0:0004

3,100

5,687

9,767

0:0005

2,328

4,911

9,271

0:0006

1,775

4,373

8,813

Table 7: Average costs as a function of age 25 risk preferences. Following the choice model estimates,
costs are negatively related to risk aversion conditional on age.
into a band around the level expected based on our estimates of equation (5), for individuals with risk
aversion level

at age 25.35 Table 7 shows for various risk aversion levels

the average costs of the

individuals selected in this manner at ages 25-30, 45-50, and 60-65. The pattern of costs re‡ects the
positive correlation between health status and risk aversion, as well as the attenuation of this positive
relationship with increases in age.
To measure the welfare di¤erence for an individual with age-25 risk aversion level

between any

0

two regimes x and x (under a given equilibrium concept e), we de…ne the …xed yearly payment yx;x0 ( )
added to income in regime x that makes the individual have the same expected utility starting at age
25 under regime x and as under regime x0 :
65
X

t

E[ e

fIt CEx (

t;

)+yx;x0 ( )g

]=

t=25

t

fIt CEx0 (

E[ e

t;

)g

];

t=25

or
yx;x0 ( ) =
For a given discount factor

1

ln

P65

t
E[
Pt=25
65
t
E[
t=25

e

fIt CEx0 (

t;

)g

e

fIt CEx (

t;

)g ]

1 and regime x, we calculate

…rst, we …rst generate the value of e
with

65
X

fIt CEx (

t;

)g

P

t

t

E[ e

]

!

:

(7)

fIt CEx (acgt ; )g

] as follows:

that each individual of age t in the band associated

would have if he chose between the 60 and 90 policies facing the equilibrium prices in regime

x and having risk aversion parameter

.36 The income level It is either held …xed (in which case,

with CARA preferences, its level doesn’t matter) or comes from the regression in equation (6) and is
estimated separately for managers and non-managers.37 We then derive Ext [ e

fIt CEx (

t;

)g

] by

3 5 We

use a band radius of 0:00005.
we evaluate the welfare of an individual who at age 25 does not foresee his risk aversion changing.
3 7 For managers, the mean income level I starts near income tier 1 at age 25 ($0-$40,000) and is near tier 4 at age 65
t
3 6 Thus,

($124,000-$176,000). Maximum income for managers occurs at age 66. For non-managers, mean income also starts near
income tier 1 at age 25 and is halfway between tiers 2 ($40,000-$80,000) and 3 ($80,000-$124,000) at age 65. Income
peaks at age 56 for non-managers, with an average near income tier 3. See the discussion of the estimates of equation
(6) in Appendix C for more details.

34

Welfare Loss from Health Status–based Pricing in RE/sp-NE ($/year)
y

4;no pre (

)

Fixed Income

y

4;no pre (

)

Non-Manager Income path

y

4;no pre (

)

Manager Income Path

0:0002

2,220

1,499

-384

0:0003

2,693

1,688

-613

0:0004

3,082

1,821

-886

0:0005

3,399

1,764

-973

0:0006

3,626

2,115

-891

Table 8: Long-run welfare comparison between the two pricing regulations of (i) pricing based on
health status quartiles (x = “ 4”) and (ii) pure community rating / no pre-existing conditions (x0 =
“no

pre”). The table presents the values for yx;x0 ( ), the annual payment required under regime x to

make consumers indi¤erent between x and x0 . The results presented are based on the RE and sp-NE
equilibria outcomes presented in Table 5. We present results for the di¤ering cases of (i) “…xed income”
(ii) “income path”for non-managers and (iii) “income path”for managers. The assumed discount rate
is

= 0:975:

calculating the sample mean of those values for age t individuals in the band. We then discount and
P
add these values over t to get t t Ext [ e fIt CEx ( t ; )g ]: We proceed similarly for regime x0 .

We …rst compare two regimes: ACG-quartile pricing and pure community rating. The latter elim-

inates reclassi…cation risk but exacerbates adverse selection. Health status-based pricing also involves
some inter-temporal redistribution, as the young tend to face lower premiums.

To the extent that

this regime smooths consumption over time when borrowing is not possible (given the fact that income
generally rises with age), this creates some welfare gain as well if agents cannot otherwise borrow to
smooth their consumption over time.
Table 8 shows the values of yx;x0 ( ) under the RE (and sp-NE) equilibrium notion comparing
pricing based on ACG-quartiles (x = “ 4”) and no pre-existing conditions (x0 = “no
take

pre”). We

= 0:975. Since we do not know the extent to which agents are able to borrow to smooth their

consumption, we compute welfare both assuming that income is …xed over time (perfect smoothing)
and assuming they cannot borrow at all.38 In the latter case we provide a calculation separately for
managers and non-managers, whose expected incomes di¤er at each age.
With a …xed income, the welfare gains from eliminating reclassi…cation when pricing pre-existing
conditions is prohibited greatly exceed any losses this rule introduces due to adverse selection. The
loss from health-based pricing on quartiles ranges from $2,220 to $3,626 per year depending on risk
aversion level. Losses are larger for those with greater risk aversion. The annual loss with health status
quartile pricing at a risk aversion level of 0.0004, approximately the mean in our sample, is $3,082,
which is about 47% of the size of the $6,559 annual average total expenses in the population (see Table
3 8 Our

calculations do not, however, consider any gains from self-insurance through precautionary saving.

35

4 in Section 3). As a direct comparison point, we can compare this to the welfare implications of just
adverse selection: with …xed income and risk aversion 0.0004 a consumer would be willing to pay $619
per year to face a regime in which everyone receives the 90 policy at price P90 = AC 90 rather than
the community rating regime in which pre-existing conditions cannot be priced and everyone ends up
buying the 60 policy at price P60 = AC 60 . Thus, the welfare loss from reclassi…cation risk induced
by this pricing regulation change is at least 5 times as large as the welfare loss from adverse selection
under pure community rating.
When individuals cannot borrow, health-based pricing confers an additional bene…t by moving
consumption forward in life. For non-managers the losses from health-based pricing now range from
$1,499 to $2,115 per year. For managers, however, whose income is higher and rises more steeply with
age (see footnote 37), and therefore bene…t more from moving consumption forward in time, healthbased pricing is actually preferred to community rating. For this group, the bene…ts of smoothing
income over time outweigh the costs of reclassi…cation risk.
We revisit Table 6 to examine the welfare implications of varying the extent to which insurers
can price health status information. Columns 3-5 illustrate the impact of …ner pricing on long-run
welfare. With …xed income (column 3), and for non-managers’income paths (column 4), the welfare
loss from increased reclassi…cation risk swamps the welfare gain from less adverse selection: the welfare
loss from pricing 20 health status categories is almost 3 times that from pricing on quartiles.

For

managers’income paths the e¤ect is not monotone, because of the bene…ts of income smoothing, but
…ne enough pricing does lead to a welfare loss relative to community rating (e.g., with 50 health status
groups). Overall, the results highlight the trade-o¤ between adverse selection and reclassi…cation risk,
and suggest that reclassi…cation risk is likely to be more important from a welfare perspective.39 ;40
We now turn to several extensions that examine policy-relevant modi…cations to our framework, e.g.,
age-based pricing, insurer risk-adjustment transfers designed to mitigate adverse selection, and the
consequences of an unenforceable mandate.

6
6.1

Extensions
Age-Based Pricing

Age-based pricing is one of the few exceptions to pure community rating allowed in the A¤ordable
Care Act. The legislation stipulates that insurers o¤ering plans in any state-based exchange can vary
prices on the basis of age by up to a 3:1 ratio: that is, older cohorts cannot be charged more than
3 9 In

addition to considering the …xed income case here, in the next section we consider the same comparison between

community rating and pricing based on health status when there is also age-based pricing which eliminates the intertemporal consumption-shifting e¤ect of health status-based pricing. When we do so, managers also prefer community
rating.
4 0 One caveat to these results is that they rely on our estimated risk preferences being apprpropriate for evaluating
reclassi…cation risk; see the discussion in Section 6.5.

36

three times the premiums of younger buyers. States may further restrict this ratio to be lower (but
cannot raise it) making this an important available policy tool. In this section, we use our framework
to study market equilibrium and consumer welfare when insurers are allowed to vary prices with age
and comment on (i) whether the 3:1 ratio is expected to bind, (ii) whether age-based pricing reduces
adverse selection, and (iii) how the presence of age-based pricing a¤ects the welfare impact of allowing
pricing of pre-existing conditions. For a further investigation of age-based pricing regulation see e.g.
Ericson and Starc (2013).
For this analysis, we group consumers into …ve-year age bins and use that categorization as the
basis for di¤erential pricing by insurers. Ericson and Starc (2013) shows that, in practice, insurers in
Massachusetts price to …ve-year age bands, though this may or may not be the same in other states.
Table 9 describes each age bucket and the equilibrium results. The …rst column shows mean total
medical expenses by age in our sample: those age 30-35 have a mean of $3,357 while those age 60-65
have a mean of $9,413. Thus, just comparing average costs, the 3:1 age ratio appears to be non-binding
in our sample judging by either ex-post or projected expenses captured by our health status measure
(our upcoming analysis with MEPS data shows a similar pattern). If we include those age 25-30, whose
mean expense is $2,756, the age restriction is binding: however, in both the A¤ordable Care Act and
Massachusetts legislation individuals in that age group can buy into a special catastrophic insurance
pool that is separately regulated. As many of the healthiest individuals sign up for the catastrophic plan
in Massachusetts, the 3:1 age restriction might not be binding in practice.41 However, since policies
typically include a deductible (e.g., our 60 policy involves a $3,000 deductible) the relation between
expected costs and the actuarial cost to the insurer is non-linear. The column on the right, labelled
“Premium,”re‡ects the actuarial cost of insuring each age group in the 60 plan given our plan designs.
The deductible impacts the younger group the most, thus making the 3:1 ratio binding for the 30-35
population.
The second question we address is whether age-based pricing ameliorates the extent of adverse
selection. As we saw in the previous section, by allowing some health status based pricing, additional
trade was generated for the healthiest quartile of the population. Age — as shown in column 1 — is a
proxy for health type, and may also enable more trade in equilibrium.
The …nal columns in Table 9 present equilibrium results with age-based pricing. Surprisingly
perhaps, allowing for age-based pricing does not prevent full unraveling. For each age group, the RE/spNE involves all-in-60. Age-based pricing undoes some of the transfers from the younger, healthier age
groups to the older groups that occur in pure community rating. However, the distributions of health
risk still have substantial enough tails even for the younger age group that full unraveling occurs in
equilibrium.42
4 1 In

Massachusetts, the age rating restriction is more restrictive than in the ACA, and doesn’t allow age-based pricing

at higher than a 2:1 ratio.
4 2 We note that these results are robust to medium-sized changes in

",

even though this shock to preferences introduces

a source of willingness to pay for coverage unrelated to risk type. As we increase standard deviation of this shock, equilibria
by age and for the whole population still involve unravelling to all-in-60. A " over 2,000 is required for some sub-markets

37

Age-based Pricing Regulation: Costs and Equilibrium Results
Expenses

ACG

Ages

Mean

S.D.

Mean

All

5,582

6,495

1.08

25-30

2,756

4,657

30-35

3,357

35-40

Sh60
S.D.

RE/sp-NE

Premium

1.42

100.0

4,051

0.56

0.79

100.0

1,784

5,189

0.71

1.23

100.0

2,215

3,762

5,029

0.78

1.05

100.0

2,540

40-45

4,560

5,642

0.87

1.04

100.0

3,237

45-50

5,778

6,575

1.06

1.32

100.0

4,098

50-55

6,722

6,831

1.32

1.82

100.0

5,038

55-60

8,394

7,134

1.53

1.58

100.0

6,304

60-65

9,413

7,268

1.77

1.73

100.0

7,259

Table 9: Average costs, health status, and Riley /sp-NE equilibrium results for age-based rating policy.
Finally, we consider the simultaneous pricing of pre-existing conditions as well as age. Insurers
will be allowed to price age in the exchanges, so it is natural to consider the e¤ect of allowing pricing
based on health status when age is priced as well. The exercise is interesting for at least two reasons.
First, pricing based on health status may have a di¤erent impact on equilibrium in a more homogenous
population, grouped by age, than it has in the whole population. Second, when evaluating the welfare
impact of health status-based pricing, age-based pricing may neutralize the bene…ts associated with
consumption smoothing, by reducing the transfer from young to old that health status-based pricing
otherwise induces.
Table 10 shows the equilibrium when insurers can separate each age group into health status quartiles. Unlike pure age-based pricing which involved full unraveling to all-in-60 for every age group, we
now have a positive share in 90 for all of the healthiest quartiles except in the oldest cohort, as well as
for the second quartile for the younger groups. The interaction of age and health status-based pricing
thus reduces adverse selection. Table 11 shows the compensation required to make an individual indifferent between a regime with health status quartile pricing for each age group, and another in which
all individuals in each age band receive the 60 policy at its average cost for their age band. Once age
is priced, health status-based pricing, which appealed to consumers with steeply increasing income, is
no longer preferred by those consumers. The bene…t of health status-based pricing is the reduction in
adverse selection, and the postponement of premiums until later in life. With age-based pricing, the
latter bene…t is eliminated. The cost associated with reclassi…cation risk then dominates the bene…ts
of reducing adverse selection.
to not fully unravel.

38

Joint Health Status Quartile and Age Pricing Regulation: Equilibrium Results
Q1 (Healthy)

Q2

Q3

Q4 (Sick)

Avg.

Ages

Sh90

P60

P90

Sh90

P60

P90

Sh90

P60

Sh90

P60

Sh90

25-30

63

126

616

25

375

1,935

0

930

0

5,520

22

30-35

63

156

676

42

337

1,597

0

1,411

0

6,855

26

35-40

52

189

966

50

608

2,028

0

1,867

0

7,246

25

40-45

38

299

1,489

0

1,257

-

0

3,180

0

8,141

10

45-50

63

492

1,592

18

1,574

4,044

0

3,891

0

10,138

20

50-55

27

946

2,936

0

2,304

-

0

5,847

0

10,858

7

55-60

33

1,477

3,617

0

5,159

-

0

6,733

0

11,702

8

60-65

0

2,200

8,700

0

5,824

-

0

7,666

0

13,321

0

Table 10: RE /sp-NE equilibrium results for pricing regulations that allows insurers to price based on
health status quartiles, conditional on age.

Welfare Loss from Health Status-quartile pricing, per age group, in RE/sp-NE ($/year)
y

4+age;age (

)

Fixed Income

y

4+age;age (

)

Non-Manager Income path

y

4+age;age (

)

Manager Income Path

0:0002

2,111

2,129

1,100

0:0003

2,911

2,028

920

0:0004

3,707

1,842

778

0:0005

4,510

1,646

1,353

0:0006

5,137

1,612

1,876

Table 11: Long-run welfare comparison between the two pricing regulations of (i) pricing based on
health status quartiles by age (x = “ 4 + age”)and (ii) pricing based on just age (x0 = “age”). The
results presented are based on the RE/sp-NE equilibria outcomes for each of the two pricing regulations.
As before, the assumed discount rate is

= 0:975:

39

6.2

Participation and Subsidies

While the individual mandate will be a component of all exchanges to be implemented under the
A¤ordable Care Act, in reality the mandate is a tax that is paid to the IRS when someone who can
a¤ord insurance remains uninsured. It is plausible that certain individuals, especially healthy ones,
will decide to pay the mandated penalty and opt out. In Massachusetts, where an individual mandate
has been in place since 2006, the penalty has been 50% of the cost of the least generous (Bronze)
plan available through the exchange (Commonwealth Connector).43 This is on average larger than the
initial penalty under the A¤ordable Care Act, which is the maximum of $695 per household member
(up to three) and 2.5% of household income. In Massachusetts, only 3% of the population failed to
comply with the individual mandate in 2008, with many of those people receiving exemptions from the
penalty due to low income [Kolstad and Kowalski (2012)].
We simulate the role of the mandate. To do so we allow individuals to opt out of the exchanges
should their expected utility from being uninsured be higher than joining their favorite insurance plan
in the market. Uninsured means that the consumer pays zero premium and pays for the total cost of
their health expenses.44
We present two exercises. First, we ask how the market would work absent the mandate. To answer
that question we …nd equilibria allowing individuals to opt out without penalty. Second, we introduce
opting out penalties, and determine equilibrium participation at di¤erent penalty levels.
Recall that equilibria without age-based pricing unravelled to all-in-60. The column “Better-o¤ In”
in the “Community Rating” section of Table 12 shows the percentage of each age group (and of the
population as a whole) that is better o¤ insured at the equilibrium premium of $4,068 than remaining
uninsured. For example, 44.2% (= 100

55:8) of 25 to 30 year old individuals prefer to opt out as their

expected utility from non-insurance is higher than being pooled with the whole population.
Naturally, those that prefer to opt out are younger, healthier and less risk averse. The expected
costs of insuring consumers who prefer to decline coverage is $3,107 versus $5,107 for those that prefer
to participate. The average risk aversion coe¢ cient of those that prefer to participate is 4:26
versus 4:03 10

4

10

4

for those that prefer to decline coverage.

Allowing healthier individuals to opt out increases the cost of covering the remaining pool, which
in turn draws more people out of the pool. The process stops at a premium of $5,339 when no more
individuals want to drop out. At that premium there are no pro…table single-policy Nash deviations
in 60 or 90 to draw buyers back in. Thus, a P60 = $5,339 is a sp-NE of the exchange without a
mandate.45 The equilibrium without the mandate involves full unravelling to 60, with 74.3% of the
4 3 In

2010, in the 02138 zip code in Cambridge, MA, this penalty would have been $5,500 for a family with two 40 year

old parents, $3,300 for a couple with two 35 year olds, and $1,434 for a single 31 year old [Kolstad and Kowalski (2012)].
4 4 This approach may overstate particpation for two reasons. First, as we discuss in Section 6.5, our estimated risk
preferences may overstate aversion to the large risks involved with having no insurance. Second, as noted by Mahoney
(2012), the choice to have no insurance may not mean that the individual pays for al of their medical expenses. On the
other hand, other behavioral factors (social norms, etc.) may push individuals toward particpation.
4 5 We have not examined whether these outcomes are RE or mp-NE.

40

Implications of Individual Mandate
Community Rating

Age-Based Pricing

Mandate:

No Mandate:

Mandate:

No Mandate:

Ages

Better-O¤ In

Participation

Premium

Better-O¤ In

Premium

Participation

All

78.3%

74.3%

-

80.7%

-

77.0%

25-30

55.8%

50.6%

1,786

70.1%

2,732

63.1%

30-35

59.6%

54.1%

2,215

70.0%

3,409

62.5%

35-40

68.7%

62.2%

2,542

75.9%

3,476

70.8%

40-45

75.1%

70.9%

3,242

77.7%

4,233

74.5%

45-50

82.5%

79.3%

4,103

82.9%

4,976

80.6%

50-55

90.6%

87.2%

5,038

88.6%

5,714

86.9%

55-60

94.7%

92.5%

6,304

92.1%

6,927

89.9%

60-65

95.8%

93.9%

7,259

91.6%

7,959

90.2%

Table 12: Implications of the individual mandate for equilibrium prices and market participation.
population voluntarily covered. The column “No Mandate: Participation”under “Community Rating”
shows participation by age in the non-mandate equilibrium.
We can also compute the welfare impact of removing the mandate. Those individuals that remain
covered, 74.3% of the population, su¤er a loss equal to the premium increase $1,271 (= 5; 339

4; 068).

Comparing the certainty equivalent of remaining uninsured versus participation in the exchange for the
25:7% of the population that opts out, we …nd that they are better o¤ by $1,972, on average. Thus,
removing the mandate entails a welfare loss of $434:3 [= 0:743(1; 271)

0:257(1; 972)] per person.

On the right side of Table 12 we show the corresponding numbers for age-based pricing. As we
saw in Section 6.1, all the equilibria under the mandate (with no opting out) for the di¤erent age
groups involve unravelling to 60. At the equilibrium premium, reported in the “Mandate: Premium”
column, only a proportion of the population would voluntarily participate in the exchange. Column
“Mandate: Better-o¤ In,”shows that the share that prefers to participate is an increasing share in age.
Older individuals are more likely to bene…t from participation, but the di¤erences across ages are less
pronounced once age is priced.
For each age, as individuals opt out, the cost of coverage increases. The column “No Mandate:
Premium” reports the equilibrium premia for each age group absent a mandate. It is substantially
higher than under the mandate, especially so for younger cohorts for whom the mandate is binding for
a larger proportion of individuals.
We now turn to the second question: how do penalties impact the equilibrium? We now allow
individuals to opt out if their expected utility from opting out and paying the penalty is higher than
the utility from buying insurance at the equilibrium premium. (A participation subsidy plays the same

41

Market Participation as Function of Penalty
Penalty

Participation %

Premium

0

74.3%

5,339

1000

78.2%

5,096

2000

82.7%

4,974

3000

88.4%

4,848

4000

96.7%

4,712

Free ins.

97.7%

4,144

Table 13: Market participation as a function of the penalty assessed for nonparticipation.
Age-based Pricing Regulation: Market Participation
30-35
Penalty

40-45

50-55

60-65

Partic.

Prem.

Partic.

Prem.

Partic.

Prem.

Partic.

Prem.

0

63.1%

3,409

74.5%

4,232

86.9%

5,714

90.2%

7,959

1000

71.1%

3,047

79.3%

4,013

89.5%

5,570

91.8%

7,840

2000

87.6%

2,517

85.5%

3,755

92.5%

5,410

93.5%

7,717

3000

99.5%

2,225

94.9%

3,406

95.7%

5,252

95.3%

7,592

Table 14: Impact of individual mandate on participation and premiums by age group under age-based
pricing.
role as the penalty.)
Table 13 shows participation for di¤erent penalty levels with community rating, and the corresponding equilibrium premium. While the penalty increases participation, it requires a very steep penalty
(high subsidy) to even approach full participation. Good health draws are hard to persuade to remain
in the pool. The last row presents participation under free insurance. Participation is not full, due to
the preference shock.
Naturally, under age-based pricing the required penalty to achieve a speci…c participation level may
be smaller. First, participation under age-based pricing is higher, but also healthier individuals who
are on average younger might be easier to persuade to remain in a younger and healthier pool. Table 14
shows that a given subsidy/penalty is more e¤ective in a¤ecting participation when there is age-based
pricing.

6.3

Risk Adjustment

In practice, the implementation of the ACA will involve risk adjustment transfers whose aim is to
ameliorate adverse selection. States are free to propose their own risk adjustment rules, provided
they receive Federal approval, or can instead default into the risk adjustment formula proposed by the

42

Federal government [see, e.g., Dept. of Health and Human Services (2012a) or Dept. of Health and
Human Services (2012b)]. In this section, we use our model to evaluate the impact of the Federal
formula. While in practice risk adjustment can lead to a number of problems, such as insurers upcoding enrollees to qualify for larger transfers, we will abstract from such issues and assume that the
government can perfectly observe the health status of each enrollee.
It is tempting to think that risk adjustment can solve the adverse selection problem entirely, by
simply providing a transfer to each …rm that gives that …rm an expected cost from each enrollee
equal to the average cost if there was no selection, thereby “eliminating the impact of selection on
cost.” Unfortunately, doing so can result in the government running a de…cit. As a result, the formula
proposed by the HHS is designed to always break even. It provides a transfer payment per member
to each plan i equal to
Ri
i si Ri

AVi
i si AVi

P

Ti =

P

P;

(8)

where Ri is plan i’s “risk score”(equal to plan i’s average cost divided by the average cost of all plans
in the market), AVi is plan i’s actuarial value (i.e., 60 or 90 in our model), si is plan i’s market share,
P
and P is the average premium in the market. (Note that i Ti = 0 , so the transfers are balanced.)

These transfers alter insurers’average costs, which are now AC90

T90 and AC60

T60 in the 90 and

60 policy, respectively.
We will examine Riley equilibria. Since in equilibrium all policies break even and the transfers are
balanced, the market average premium must equal the market average cost:46
P = AC( P )

s90 ( P )AC90 ( P ) + s60 ( P )AC60 ( P ):

Plan i’s risk score is Ri = AC90 ( P )=AC( P ).
Substituting into (8), we get
T90 ( P )

AC90 ( P )
AC( P )

=

= AC90 ( P )

0:9
AC( P )
AV ( P )
0:9
AC( P )
AV ( P )

where
AV ( P )
4 6 Formally,

s90 ( P )(0:9) + s60 ( P )(0:6):

in equilibrium each policy will break even given its post-transfer average cost. Thus, recalling that Ti is a

per member transfer, we have
P90 = AC90 ( P )

T90 ( P )

and
P60 = AC60 ( P ) + T90 ( P )

s90 ( P )
s60 ( P )

:

The market average premium is therefore
P = s90 ( P )P90 + s60 ( P )P60 = AC( P ):

43

Welfare Bene…t of Risk-Adjusted Transfers: RE/sp-NE ($/year)
yno

pre;risk adj (

)

yno

Fixed Income

pre;risk adj (

)

yno

Non-Manager Income path

pre;risk adj (

)

Manager Income Path

0:0001

316

261

106

0:0002

327

202

27

0:0003

336

139

18

0:0004

349

84

0

0:0005

368

36

38

0:0006

386

23

72

Table 15: Long-run welfare implications of insurer risk adjustment regulation (transfers based on risk
mixture of the population enrolled).
Observe that the transfers depend on the market prices (through

P ), while the market prices

depend on the transfer rule. Thus, the equilibrium prices are determined as a …xed point. Speci…cally,
the prices will be
P90 ( P )

= AC90 ( P )
= AC( P )

T90 ( P )
0:9
AV ( P )

and
P60 ( P ) = AC( P )
This leads to a …xed point condition for

0:6
AV ( P )

:

P:

P = AC( P )

0:3
AV ( P )

:

(9)

Applying formula (9) to our data, we …nd that when health status-based pricing is not allowed the
equilibrium with risk adjustment has prices P90 = 6; 189 and P60 = 4; 139, and the 90 policy capturing
a 49% market share for the whole population.
To study the welfare implications we compare the long-run implications of equilibrium outcomes with
and without insurer risk adjustment, for the case of pure community rating. Table 15 shows the yearly
amount yno

pre;risk adj

an individual would be willing to pay to implement insurer risk adjustment

relative to the case of pure community rating with no insurer transfers. The risk adjustment outcome
is preferred, re‡ecting the reduction in adverse selection compared to the case with no insurer transfers.

44

6.4

Rebalancing of the Population

The analysis to this point has relied on health choice and utilization data from a large …rm with approximately 10,000 employees and 20,000 covered lives. While these data have a lot of depth on dimensions
that are essential to model health risk and risk preferences, they represent a speci…c population working
for a speci…c large employer. Our results thus represent the case of exchange design as if this population
were the population of interest. In this section we extend the analysis by applying our framework to a
more externally relevant sample from the Medical Expenditures Panel Survey (MEPS), a survey that
was speci…cally created to study medical care decisions for a nationally representative population. This
analysis serves two purposes: (i) to study whether our broad conclusions are robust to changes in the
population composition and (ii) to apply our analysis to a nationally representative sample.
We study individuals in the MEPS data from 2004 to 2008. The data are structured as overlapping
two-year panels where each individual is in the panel for two consecutive years, and a new panel of
individuals enters in each year. Table D.0 in Appendix D shows the number of individuals present in
each year, which ranges from 33,066 to 34,403 over the …ve-year span. Note that because of the panel
structure, an individual “counts” twice, once in each year they appear.
We base our analysis on two distinct samples that may be of interest to an exchange regulator,
described in Table D.1 in Appendix D along with statistics for the full MEPS sample. Column 1
contains the summary statistics for the entire sample, with no sample cuts. Column 2 contains summary
statistics for the sample of individuals between ages 25-65. In this table and in the analysis we split
individuals within the same family into distinct individuals and run our simulations as if the entire
market is an individual market.47 Column 3 describes the sample of individuals between 25-65 who
are uninsured, unemployed, or work for an employer that does not o¤er coverage (implying that if the
individual has coverage, it is from the individual market). We run our exchange market analysis for
the samples in Column 2 and Column 3. Column 2 is of interest if all individuals 25-65 participate in
an exchange (e.g., the exchange insurers everybody). This sample is about half of the overall MEPS
sample. Column 3 is of interest because it covers the population that will enter exchanges immediately
when they are set up (uninsured and insured on individual market). This latter sample is about 15%
of the overall MEPS sample, similar in age, lower in income, and more likely to come from the South.
We note that this table presents the data “as is” while we use MEPS sample weights (which they use
to make their own data representative) in our …nal analysis.
Table D.2 in Appendix D describes the insurance coverage for each of the three samples described
in Table D.1. For individuals in Column 2 (age 25-65), 64% have some form of private insurance, 12%
are on Medicaid, and 22% are uninsured. 76% of families have employer insurance o¤ered at some
point, while 62% always have an o¤er of employer insurance. Column 3, by design, has 83% of people
4 7 Once

the structure of family based premium setting is clear, we could run an additional analysis taking that into

account, to the extent that it di¤ers from aggregating up individual premiums into family premiums, which our current
approach is essentially equivalent to.

45

uninsured and 17% of people insured on the individual market (with no employer insurance o¤er).
Our analysis matches individuals in the employer data used throughout our analysis to the two
MEPS populations of interest (Columns 2 and 3) and creates two new simulation samples with demographic weights similar to the MEPS samples, but with detailed health and risk preference data from
our estimates.48 We match individuals in our data to those in the MEPS data based on three demographics: age, income, and gender. To do this, we probabilistically model cells of age, gender, and
income in the MEPS samples, and then draw randomly from individuals in those bins in our data
with weights proportional to the MEPS cell weights. We note that, before we construct the MEPS
cell weights, we incorporate the sample weights in the MEPS data, which are intended to correct for
sampling and response issues. Table D.3 in Appendix D describes the age, income, and gender cell
multivariate cell weights for each of the two MEPS samples. We model the multivariate distribution
of age and income fully non-parametrically, and assume that the probability of gender conditional on
income is the same for all ages. We note that in this analysis, we do not match our sample to MEPS
using health expenditure data (conditional on the other demographics) since our sample has more detailed medical information on consumers. However, the analysis below and the tables in Appendix D
show that average costs conditional on demographics bins are similar in our data and in the MEPS
data. Table D.4 provides more detail on the health risk for both MEPS samples.
Given this population weighting procedure, we study market equilibrium as in Section 4 for each
weighted sample and each equilibrium concept. We study the pricing regimes of (i) pure community
rating and (ii) health status quartile pricing, to compare to the results from our data. Table 16
presents the equilibrium simulation results for the sample re-weighted for all MEPS individuals from
25-65, while Table 17 presents the results for the sample re-weighted according to the MEPS uninsured
/ individual market population. These can be directly compared to Table 5. The comparison yields
several important insights. First, the equilibrium premia and market shares are quite similar in the
MEPS re-weighted samples to those from our main sample. For all samples the market fully unravels to
all-in-60 for the case of pure community rating. For all samples, the healthiest quartile has substantial
market share in both 60 and 90 under health status-based pricing: in our main analysis 64.8% in
quartile 1 choose 60, for the re-weighted full MEPS analysis this value is 60.2%, while for the reweighted uninsured / individual market MEPS sample it is 57.5%. Interestingly, there is also 30.4% of
consumers enrolled in 90 for quartile 2 of the uninsured re-weighted sample, though for the other two
samples this share is 0. This suggests that if the exchanges are comprised of only uninsured individuals
and those that would have been on the individual market, there will be higher insurance rates for
the within-exchange population. For the two sickest quartiles, everyone enrolls in 60 in equilibrium.
Finally, and importantly, we note that the population expense levels are very similar between our main
sample and the full re-weighted MEPS sample: if all enroll in 60, the average costs in the former are
$3,852 while in the latter they are $4,051. For the uninsured re-weighted sample this value is $3,901,
4 8 We

bring in the cost data from our data set because it is more detailed on the health risk dimension and our setting

provides more precise plan characterizations, with which it is possible to estimate risk preferences.

46

MEPS Weighted: Equilibria without Pre-existing Conditions
Equilirium Type

P60

Sh60

AC60

P90

Sh90

AC90

Riley / sp-NE

3,852

100.0

4,051

–

0

–

21.5

12,760

Multiple-policy Nash
Wilson

Does not exist
3,774

78.5

2,112

6,674

MEPS Weighted: Equilibria with Health Status-based Pricing (Quartiles)
Market

Equilibrium Type

P60

Sh60

AC60

P90

Sh90

AC90

Quartile 1

RE/sp-NE/mp-NE

321

60.2

321

1,521

39.8

1,521

Quartile 2

RE/sp-NE

1,445

100.0

1,445

-

0

-

Quartile 3

RE/sp-NE

4,239

100.0

4,239

-

0

-

Quartile 4

RE/sp-NE

9,347

100.0

9,347

-

0

-

Table 16: This table presents the analogous table to Table 5 on equilibrium outcomes, applied to the sample
reweighted by characteristics of the MEPS full population, as described in the text. The top presents the
equilibrium results for the case of pure community rating (no pricing of pre-existing conditions) and the bottom
for the case where insurers can price based on health status quartiles.

but the distribution is more heavily skewed, with larger masses of both very healthy and very sick
consumers. Overall, the analysis of MEPS data in this section suggests that, at a …rst pass, our main
results are robust to di¤erent weighting of demographics to re‡ect a more nationally representative
sample.

6.5

Lower Aversion toward Reclassi…cation Risk

The welfare calculations above used the estimates of risk aversion from Section 3. Those estimates,
however, were derived from situations in which individuals faced risks that were signi…cantly smaller
than the risks arising from reclassi…cation, especially in the limit case where health status can be fully
priced by insurers. Families choosing between the …rm’s PPO policies faced a maximum out-of-pocket
cost of between $6,000 and $10,000, depending on their income, while reclassi…cation risk can measure
in the tens or even hundreds of thousands of dollars, depending on how much information insurers can
use in pricing. The range of CARA risk aversion levels we estimated can imply implausible levels of
risk aversion as the risks consumers consider are scaled up to higher monetary amounts [see, e.g., Rabin
(2000)].
To address this issue we compute long-run welfare under a range of CRRA coe¢ cients. The mac-

47

MEPS Unins. Weighted: Equilibria without Pre-existing Conditions
Equilirium Type

P60

Sh60

AC60

P90

Sh90

AC90

Riley / sp-NE

3,901

100.0

3,901

–

0

–

18.8

13,602

Multiple-policy Nash
Wilson

Does not exist
3,834

81.2

2,269

6,834

MEPS Unins. Weighted: Equilibria with Health Status-based Pricing (Quartiles)
Market

Equilibrium Type

P60

Sh60

AC60

P90

Sh90

AC90

Quartile 1

RE/sp-NE/mp-NE

311

57.5

311

1,476

42.5

1,476

Quartile 2

RE/sp-NE

1,128

69.6

1,128

3,228

30.4

3,228

Quartile 3

RE/sp-NE

4,121

100.0

4,121

-

0

-

Quartile 4

RE/sp-NE

9,751

100.0

9,751

-

0

-

Table 17: This table presents the analogous table to Table 5 on equilibrium outcomes, applied to the sample
reweighted by characteristics of the uninsured / individual coverage MEPS, described in the text. The top
presents the equilibrium results for the case of pure community rating (no pricing of pre-existing conditions)
and the bottom for the case where insurers can price based on health status quartiles.

Distributions of Certainty Equivalents of One-Year Risks
Community Rating

Health Status Quartile Pricing

Age

Mean

S.D.

Mean

S.D.

30

5,840

1,037

3,455

3,581

45

6,622

1,067

5,659

4,034

60

7,580

1,030

9,389

4,111

Table 18: Distributions of certainty equivalents for one-year risk at di¤erent ages, from ex ante perspective.

48

roeconomics literature has considered a range of CRRA coe¢ cients from 1 up to 10. Many authors
concur that 1 to 4 are appropriate for the risks addressed in the …nance and macro literature [see e.g.
Barsky et al. (1997)]. However, the reclassi…cation risk we model is substantially smaller than the risks
considered in that literature. Table 18, for example, shows the mean and standard deviation of the distribution of certainty equivalents of the one-year risk faced under community rating and health status
quartile pricing at the ages of 30, 45, and 60 for an individual whose CARA coe¢ cient is 0.0004.49
Under health status quartile pricing, the standard deviation of those certainty equivalents is roughly
$4,000 at each age. That is $3,000 higher than with community rating.
Since we do not have a clear guidance on what risk parameter to use, we study the sensitivity of
our …ndings to risk tolerance. As a reference, it is helpful to consider how an individual with CRRA
preferences would respond to a bet with expected return of $1,000 (roughly the expected premium
di¤erence for a 40 year old), and a standard deviation of $4,000. An individual making $40,000 is
indi¤erent between taking the bet and not taking it if their CRRA coe¢ cient of risk aversion is 5. For
$80,000 income, a coe¢ cient of 10.1 is needed, and 15.2 if income is $120,000.
We can ask a similar question comparing the community rating and health status quartile regimes:
at what level of CRRA would an individual be indi¤erent between them? For a …xed $75,000 income
this would be a CRRA coe¢ cient of 6.5, for an individual facing the non-manager income path it would
be a coe¢ cient of 9.5, and for someone with a manager’s income path even a coe¢ cient of 15 would
lead them to prefer the health-status based pricing.50

6.6

Wilson Equilibria and Welfare

For robustness we also consider Wilson equilibria (WE). Wilson equilibria, as in the Rothschild-Stiglitz
framework, may but need not coincide with the Riley and Nash equilibria. Indeed, we actually know
that since the RE/sp-NE premiums we found do not survive a multi-policy Nash deviation, they are
not a WE (since double deviations are una¤ected by existing policies being dropped).
Wilson policies break even in total, but they do so allowing the 60 policy to cross-subsidize the 90
policy. We rely on the following result to identify WE in our data:
BE
Proposition 3. Let (P BE
90 ; P 60 ) be the break-even price con…guration associated with

let

P w = Arg max

con…guration

w
w
(P90
; P60
)

Thus, when
4 9 More

P 2[ ; P BE ]

(P BE
60 +

P; P BE
60 ). If

associated with price di¤ erence

AC( ) >

P

AC( ) >
w

P BE , and

, then the break-even price

is a Wilson equilibrium.

(which is the case in our data), the price di¤erence that maximizes the

precisely, for each age t = 30, 45, and 60, these are the distributions of the certainty equivalents of the one-year

risk CEx (

t;

) among those individuals in the year t band for age-25 risk aversion level

= 0:0004. (These are the

distributions we used in the welfare calculations in Section 5.)Thus, they re‡ect the uncertainty individuals face from an
ex ante perspective.
5 0 We do this calculation by using a 0.0004 CARA coe¢ cient to derive the within-year certainty equivalents, and then
apply the CRRA coe¢ cient to the ex ante long-run utility calculation using those certainty equivalents.

49

Wilson Equilibria: Community Rating and Health Status-based Pricing (Quartiles)
Market

P60

Sh60

Full Population

4,006

83.7

Quartile 1

302

Quartile 2

AC60

P90

Sh90

AC90

2,477

7,105

16.3

14,961

60.2

290

1,502

39.8

1,519

1,307

64.7

1,155

3,307

35.3

3,586

Quartile 3

4,443

70.0

3,337

7,193

30.0

9,648

Quartile 4

9,704

73.6

7,259

13,204

26.4

20,007

Table 19: Equilibrium results for Wilson solution concept for (i) pure community rating (no pre-existing
conditions) and (ii) health status-based pricing with quartiles.
Welfare Loss from Health-Status-based Pricing (Quartiles) in Wilson Equilibrium ($/year)
y

4;no pre (

)

Fixed Income

y

4;no pre (

)

y

Non-Manager Income path

4;no pre (

)

Manager Income Path

0:0002

2,101

1,390

-468

0:0003

2,577

1,592

-682

0:0004

2,964

1,711

-950

0:0005

3,277

1,628

-1,076

0:0006

3,506

1,923

-1,050

Table 20: Long-run welfare based on the Wilson Equilibrium results. Compares the two pricing regulations of (i) pricing based on health status quartiles (x = “ 4”) and (ii) pure community rating / no
pre-existing conditions (x0 = “no

pre”).

BE
pro…t from a multi-policy deviation from (P BE
90 ; P 60 ), the break-even price con…guration associated

with

P BE , is a WE.51

Table 19 shows the equilibria with community rating and with health status quartile pricing. The
cross-subsidization can be seen by comparing the prices to the average costs for each policy. We see
that in every population the WE has a positive share of consumers purchasing the 90 policy, in contrast
to the RE/sp-NE of Section 4.
Table 20 shows welfare results for WE. Here the welfare gains from prohibiting pricing based on preexisting conditions with a …xed income are even larger, as the adverse selection losses from prohibiting
pricing based on health status are smaller under the Wilson concept than under the Riley concept.
5 1 In

the Appendix, we also show that this is the unique Wilson equilibrium when

but have not proven that the same is true if

Pw

2f ;

P BE g:

We show as well that

that leads to the lowest break-even P60 among all price di¤erences at or below

50

Pw 2 ( ;

P BE .

Pw

P BE ). We conjecture,

is also the price di¤erence

7

Conclusion

In this paper we develop a model to study equilibrium and welfare for a class of regulated health
insurance markets known as exchanges. We build on the theory of insurer competition under asymmetric
information to develop a series of results characterizing equilibria in a stylized insurance exchange
market, motivated by the exchanges proposed in the A¤ordable Care Act. We study several equilibrium
concepts, including Riley equilibrium, Nash equilibrium, and Wilson equilibrium and prove results
establishing the existence and uniqueness of Riley equilibrium in our environment, and provide an
algorithm for identifying equilibria in our data. We estimate consumer micro-foundations, including
ex ante health risk and risk preferences, using detailed health insurance choice and medical claims data
from a large …rm and use these estimates to simulate equilibria and long-run welfare using our data for
a variety of possible pricing regulations.
The results reveal full unraveling in equilibrium with pure community rating, leading to all consumers being enrolled in the least comprehensive insurance available. As the health status information
insurers can use to price their policies becomes …ner and …ner, the market share of the more comprehensive policy increases (less adverse selection) but consumers face greater year-to-year premium
reclassi…cation risk. We …nd that if consumers can borrow freely or if pricing based on age is also
allowed (eliminating any consumption smoothing bene…t of health-based pricing), the welfare loss from
reclassi…cation risk far outweighs the welfare gain from reduced adverse selection. Finally, we study
a range of other market policies, including age-based pricing regulation, the implications of an unenforceable mandate, and insurer risk-adjustment. We also perform an analysis that matches our data
to nationally representative MEPS data to illustrate that (i) this population is not that di¤erent from
our own and (ii) the results are similar when we weight our data to re‡ect nationally representative
demographic characteristics.
There are a number of dimensions on which our stylized model could be extended to more closely
model most exchange environments. In our setting, products are di¤erentiated only on …nancial dimensions. While in some settings (e.g., the Netherlands and Germany) this is essentially true in reality,
in the U.S. context exchanges include insurers that o¤er products that are di¤erentiated in terms of
medical care and the network of available physicians. Accounting for this fact could enrich our equilibrium predictions and understanding of long-run welfare. In addition, it would be interesting to model
more subtle consumer micro-foundations such as inertia or decision-making in complex product environments. With speci…c observed market regulations to guide us, it would be interesting to analyze
markets where consumers can cover families as well as themselves (e.g., what are the implications of
bundling individuals together into a contract). While these advances are exciting opportunities for
future work, they require further developments of the model we develop which are beyond the scope of
this paper.
More broadly, while our analysis has largely focused on the pricing restrictions in the A¤ordable
Care Act in 2010, we have constructed a ‡exible framework that can be used to study a variety of

51

counterfactual regulations. Besides the pricing regulations we study, important potential regulations
to investigate include Minimum Creditable Coverage (the least comprehensive …nancial plans that can
be o¤ered) and contract regulation in general, which is a de…ning feature of exchange design. It would
be particularly interesting to study dynamic, or long-run, insurance contracts that are more complex
than the year-to-year contracts that we study but have the potential to reduce reclassi…cation risk.
While these kinds of contracts have been discussed to some extent [Cochrane (1995); Herring and
Pauly (2006)], there has been little to no empirical analysis of such contracts, in part because they are
complicated to analyze, both for researchers and consumers, and are observed infrequently in reality.

References
[1] Barsky, R.B., F.T. Juster, M.S. Kimball, and M.D. Shapiro (1993), “Preference Parameters and
Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and Retirement Study,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2): 537-79.
[2] Bhattacharya, J., A. Chandra, M. Chernew, D. Goldman, A. Jena, D. Lakdawalla, A. Malani, and
T. Phillipson (2013), “Best of Both Worlds: Uniting Universal Coverage and Personal Choice in
Health Care,” American Enterprise Institute.
[3] Bundorf, K., J. Levin, and N. Mahoney (2012), “Pricing and Welfare in Health Plan Choice,”
American Economic Review 102(7): 3214-3248.
[4] Capretta, J. and T. Miller (2010), “How to Cover Pre-Existing Conditions,”, National A¤ airs, 4:
110-126.
[5] Cardon, J. and I. Hendel (2001), “Asymmetric Information in Health Insurance: Evidence from
the National Medical Expenditure Survey,” RAND Journal of Economics 32: 408-27.
[6] Carlin, C. and R. Town (2009), “Adverse Selection, Welfare, and Optimal Pricing of Employer
Sponsored Health Plans,” University of Minnesota working paper.
[7] Cochrane, J. (1995), “Time-Consistent Health Insurance,”Journal of Political Economy 103: 44573.
[8] Consumers Union. (2009),“What Will an Actuairal Value Standard Mean for Consumers?”
[9] Cutler, D. and S. Reber (1998), “Paying for Health Insurance: The Tradeo¤ Between Competition
and Adverse Selection,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113: 433-66.
[10] Department of Health and Human Services. (2012a), “Patient Protection and A¤ordable Care Act:
HHS Notice of Bene…t and Payment Parameters for 2014; Proposed Rule: Part II.”
[11] Department of Health and Humans Services. (2012b), “Risk Adjustment Methodology Overview.”
52

[12] Einav, L. and A. Finkelstein (2011), “Selection in Insurance Markets: Theory and Empirics in
Pictures,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(1): 115-38.
[13] Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, and J. Levin (2010a), “Beyond Testing: Empirical Models of Insurance
Markets,” Annual Review of Economics 2: 311-36.
[14] Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, and P. Schrimpf (2010b), “Optimal Mandates and the Welfare Cost of
Asymmetric Information: Evidence from the U.K. Annuity Market,” Econometrica 78: 1031-92.
[15] Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, and M. Cullen (2010c), “Estimating Welfare in Insurance Markets Using
Variation in Pricing,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(3): 877-921.
[16] Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, S. Ryan, P. Schrimpf, and M. Cullen (2013), “Selection on Moral Hazard
in Health Insurance,” American Economic Review 103(1): 178-219.
[17] Engers, M. and L. Fernandez (1987), “Market equilibrium with Hidden Knowledge and Selfselection,” Econometrica 55: 425-39.
[18] Ericson, K. and A. Starc. (2013), “Pricing Regulation and Imperfect Competition on the Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange,” Wharton working paper.
[19] Fernandez, B., and A. Mach (2012), “Health Insurance Exchanges Under the Patient Protection
and A¤ordable Care Act,” Congressional Research Service.
[20] Finkelstein, A. and K. McGarry (2006), “Multiple Dimensions of Private Information: Evidence
from the Long-Term Care Insurance Market,” American Economic Review 96: 938-958.
[21] Finkelstein, A., K. McGarry, and A. Su…, A. (2005), “Dynamic Ine¢ ciencies in Insurance Markets:
Evidence from Long-Term Care Insurance,” MIT working paper.
[22] Handel, B. (2013), “Adverse Selection and Switching Costs in Health Insurance Markets: When
Nudging Hurts,” UC-Berkeley working paper.
[23] Hendel, I. and A. Lizzeri (2003), “The Role of Commitment in Dynamic Contracts: Evidence from
Life Insurance,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 299-327.
[24] Herring, B. and M. Pauly (2006), “Incentive-Compatible Guaranteed Renewable Health Insurance
Premiums,” Journal of Health Economics 25: 395-417.
[25] Kaiser Family Foudnation. (2010), “Focus on Health Reform: Summary of New Health Reform
Law,” http://www.k¤.org/healthreform/upload/8061.pdf.
[26] Koch, T. (2011), “One Pool to Insure Them All? Age, Risk, and the Price(s) of Medical Insurance,”
UC-Santa Barbara Working Paper.

53

[27] Kolstad, J. and A. Kowalski (2012), “Mandate-Based Health Reform and Evidence from the Labor
Market: Evidence from the Massachusetts Reform,” Wharton working paper.
[28] Lustig, J. (2010), “Measuring Welfare Losses from Adverse Selection and Imperfect Competition
in Privatized Medicare,” Boston University working paper.
[29] Mahoney, N. (2012), “Bankrupcy as Implicit Insurance,” working paper.
[30] Miyazaki, H. (1977), “The Rat Race and Internal Labor Markets,” Bell Journal of Economics 8:
394-418.
[31] Rabin, M. (2000), “Risk Aversion and Expected-Utility Theory: A Calibration Theorem,”Econometrica 68(5): 1281-92.
[32] Riley, J. G. (1985), “Informational Equilibrium,” Econometrica 47: 331-59.
[33] Rothschild, M. and J. E. Stiglitz (1976), “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay
on the Economics of Imperfect Information,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 90: 629-49.
[34] Train, K. (2009), Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation, 2nd. Ed., Cambridge University Press.
[35] Wilson, C. (1977), “A Model of Insurance Markets with Imperfect Information,” Journal of Economic Theory 16: 167-207.

54

A

Appendix: Proofs

In what follows, we refer to the lowest o¤ered prices (P90 ; P60 ) for the two policies as a “price con…guration.” An “outcome” refers to the market shares of the two policies and the lowest o¤ered prices for
any policies that are purchased by a strictly positive share of consumers.

A.1

Nash Equilibria

We …rst discuss Nash equilibria (NE), both with single-policy and multi-policy …rms. Note that we can
without loss of generality restrict attention to Nash equilibria in which more than one …rm o¤ers each
of the prices in an equilibrium price con…guration. To see this, suppose we have a Nash equilibrium,
with equilibrium price con…guration (P90 ; P60 ), in which this is not true. Introducing additional …rms
that o¤er these prices makes the pro…t earned by any active …rm through a deviation identical to the
pro…t earned by an entrant making the same deviation.

Since no entrant wanted to deviate in the

initial Nash equilibrium despite having zero pro…ts (which is weakly less than the pro…t of any active
…rm in the equilibrium), no active …rm will want to deviate at this new set of price o¤ers. Moreover,
no entrant will want to deviate either (an entrant’s deviation pro…t hasn’t changed), so the new set of
price o¤ers is a Nash equilibrium and results in an identical price con…guration and outcome as in the
initial equilibrium. Finally, note that we can therefore test whether a price con…guration arises in a
Nash equilibrium by examining solely the pro…tability of entrant deviations.
The discussion that follows establishes Proposition 1.
A.1.1

Single-policy …rms

Lemma 1. Suppose that (P90 ; P60 ) is a NE price con…guration. Then both policies must break even:
i.e.,

90 (P90 ; P60 )

=

60 (P90 ; P60 )

= 0:

Proof. Suppose policy k is pro…table.

A new …rm could enter and o¤er price Pk

", where " > 0,

for that contract and make a positive pro…t: This deviation attracts all consumers who are purchasing
policy k, and earns a positive pro…t on them, and for small ", attracts very few others. Taking " ! 0
yields the result.
Lemma 2. Among all price con…gurations (P90 ; P60 ) at which both policies break even and there are
positive sales of the 60 policy ( P > ), only the one with the lowest sales of the 60 policy (i.e., having
P =

P BE ) can be NE.52

00
0
0
00
; P60
) both policies break
Proof. Suppose that at price con…gurations P 0 = (P90
; P60
) and P 00 = (P90

even, minf P 0 ; P 00 g > , and there is a larger share for the 60 policy in P 00 than in P 0 . Then

P0 <

0
P 00 and there are positive sales of the 90 policy at P 0 .53 In addition, P60
= AC60 ( P 0 ) < AC60 ( P 00 ) =

5 2 Such
5 3 Note

a policy con…guration may have all consumers buying the 60 policy.
that we may have P 00 = .

55

00
P60
. Starting at price con…guration P 00 , consider a deviation in which an entrant o¤ers price Pb90
00
00
00
00
P60
+ P 0 < P60
+ P 00 = P90
. Since Pb90 P60
= P 0 , after the deviation the share of the 90 policy

is the same (positive) share as at P 0 . Moreover,
Pb90

AC90 (Pb90

00
P60
)

00
(P60
+

P 0)

AC90 ( P 0 )

0
> (P60
+

P 0)

AC90 ( P 0 )

=

0
= P90

=

AC90 ( P 0 )

0:

Thus, the deviation is pro…table, implying that P 00 is not a Nash equilibrium price con…guration.
Lemma 2 tells us that we can narrow down the possible equilibria to two: (i) everyone in the 90
policy with P90 = AC 90 and

P = , and (ii)

P =

P BE (the lowest break-even

P 2 ( ; ], at

which there are positive sales of the 60 policy). The former (“all-in-90”) is an equilibrium only if there
is no pro…table deviation to a P60 < AC 90

: Moreover, observe the following:

Lemma 3. If there is a NE outcome in which all consumers buy the 90 policy, then this is the unique
NE outcome.
Proof. By Lemma 1, the equilibrium price of the 90 policy in this NE price con…guration, say P =
(P90 ; P60 ), has P90 = AC 90 . Suppose as well that there is a NE price con…guration P

= (P90 ; P60 ) in

which policy 60 is purchased by a positive measure of consumers. By Lemma 1, we must therefore have
P60 > AC 60 . If AC 90

P60 , then starting from the all-in-90 price con…guration P , a deviation

to P60 would attract all consumers to the 60 policy and be strictly pro…table (since P60 > AC 60 ),
breaking the all-in-90 equilibrium. So, it must be that AC 90

< P60 . But in that case, starting from

the price con…guration P , an entrant could earn a strictly positive pro…t by o¤ering the 90 policy at
price Pb90 P + . This deviation attracts all of the consumers, and earns a positive pro…t since
60

Thus, P

Pb90

AC90 (Pb90

P60 ) = (P60 + )

AC 90 > 0:

cannot be an equilibrium price con…guration –a contradiction.

These results suggest the following procedure: First, see if all consumers buying the 90 policy is a
NE by checking if there is pro…table deviation in P60 . If it is a NE, then it is the unique NE. If it is
not a NE, then identify the price di¤erence

P BE (the lowest break-even

the 60 policy) and check if the price con…guration associated with

P

BE

P with positive sales of
is a NE. In applying this

procedure, two useful results are the following:
Lemma 4. If

AC( ) > , then there cannot be a NE outcome in which all consumers buy the 90

policy.

56

Proof. In an all-in-90 equilibrium, we must have P90 = AC 90 . A deviation in P60 to Pb60 = AC 90

for su¢ ciently small " > 0 attracts a positive measure of consumers with types close to
strictly positive pro…ts since Pb60 AC 60 = (AC 90
) AC 60 = AC( )
> 0.
Lemma 5. Suppose that at price con…guration (P90 ; P60 ) we have

90 (P90 ; P60 )

=

"

and earns

60 (P90 ; P60 )

=0

and positive sales of the 60 policy. Then no single-policy deviation by an entrant in P60 is pro…table.
Proof. An entrant’s deviation Pb60 must be below P60 to attract any consumers. But any such deviation

makes losses, since

Pb60

AC60 (P90

Pb60 ) < P60

AC60 (P90

P60 ) = 0.

Lemma 4 provides a simple su¢ cient condition for all-in-90 to fail to be an equilibrium, while
P BE arises in

Lemma 5 tells us that we can restrict attention to deviations in P90 when checking if
a NE.
A.1.2

Multi-policy …rms (with multi-policy deviations)54

Clearly, Lemmas 1-5 still hold (note that all of the deviations used in the proofs of those results are
still feasible). The new result is as follows:
Lemma 6. If P = (P90 ; P60 ) is a NE price con…guration with multi-policy …rms, then
(i) if all consumers are buying the 90 policy, P is a NE price con…guration if there is no pro…table
single policy deviation by an entrant in P60 ;
Proposition 4.
(ii) if some consumers are buying the 60 policy, P is a NE price con…guration i¤
(P90 ; P60 ) = 0 =
maxPb90 P
(Pb90 ; P60 ), that is, if there is no pro…table multi-policy deviation by an entrant that
90

reduces P90 and lowers P60 slightly to capture all consumers.

Proof. For part (i), let (P90 ; P60 ) be the candidate equilibrium in which only the 90 policy is purchased
(P ; P ). To be
(at price P = AC ). Consider any entrant multi-policy deviation (Pb90 ; Pb60 )
90

90

90

60

pro…table, some consumers must buy policy 60 in the deviation, so Pb60 < P60 and Pb > P . But
the most pro…table such deviation must have Pb90 equal to or arbitrarily close to P90 . (Otherwise, both
Pb90 and Pb60 could be raised by a small and equal amount.) But, since the reduction in P60 makes the

90 policy at price P90 unpro…table, this deviation is less pro…table for the entrant than a single-policy
deviation to Pb60 .
5 4 Note

that when …rms can o¤er multiple policies but can deviate in only one policy at a time there is no change from

the analysis of the previous subsection.

57

For part (ii), we already know that an entrant’s single-policy deviation in P60 is unpro…table (Lemma
5). A single-policy deviation o¤ering the 90 policy at price Pb90 < P90 , since it makes the 60 policy at
price P earn strictly positive pro…ts, is less pro…table than the multi-policy deviation (Pb90 ; P
")
60

60

for su¢ ciently small " > 0, as this captures the entire market. As " ! 0, this deviation has pro…ts
equal to max b
(Pb90 ; P ).
60

P90 P90

Although it will not pay a role in our analysis, we note the following result:

Lemma 7. If

> C90 ( )

C60 ( ) for all

2 [ ; ], then some consumers must be buying the 90 policy

in any NE with multi-policy …rms.
Proof. Suppose all consumers were purchasing the 60 policy. Then, by Lemma 1, P60 = AC 60 and
P90 = P60 + . Now consider a deviation to (P90

"; P60 ). We will show that for small " > 0, aggregate

pro…ts are strictly positive. Aggregate pro…ts equal
(")

(P90

"; P60 ) =

Z

[P90

"

C90 ( )]f ( )d +

"

Z

"

[P60

C60 ( )]f ( )d :

Now
0

(") = [P90

"

C90 (

")]f (

")

[P60

C60 (

")]f (

")

[1

F(

")];

so
0

(0)

=

[P90

= f ( )f
Since, by Lemma 1, (0) =

[C90 ( )

[P60

C60 ( )]f ( )

C60 ( )]g > 0:

(P90 ; P60 ) = 0, this implies that for small " > 0 aggregate pro…t is strictly

positive. As a result, there is a
The assumption that

C90 ( )]f ( )

> 0 such that (P90

> C90 ( )

C60 ( ) for all

"; P60

) is a pro…table deviation.

2 [ ; ] is an implication of risk aversion; it

says that all consumers prefer the greater coverage of the 90 policy if it is priced at fair odds (for that
consumer). However, in our analysis the presence of a (behavioral) idiosyncratic preference shock for
each policy could mean that consumers do not satisfy this condition.

A.2

Riley Equilibria

A.2.1

Safe price o¤ers

We begin by considering which price o¤ers are “safe”in the sense that they do not incur losses regardless
of any additional o¤ers being introduced.
00
Lemma 8. Given price con…guration (P90 ; P60 ), single-policy o¤ er P60
< P60 is safe if and only if
00
60 (P90 ; P60 )

0.

58

00
60 (P90 ; P60 )

0
< 0, then P60
makes losses absent any reaction, and hence is not safe. So
00
00
suppose that 60 (P90 ; P60 )
0. Any price o¤ers Pb = (Pb90 ; Pb60 ) with a Pb60 < P60
gives the …rm
00
00
o¤ering P60
a pro…t of zero. Any price o¤ers Pb with Pb90 P90 and Pb60 P60
cannot make the …rm
00
b
b
b
o¤ering P incur losses. Finally, any price o¤ers P with P90 < P90 and P60 P 00 weakly lowers the

Proof. If

60

60

00
sales of the …rm o¤ering
If that …rm makes no sales at (Pb90 ; P60
), then its pro…t is zero. If it has
00
00
00
b
positive sales at (P90 ; P60 ), then it must also at (P90 ; P60 ). This implies that 60 (Pb90 ; P60
) 0 since
00
00
00
then AC60 (Pb90 P ) AC60 (P90 P ) P .
00
P60
.

60

60

60

De…nition 2. The lowest safe 60 price given P90 is P 60 (P90 )
Remark 1. De…ne the price Pe60 (P90 )

f Pe60 : Pe60 = AC60 (P90

00
minfP60
:

00
60 (P90 ; P60 )

0g.

Pe60 )g. Note that this equality has a

unique solution, which is continuous and weakly increasing in P90 and strictly increasing at any P90 at
which P90 Pe60 (P90 ) 2 ( ; ) (so that there are sales of both policies). Since Pe60 (AC 60 + ) = AC 60 and
Pe60 (AC 60 + ) = AC 60 , this occurs when P90 2 (AC + ; AC 60 + ). See Figure 1. Moreover, one
60

can see in the …gure that AC60 (P90 Pe60 (P90 )) is strictly increasing for this range of P90 , which also
means that P90 Pe60 (P90 ) is strictly increasing, and these are weakly increasing at all P90 . Moreover,
observe that the lowest safe 60 price given P90 is given by the continuous function:
9
8
>
>
P
if
P
AC
+
>
>
90
90
60
=
<
e
:
P 60 (P90 ) =
P60 (P90 ) if P90 2 (AC 60 + ; AC 60 + )
>
>
>
>
;
:
AC 60
if P90 AC 60 +
When P90

AC 60 + , all consumers buy the 90 policy at prices (P90 ; P 60 (P90 )); when P90 2 (AC 60 +

; AC 60 + ) there are positive sales of both policies at prices (P90 ; P 60 (P90 )); and when P90

AC 60 +

all consumers buy the 60 policy at prices (P90 ; P 60 (P90 )).
00
00
Remark 2. Observe that if a two-policy reaction (P90
; P60
) is safe and causes the pro…table single0
00
policy deviation P90
to instead make losses, then the single-policy reaction P60
is also safe and causes
0
00
0
the single-policy deviation P90
to make losses. To see why, note …rst that it cannot be that P90
< P90
00
0
(otherwise the deviator’s pro…t would not be strictly negative). The result is immediate if P90
> P90
.
0
00
= P90
. Since the …rms make losses on the 90 policy and the reaction is safe, we
So suppose that P90

must have

0
00
60 (P90 ; P60 )

00
> 0. But then Lemma 8 implies that the single-policy reaction P60
is safe and

clearly also causes the deviating …rm to make losses. Hence, in looking at safe reactions to single-policy
deviations in P90 , we can restrict attention to single-policy safe reactions in P60 .
Lemma 9. If at (P90 ; P 60 (P90 )) we have positive sales of the 90 policy and
then

90 (P90 ; P60 )

0,

0 at all P60 > P 60 (P90 ):

Proof. Since there are positive sales of the 90 policy, it follows that P90
AC90 (P90

90 (P90 ; P 60 (P90 ))

AC90 (P90

P 60 (P90 ))

P60 ) for any P60 > P 60 (P90 ), where the second inequality follows from that fact that

increases in P60 weakly lower AC90 .

59

Increase in P90
450
AC 60
~
AC60 ( P90 − P60 )

AC 60

~
P60 ( P90 )

AC 60

AC 60

~
P60

P90 − θ

P90 − θ

Figure A1: Graphical Description of the Lowest Safe P60 given P90 .
0
Remark 3. In light of Remark 2, Lemma 9 implies that a pro…table single-policy deviation to P90
can

be rendered unpro…table by a safe reaction if and only if it is rendered unpro…table by a single-policy
0
reaction to P 60 (P90
).

A.2.2

Characterization of Riley Equilibria

Just as with Nash equilibria, we can restrict attention to Riley equilibria (RE) in which each price
in the equilibrium price con…guration is o¤ered by more than one …rm.

We establish Proposition 2

through a series of lemmas.
= 0.

90 (P90 ; P60 )

Proof. We …rst show that

0. Suppose otherwise, so that

small " > 0 we would have
P60

60 (P90 ; P60 )
60 (P90 ; P60

=

60 (P90 ; P60 )

Lemma 10. If (P90 ; P60 ) is a RE, then

60 (P90 ; P60 )

> 0. Then for

") > 0. By Lemma 8, a single-policy deviation that o¤ers

" would then be safe, and there would therefore be no reaction that could render it unpro…table.

But then (P90 ; P60 ) would not be a Riley equilibrium, a contradiction.
We next show that

90 (P90 ; P60 )

0. The result is immediate if

the 90 policy makes no sales at (P90 ; P60 ). So suppose that

P <

P

P90

so that

(implying that the 90 policy has

positive sales) and that contrary to the claim (P90 ; P60 ) is a Riley equilibrium with
If P 60 (P90 ) > P60 , then a single-policy deviation to P90

P60 =

90 (P90 ; P60 )

" for small enough " > 0 would be a pro…table

Riley deviation as no safe reaction in P60 could render it unpro…table. So we must have P 60 (P90 )
60

> 0.
P60 .

0
0
Now if P 60 (P90 ) < P60 , then there can be no 60 sales at (P90 ; P60
) for any P60
2 [P 60 (P90 ); P60 ), since
0

otherwise a single-policy deviation to P60 + " for su¢ ciently small " > 0 would be pro…table and safe.
Thus, P 60 (P90 )
have that
P90

P60 implies that

90 (P90

"; P 60 (P90

90 (P90 ; P 60 (P90 ))

=

90 (P90 ; P60 )

> 0. By continuity, we then

")) > 0 for small enough " > 0, so a single-policy deviation to such a

" cannot be rendered unpro…table by any safe reaction, yielding a contradiction.
Thus, we have

60 (P90 ; P60 )

0 and

90 (P90 ; P60 )

0: But if either is strictly negative, then some

…rm must be earning strictly negative pro…ts, and would do better by dropping all of its policies. The
result follows.
Lemma 11. There is a Riley equilibrium in which all consumers buy the 90 policy if and only if there
0
is no P60
such that

0
60 (AC 90 ; P60 )

> 0.

0
Proof. By Lemma 10, P90 = AC 90 . Necessity follows because if there was a P60
such that

0, then a single-policy deviation to

0
P60

0
60 (AC 90 ; P60 )

would be pro…table and safe (Lemma 8), so could not be rendered

0
unpro…table by any reaction. For su¢ ciency, suppose that there is no P60
such that

0
60 (AC 90 ; P60 )

>0

0
0
but that P 0 = (P90
; P60
) is a pro…table Riley deviation. If the deviator makes no sales of the 90
0
policy, then its sales would be the same with a single-policy deviation to P60
, so we would have
0
60 (AC 90 ; P60 )

> 0 – a contradiction. Suppose, instead, that the deviator does make positive sales

0
of the 90 policy (which requires that P90

make positive sales of the 60 policy (since

AC 90 ). Since it is a pro…table deviation it must also
0
P90

AC 90 , it can’t make a positive pro…t selling only

0
the 90 policy). But, in this case P90

0
0
AC 90 < AC90 ( P 0 ), so we must have 60 (P90
; P60
) > 0
0
P0
P60
, this implies that
In turn, letting Pb60
AC 90

since it is a pro…table deviation.
0
0
b
60 (AC 90 ; P60 )
60 (P90 ; P60 ) > 0 –a contradiction.

Lemma 12. Among all price pairs (P90 ; P60 ) at which both policies break even and there are positive
sales of the 60 policy, only the one with the lowest sales of the 60 policy (i.e., having

P =

P BE )

can be a Riley equilibrium.
0
0
00
00
Proof. Suppose there are two price pairs that are Riley Equilibria P 0 = (P90
; P60
) and P 00 = (P90
; P60
)

with both having positive and di¤ering 60 shares. We have already seen in the proof of Lemma 2 that,
0
starting at P 00 , a single-policy deviation to P90
is pro…table. Now, observe that the lowest safe 60 price
0
0
0
0
is P60
; i.e., P 60 (P90
) = P60
, so
given P90

0
0
90 (P90 ; P 60 (P90 ))

= 0. Hence, there are no safe reactions

00
00
that make the deviator incur a loss (Remark 3). This implies that (P90
; P60
) is not a Riley equilibrium,

which is a contradiction.
Lemma 13. Suppose that at P = (P90 ; P60 ) there are positive sales of the 60 policy (so
and both policies break even. Then P

P 2 ( ; ])

is a Riley equilibrium if and only if there are no single-policy

Riley pro…table deviations in P90 .
0
0
Proof. Consider a multi-policy pro…table Riley deviation P 0 = (P90
; P60
). We will show that we
0
0
0
necessarily have 90 (P90
; P60 ) > 0 and 90 (P90
; Pe60 )
0 for all Pe60 2 [P 60 (P90
); P60 ]. Thus, a

61

>

0
single-policy deviation to P90
would be a pro…table Riley deviation. This will imply (see Remark 3)

that in looking for Riley pro…table deviations when the 60 policy has positive sales, we can restrict
attention to single-policy deviations in P90 .
0
0
The claim is immediate if P60
> P60 since then dropping o¤er P60
would a¤ect neither the deviation

pro…t, nor the deviator’s pro…t after any reaction.
Moreover, we must have
P60 = AC60 ( P )

0
So henceforth we shall assume that P60

P60 .
0

0
P90

P90 : otherwise the deviator can sell only the 60 policy at price P60
0

AC60 ( P ), contradicting P 0 being a pro…table Riley deviation. So P 0

Next, observe that we must have

P0 <

P

P .

and an increased share of the 90 policy being

purchased. If not, then since the average costs of both policies would be no lower than they were before
the deviation, and both deviation prices would be weakly lower, the deviation could not generate a
0
strictly positive pro…t. Note that this also implies that we must have P90
< P90 .
0
0
Suppose, …rst, that P 60 (P90
) < P60
. If

to

0
P 60 (P90
)

0
0
90 (P90 ; P 60 (P90 ))

makes the deviator incur losses, in contradiction to the assumption that P 0 is a pro…table
0
0
90 (P90 ; P 60 (P90 ))

Riley deviation. So in this case we must have
0
P60
.

0. Moreover, there must be positive

0
0
(P90
; P 60 (P90
))

0
because, if not, then (see Remark 1) P 60 (P90
) = AC 60
0
0
e
e
90 (P90 ; P60 ) > 0 for all P60 2 (P 60 (P90 ); P60 ], implying that the single-policy

sales of the 90 policy at prices
P60

< 0, then the safe single-policy reaction

Thus,

0
deviation to P90
is a pro…table Riley deviation.
0
On the other hand, if P 60 (P90
)

0
P60
, then

0
0
60 (P90 ; P60 )

0, which implies that

(since the deviation to P 0 is pro…table). This, in turn, implies that

0
90 (P90 ; P60 )

0
0
90 (P90 ; P60 )

>0

> 0, which establishes

the result.
Lemma 14. A Riley equilibrium exists.
Proof. Suppose otherwise. It is immediate that if at prices (P90 ; P60 ) = (AC 90 ; AC 60 ) all consumers
buy policy 60, then by Lemma 13 this is a Riley equilibrium as there is no single-policy deviation in
P90 that can earn a strictly positive pro…t, yielding a contradiction. Thus, we henceforth assume that
there are positive sales of the 90 policy at (P90 ; P60 ) = (AC 90 ; AC 60 ).
Given Lemma 12, we need to show that either a price con…guration leading to all-in-90 or the
break-even price con…guration with
Let P

P =

P BE is a Riley Equilibrium.
P

=

P BE > . Note also

P60 2 ( ; ). If

P

= , then (by Lemma

= (P90 ; P60 ) be the break-even price con…guration with

that P60 = P 60 (P90 ). [This is immediate if

P

P90

10) P60 = AC 60 and P90 = AC 60 + . By Remark 1, the latter equality implies that P 60 (P90 ) = AC 60 .]
If P

0
is not a Riley Equilibrium, by Lemma 13 there is a single-policy deviation P90
< P90 with

0
90 (P90 ; P60

0
) > 0 that does not incur losses when facing the reaction of the lowest safe price P 60 (P90
)

P 60 (P90 ) = P60 , so that
0

90 policy at prices P =

0
0
90 (P90 ; P 60 (P90 ))
0
0
(P90
; P 60 (P90
))

0. Note also that there must be positive sales of the

0
since otherwise (by Remark 1) we have P 60 (P90
) = AC 60

0
P60 , which would imply that there are no sales of the 90 policy at prices (P90
; P60 ), contradicting
0
90 (P90 ; P60

) > 0.

62

Now, suppose that everyone-in-90 is not a Riley Equilibrium. Then by Lemma 11 there is a Pb60
such that 60 (AC 90 ; Pb60 ) > 0, implying that P 60 (AC 90 ) < Pb60 and at prices (AC 90 ; P 60 (AC 90 ))
there are positive sales of the 60 policy.

Moreover, there must also be positive sales of the 90

policy at prices (AC 90 ; P 60 (AC 90 )): if not, by Remark 1 we would have P 60 (AC 90 ) = AC 60 , but

this contradicts (recall the …rst paragraph of the proof) that there are positive sales of the 90 policy
at (P90 ; P60 ) = (AC 90 ; AC 60 ). Because there are positive sales of both policies at prices (P90 ; P60 ) =
(AC 90 ; P 60 (AC 90 )), we have

90 (AC 90 ; P 60 (AC 90 ))

< 0. Continuity of the function 90 (P90 ; P 60 (P90 ))
0
in P90 then implies that there is a Pe90 2 (AC 90 ; P90
] at which 90 (Pe90 ; P 60 (Pe90 )) = 0. Hence, both
policies break even at price pair Pe = (Pe90 ; P 60 (Pe90 )).

Finally, we establish the result by showing that there are positive sales of the 60 policy at prices
e
P , and that Pe < P , which contradicts P being the price pair with the lowest P among those

with positive sales of the 60 policy. For the …rst point, note that because there are positive sales of the

60 policy at prices (AC 90 ; P 60 (AC 90 )), Remark 1 tells us that there are positive sales of the 60 policy
at price pair Pe (and also at prices P 0 ). For the second point, observe that because there are positive
sales of both policies at prices P 0 , by Remark 1 we have

result.

A.3

Pe

P0 <

P

.

This establishes the

Wilson Equilibria

Recall that a price con…guration P = (P90 ; P60 ) is a Wilson equilibrium (WE) if there is no deviation
by an entrant to a price pair that is strictly pro…table once any o¤ers are withdrawn that make losses
after the deviation.55 We will say that a deviation from price con…guration P that is strictly pro…table
after any such withdrawals is a “pro…table Wilson deviation.” Note that no policy 60 o¤ers will ever
be withdrawn after a deviation, because a reduction in P90 can never cause a P60 o¤er to make losses
(since a reduction in P90 lowers AC60 ).
We characterize Wilson equilibria (WE) through a series of lemmas that imply Proposition 3. First,
we identify some properties that any WE must satisfy:
w
w
Lemma 15. If P w = (P90
; P60
) is a WE price con…guration, then

(a)

w
w
(P90
; P60
) = 0;

(b)

0
w
90 (P90 ; P60 )

(c)

w
P w = (P90

0
0 for all P90
w
P60
)

w
P90
;

P BE , the lowest break-even

P with positive sales of the 60 policy.

w
w
w
w
; P60
) < 0, then some …rm would be better o¤ dropping its o¤ers, while if (P90
; P60
)>
Proof. (a) If (P90
w
0 then an entrant could pro…t by o¤ering (P90
0
ated at P90
, then
5 5 Note

0
90 (P90

w
"; P60

") for su¢ ciently small " > 0. (b) If this is viol-

w
0
"; P60
) > 0 for su¢ ciently small " > 0. A entrants’o¤ering of P90

" would

that since at least one of P90 and P60 is undercut by any pro…table entrant deviation, there is no ambiguity

about which polices to withdraw in the event that one of the o¤ers in the price con…guration makes losses.

63

P BE = . So suppose that

be a pro…table Wilson deviation. (c) This is immediate if
and that

Pw >

P BE . Since both policies break even at

P BE , and

w
w
60 (P90 ; P60 )

(a) and (b), it must be that the break-even price con…guration associated with
BE
has P BE
) < AC60 ( P w )
60 = AC60 ( P

w
w
P60
. Since P BE
60 < P60 and

P

P BE <

BE

P BE <
0 by parts

BE
, (P BE
90 ; P 60 ),

P w , we also have

BE
BE
w
P BE
90 < P90 . So an entrant’s o¤er of (P 90 + "; P 60 + ") for su¢ ciently small " > 0 is a pro…table

Wilson deviation.
Consider the following problem:
min(P90 ;P60 )

min P60

s.t.

(i)
(ii)

(P90 ; P60 ) = 0

0
90 (P90 ; P60 )

(iii) P90

0
0 for all P90

(10)
P90

P60 2 [ ; P BE ]

Lemma 16. Any P = (P90 ; P60 ) that solves problem (10) is a WE price con…guration.
Proof. We construct an equilibrium in which all prices P

P are o¤ered by multiple …rms and each

…rm has an equal share of sales of both policies. Thus, all active …rms earn zero, and we need only
consider deviations by entrants.
To begin, it follows from constraint (ii) of problem (10), and the fact that 60 o¤ers are never
withdrawn, that there is no pro…table Wilson deviation in which an entrant makes sales only of the 90
policy (which would require a price Pb90 < P ).
90

Next, there is no pro…table Wilson deviation in which an entrant makes sales only of the 60 policy.
Suppose there were and let the deviation 60 price be Pb60 < P60 . If everyone buys the 60 policy at prices
(P ; Pb60 ) then no 90 policy o¤ers will be withdrawn and Pb60 > AC 60 . But then prices (P ; AC 60 )
90

90

would be feasible in problem (10) and attain a lower value of P60 than P60 , contradicting P being
a solution. Suppose instead that some consumers still buy the 90 policy at prices (P90 ; Pb60 ). Then
b
will be withdrawn, as will every P90 up to the lowest
90 (P ; P60 ) < 0, which implies that o¤er P
90

90

b
b
90 (P 90 ; P60 ) = 0. The entrant’s pro…t will therefore be
60 (P 90 ; P60 ).
However, it cannot be that 60 (P 90 ; Pb60 ) > 0: if so then we have (P 90 ; Pb60 ) > 0. But this would
imply that there is an " > 0 such that price pair (P 90 "; Pb60 ") is feasible in problem (10) and

P 90 above P90 such that

achieves a lower P60 than P60 , a contradiction to P solving problem (10).56

Finally, suppose that there is a pro…table Wilson deviation for an entrant o¤ering Pb = (Pb90 ; Pb60 ), in

which the entrant makes sales of both policies. Then since o¤ers for the 60 policy are never withdrawn,
Pb60 < P . We …rst argue that 90 (P90 ; Pb60 ) 0 for all P90 Pb90 . If Pb90 < P , then this follows
60

90

because P satis…es constraint (ii) and Pb60 < P60 . If, instead, Pb90 > P90 , then it follows because the
entrant can make sales of the 90 policy only if 90 (P90 ; Pb60 ) < 0 for all P90 < Pb90 , so that rivals’o¤ers
are withdrawn. Next, observe that if 90 (Pb90 ; Pb60 ) 0 and (Pb90 ; Pb60 ) > 0, then for some " > 0 price
5 6 This

" would set

for all P90

P 90 .

(P 90

"; Pb60

") = 0, and would satisfy constraint (ii) of problem (10) since

64

b

90 (P90 ; P60

")

0

pair (Pb90

"; Pb60

") is feasible in problem (10) and achieves a lower P60 than P60 , a contradiction to

P solving problem (10).57
To solve for the Wilson equilibrium, we examine a relaxed version of problem (10). For
we …rst de…ne

BE
P60
(

P ) by

BE
[P60
( P)
BE
and P90
( P)

P 2 [ ; ],

BE
AC60 ( P )]F ( P ) + [P60
( P) +

BE
P60
( P) +

AC90 ( P )][1

F ( P )] = 0;

BE
BE
P . Note that P60
( P ) and P90
( P ) are continuous functions.

BE
P 2 [ ; ], [P60
( P)

Note as well that, for

P

AC60 ( P )] T 0 if and only if

AC( P ) T

P .58

We will consider the relaxed problem
min

P 2[ ; P BE ]

BE
P60
( P)

(11)

Note that in problem (11) the constraint set is closed and bounded, and the objective function is continuous, so a solution exists. We also note the equivalence of this problem to the problem of …nding the
BE
BE
( P BE )):
pro…t-maximizing multi-policy Nash deviation from price con…guration (P90
( P BE ); P60

max

Lemma 17. Arg min

P 2[ ; P BE ]

P 2[ ; P BE ]

Proof. Letting ( P )

BE
P60
( P ) = Arg max

BE
P60
( P BE )

BE
(P60
( P BE ) +

BE
(P60
( P BE ) +

BE
P; P60
( P BE ))

P and

BE
P60
( P ), we have

BE
P; P60
( P BE ))

=

BE
(P60
( P) +

BE
P + ; P60
( P) + )

=

BE
(P60
( P) +

BE
P; P60
( P )) +
BE
P60
( P );

P 0 we have

BE
BE
(P60
( P BE )+ P; P60
( P BE ))

BE
BE
BE
BE
(P60
( P BE )+ P 0 ; P60
( P BE )) = P60
( P 0 ) P60
( P ):

Thus, the solution to the relaxed problem (11) is exactly the
multi-policy deviation pro…ts from

" would set (Pb90
for all P90 Pb90 .
5 8 This follows since

"; Pb60

AC( P ) T

P

P BE that maximizes the

P BE . The usefulness of the relaxed problem stems from the

following result [whose assumption that
5 7 This

BE
BE
(P60
( P BE )+ P; P60
( P BE )):

P 2[ ; P BE ]

BE
= P60
( P BE )

so for any

(12)

AC( ) >

is satis…ed in our data]:

") = 0, and would satisfy constraint (ii) of problem (10) since

BE
P , P60
( P)

BE
AC60 ( P ) T P90
( P)

65

AC90 ( P ):

b

90 (P90 ; P60

")

0

Lemma 18. Suppose that
price con…guration

BE
(P90
(

AC( ) >
P

BE
); P60
(

and that

P = arg min

P 2[ ; P BE ]

BE
P60
( P ).

Then the

P )) is the unique solution to problem (10).

BE
BE
Proof. By construction (P90
( P ); P60
( P )) satis…es constraints (i) and (iii) of problem (10). We
BE
BE
therefore need only show that (P90
( P ); P60
( P )) satis…es constraint (ii). Observe that when

P 2 [ ; P BE ] we have

AC( ) > , at any
[ ; P

BE

AC( P ) >

This implies that for all

P 2

]
0

BE
90 (P90 (

BE
P ); P60
( P ))

BE
90 (P90 (

BE
P ); P60
( P ));

BE
where the second inequality follows because P60
( P )

of

P.

BE
P60
( P ) for all

BE
P being the solution to problem (11). Continuity of P90
( P ) in
BE
90 (P90 ; P60 (

0

P 2 [ ; P BE ] by virtue

P then implies that

BE
P )) for all P90 2 [AC 90 ; P90
( P )].

Since we also have that
0

BE
90 (P90 ; P60 (

P )) for all P90

AC 90 ,

BE
BE
(P90
( P ); P60
( P )) satis…es constraint (ii) of problem (10).

Finally, we show that the solution P to problem (10) is the only WE whenever

P 2 ( ; P BE ).

Lemma 19. Suppose that there is a unique solution P of problem (10) and that

P 2 ( ; P BE ).

Then P is the unique WE price con…guration.59

Proof. Lemma 15 shows that any WE price con…guration must satisfy the constraints of problem (10).
We next argue that any price con…guration Pe = (Pe90 ; Pe60 ) that satis…es the constraints but is not a
solution cannot be a WE price con…guration. By de…nition, P60 < Pe60 .
If (P90 ; P60 ) << (Pe90 ; Pe60 ) then at price con…guration (Pe90 ; Pe60 ) an entrant has a pro…table Wilson

deviation to (P90 + "; P60 + ") for small " > 0. So, for the rest of the proof, suppose instead that
P90 Pe90 , which also implies that Pe < P since P60 < Pe60 .
> AC 60 , since P60 > AC 60 [which follows from

Observe, …rst, that we must then have AC 90

there being sales of the 60 policy at P
problem (10). Thus,
in turn, that

and

60 (P90 ; P60 )

AC( ) > , which implies that

BE
90 (P90 (

BE
P ); P60
( P )) < 0 for all

that for each P90 2 [Pe90 ; P90 ], there is a

0] and (AC 90 ; AC 90

AC( P ) >

P for all

P 2 ( ; P BE ) and,

P 2 ( ; P BE ). Moreover, continuity implies

BE
P 2 ( ; P BE ) such that P90
( P ) = P90 . Thus, since

BE
P60 < P60
( P ) for all P and there are positive sales of the 90 policy at P , we have
for all P90 2 (Pe90 ; P ] and at Pe90 if Pe90 > AC .
90

90

We will consider two cases:

5 9 We

) is feasible in

conjecture, but have not proven, that the result extends to cases in which

66

P =

P BE .

90 (P90 ; P60 )

<0

(i) P90 = Pe90 . In this case, there are sales of the 90 policy at prices Pe, and we have 0
e e
e
e
e
90 (P90 ; P60 ) =
90 (P ; P60 ) >
90 (P ; P ) =
90 (P90 ; P ). So at P an entrant has a pro…table
90

90

60

60

0
Wilson deviation o¤ering prices (P90 + "; P60 + ") for " > 0 such that 90 (P90
; P60 + ") < 0 for all
0
e
e
P90 2 [P90 ; P90 + "] and P60 + " < P60 , which results in all 90 policy o¤ers in [Pe90 ; P90 + "] being

withdrawn.

(ii) P90 > Pe90 . Note …rst that if

Pe =

(so there are no sales of the 60 policy at Pe) then

Pe90 = AC 90 . There must then be positive sales of the 60 policy at (AC 90 ; P60 ) for otherwise (AC 90 ; P60 )

would satisfy constraints (i) and (ii) of problem (10), contradicting P being the unique solution. This
implies that 90 (AC ; P ) < 0. As well, recall that we have 90 (P90 ; P ) < 0 for all P90 2 (Pe90 ; P ]
90

60

and at Pe90 if Pe90 > AC 90 .

60

90

Thus, in this case, an entrant again has a pro…table Wilson deviation
+ ") for " > 0 such that 90 (P 0 ; P + ") < 0 for all P 0 2 [Pe90 ; P + "]

o¤ering prices (P90 + "; P60
90
60
90
and P60 + " < Pe60 , which results in all 90 policy o¤ers in in [Pe90 ; P90 + "] being withdrawn.

67

90

B

Appendix: Cost Model Setup and Estimation

This appendix describes the details of the cost model, which is summarized at a high-level in section
3, and similar to that used in Handel (2013). The output of this model, Fjkt , is a family-plan-timespeci…c distribution of predicted out-of-pocket expenditures for the upcoming year. This distribution
is an important input into the empirical choice model, where it enters as a family’s predictions of its
out-of-pocket expenses at the time of plan choice, for each plan option. We predict this distribution in
a sophisticated manner that incorporates (i) past diagnostic information (ICD-9 codes) (ii) the Johns
Hopkins ACG predictive medical software package (iii) a non-parametric model linking modeled health
risk to total medical expenditures using observed cost data and (iv) a detailed division of medical
claims and health plan characteristics to precisely map total medical expenditures to out-of-pocket
expenses. The level of precision we gain from the cost model leads to more credible estimates of the
choice parameters of primary interest (e.g., risk preferences and health risk). Crucially, the cost model
output is also used to predict consumer expected average costs for the upcoming year, , which is used
to determine plan costs (as a function of who selects which plans) in our equilibrium analyses.
In order to predict expenses in a precise manner, we categorize the universe of total medical claims
into four mutually exclusive and exhaustive subdivisions of claims using the claims data. These categories are (i) hospital and physician services (ii) pharmacy (iii) mental health and (iv) physician o¢ ce
visits. We divide claims into these four speci…c categories so that we can accurately characterize the
plan-speci…c mappings from total claims to out-of-pocket expenditures since each of these categories
maps to out-of-pocket expenditures in a di¤erent manner. We denote this four dimensional vector of
claims Cit and any given element of that vector Cd;it where d 2 D represents one of the four categories
and i denotes an individual (employee or dependent). After describing how we predict this vector of
claims for a given individual, we return to the question of how we determine out-of-pocket expenditures
in plan k given Cit .
Denote an individual’s past year of medical diagnoses and payments by
age and sex by

it .

it

and the demographics

We use the ACG software mapping, denoted A, to map these characteristics into a

predicted mean level of health expenditures for the upcoming year, denoted :
A:

!

In addition to forecasting a mean level of total expenditures, the software has an application that
predicts future mean pharmacy expenditures. This mapping is analogous to A and outputs a prediction
for future pharmacy expenses.
We use the predictions

and

to categorize similar groups of individuals across each of four claims

categories in vector in Cit . Then for each group of individuals in each claims category, we use the
actual ex post realized claims for that group to estimate the ex ante distribution for each individual
under the assumption that this distribution is identical for all individuals within the cell. Individuals
are categorized into cells based on di¤erent metrics for each of the four elements of C:
68

Pharmacy:

it

Hospital / Physician (Non-OV):

it

Physician O¢ ce Visit:

it

Mental Health:

CM H;i;t

1

For pharmacy claims, individuals are grouped into cells based on the predicted future mean pharmacy
claims measure output by the ACG software,

it .

For the categories of hospital / physician services (non

o¢ ce visit) and physician o¢ ce visit claims individuals are grouped based on their mean predicted total
future health expenses,

it .

Finally, for mental health claims, individuals are grouped into categories

based on their mental health claims from the previous year, CM H;i;t

1

since (i) mental health claims are

very persistent over time in the data and (ii) mental health claims are generally uncorrelated with other
health expenditures in the data. For each category we group individuals into a number of cells between
8 and 10, taking into account the tradeo¤ between cell size and precision. The minimum number of
individuals in any cell is 73 while almost all cells have over 500 members. Thus, since there are four
categories of claims, each individual can belong to one of approximately 104 or 10,000 combination of
cells.
Denote an arbitrary cell within a given category d by z. Denote the population in a given categorycell combination (d; z) by Idz . Denote the empirical distribution of ex-post claims in this category for
^ ( ). Then we assume that each individual in this cell has a distribution equal to a
this population GIdz
continuous …t of GI ^ ( ), which we denote Gdz :
dz

^ ( ) ! Gdz
$ : GIdz
We model this distribution continuously in order to easily incorporate correlations across d. Otherwise,
it would be appropriate to use GIdz as the distribution for each cell.
The above process generates a distribution of claims for each d and z but does not model correlation
over D. It is important to model correlation across claims categories because it is likely that someone
with a bad expenditure shock in one category (e.g., hospital) will have high expenses in another area
(e.g., pharmacy). We model correlation at the individual level by combining marginal distributions Gidt
8 d with empirical data on the rank correlations between pairs (d; d0 ).60 Here, Gidt is the distribution
Gdz where i 2 Idz at time t. Since correlations are modeled across d we pick the metric

to group

people into cells for the basis of determining correlations (we use the same cells that we use to determine
group people for hospital and physician o¢ ce visit claims). Denote these cells based on

by z . Then
0

for each cell z denote the empirical rank correlation between claims of type d and type d by
6 0 It

z

(d; d0 ).

is important to use rank correlations here to properly combine these marginal distribution into a joint distribution.

Linear correlation would not translate empirical correlations to this joint distribution appropriately.

69

Then, for a given individual i we determine the joint distribution of claims across D for year t, denoted
Hit ( ), by combining i’s marginal distributions for all d at t using
: GiDt

z

it

z

(d; d0 ):

(D; D0 ) ! Hit

Here, GiDt refers to the set of marginal distributions Gidt 8d 2 D and
pairwise correlations

z

it

(d; d0 )8(d; d02 . In estimation we perform

z

it

(D; D0 ) is the set of all

by using a Gaussian copula to

combine the marginal distribution with the rank correlations, a process which we describe momentarily.
The …nal part of the cost model maps the joint distribution Hit of the vector of total claims C over
the four categories into a distribution of out of pocket expenditures for each plan. For each of the three
plan options we construct a mapping from the vector of claims C to out-of-pocket expenditures Xk :

k

: C ! Xk

This mapping takes a given draw of claims from Hit and converts it into the out-of-pocket expenditures
an individual would have for those claims in plan k. This mapping accounts for plan-speci…c features
such as the deductible, co-insurance, co-payments, and out-of-pocket maximums described in the text.
We test the mapping

k

on the actual realizations of the claims vector C to verify that our mapping

comes close to reconstructing the true mapping. Our mapping is necessarily simpler and omits things
like emergency room co-payments and out of network claims. We constructed our mapping with and
without these omitted categories to insure they did not lead to an incremental increase in precision.
We …nd that our categorization of claims into the four categories in C passed through our mapping

k

closely approximates the true mapping from claims to out-of-pocket expenses. Further, we …nd that
it is important to model all four categories described above: removing any of the four makes

k

less

accurate. See Handel (2013) for …gures describing this validation exercise with the data used in this
paper.
Once we have a draw of Xikt for each i (claim draw from Hit passed through

k)

we map individual

out-of-pocket expenditures into family out-of-pocket expenditures. For families with less than two
members this involves adding up all the within family Xikt . For families with more than three members
there are family level restrictions on deductible paid and out-of-pocket maximums that we adjust for.
De…ne a family j as a collection of individuals ij and the set of families as J. Then for a given family
out-of-pocket expenditures are generated:

k

: Xij ;kt ! Xjkt

To create the …nal object of interest, the family-plan-time speci…c distribution of out of pocket expenditures Fjkt ( ), we pass the claims distributions Hit through

k

and combine families through

k.

Fjkt ( ) is then used as an input into the choice model that represents each family’s information set over
future medical expenses at the time of plan choice. Eventually, we also use Hit to calculate total plan
cost when we analyze counterfactual plan pricing based on the average cost of enrollees.
70

We note that the decision to do the cost model by grouping individuals into cells, rather then by
specifying a more continuous form, has costs and bene…ts. The cost is that all individuals within a
given cell for a given type of claims are treated identically. The bene…t is that our method produces
local cost estimates for each individual that are not impacted by the combination of functional form
and the health risk of medically di¤erent individuals. Also, the method we use allows for ‡exible modeling across claims categories. Finally, we note that we map the empirical distribution of claims to a
continuous representation because this is convenient for building in correlations in the next step. The
continuous distributions we generate very closely …t the actual empirical distribution of claims across
these four categories.
Cost Model Identi…cation and Estimation. The cost model is identi…ed based on the two assumptions of (i) no moral hazard / selection based on private information and (ii) that individuals
within the same cells for claims d have the same ex ante distribution of total claims in that category.
Once these assumptions are made, the model uses the detailed medical data, the Johns Hopkins predictive algorithm, and the plan-speci…c mappings for out of pocket expenditures to generate the …nal
output Fjkt ( ). These assumptions, and corresponding robustness analyses, are discussed at more length
in the main text and in Handel (2013).
Once we group individuals into cells for each of the four claims categories, there are two statistical
components to estimation. First, we need to generate the continuous marginal distribution of claims
for each cell z in claim category d, Gdz . To do this, we …t the empirical distribution of claims GIdz
to a Weibull distribution with a mass of values at 0. We use the Weibull distribution instead of the
lognormal distribution, which is traditionally used to model medical expenditures, because we …nd
that the lognormal distribution overpredicts large claims in the data while the Weibull does not. For
each d and z the claims greater than zero are estimated with a maximum likelihood …t to the Weibull
distribution:

(

max

dz ; dz )

i2Idz

dz

(

cid

dz

)

dz

1

e

(

cid
dz

)

dz

dz

Here, ^dz and ^dz are the shape and scale parameters that characterize the Weibull distribution.
Denoting this distribution W ( ^dz ; ^dz ) the estimated distribution G^dz is formed by combining this with
the estimated mass at zero claims, which is the empirical likelihood:
8
< GI (0)
dz
Gdz^(c) =
: GIdz (0) +

if c = 0
W ( ^dz ; ^dz )(c)
1 GIdz (0)

if c > 0

^ to represent the set of marginal distributions for i over the categories
Again, we use the notation GiDt
d: the distribution for each d depends on the cell z an individual i is in at t. We combine the distributions
^ for a given i and t into the joint distribution Hit using a Gaussian copula method for the mapping
GiDt
^ equivalent
. Intuitively, this amounts to assuming a parametric form for correlation across GiDt
71

to that from a standard normal distribution with correlations equal to empirical rank correlations
z

it

(D; D0 ) described in the previous section. Let

distribution with pairwise correlations

z

it

i
1j2j3j4

denote the standard multivariate normal

(D; D0 ) for all pairings of the four claims categories D. Then

an individual’s joint distribution of non-zero claims is:
^( ) =
Hi;t
Above,

d

1j2j3j4 (

1
1

(Gid^1 t );

1
2

^ t );
(Gid
2

1
3

^ t );
(Gid
3

1
4

^ t ))))
(Gid
4

^ i;t is the joint distribution of
is the standard marginal normal distribution for each d. H

claims across the four claims categories for each individual in each time period. After this is estimated,
^ i;t for each
we determine our …nal object of interest Fjkt ( ) by simulating K multivariate draws from H
i and t, and passing these values through the plan-speci…c total claims to out of pocket mapping
and the individual to family out of pocket mapping

k.

k

The simulated Fjkt ( ) for each j, k, and t is

then used as an input into estimation of the choice model.
Table B1 presents summary results from the cost model estimation for the …nal choice model
sample, including population statistics on the ACG index , the Weibull distribution parameters ^dz
and ^dz for each category d, as well as the across category rank correlations z (D; D0 ). These are the
it

fundamentals inputs used to generate Fjkt , as described above, and lead to accurate characterizations of
the overall total cost and out-of-pocket cost distributions (validation exercises which are not presented
here).

72

Final Sample
Cost Model Output
Overall

PPO250

PPO500

PPO1200

Mean

1.42

0.74

0.72

Median

0.83

0.37

0.37

Individual Mean (Median)
Unscaled ACG Predictor

Pharmacy: Model Output
Zero Claim Pr.

0.35 (0.37)

0.31 (0.18)

0.40 (0.37)

0.42 (0.37)

Weibull

1182 (307)

1490 (462)

718 (307)

596 (307)

Weibull

0.77 (0.77)

0.77 (0.77)

0.77 (0.77)

0.77 (0.77)

Zero Claim Pr.

0.88 (0.96)

0.87 (0.96)

0.90 (0.96)

0.90 (0.96)

Weibull

1422 (1295)

1447 (1295)

1374 (1295)

1398 (1295)

Weibull

0.98 (0.97)

0.99 (0.97)

0.98 (0.97)

0.98 (0.97)

Zero Claim Pr.

0.23 (0.23)

0.21 (0.23)

0.26 (0.23)

0.26 (0.23)

Weibull

2214 (1599)

2523 (1599)

1717 (1599)

1652 (1599)

Weibull

0.58 (0.55)

0.59 (0.55)

0.55 (0.55)

0.55 (0.55)

(> $40; 000) Claim Pr.

0.02 (0.01)

0.02 (0.01)

0.01 (0.01)

0.01 (0.01)

Zero Claim Pr.

0.29 (0.20)

0.26 (0.20)

0.33 (0.46)

0.34 (0.46)

Weibull

605 (553)

653 (553)

517 (410)

529 (410)

Weibull

1.15 (1.14)

1.15 (1.14)

1.15 (1.14)

1.14 (1.14)

Rank Correlation Hospital-Pharm.

0.28 (0.34)

0.26 (0.32)

0.31 (0.34)

0.32 (0.34)

Rank Correlation Hospital-OV

0.73 (0.74)

0.72 (0.74)

0.74 (0.74)

0.74 (0.74)

Rank Correlation Pharm.-OV

0.35 (0.41)

0.33 (0.37)

0.38 (0.41)

0.39 (0.41)

Mental Health

Hospital / Physician

Physician OV

Correlations

Table B1: This table describes the output of the cost model in terms of the means and medians of individual
level parameters, classi…ed by the plan actually chosen. These parameters are aggregated for these groups but

73 inputs into our cost projections in the choice model.
have more micro-level groupings, which are the primary
Weibull , Weibull , and Zero Claim Probability correspond to the cell-speci…c predicted total individual-level
health expenses as described in more detail in Appendix B.

C

Appendix: Choice Model Estimation Algorithm Details and
Additional Results

This appendix describes the details of the choice model estimation algorithm. The corresponding section
in the text provided a high-level overview of this algorithm and outlined the estimation assumptions
we make regarding choice model fundamentals and their links to observable data. In addition, after
the presentation of the estimation algorithm, we discuss further speci…cation details and results for our
primary choice model.
We estimate the choice model using a random coe¢ cients simulated maximum likelihood approach
similar to that summarized in Train (2009). The simulated maximum likelihood estimation approach
has the minimum variance for a consistent and asymptotically normal estimator, while not being too
computationally burdensome in our framework. Since we use panel data, the likelihood function at
the family level is computed for a sequence of choices from t0 to t2 , since inertia implies that the
likelihood of a choice made in the current period depends on the choice made in the previous period.
The maximum likelihood estimator selects the parameter values that maximize the similarity between
actual choices and choices simulated with the parameters.
First, the estimator simulates Q draws from the distribution of health expenditures output from
the cost model, Fjkt , for each family, plan, and time period. These draws are used to compute plan
expected utility conditional on all other preference parameters. It then simulates S draws for each
family from the distributions of the random coe¢ cients
the preference shocks

k.

j

We de…ne the set of parameters

and

j,

as well as from the distribution of

as the full set of ex ante model parameters

(before the S draws are taken):
( ; ;
We denote

sj

2

;

(Aj );

(Aj ); ;

K

(Aj );

K (Aj ); 0 ; 1 ):

one draw derived from these parameters for each family, including the parameters

constant across draws:

sj

Denote

Sj

( j;

j;

;

KT ; 0 ; 1 )

the set of all S simulated draws for family j. For each

sj

the estimator then uses all Q

health draws to compute family-plan-time-speci…c expected utilities Usjkt following the choice model
outlined in earlier in section 3. Given these expected utilities for each

sj ,

we simulate the probability

of choosing plan k in each period using a smoothed accept-reject function with the form:
(
P rsjt (k = k ) =
k(

74

1
Usjk t ( )
1
()
K U
sjkt
1
()
Us^
|kt
1
(
K U
sjkt

)
)

)

This smoothed accept-reject methodology follows that outlined in Train (2009) with some slight modi…cations to account for the expected utility speci…cation. In theory, conditional on

sj ,

we would want

to pick the k that maximizes Ujkt for each family, and then average over S to get …nal choice probabilities. However, doing this leads to a likelihood function with ‡at regions, because for small changes in
the estimated parameters , the discrete choice made does not change. The smoothing function above
mimics this process for CARA utility functions: as the smoothing parameter

becomes large the

smoothed Accept-Reject simulator becomes almost identical to the true Accept-Reject simulator just
described, where the actual utility-maximizing option is chosen with probability one. By choosing
1
Ujk

be large, an individual will always choose k when

t

>

1
Ujkt 8k

to

6= k . The smoothing function

is modi…ed from the logit smoothing function in Train (2009) for two reasons (i) CARA utilities are
negative, so the choice should correspond to the utility with the lowest absolute value and (ii) the logit
form requires exponentiating the expected utility, which in our case is already the sum of exponential
functions (from CARA). This double exponentiating leads to computational issues that our speci…cation overcomes, without any true content change since both models approach the true Accept-Reject
function.
Denote any sequence of three choices made as k 3 and the set of such sequences as K 3 . In the limit as
grows large the probability of a given k 3 will either approach 1 or 0 for a given simulated draw s and
family j. This is because for a given draw the sequence (k1 ; k2 ; k3 ) will either be the sequential utility
maximizing sequence or not. This implicitly includes the appropriate level of inertia by conditioning
on previous choices within the sequential utility calculation. For example, under
two will be made by a family j only if it is optimal conditional on

sj ,

sj

a choice in period

other preference factors, and the

inertia implied by the period one choice. For all S simulation draws we compute the optimal sequence
3
of choices for k with the smoothed Accept-Reject simulator, denoted ksj
. For any set of parameter

values

Sj

the probability that the model predicts k 3 will be chosen by j is:
3
B
P^jk ( ; Fjkt ; ZA
j ; Zj ; Hj ; Aj ) =

s2S 1[k

3

3
= ksj
]

3
3
Let P^jk ( ) be shorthand notation for P^jk ( ; Fjkt ; ZjA ; ZjB ; Hk ; Aj ). Conditional on these probabil-

ities for each j, the simulated log-likelihood value for parameters
SLL( ) =

j2J

k3 2K 3 djk3

is:

3
lnP^jk

Here djk3 is an indicator function equal to one if the actual sequence of decisions made by family j
was k 3 . Then the maximum simulated likelihood estimator (MSLE) is the value of
space

in the parameter

that maximizes SLL( ). In the results presented in the text, we choose Q = 100, S = 50, and

= 6, all values large enough such that the estimated parameters vary little in response to changes.

75

C.1

Speci…cation for Inertia

In the main text we did not describe the details for our speci…cation for consumer inertia. The model
for inertia, which is similar to that in Handel (2013), speci…cs an inertial cost (ZB
j ) that is linearly
related to consumer characteristics and linked choices, ZB
j :
(ZB
j )=

0

+

B
1 Zjt

The characteristics in ZB
j include family status (e.g., single or covering dependents), income, several
job status measures, linked choice of Flexible Spending Account (FSA), and whether the family has
any members with chronic medical conditions (and, if so, how many chronic conditions total in the
family).

C.2

Additional Results

In the interest of space, the text only presented the risk preference parameter estimates from our primary
speci…cation, since this was the key object of interest recovered there for our equilibrium analysis of
insurance exchange pricing regulations. Here, for completeness, in Tables C1 and C2 we include the
full set of estimates in the primary model for reference, including inertia parameters, P P O1200 random
coe¢ cients, and " standard deviations. Overall, the parameters not discussed in the text have similar
estimates to those in Handel (2013), though the risk preference estimates di¤er here because they are
linked explicitly to health risk to estimate correlations between those two micro-foundations.

76

Empircal Model Results
Parameter / Model

(1)

Paramater

Primary Model

Standard Error

Risk Preference Estimates
- Intercept,
- log(

i j i ),

- age,
- log(

1

2
i j i)

- Manager,

3

1:21 10

0

age,
4

- Manager ability,

5

- Non-manager ability ,

6

5

1:14 10

4

9:8 10

6

5:21 10

6

1:0 10

7

1:3 10

7

1:10 10

3

5:0 10

6

4:3 10

5

5:2 10

5

1:4 10

5

1:2 10

5

7:5 10

6

2:4 10

6

4:39 10

4

-

- Population

6:63 10

5

-

-

1:24 10

4

- Population Mean

standard deviation

3:5 10

5

Inertia Estimates
0;

Intercept

1,336

76

1;

Family

2,101

52

1;

FSA Enroll

-472

44

1;

Income

96

15

1;

Quantitative

6

27

1;

Manager

162

34

1;

Chronic Condition

108

24

Table C1: This table presents the …rst half of the full set of primary choice model estimates: the set of estimates
relevant for our analysis of exchange pricing regulation is presented and interpreted in much more detail in the
main text. Standard errors are presented in column 2.

77

Empircal Model Results
(1)

Parameter

Primary Model

Standard Error

: Single

-2,504

138

: Single

806

47

: Family

-2,821

424

: Family

872

48

-805

79

50

340

Single

525

180

Family

141

56

615

216

Parameter / Model

PPO1200 Preferences

Other
; High-Cost, PPO250
"500 ,
"1200 ,
"500 ,
"1200 ,

",

Single

",
",

",

Family

Table C2: This table presents the second half of the full set of primary choice model estimates: the set of
estimates relevant for our analysis of exchange pricing regulation is presented and interpreted in much more
detail in the main text. Standard errors are presented in column 2.

78

D

Appendix: MEPS Analysis Descriptives

This section presents some extra tables to support the analysis that re-weights our population according
to demographics in the nationally representative MEPS data. See Section 6 in the text for our primary
equilibrium and welfare analysis using these re-weighted data. Table D.0 describes the number of
individuals in MEPS in each year we use (these years overlap exactly with those from our data). Table
D.1 presents detailed characteristics of our population of interests (i) all individuals in MEPS (ii) all
individuals in MEPS 25-65 and (iii) all uninsured / individual market insured individuals in MEPS,
age 25-65. Table D.2 describes the insurance coverage statistics for each of these three sample. Table
D.3 describes the weights used to re-weight our own data for the analysis in the text, while Table D.4
provides a detailed breakdown of health status for these three populations.

Table D.0: MEPS Data Sample Counts
Year

Number of Individuals

2004

34,403

2005

33,961

2006

34,145

2007

30,964

2008

33,066

79

Entire MEPS
(1)

All Ind. 25-65
(2)

25-65 Unins/Ind
(3)

N - Individual-Year Obs.

166,539

81,733

21,856

N - Individuals in Panel

105,353

51,922

13,804

N - Family-Year Obs.

58,647

-

-

N - Families in Panel

36,317

-

-

Avg. Family Members

2.90

-

-

33.82

43.15

42.6

10th Qtile

5

28

27

25th Qtile

14

34

32

Median

32

43

42

75th Qtile

51

52

52

90th Qtile

66

59

60

47.7%

46.6%

50.2%

Mean

53613

64058

42746

10th Qtile

9240

12733

8000

25th Qtile

19000

26000

17068

Median

39080

50000

31114

Age-Individual
Mean

Gender-Individual
Male %
Total Income-Family-Year* **

75th Qtile

72375

85584

54995

90th Qtile

115086

131080

89600

44583

59945

38882

0

7348

300

Wage Income-Family-Year**
Mean
10th Qtile
25th Qtile

8000

24000

14280

Median

32000

48300

30000

75th Qtile

65000

83753

52000

90th Qtile

104438

124996

82680

Region-Individual
Northeast

14.5%

15.0%

10.1%

Midwest

19.2%

19.6%

15.0%

South

38.3%

38.7%

46.3%

West

26.9%

26.8%

28.7%

Table D1: This table describes demographic data for key samples of interest in the MEPS data, for the pooled
data from 2004-2008. A more detailed description of each
80 column’s sample is contained in the text.
*In individual samples, a given family’s income may count twice since two individuals can be from same family.

Entire MEPS
(1)

All Ind. 25-65
(2)

25-65 Unins/Ind
(3)

66.3%

73.3%

41.0%

Medicaid (someone)

30.7%

33.4%

45.4%

Medicare (someone)

29.01%

14.0%

16.4%

Uninsured** (someone)

26.7%

35.0%

84.7%

Only Public in Fam

22.5 %

15.1%

0%

Always O¤ered Employer (someone)

48.8 %

62.1%

–

O¤ered Employer Sometimes (someone)

62.0%

76.1%

–

Family Member Emp. Always

69.7%

84.7%

76.2%

Family Member Emp. Once

77.5%

92.3%

87.4%

Private (Employer or Ind.)

54.5%

64.0%

16.8%

Medicaid

25.4%

12.4%

0.72%

Medicare

13.4%

3.9% 1

.25%

Uninsured**

16.6%

22.3%

83.2%

Only Public

27.6%

12.7%

0%

Always O¤ered Employer

21.3 %

38.9%

–

O¤ered Employer Sometimes

32.5%

55.0%

–

Individual Emp. Always

37%

65.4%

37.5%

Individual Emp. Once

48%

78.3%

48.0%

Family-Year: Coverage Type*
Private (Employer or Ind.)

Individual-Year: Coverage Type*

Table D2: This table describes insurance coverage, expenditures, and other statistics in the MEPS data for
the pooled data from 2004-2008. A more detailed description of each column’s sample is contained in the text.
*Coverage type re‡ects whether a family ever had this kind of coverage (for any member) throughout the year,
so these numbers add to more than 100%.
**Uninsured variable occurs when none of other coverage types are held, and the family is uninsured for whole
year.

81

MEPS Weights Incorporated
All 25-65 Sample
Age Bucket / Fam. Wages

0-$35,000

$35,000-$70,000

$70,000-$105,000

105,000

25-29

4.1%

4.5

2.7

1.9

13.1%

30-34

3.3%

4.4

2.6

1.9

12.3%

35-39

3.5%

4.2

2.8

2.3

12.9%

40-44

3.6%

4.5

3.0

2.8

13.9%

45-49

3.5%

4.2

3.0

3.1

13.9%

50-54

3.5%

3.8

2.8

2.9

13.1%

55-59

3.8%

3.2

2.3

2.3

11.7%

60-64

4.4%

2.3

1.3

1.2

9.2%

Total

29.7%

31.1%

20.5%

18.4%

100%

% Male by Income*

45.6%

49.9%

50.3%

51.4%

0-$35,000

$35,000-$70,000

$70,000-$105,000

25-29

7.4%

5.0

1.9

1.6

15.9%

30-34

6.0%

4.4

1.3

0.7

12.4%

35-39

6.4%

3.5

1.1

0.6

11.6%

40-44

6.1%

4.0

1.4

0.8

12.2%

45-49

6.2%

3.1

1.6

0.9

10.8%

50-54

5.9%

2.9

1.1

0.9

10.8%

55-59

7.0%

2.5

1.1

0.8

11.4%

60-64

10.1%

2.3

0.8

0.8

14.0%

Total

55.1%

27.7%

10.3%

7.1%

100%

% Male by Income*

51.4%

56.2%

55.4%

56.8%

Total

25-65 Unins./ Private
Age Bucket / Fam. Wages

105,000

Total

Table D3: This table describes the discrete age probabiliities for di¤erent age / gender / income categories for
(i) all individuals in MEPS, age 25-65, and (ii) all uninsured / individual market insured individuals in MEPS,
age 25-65. These weights incoporate MEPS sample weights as well, as an additional weighting factor.
*Percentages of gender across age are essentially constant conditional on income, which is why those …gures are
not presented here.

82

MEPS Weights Incl.
All 25-65 Sample
Age Bucket / Quantile

10th

25th

50th

75th

90th

95th

25-29

0 (0)

0 (203)

125 (843) 620 (2833) 2109 (7638)

4155 (12007)

997 (2820)

30-34

0 (0)

0 (241)

224 (940) 922 (3179) 2815 (9040) 5582 (13122)

1376 (3146)

35-39

0 (0)

0 (239)

331 (925) 1314 (2928) 3499 (8158) 6333 (13595)

1696 (3126)

40-44

0 (0)

25 (258)

450 (967) 1669 (2955) 4513 (7844) 9099 (13843)

2235 (3544)

45-49

0 (0)

115 (365) 703 (1342) 2425 (3827) 6423 (9143) 12125 (15505)

3016 (3838)

50-54

0 (90) 221 (563) 1114 (1860) 3385 (4744) 8562 (10683) 16271 (17135)

4187 (4551)

55-59

0 (102) 410 (781) 1837 (2437) 4953 (5820) 11929 (13615) 21069 (22741)

5315 (6129)

60-64

71 (255) 707 (1109) 2337 (2906) 5916 (6771) 15261 (14493) 27033 (24997)

6790 (6666)

Mean

25-65 Unins./ Private
Age Bucket / Quantile

10th

25th

50th

75th

90th

95th

25-29

0 (0)

0 (0)

0 (166)

173 (758)

819 (2959)

1824 (5502)

391 (952)

30-34

0 (0)

0 (0)

0 (180)

254 (852)

1062 (3234)

2024 (6095)

608 (1322)

35-39

0 (0)

0 (0)

0 (174)

328 (1024) 1650 (3187)

3164 (5748)

744 (1223)

40-44

0 (0)

0 (0)

50 (308)

750 (1459) 2929 (3966)

4500 (6908)

1381 (2449)

45-49

0 (0)

0 (0)

120 (425) 857 (1846) 3108 (4566)

6719 (9658)

2089 (1967)

50-54

0 (0)

0 (144)

340 (798) 1576 (2866) 5590 (7462) 11851 (12952)

2474 (3085)

55-59

0 (0)

24 (176) 1076 (1312) 3565 (3996) 9290 (9990) 16419 (19459)

3898 (4941)

60-64

0 (60) 449 (732) 1966 (2398) 5166 (5730) 13749 (12017) 24157 (21839)

6003 (6043)

Mean

Table D4: This table describes the expenditure quantiles for (i) all individuals in MEPS age 25-65 (top panel)
and (iii) all uninsured / individual market insured individuals in MEPS, age 25-65 (bottom panel). Female
numbers presented in parantheses, male numbers are not.

83

