                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        FACTORYLESS GOODS PRODUCERS IN THE US

                                           Andrew B. Bernard
                                             Teresa C. Fort

                                          Working Paper 19396
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w19396


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2013




This paper was prepared for the conference on The FactoryFree Economy: what next for the 21st
century? held in Paris, June 17-19, 2013. The research in this paper was conducted while the authors
were Special Sworn Status researchers of the US Census Bureau at the Boston Research Data Center
and the Center for Economic Studies. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Census Bureau, the NBER, or any other
institution to which the authors are affiliated. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information is disclosed.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Andrew B. Bernard and Teresa C. Fort. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Factoryless Goods Producers in the US
Andrew B. Bernard and Teresa C. Fort
NBER Working Paper No. 19396
August 2013
JEL No. D22,F61,L23,L24,L81

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper documents the extent and characteristics of plants and firms in the US that are outside the
manufacturing sector according to official government statistics but nonetheless are heavily involved
in activities related to the production of manufactured goods. Using new data on establishment activities
in the Census of Wholesale Trade conducted by the US Bureau of the Census in 2002 and 2007, this
paper provides evidence on so-called “factoryless goods producers” (FGPs) in the US economy. FGPs
are formally in the wholesale sector but, unlike traditional wholesale establishments, FGPs design
the goods they sell and coordinate the production activities. This paper documents the extent of FGPs
in the wholesale sector and how they differ from traditional wholesalers in terms of their employment,
wages, productivity and output. Reclassifying FGP establishments to the manufacturing sector using
our definition would have shifted at least 595,000 workers to as many as 1,311,000 workers from
wholesale to manufacturing sectors in 2002 and at least 431,000 workers to as many as 1,934,000
workers in 2007.


Andrew B. Bernard
Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
Andrew.B.Bernard@dartmouth.edu

Teresa C. Fort
Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
teresa.c.fort@dartmouth.edu
                                  Factoryless Goods Producers in the US


1        Introduction

The global economy has undergone a series of rapid, connected transformations in recent years that
are changing the way we think about ﬁrms and sectors and that have potentially large consequences
for future policy, productivity and prosperity. International trade in goods has surged with the ratio
of trade to GDP increasing for almost all exporter-importer country pairs. This substantial increase
in trade has been accompanied by the rise of the importance of global value networks and the
fragmentation of production activities across national borders even within narrowly-deﬁned goods
categories. At the same time, there has been renewed interest in the fragmentation of production
activities across the boundaries of the ﬁrm and its links to the increases in trade and oﬀshoring of
production. The diﬀerent activities of the value chain for a product can be performed by one or more
establishments of a single ﬁrm, or can involve many diﬀerent ﬁrms. In both cases, the activities can
be performed in diﬀerent locations within and across country borders. However, to date, almost
all analyses of these trends and their consequences for output, employment or productivity, either
aggregate or ﬁrm-level, have focused on establishments and ﬁrms in the manufacturing sector and
their decisions to outsource or oﬀshore.
        In this paper we consider an extreme form of the fragmentation of production activities where
the establishment is outside the manufacturing sector according to oﬃcial government statistics
but nonetheless is heavily involved in activities related to the production of manufactured goods.
These establishments are found in the wholesale sector and are formally known as “factoryless-goods
producers” (FGPs). Traditional wholesalers are primarily, or exclusively, involved in intermediating
goods between producers and retailers/consumers. Factoryless goods producers, in contrast, design
the goods they sell and coordinate the production activities, either at the establishment itself or
through the purchase of contract manufacturing services. In other words, FGPs are manufacturing-
like in that they perform many of the tasks and activities found in manufacturing establishments
themselves.
        There are many ways to classify the activities or tasks needed to take a product from an initial
concept through production until its delivery to the ﬁnal customer. Pre-production activities can
include development of the initial idea or conceptualization, R&D, product design and engineering
as well as development of speciﬁcations for production. Production itself involves transformation
and assembly of inputs and coordination of the various production stages. Post-production tasks
might cover the determination of prices and quantities, marketing and branding, logistics and the
ultimate sale of the good to ﬁnal customers1
        Traditionally, these activities were undertaken by the same ﬁrm in one location. Today, ﬁrms
may perform diﬀerent parts of each production stage, as well as the stages themselves, in diﬀerent
    1
    Our focus is on tasks related to production of the goods themselves.We do not address the issue of services
provided to the customer by the ﬁrm. This growing activity is discussed in Crozet and Milet (2013)


                                                      1
                                    Factoryless Goods Producers in the US



                                       Figure 1: From Idea to Customer




                '#!
                                    #!
              !& (&
              & !  '#!
               !    $            
              #!           !     #!!
                                   #!    
                                                        !
                                                      
                                                                 !




domestic and foreign locations. When the activities are separated in space, ﬁrms can also decide
whether they should outsource them to others. We deﬁne a factoryless goods producer as an
establishment that is outside of the manufacturing sector but performs pre-production activities
such as design and engineering itself and is involved in production activities either by doing (some
of) them at the establishment or through purchases of contract manufacturing services (CMS).2
CMS purchases entail an arrangement in which the FGP provides design and production criteria
to a manufacturer who performs the physical transformation activities, generally on materials or
inputs speciﬁed by the FGP.
      FGPs are not hard to ﬁnd. Perhaps the best-known example of a factoryless goods producer
is Apple Inc. Apple designs, engineers, develops, and sells consumer electronics, software and
computers. However, since 2004, Apple has not owned any production lines in the US and the
actual production is conducted by other ﬁrms, such as Foxconn, in China and elsewhere. While
Apple is known for its goods and services and closely controls all aspects of a product, from the idea
until the product lands in the hands of the consumer, none of Apple’s US establishments would be
  2
      Our deﬁnition diﬀers from that currently under consideration by statistical agencies in the US, see Appendix B



                                                          2
                                   Factoryless Goods Producers in the US


in the manufacturing sector.3
       The semiconductor industry is well-known to have factoryless goods producers in the form of
“fabless” ﬁrms.4 Mindspeed Technologies, a fabless semiconductor manufacturer in Newport Beach,
CA with 500+ employees “designs, develops and sells semiconductor solutions for communications
applications in wireline and wireless network infrastructure equipment”.5 Mindspeed outsources all
semiconductor manufacturing to other merchant foundries, such as TSMC, Samsung and others.
As with Apple, Mindspeed’s establishments would not be in the manufacturing sector.
       Perhaps the canonical example of a factoryless goods producer is the British appliance ﬁrm,
Dyson, best known for its innovative vacuum cleaners. The ﬁrm initially designed, engineered
and produced household appliances in Wiltshire, England but subsequently chose to oﬀshore and
outsource all its production to Malaysia while leaving several hundred research and other employees
in the UK.6
       All three of these FGPs started with production facilities inside the ﬁrm in the home country and
subsequently shed their production lines and outsourced and oﬀshored production. In addition,these
ﬁrms retained or expanded other activities including research and development, design, engineering,
marketing, and distribution.
       Anecdotes aside, however, there is very little systematic evidence on the extent of these types
of ﬁrms and establishments. In this paper, we use data from the US Census of Wholesale Trade in
2002 and 2007 to systematically document the extent of FGP activities in the wholesale sector in
the US and to examine the characteristics of plants and ﬁrms that are factoryless goods producers.
Statistical agencies in the US and elsewhere are grappling with the problem of how to collect
information about the evolving variety of manufacturing-related companies in the economy (OMB
(2010)). The US Census Bureau has historically classiﬁed many FGP plants in the wholesale trade
sector, but beginning in 2017, will move these FGP establishments in to manufacturing.7 In addition
there may be substantial numbers of non-wholesale FGPs in other sectors such as Business Services.8
       There are several reasons why distinguishing FGPs from traditional wholesale establishments
may be important for economic welfare or policy. First, the mere existence of the FGPs high-
lights a new type of production function in the global economy involving extreme fragmentation of
tasks. Second, the types of workers, and as result jobs and wages, employed by FGPs may diﬀer
   3
      As of June 2013, Apple has announced but not yet implemented an investment in new manufacturing facilities
in the US. For a description of the distribution of value in several of Apple’s products, see Kraemer, Linden, and
Dedrick (2011).
    4
      Bayard, Byrne, and Smith (2013) document the extent and characteristics of FGPs in the US semi-conductor
industry.
    5
      See the company proﬁle at www.mindspeed.com.
    6
      See Financial Times August 23, 2011
    7
      Doherty (2013) discusses the expected impact of reclassifying FGPs on US economic statistics including the value
of imports and exports and sectoral employment and wages.
    8
      Our data do not cover sectors beyond Wholesale Trade and Manufacturing so we are unable to document how
many FGPs might exist in other sectors.


                                                          3
                                  Factoryless Goods Producers in the US


signiﬁcantly from those at integrated manufacturing plants or traditional wholesalers. Third, the
relative importance of R&D and innovation is likely more important at FGPs. These potential dif-
ferences between FGPs and traditional manufacturers and wholesalers introduce the possibility of
very diﬀerent wage, employment, and productivity dynamics if factoryless goods production grows
in aggregate activity. We do not address these issues directly, but as a ﬁnal exercise we attempt
to calculate how much employment and output would be shifted from the wholesale sector to the
manufacturing sector if FGPs are reclassiﬁed. Moving FGP establishments to the manufacturing
sector would have shifted at least 595,000 workers to as many as 1,311,000 workers from wholesale
to manufacturing sectors in 2002 and at least 431,000 workers to as many as 1,934,000 workers in
2007.
    Our research is related to a broader set of questions that asks how production, innovation,
knowledge and productivity are related. One perspective is that without production activities
located nearby in the long run a ﬁrm cannot continue to generate new ideas, improve product
quality, innovate its designs and raise productive eﬃciency. The counterpoint suggests that the
advent of dramatic improvements in telecommunication technology, the rise of the internet, and
the reduction of transportation and trade costs have combined to allow ﬁrms to separate their
activities geographically and potentially locate them outside the ﬁrm. This perspective suggests
ﬁrms will thrive if they can take advantage of comparative advantage and relative cost diﬀerences
in the performance of the tasks involved in the creation, production, distribution and marketing of
a product. Co-location of these tasks may not be necessary and might be more costly.
    We provide a ﬁrst step in developing an understanding of these complex processes by document-
ing the extent to which plants are engaged in diﬀerent activities in the production value chain. Our
focus is on establishments that are currently characterized by statistical authorities as performing
wholesale trade, i.e. those that are thought to be outside manufacturing. We are motivated by
the idea that the rapid decline in manufacturing employment in the US in recent years has been
accompanied at least in part by a rise in employment in manufacturing-related activities in other
sectors.9

Relation to existing work

This paper contributes to a growing empirical literature about the importance of international
fragmentation of production (i.e., oﬀshoring). A number of papers use industry-level input output
(IO) tables to show the importance of oﬀshoring across countries and over time (e.g., Hummels,
Ishii, and Yi (2001), Johnson and Noguera (2012)). While these papers provide strong evidence
that international fragmentation of production is an important and growing phenomenon, their
   9
     See Pierce and Schott (2012) for a description and trade-related explanation of the decline in US manufacturing
sector employment.



                                                         4
                                    Factoryless Goods Producers in the US


analyses focus on the manufacturing sector. In this paper, we show that when establishments
relocate the entire physical production process to another location, they become FGPs and so are
no longer included in oﬃcial manufacturing statistics. As a result, current work that relies on IO
tables, or manufacturing more generally, will miss this potentially important type of production
fragmentation.10
       There is also research into the determinants of ﬁrms’ vertical production networks. One strand
of this literature focuses on multinational production to assess production sharing across countries
(e.g., Hanson, Mataloni, and Slaughter (2005), Yeaple (2003)). These papers ﬁnd an important
role for wages, distance, taxes and human capital in ﬁrms’ sourcing decisions. In more recent work,
Fort (2013) uses the 2007 Census of Manufactures (CM) to asses the role of labor costs, distance to
suppliers, and communication technology in US ﬁrms’ domestic and foreign fragmentation decisions.
While the ﬁndings in that paper show that ﬁrm use of communication technology signiﬁcantly
increases the likelihood of domestic fragmentation, it does not necessarily lead ﬁrms to oﬀshore.
Most ﬁrms in that paper oﬀshore to low wage countries, but use of communication technology only
increases the likelihood of sourcing from high technology countries. An open question is whether
these results also apply to oﬀshoring by FGPs that have relocated the entire physical production
process overseas.
       The vast majority of the existing evidence on international fragmentation is based on manu-
facturers’ decisions to oﬀshore production. In this paper, we show that focusing exclusively on
manufacturing misses an important element of production fragmentation. Existing evidence on
fragmentation by non-manufactures is much more limited. Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2009) and
Bernard, Jensen, Redding, and Schott (2010) show that ﬁrms with wholesale establishments ac-
count for more than 40 percent of US imports. However, these papers are silent on the relationship
between wholesalers and production fragmentation, either domestic or foreign.11
       The paper also relates to the theoretical literature on oﬀshoring by providing evidence on the
types of producers who fragment, the extent to which they do so, and their import activity. Gross-
man and Rossi-Hansberg (2008) conceptualize the production process in terms of tasks that are
costly to separate from the headquarter location. The FGPs documented here provide some of the
ﬁrst direct evidence on establishments that have completely outsourced their production activities.
Baldwin and Venables (2010) take the physical production process seriously to distinguish between
“snakes”, in which production is sequential, and “spiders” in which multiple parts can be made at
the same time. This paper highlights the importance of extending the concept of production to
include product design and engineering. In this sense, the theoretical framework in Antràs and
  10
      While the IO tables do include information for the wholesale sector, it is at such a high level of aggregation that
it does not allow for a comparable analysis.
   11
      The new empirical literature on intermediaries in exports implicitly or explicitly assumes that wholesale ﬁrms
are merely reselling goods from other producers, i.e. acting as traditional wholesale resellers, see Akerman (2010),
Blum, Claro, and Horstmann (2010), and Bernard, Grazzi, and Tomasi (2011).


                                                           5
                              Factoryless Goods Producers in the US


Helpman (2004) is closely related to the producers we describe here. In that paper, producers
combine headquarter services with intermediate good production that can occur within or outside
the boundaries of a producer’s ﬁrm and country. The FGPs we identify provide the precise type of
headquarter services modeled in Antràs and Helpman (2004) and source their intermediate inputs
both domestically and oﬀshore.
    Although Antràs and Helpman (2004) is one of the few theoretical papers to consider both
domestic and foreign fragmentation within the same framework, a burgeoning empirical literature
explores the domestic fragmentation option. Fort (2013) shows that US manufacturers that fragment
production domestically are far more prevalent than those that oﬀshore. Using IO tables for the US,
Fally (2012) assesses the number of production stages within industries and over time. While that
paper documents a decrease in production fragmentation over time, we note that the emergence
of FGPs introduces error into the IO tables since they do not capture outsourcing by wholesalers.
Akerman and Py (2011) employ ﬁrm-level data on Swedish manufacturers to show that ﬁrms in
large cities contain fewer occupations, consistent with the premise that these ﬁrms are specialized
in a smaller range of tasks. The FGPs documented in this paper have undertaken an extreme form
of fragmentation in which all the physical production processes have been relocated to another
location. To the extent that domestic fragmentation allows for gains to specialization, it represents
a dimension of ﬁrms’ organizational choices with potentially large aggregate productivity eﬀects.
    Our paper is most closely related to several recent working papers on measuring the extent of
FGP activity in the US economy. Doherty (2013) looks at the response of international and US
statistical organizations to the phenomena of rapid improvements in ICT and transportation and
the resulting increase in oﬀshore outsourcing. Kamal, Moulton, and Ribarsky (2013) analyze data
on contract manufacturing services (CMS) from US ﬁrm surveys focusing on the 2011 Company
Organization Survey. They ﬁnd that ﬁve percent of US ﬁrms purchase CMS and four percent supply
CMS with one percent both supplying and purchasing. Bayard, Byrne, and Smith (2013) present a
case study of FGP semiconductor production identifying domestic establishments of FGP ﬁrms with
a unique dataset combining outside company directories of FGP semiconductor ﬁrms with Economic
Census data for 2002 and 2007. Within wholesale trade, they ﬁnd that FGP establishments are
larger in terms of both employment and sales, their employees have higher average earnings, and
they are more geographically concentrated than establishments of other ﬁrms. This paper revisits
the deﬁnition of an FGP and expands the analysis to cover the entire wholesale sector.


2    Data

The data employed in this paper are from the 2002 and 2007 US Census Bureau Census of Whole-
sale Trade (CW). The CW is conducted in years that end in 2 and 7 and covers the universe of
establishments classﬁed in the Wholesale Trade sector. The data analyzed here are from a new set

                                                 6
                                   Factoryless Goods Producers in the US


of “Establishment Activities” (EA) questions that were asked in the 2002 and 2007 censuses. In
2002, the CW asked each establishment whether i) Product design/engineering, and ii) Materials
fabrication/processing/assembly/blending were a) performed by the establishment; b) performed
for the establishment by another company; or c) not provided by the establishment. In 2007, the
CW asked each establishment whether i) it designed, engineered, or formulated the manufactured
product it sold, produced, or shipped; ii) its primary activity was to provide contract manufacturing
services for other establishments, manufacture its own goods, resell goods produced by others, or
other; and iii) it purchased contract manufacturing services from another establishment (within
or outside the ﬁrm) to process its inputs. Copies of the exact questions as they appeared in the
censuses are in the appendix.
    The EA data are not available for every wholesale plant. In 2002, all establishments in every
wholesale industry were asked the EA questions. In 2007, only establishments in 49 of the 71 NAICS
industries were sent a form with the EA questions.12 All establishments that receive a census form
in the mail are legally required to return the completed form. Despite the legal requirement, a
number of establishments in both years did not respond to the question. The appendix provides a
list of the excluded wholesale industries in 2007 and discusses sample selection issues.
    Establishments are given a single industry (sector) classiﬁcation based on their production pro-
cess, i.e. they can either be classiﬁed as Manufacturing or Wholesale Trade but not both. However,
a given establishment may perform activities in both sectors and have employment in both sectors.
The practical implication of the assignment process is that plants in the Wholesale Trade sector
may, and many do, perform some physical transformation activities.13 These wholesale establish-
ments’ manufacturing activities are not captured by aggregate statistics since all employment and
sales are designated to an establishment’s uniquely assigned industry and sector.
    The EA data are also available for manufacturing establishments in 2007. The Census of Man-
ufactures (CM) included the same set of Establishment Activities questions asked on the 2007 CW.
For manufacturers, all large plants and all plants that belong to multi-unit ﬁrms, as well as a ran-
dom sample of small and medium-sized plants within industries, were asked the EA questions. The
smallest manufacturing plants, generally those with fewer than ﬁve employees, are never surveyed.14
The EA data on manufacturers allow us to compare FGPs in the wholesale sector to manufacturing
establishments that are similar along several key dimensions.
    We supplement the EA data with additional establishment and ﬁrm-level variables. Sales,
employees, and wages are available in the censuses. We link the census data to the Longitudinal
   12
      In practice, there are answers to the EA questions in every industry since information was collected from estab-
lishments that switched from one of the included 49 industries in 2002 into an excluded industry in 2007.
   13
      See Appendix A for more detail.
   14
      Manufacturing has short and long forms, and only the long forms asked the EA purchase questions. While all large
and multi-unit ﬁrm establishments receive the long form, only a random sample of small, single-unit ﬁrms received
the long form. Data for the smallest establishments is imputed from Federal tax returns and industry averages.



                                                          7
                                   Factoryless Goods Producers in the US


Business Database (LBD) to determine establishment and ﬁrm age, as well as the ﬁrm’s employment
in all other sectors. We also link the census data to Customs Trade Transactions data to obtain
measures of each ﬁrm’s imports. The Customs data provide value, transaction type (whether the
imports are intra-ﬁrm), country, and product information at the ﬁrm level.
         We construct a value-added labor productivity measure for establishment i as vapi = vai /tei ,
where va denotes value-added and te denotes total employment. For manufacturing establish-
ments, value-added is provided in the census. For wholesalers, we calculate a proxy measure for
value-added as vai = salesi − merchi − invbi + invei , where merchi denotes the establishment’s
purchases of merchandise for resales and invbi and invei denote inventory at the beginning and
end of the year respectively. It may therefore be more appropriate to think of wholesaler produc-
tivity as a gross-margin, but this provides the most comparable productivity measure available for
wholesale establishments given the existing data. Establishment sales, employment, wages and pro-
ductivity all vary signiﬁcantly across industries. To make meaningful comparisons of these variables
across establishments in diﬀerent industries, we provide information on a relative measure for each
characteristics, xij /x̄j , where x̄j is the mean of variable x in industry j.
         At ﬁrst glance, manufacturing production by wholesalers appears paradoxical. Traditional
wholesalers simply distribute goods and have no involvement in the manufacturing process. While
the majority of wholesalers still function as distributors, the sector has evolved to include establish-
ments that design, market and sell their own goods. Because these establishments perform few or
no physical transformation activities, they are classiﬁed as wholesalers. From an economic theory
perspective, however, plants that design goods and coordinate their production are closer to man-
ufacturers than distributors. As such, the wholesale sector contains plants whose behavior sheds
light on manufacturing activity in the US economy.15


3         Design and manufacturing at wholesale establishments

Since individual establishments (plants) are assigned a single primary industry code, each plant is
covered by only one sector of the quinquennial Economic Census.16 As discussed above, in 2002,
every establishment in the Census of Wholesale Trade was asked questions about its activities in
product design and manufacturing. We focus on these questions to explore the manufacturing-
    15
     The Census Bureau has recognized this issue and attempted to address it in the 2017 Economic Census by
identifying every manufacturing or wholesale establishment that does not perform its own manufacturing activities,
but “undertakes all of the entrepreneurial steps and arranges for all required capital, labor, and material inputs
required to make a good” (OMB (2010), pp. 3-4). In 2017, these establishments will be classiﬁed in the manufacturing
industry that corresponds to the good they sell, with an additional ﬂag identifying them as factoryless goods producers
(FGPs). The ﬂag will distinguish FGPs from the traditional “integrated manufactures” (IMs) that perform their own
transformation activities, and establishments whose main activity is to provide contract manufacturing services for
others (referred to as manufacturing service providers or MSPs).
  16
     For example a plant is either in the Economic Census in the Manufacturing Sector or in the Wholesale Sector
but not both. This is true even if the plant performs both activities.



                                                          8
                                 Factoryless Goods Producers in the US



          Figure 2: Design and Manufacturing Activities at Wholesale Establishments - 2002




related activities of wholesale establishments and ultimately to create a formal deﬁnition of an FGP
plant.

2002

In Table 1, we tabulate the counts of plants in the wholesale sector that responded to both the Design
and Manufacturing questions in the 2002 Census.17 In each case, a plant could either perform the
activity at the plant, have it provided by another company, or not provide the activity. Of the
207,494 responding establishments, 63.2 percent participated in neither design or manufacturing
activities, either inside the plant or purchased from another ﬁrm, see Figure 2. These plants match
the typical perception of a wholesaler that is not involved in the creation of the product but rather
is active in delivery, warehousing, order fulﬁllment, logistics or other services that intermediate
between a producer and a customer.
       However, more than 36 percent of wholesale establishments are involved in either design or
manufacturing activities or both. Almost a third of the responding wholesale plants are involved
in manufacturing, evenly split between plants that are doing manufacturing themselves or those
purchasing contract manufacturing services. Similarly more than a quarter of wholesale plants are
  17
    The exact questions from the 2002 CW can be found in Figure 4. Many more plants responded to one of the two
questions. The distribution of responses was similar for plants answering one or two questions.


                                                      9
                                  Factoryless Goods Producers in the US


involved in design and engineering activities; 16.8 percent design at the establishment while 10.0
percent outsource design activities to others. These results challenge the stereotype of a wholesale
establishment that simply intermediates between producer and consumers. The wholesale sector
is a heterogeneous mix of traditional resellers and plants that are actively involved in production
activities.
       There is also new evidence in the other direction, i.e. that manufacturing ﬁrms are increasingly
producing services. Crozet and Milet (2013) document the shift away from goods towards services
in French manufacturing ﬁrms. They ﬁnd that one third of French manufacturing ﬁrms have more
than half of their revenue from services.
       Plants that perform design activities themselves are most likely to conduct manufacturing activ-
ities as well, or to have manufacturing provided by an outside company. More than 1 in 12 wholesale
plants both design and manufacture at the establishment itself. For those plants that outsource
design activities, a large majority (more than 80 percent) also contract for manufacturing services.

2007

As discussed above, the coverage and format of the questions changed between the 2002 and 2007
Economic Censuses. In Table 2 we report three dimensions of the underlying sample of plants for
2007: those that did or did not perform design activities at the plant, the primary activity of the
plant, and whether or not the plant contracted for manufacturing services, either inside or outside
the US. To be included in the table, an establishment had to provide a response to all three of the
questions.18
       Of the 140,726 responding establishments, 15.2 percent indicated that they perform design
activities at the plant, down slightly from 2002. More than a ﬁfth of wholesale plants (21.5 percent)
are involved in activities related to manufacturing either through the purchase or sale of contract
manufacturing services or because they report their primary activity to be manufacturing. There is
substantial variation in manufacturing activities depending on whether or not the plant does design
in-house. 67.5 percent of designing establishments buy or sell CMS or have their primary activity
as manufacturing. Only 13.3 percent of non-design plants are similarly involved in manufacturing
activities.
       For these plants with no design activities, 95.2 percent report their primary activity to be in
“resales” or “other”. These establishments conform to the traditional view of a wholesalers. The
remaining 5,678 establishments with no design activity at the plant describe their primary activity
as manufacturing or contract manufacturing for others.
  18
    The exact questions from the 2007 CW form can be found in Figure 5. This requirement that a plant provides
an answer to all three questions results in the smaller sample size in Table 2 than in Table 1. One and two-way
tabulations that are not limited to the subset of plants that responded to all three questions result in comparable
percentages of plants across the categories.



                                                        10
                                   Factoryless Goods Producers in the US



                Figure 3: Design and Manufacturing Activities at Wholesale Plants, 2007




      Among the 21,430 establishments that do report design activities, 6,829 (31.9 percent) report
their primary activity as manufacturing and another 8.3 percent are primarily contract manu-
facturers for other companies, see Figure 3. Although categorized as wholesalers, these plants are
performing a substantial range of manufacturing-related activities. Even among establishments that
describe themselves as resellers (or other), almost 46 percent are purchasing contract manufacturing
services from domestic or foreign locations in addition to their own design activity.
      The 2007 questions also shed light on the role these non-traditional wholesale establishments
play in global production chains. Two percent of establishments that do not design their products
purchase CMS oﬀshore. In contrast, 13 percent of wholesale plants that design their own goods also
oﬀshore customized production (i.e., purchase CMS abroad). Fort (2013) examines oﬀshore CMS
purchases in the manufacturing sector and ﬁnds that the share of oﬀshoring establishments is close
to two percent. The share of designing wholesale establishments that oﬀshore is therefore more
than six times the share of manufacturing establishments that oﬀshore. We do note that, as in the
results for manufacturing reported in Fort (2013), establishments with domestic CMS purchases are
still more prevalent than establishments with oﬀshore purchases.19
      In both 2002 and 2007, a sizable fraction of wholesale plants are conducting a range of manufacturing-
 19
      Fontagné and D’Isanto (2013) ﬁnd that 4.2 percent of French non-ﬁnancial ﬁrms source activities from abroad.



                                                         11
                                  Factoryless Goods Producers in the US


related activities from design to the purchase of contract manufacturing services to manufacturing
itself. Establishments that perform design are much more likely to have manufacturing activity at
the plant or purchase contract manufacturing than plants that report no design activities.


4     Factoryless Goods Producers

The results above suggest that there are multiple types of wholesale plants engaged in a range of
activities related to the production and distribution of manufactured goods. Both national statistical
agencies and researchers are faced with the diﬃcult question of how to conceptually and practically
deﬁne an establishment that performs a suﬃcient range of manufacturing-related activities to be
categorized as a factoryless goods producer. Whether or not FGPs should be moved from non-
manufacturing sectors to manufacturing is a separate question.20 Not every wholesale plant that
does design, purchases contract manufacturing services, or manufactures onsite should qualify for
this change in status. The range of manufacturing-related activity must be suﬃcient to cover both
the conceptualization and fabrication of a good. Additional complications arise from the variation
in underlying survey questions over time.

4.1    Deﬁnition of a Factoryless Goods Producer

Our deﬁnition is based on a combination of activities at the plant: the wholesale establishment must
perform design (pre-production) and be involved in manufacturing in some capacity (physical trans-
formation activities). Wholesale establishments by deﬁnition are also involved in post-production
activities.

Deﬁnition 1. A Factoryless Good Producer (FGP) is a wholesale establishment that performs de-
sign/engineering/R&D activity at the establishment and either conducts manufacturing operations
at the establishment itself or purchases manufacturing services from a domestic or foreign company.

    By this deﬁnition the wholesale plant has manufacturing-related activity both before (design)
and during the production of the good. Wholesale establishments that are not FGPs (non-FGPs)
include those that contract for design services, those that report no purchases of contract or onsite
manufacturing even if design itself is occurring at the establishment, and those that are not involved
in product design at all.21 In theory the deﬁnition covers all wholesale establishments and divides
them into FGPs and non-FGPs. In practice, wholesale establishments might not be able to be
  20
     One practical reason to classify FGPs in the manufacturing sector is to ensure adequate data collection. The CM
collects much more detailed information on the inputs and outputs of the physical production process.
  21
     International and US deﬁnitions of FGPs diﬀer according to the ownership of inputs but both use a deﬁnition
that ignores manufacturing activity at the establishment. Using the same CW data, Bayard, Byrne, and Smith
(2013) adopt a version of this narrower deﬁnition of an FGP as a wholesale establishment that performs design and
purchases contract manufacturing services. Wholesale establishments that both design and manufacture onsite are
excluded from these deﬁnitions but are included in ours.



                                                        12
                                   Factoryless Goods Producers in the US


categorized if they did not answer the relevant questions about design and manufacturing and thus
will be classiﬁed as Missing.22 The implementation of our deﬁnition varies between 2002 and 2007.
We caution that comparisons across the years are diﬃcult both due to changes in the underlying
sample of responding establishments as well as to changes in the nature of the questions in the
Economic Censuses.

4.2      FGPs in 2002

For 2002, using our deﬁnition, an FGP is an establishment in the wholesale sector that reports de-
sign activity in-house and either conducts manufacturing activity itself or purchases manufacturing
services from outside the company.23 These criteria mean that, for the 2002 CW, the establishment
must have provided an answer to both the design and manufacturing questions to be classiﬁed as
an FGP.24
       The upper panel of Table 3 reports the counts of FGP and non-FGP plants in the wholesale
sector along with their total sales and employment, while the bottom panel of the table provides
similar totals for the population of wholesale and manufacturing establishments. We are able to
classify almost half of the wholesale establishments in 2002 according to their FGP status. Of
the plants with non-missing FGP status, 13.5 percent are Factoryless Goods Producers doing both
design and manufacturing activities.25 The FGP plants have $253B in sales and employ 595,000
workers. Compared to the population of wholesale establishments, FGP establishments represent
6.5 percent of total establishments and account for 10.2 percent of employment and 5.2 percent of
output.26

4.3      FGPs in 2007

As mentioned earlier, the questions about manufacturing-related activities at the establishment
changed between the 2002 and 2007 Censuses. In addition in 2007 not every wholesale industry
was asked the questions. To qualify under our deﬁnition of FGP in 2007, a plant had to either (a)
  22
     In practice it is sometimes possible to classify a plant based as non-FGP based on their answer to a single
question. For example, if they indicate they did no design but did not answer the other questions or if they indicate
they were not involved in manufacturing at the plant or through the purchase of contract manufacturing services but
gave no information about their design activity.
  23
     In 2002, the Economic Census does not distinguish between domestic and foreign contract manufacturing pur-
chases.
  24
     However, we are able to categorize some plants as non-FGP even if they answered only one of the questions on
design or manufacturing. All plants with no design and all plants that report no manufacturing are classiﬁed as
non-FGP (regardless of their answer to the other question) and as a result the total number of plants in Table 3 is
greater than the totals in Table 1.
  25
     These 28,331 FGP establishments represent the sum of the 18,539 plants that did design and manufacturing at
the plant (Table 1 row 1 column 1) and the 9,792 plants that did design at the plant and purchased CMS (Table 1
row 1 column 1).
  26
     We caution that these shares represent the activity at plants we can identify as FGP, i.e. a lower bound, as the
FGP status of more than half of plants in the Wholesale sector is missing.



                                                         13
                                  Factoryless Goods Producers in the US


do design and have its primary activity as Manufacturing, Contracting, or Other or (b) do design
with the primary activity of Resales and purchase contract manufacturing services. A plant was
non-FGP if it either (a) did not perform design or (b) did design with the primary activity of Resales
but did not purchase contract manufacturing services.
         Table 4 gives plant, sales and employment totals for FGP and non-FGP plants in 2007 in the
upper panel. The numbers of plants that are classiﬁed as FGP or non-FGP drops between 2002
and 2007 even as the population of wholesale establishments grows slightly.27 This is likely due to
the diﬀerence in the questions asked in the 2007 Census, the need for responses to three questions
instead of two, and the fact that not all industries in the Wholesale Trade sector were asked the
EA questions. Of the wholesale plants with non-missing status in 2007, 10.5 percent are classiﬁed
as FGP with $279B in sales employing 431,000 workers.
         Interestingly, in the 2007 Economic Census, a subset of manufacturing establishments was asked
the same questions about design, primary activity and CMS purchases and thus we are able to
classify manufacturing ﬁrms according to the same criteria. The majority of manufacturing estab-
lishments with non-missing data satisfy the FGP criteria (58.4 percent) and they account for just
under half of total manufacturing sales and employment.


5         Characteristics of FGP Establishments

In this section we compare FGP establishments, non-FGP establishments, all wholesalers, and man-
ufacturing establishments in terms of employment, wages, sales, labor productivity, and age. As
there is no formal theoretical guidance from the literature on how these characteristics should vary
across plant types, we describe two possible wholesale establishments. The FGP plant creates, de-
signs and engineers the product itself and coordinates the production, possibly through the purchase
of CMS. Wholesale status means it is likely that the establishment is involved in post-production
logistics and distribution. The traditional wholesale establishment (non-FGP) is not involved with
pre-production activities, purchases the ﬁnished good directly form the producer, and is primarily
involved in post-production activities.
         The addition of the design activities would tend to raise employment and measured value-added
at the FGP plant, especially when adjusting for total sales. If pre-production workers are relatively
skill intensive, average wages would also be higher at the FGP facility. Sales volume itself might
be higher at the non-FGP plant, especially sales per employee, in part because the traditional
    27
    The 16,752 FGP establishments in 2007 represent the sum of the 10,881 plants that did design at the plant and
had Contracting, Manufacturing or Other as their primary activity (Table 2 rows 1-3 column 4) and the 4,842 plants
that did design at the plant,purchased CMS, and had Resales as their primary activity (Table 2 row 4 columns 1-2).
Note that these numbers sum to only 15,723 since Table 2 is limited to establishments that answered the design
question, the primary activity question and the CMS question. In contrast, FGP status is deﬁned for all plants that
answered the design question and at least one of the primary activity and CMS questions.




                                                        14
                              Factoryless Goods Producers in the US


wholesaler is likely to handle a wider variety of goods in any given market.

2002

Table 5 reports unweighted means for each characteristic by plant FGP status in the top panel for
2002. Since diﬀerences in the means can come from a combination of within industry diﬀerences
at FGP and non-FGP plants and the mix of industries in the sample of plants with non-missing
FGP status (and the industry mix diﬀerence between FGP and non-FGP) we report the average
unweighted ratio (or log diﬀerence) relative to the mean in the industry of the establishment in the
middle panel. The bottom panel in the table gives unweighted means across all establishments in
the wholesale and manufacturing sectors for comparison.
   Within the sample of establishments where we can identify FGP status, we ﬁnd that FGP plants
have much lower sales and log value-added per worker than traditional wholesale plants (non-FGP),
while employment is substantial larger and the average wage is comparable. They are also slightly
younger.
   The middle panel shows the extent to which the diﬀerences between FGPs and non-FGPs depend
upon the industry composition of each group. In this panel, a value of one indicates that a plant is
exactly at its industry mean (zero for log VA/worker). First, it is clear that, on average, plants in
the FGP sample are larger and more productive than establishments with a missing status. Both
FGPs and Non-FGPs have values greater than one. Second, the relative means reveal important
within-industry diﬀerences from the raw averages presented in the top panel. Although non-FGPs
still have more sales than FGPs, their relative mean is only 4.7 percent larger than the FGP mean,
whereas the raw numbers suggested a 41 percent diﬀerence in size. In contrast, the relative means
reveal even bigger diﬀerences in employment at FGPs versus non-FGPs. FGPs employ 1.67 times
more workers than their industry average, compared to just 1.15 times for Non-FGPs.

2007

We repeat the exercise for 2007 in Table 6. Within the sample of wholesale establishments where
we can identify FGP status, we ﬁnd that FGP plants have somewhat lower sales and substantially
higher employment than traditional wholesale establishments as in 2002. However in this sample,
FGP plants on average have higher wages and comparable, rather than lower, productivity. FGP
plants are also younger than non-FGPs.
   Looking at the middle panel, we ﬁnd that relative to their industry averages, FGP establishments
have substantially higher sales, wages, productivity and especially employment. On average, FGP
plants are also larger, more productive, and pay higher wages than non-FGP plants in the same
industry.




                                                 15
                                   Factoryless Goods Producers in the US


6         FGP Firms

Having established a number of plant-level facts, we turn our focus to the ﬁrm. While the Economic
Censuses collect information at the unit of the establishment, economic decision-making in many
cases takes place at the ﬁrm level. Most ﬁrms in both manufacturing and wholesale trade are single-
plant (SP) organizations but the smaller number of multi-plant (MP) ﬁrms are disproportionately
important in aggregate output, and employment and are more likely to produce multiple products
(see Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson (1988) and Bernard, Redding, and Schott (2010)). For SP
ﬁrms, FGP status is a straightforward application of Deﬁnition 1; however, for MP ﬁrms we need a
new deﬁnition.

Deﬁnition 2. A Factoryless Good Producing Firm (FGPF or FGP ﬁrm) is a ﬁrm with at least one
FGP wholesale establishment.

         The practical implementation of Deﬁnition 2 is complicated by the fact that each wholesale
plant can be in one of three categories: FGP, non-FGP, or Missing. As a result, ﬁrms can also be
in one of three categories: FGPF - at least one wholesale plant is an FGP, non-FGPF where none
of the wholesale plants at the ﬁrm is identiﬁed as an FGP and at least one plant is identiﬁed as
not being an FGP, and Missing - where every wholesale plant in the ﬁrm has Missing for its FGP
status.28
         MP ﬁrms can be comprised of only wholesale establishments, a mix of manufacturing and whole-
sale establishments and only manufacturing establishments. FGP ﬁrms come from the the ﬁrst two
ﬁrm types, any ﬁrm that has no wholesale (only manufacturing) establishments is not an FGPF.29
         Table 7 reports the number of ﬁrms by FGP status and Firm type in 2002 (upper panel) and
2007 (lower panel). In 2002, 16.5 percent of the ﬁrms with non-Missing status are FGPFs and only
a small fraction of FGPFs are Mixed ﬁrms. However, FGPFs are almost twice as likely to be a
Mixed ﬁrm (3.8 percent) than are non-FGPFs (2.0 percent) or Missing ﬁrms. For 2007, as with
the plant-level data, fewer ﬁrms have non-missing FGPF status and among those a smaller fraction
are FGPF. Again the share of Mixed ﬁrms among FGPFs is much higher (5.3 percent) than for
non-FGPFs (2.0 percent)
         Table 8 reports on ﬁrm characteristics by FGPF status and Firm type (upper panel) as well as by
Census (lower panel) for 2002.30 The comparable ﬁrm characteristics for 2007 are given in Table 9.
Sales, employment, and imports are much larger at FGPFs than at other types of ﬁrms (non-FGPF
    28
     We note that this is a conservative deﬁnition of an FGP ﬁrm since a plant with missing status at a non-FGP
ﬁrm may be an FGP. An alternative deﬁnition would have classiﬁed all ﬁrms with one or more plants with a missing
status as Missing. However, this classiﬁcation scheme would likely have resulted in a much bigger allocation of the
larger, MP ﬁrms to the Missing category.
  29
     We note that all ﬁrms may have employment in other sectors, such as Retail Trade or Business Services, but we
do not measure those activities here.
  30
     We do not report normalization within industries due to the multi-industry nature of many ﬁrms.


                                                        16
                                  Factoryless Goods Producers in the US


or Missing) in both years. FGPFs also have more manufacturing plants on average (almost four times
as many in 2002 and ﬁve times as many in 2007) than non-FGPFs. A portion of these diﬀerences
is driven by the increased presence of Mixed ﬁrms in the FGPF category. Within each group,
Mixed ﬁrms are dramatically larger, more productive, and more involved in imports. Despite this
compositional component, the Mixed FGPFs are still diﬀerent from the Mixed non-FGPs. They are
more productive and have more sales, employment, and imports than the non-FGPFs. In addition,
the Mixed FGPFs have twice as many manufacturing and wholesale establishments on average than
non-FGPFs in both 2002 and 2007.
         Tables 8 and 9 also show the average share of intra-ﬁrm (related party) imports by FGP status
and ﬁrm type. The share of intra-ﬁrm imports for Mixed ﬁrms is between 0.25 and 0.27 for both
FGPFs and non-FGPFs in 2002 and 2007. In contrast, FGPF Wholesale-only ﬁrms have a noticeably
lower share of intra-ﬁrm imports compared to non-FGPFs. In 2002, the average share of intra-ﬁrm
imports for FGPFs was only 0.09 compared to 0.13 for non-FGPFs. A similar pattern is evident in
2007. Wholesale-only FGPFs had an average share of intra-ﬁrm imports of 0.08 compared to 0.13
for non-FGPs.


7         Aggregate Implications

In this section we consider how employment and output aggregates for manufacturing would have
been diﬀerent if FGP establishments had been included in the manufacturing sector in 2002 and
2007 instead of in the wholesale sector. In 2017, the US Census Bureau is scheduled to do exactly
this by recording FGPs in the manufacturing sector. We emphasize that the results in this section
depend on our deﬁnition of FGP in each year. The diﬀerence in the survey questions and coverage
over time makes even the comparison of the 2002 and 2007 numbers problematic.
         A major concern for policymakers in advanced, industrialized economies has been the rapid and
systematic decline in the manufacturing sector in recent decades. The focus of this paper is on
the presence of FGPs that reside outside the manufacturing sector but conduct manufacturing-like
or manufacturing-related activities. Broadly construed FGPs employ workers and produce output
that is similar in many dimensions to traditional manufacturing operations but their employment
and output do not count towards manufacturing aggregates.
         Here we report the results of two exercises that shift FGPs to the manufacturing sector with
adjustments to the aggregate manufacturing employment and output statistics.31 In the ﬁrst ad-
    31
    Using a narrower deﬁnition of FGPs and focusing on the semiconductor industry, Bayard, Byrne, and Smith
(2013) estimate that US manufacturing output would have been 7-30 percent higher in 2002 and 2007 if FGPs has
been included. We consider FGPs more broadly and include a focus on employment which is typically the focus of
policy debates on the manufacturing sector. They ﬁnd a larger share of output in FGPs in the semiconductor sector
than we do for manufacturing overall. This diﬀerence might exist in part because the semiconductor industry has
undergone more production fragmention than the average manufacturing sector.




                                                       17
                                Factoryless Goods Producers in the US


justment, we add employment (output) by establishments that we have identiﬁed as FGPs in 2002
and 2007 to existing manufacturing aggregates. In the second adjustment, we assume that the
prevalence of FGPs in our samples of responding establishments holds for the entire population of
wholesale plants and that employment and output at all those plants diﬀers from their industry
means to the same extent as found in the samples of responding establishments. The two methods
provide rough lower and upper bounds on the extent of manufacturing-like activity due to the pres-
ence of FGPs in the Wholesale Trade sector. To the extent that FGPs are present in other sectors,
such as Business Services, both of our estimates may understate the presence of FGPs and their
employment and output.
    The ﬁrst method is quite straightforward and merely involves adding the employment and output
aggregates at establishments identiﬁed as FGP in Section 4 to the reported manufacturing totals
for each year. Reclassifying FGP establishments to the manufacturing sector would have increased
reported manufacturing jobs by 595,000 in 2002 and by 431,000 in 2007, corresponding to an 4.0
percent increase in manufacturing employment in 2002 and 3.2 percent increase in 2007. The same
method of adjustment would have resulted in increased reported manufacturing output by $253B
(6.5 percent) in 2002 and by $279B (5.2 percent) in 2007.
    The second method involves two strong additional assumptions. First, we assume that the frac-
tion of FGPs in the overall wholesale sector is the same as that among those plants answering both
the design and manufacturing questions in 2002, and those answering the design, primary activity
and outsourcing questions in 2007. Second, we assume that all these FGPs are proportionally dif-
ferent from (larger than) the average in their industry in terms of employment and output to the
same degree as the observed FGP plants (see Tables 5 and 6).
    Applying the ﬁrst assumption results in 58,147 FGPs in 2002 and 45,624 FGPS in 2007. Average
employment at wholesale plants was 13.5 workers in 2002 and 14.3 workers in 2007 and the within-
industry FPG-adjustment factors were 1.67 and 1.65 respectively yielding an average of 22.5 workers
per FGP in 2002 and 23.6 workers per FGP in 2007.
    This more liberal set of assumptions results in 1,311,000 more manufacturing jobs in 2002 and
1,934,000 in 2007, 9.0 percent and 14.4 percent respectively. The same method of adjustment would
have resulted in increased reported manufacturing output by $758B (19.4 percent) in 2002 and by
$895B (16.8 percent) in 2007.


8    Conclusions

Large numbers of workers in the wholesale sector are employed at plants that engage in manufacturing-
related activities. Unlike traditional wholesalers, these establishments are not primarily engaged
in intermediation but instead undertake design and engineering of products themselves and exert
control over the production process. To date, many of these factoryless goods producers have been

                                                 18
                              Factoryless Goods Producers in the US


hidden in the wholesale sector. Our ﬁndings open a window into the extent and characteristics of
FGPs in the US wholesale sector. The potential for increasing fragmentation of production across
ﬁrms and borders means that FGPs are likely to play an even larger role in industrialized economies
in years to come.
   The ﬁndings in this paper raise issues for academic researchers and statistical agencies. There
is the relatively straightforward question of how to assign FGPs to broad sectors such as manufac-
turing or wholesale trade. Our results suggest that merely asking plants about their outsourcing
activities might miss an important segment of FGPs, those that design their goods and still do some
manufacturing but not enough to be reclassiﬁed as traditional manufacturers. Our ﬁndings suggest
that moving FGPs to manufacturing will substantially raise measured manufacturing employment.
These results also raise questions about the production process itself and how it is fragmented across
locations and ﬁrms. Measurement of output and inputs may be fundamentally diﬀerent at FGPs
than at integrated manufacturing ﬁrms or at more traditional wholesalers with obvious consequences
for measuring value-added and productivity. The presence of FGPs in an industry also complicates
the already-diﬃcult job of measuring productivity, both within FGPs over time and between FGPs
and other plants. We lack evidence on their production function, or on how their existence may
bias existing estimates of productivity.
   Our results suggest a fruitful area of research related to theoretical models of tasks, outsourc-
ing and oﬀshoring. The largely neglected wholesale trade sector contains a sizable number of
establishments that are at the forefront of this type of production fragmentation. The FGPs we
document in this paper suggest that, at least for some producers, it is optimal to fragment the ma-
jority of the physical transformation activities to another location. We also ﬁnd that these plants
are systematically diﬀerent from integrated manufacturers or traditional wholesale intermediaries.
Rodríguez-Clare (2010) develops a dynamic model of oﬀshoring in which the reallocation of factors
of production away from manufacturing and towards design activities can result in long-term pro-
ductivity gains for the oﬀshoring country. The factoryless goods producers we document in this
paper provide evidence of a production process that is consistent with this mechanism. However,
our results only provide a snapshot of FGPs at two points in time. We know nothing about how
they are created, for example whether they are new establishments or transformations of existing
ones, or how they perform over time in terms of output, employment growth, and survival.




                                                 19
                             Factoryless Goods Producers in the US


References

Akerman, A. (2010): “A theory on the role of wholesalers in International trade based on economies
  of scope,” Research papers in economics, Stockholm University, Department of Economics. 11

Akerman, A., and L. Py (2011): “Outsourcing and the Division of Labor between Firms: Evidence
  from Swedish Cities,” mimeo, Stockholm University. 1

Antràs, P., and E. Helpman (2004): “Global Sourcing,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(31),
  552–580. 1

Baldwin, R., and A. Venables (2010): “Relocating the Value Chain: Oﬀshoring and Agglom-
  eration in the Global Economy,” NBER Working Paper 16611. 1

Bayard, K., D. Byrne, and D. Smith (2013): “The Scope of U.S. Factoryless Manufacturing,”
  mimeo, Federal Reserve Board. 4, 1, 21, 31

Bernard, A. B., M. Grazzi, and C. Tomasi (2011): “Intermediaries in International Trade:
  Direct versus indirect modes of export,” NBER Working Papers 17711, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research. 11

Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2010): “Wholesalers and
  Retailers in US Trade,” American Economic Review, 100(2), 408–13. 1

Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, and P. K. Schott (2009): “Importers, Exporters, and Multina-
  tionals: A Portrait of Firms in the U.S. that Trade Goods,” in Producer dynamics: New Evidence
  from Micro Data, ed. by T. Dunne, J. Jensen, and M. Roberts. University of Chicago Press. 1

Bernard, A. B., S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2010): “Multiple-Product Firms and
  Product Switching,” American Economic Review, 100(1), 70–97. 6

Blum, B. S., S. Claro, and I. Horstmann (2010): “Facts and Figures on Intermediated Trade,”
  American Economic Review, 100(2), 419–23. 11

Crozet, M., and E. Milet (2013): “Shift from products to related services within ﬁrms,” Discus-
  sion paper, Conference on the Factory-Free Economy. 1, 3

Doherty, M. (2013): “Reﬂecting factoryless goods production in the U.S. statistical system,”
  mimeo. 7, 1

Dunne, T., M. J. Roberts, and L. Samuelson (1988): “Patterns of Firm Entry and Exit in
  U.S. Manufacturing Industries,” Rand Journal of Economics, 19, 495–515. 6



                                               20
                            Factoryless Goods Producers in the US


Fally, T. (2012): “Production Staging: Measurement and Facts,” Working paper, University of
  Colorado-Boulder. 1

Fontagné, L., and A. D’Isanto (2013): “Fragmentation: Survey-based evidence for France,”
  Discussion paper, Conference on the Factory-Free Economy. 19

Fort, T. C. (2013): “Breaking up is hard to do: Why ﬁrms fragment production across locations,”
  working paper, Tuck School of Business. 1, 3

Grossman, G. M., and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2008): “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Oﬀ-
  shoring,” The American Economic Review, 98(5), 1978–1997. 1

Hanson, G. H., R. J. Mataloni, and M. J. Slaughter (2005): “Vertical Production Networks
  in Multinational Firms,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(4). 1

Hummels, D., J. Ishii, and K.-M. Yi (2001): “The Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization
  in World Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 54(1), 75–96. 1

Johnson, R., and G. Noguera (2012): “Fragmentation and Trade in Value Added Over Four
  Decades,” Working Paper 18186, NBER. 1

Kamal, F., B. R. Moulton, and J. Ribarsky (2013): “Measuring "factoryless" manufacturing:
  Evidence from U.S. Surveys,” mimeo. 1

Kraemer, K. L., G. Linden, and J. Dedrick (2011): “Capturing Value in Global Networks:
  Apple’s iPad and iPhone,” working paper, Personal Computing Industry Center, UC Irvine. 3

OMB (2010): “Economic Classiﬁcation Policy Committee Recommendation Recommendation for
  Classiﬁcation of Outsourcing in North American Industry Classiﬁcation System (NAICS) Revi-
  sions for 2012,” Federal register, Oﬃce of Management and Budget. 1, 15, B

Pierce, J. R., and P. K. Schott (2012): “The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Manufacturing
  Employment,” Woking Paper 18655, NBER. 9

Rodríguez-Clare, A. (2010): “Oﬀshoring in a Ricardian World,” American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics, 2(2). 8

Yeaple, S. R. (2003): “The Role of Skill Endowments in the Structure of U.S. Outward Foreign
  Direct Investment,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(3), 726–734. 1




                                                 21
                               Factoryless Goods Producers in the US


Appendix

A     Data

The industry classiﬁcations for all establishments covered by the economic census and surveys are
based on the North American Industry Classiﬁcation System (NAICS).The method of assigning
industry classiﬁcations and the level of detail at which establishments were classiﬁed depends on
whether a report form is obtained for the establishment. Establishments that returned a report form
are classiﬁed on the basis of their self-designation; product line sales, products produced, or services
rendered; and responses to other industry-speciﬁc inquiries. Establishments that do not return a
report form and those that were not sent a report form were classiﬁed using the following methods:
(a) the most current industry classiﬁcation available from the applicable Census Bureau current
surveys or the previous economic census, (b) the classiﬁcation from administrative records of other
federal agencies, (c) a brief inquiry requesting information necessary to assign a kind-of-business
code and/or (d) research done by Census Bureau analysts.


                   Figure 4: Census Design and Manufacturing Questions - 2002




                                                  22
                  Factoryless Goods Producers in the US



Figure 5: Census Design, Primary Activity and Outsourcing Questions - 2007




 Figure 6: Industries not asked the Establishment Activity Questions - 2007




                                    23
                              Factoryless Goods Producers in the US


B      Deﬁnitions of FGPs

The Economic Classiﬁcation Policy Committee (OMB (2010)) gives the following deﬁnition of an
FGP:

          The factoryless goods producer (FGP) outsources all of the transformation steps
       that traditionally have been considered manufacturing, but undertakes all of the en-
       trepreneurial steps and arranges for all required capital, labor, and material inputs
       required to make a good. Characteristics of FGPs include:
          Owns rights to the intellectual property or design (whether independently developed
       or otherwise acquired) of the ﬁnal manufactured product;

         • May or may not own the input materials;

         • Does not own production facilities;

         • Does not perform transformation activities;

         • Owns the ﬁnal product produced by manufacturing service provider partners; and

         • Sells the ﬁnal product.

       The FGP can provide information on the purchase of the manufacturing service, that
       is, the cost of the contract, but would not necessarily have production worker payroll
       or capital expenditures on plant and equipment. However, it can provide data on the
       number of units that were produced and the market value of the ﬁnal product.




                                                 24
                    Factoryless Goods Producers in the US



Table 1: Design and Manufacturing Activities at Wholesale Plants, 2002
                                                Manufacturing
                                  At Plant     Outside        No         Total
                At Plant           18,539       9,792        6,450       34,781


     Design
               Outsourced           2,137      17,193        2,039       21,369
              Not Provided         13,130       6,983       131,231     151,344
                 Total             33,806      33,968       139,720     207,494
       Note: Each cell gives a count of the number of establishments. Estab-
       lishments had to answer both the Design and Manufacturing questions
       to be included. Design refers to design or engineering activity in product
       development. Manufacturing refers to materials fabrication, processing,
       assembly, or blending. At Plant - activity was performed by this plant;
       Outsourced/Outside - activity was performed for this plant by another
       company; No - activity not provided by this plant. All plants were
       covered by the Census of Wholesale Trade.




                                          25
                            Factoryless Goods Producers in the US



Table 2: Design, Contract Manufacturing, and Primary Activity at Wholesale Plants, 2007
                                            Did Design at Plant
                                                 Contract Manufacturing
                                       In US    Outside US         No        Total
                        Contracting     632        207             932        1,771
                       Manufacturing   2,507       495            3,827       6,829
                          Other         480        545            1,256       2,281
                          Resales      3,294      1,548           5,707      10,549
                        Total - Yes    6,913      2,795          11,722      21,430
             Primary




                                               Did Not Design at Plant
                                                 Contract Manufacturing
                                       In US    Outside US          No       Total
                        Contracting     596        139             1,657      2,392
                       Manufacturing    745         84             2,457      3,286
                          Other         821        301            17,141     18,263
                          Resales      7,085      1,945          86,345     95,375
                        Total - No     9,247      2,469          107,600    119,316

              Note: Each cell gives a count of the number of establishments. Only
              establishments that answered the Design, Contract Manufacturing, and
              Primary Activity questions are included. Design: Did this plant design,
              engineer or formulate the manufactured products that it sold, produced,
              or shipped (yes/no)? Primary refers to the establishment’s primary
              activity: Contracting - Providing contract manufacturing services to
              others; Manufacturing - Transforming raw materials or components into
              new products that this plant owns or controls; Other - Other (sector-
              speciﬁc); Resales - Reselling goods manufactured by others (with or
              without minor ﬁnal assembly). The Contract Manufacturing question is
              “Did this establishment purchase contract manufacturing services from
              other companies or other establishments of your company to process
              materials or components that this establishment owns or controls?” In
              US - primarily with plants within the 50 States and DC; Outside US -
              primarily with establishments outside the 50 States and DC; No - No.
              All plants were covered by the Census of Wholesale Trade.




                                                26
                  Factoryless Goods Producers in the US




Table 3: Plants, Sales and Employment by FGP Status and Census, 2002
                                     FGP Status
                              Plants Sales Employment
                   No        181,671 2,750      2,897
                   Yes        28,331    253      595
                  Total      210,002 3,003      3,492

                                    Census
                                  Plants Sales        Employment
              Wholesale          431,013 4,570           5,830
             Manufacturing       348,813 3,900          14,600
                Total            779,826 8,470          20,430
      Note: FGP Status: Yes indicates the establishment performed design
      or engineering activity in product development and did manufacturing
      at the plant or purchased contract manufacturing services; No indicates
      the plant did no design or engineering activity in product development
      and/or was not involved in manufacturing either at the plant or through
      the purchase of contract manufacturing services. In 2002, only plants
      in the Census of Wholesale Trade were asked the design question. Cen-
      sus: Manufacturing indicates the plant was covered by the Census of
      Manufactures; Wholesale indicates the plant was covered by the Cen-
      sus of Wholesale Trade. The numbers in the cells represent the sums
      within the category. Employment is in thousands of workers, Sales are
      in billions of 2002 dollars.




                                        27
                  Factoryless Goods Producers in the US




Table 4: Plants, Sales and Employment by FGP Status and Census, 2007
                               FGP Status
                                  Plants  Sales Employment
                           No    142,961  2,600      2,487
           Wholesale
                           Yes    16,752    279       431
                           No     43,676  1,360      3,024
         Manufacturing
                           Yes    61,427  2,520      6,031
                          Total 264,816   6,750     11,973

                                     Census
                                      Plants       Sales    Employment
              Wholesale              434,984       6,520       6,230
             Manufacturing           332,536       5,320      13,400
                Total                767,520      11,840      19,630

      Note: FGP Status: Yes indicates that the plant did design and the pri-
      mary activity was Manufacturing, Contracting, or Other, or that the
      plant did design and the primary activity was Resales and the plant
      purchased contract manufacturing services; No indicates that the plant
      did not design or that the plant did design and the primary activity was
      Resales and the plant did not purchase contract manufacturing services.
      Plants in both the Census of Manufactures and the Census of Wholesale
      Trade were asked the design, primary activity and contract manufactur-
      ing questions - for the exact coverage see the Data Appendix. Census:
      Manufacturing indicates the plant was covered by the Census of Man-
      ufactures; Wholesale indicates the plant was covered by the Census of
      Wholesale Trade. The numbers in the cells represent the sums within the
      category. Employment is in thousands of workers, Sales are in billions
      of 2007 dollars.




                                        28
                     Factoryless Goods Producers in the US




      Table 5: Plant Characteristics by FGP Status and Census, 2002

                                    FGP Status
                        Sales     Employment log VA/worker              Age     Wage
         No            15,136        16.0         4.81                  12.2    39.9
         Yes            8,918        21.0         4.47                  11.6    39.9
        Total          14,297        16.6         4.77                  12.1    39.9

                             Relative to NAICS 6-digit industry means
                         Sales Employment log VA/worker Age Wage
         No               1.29      1.15           0.155        1.11 1.06
         Yes              1.23      1.67           0.010        1.11 1.07
        Total             1.28      1.22           0.136        1.11 1.06

                                      Census
                        Sales     Employment        log VA/worker       Age     Wage
    Wholesale          10,600        13.5                4.55           10.8    37.1
   Manufacturing       11,173        41.9                4.16           13.0    29.7
      Total            10,856        26.2                4.37           11.8    33.6
Note: FGP Status: Yes indicates the establishment performed design or engineering ac-
tivity in product development (row 1 of Table1) and did manufacturing at the plant or
purchased contract manufacturing services (columns 2 or 3 of Table1); No indicates the
plant did no design or engineering activity in product development and/or was not involved
in manufacturing either at the plant or through the purchase of contract manufacturing
services. Plants in both the 2007 Census of Manufactures and the 2007 Census of Whole-
sale Trade were asked the design, primary activity and contract manufacturing questions -
for the exact coverage see the Data Appendix. Census: Manufacturing indicates the plant
was covered by the Census of Manufactures; Wholesale indicates the plant was covered by
the Census of Wholesale Trade. The numbers in the cells represent the sums within the
category. Sales and Wage are in ’000s of 2002 dollars.




                                           29
                      Factoryless Goods Producers in the US




      Table 6: Plant Characteristics by FGP Status and Census, 2007
                               FGP Status
                        Sales Employment log VA/worker Age Wage
                 No    18,189        17.4           4.79       14.0 44.6
 Wholesale
                 Yes   16,667        25.7           4.78       12.9 49.4
                 No    40,959        98.2           4.59       19.1 41.9
Manufacturing
                 Yes   31,111        69.2           4.52       17.9 39.0
                Total 25,506         45.2           4.70       15.8 43.3

                                  Relative to NAICS 6-digit industry means
                              Sales Employment log VA/worker Age Wage
                    No         1.11      1.06           0.126        1.12  1.05
  Wholesale
                    Yes        1.31      1.65           0.154        1.10  1.13
                    No         2.26      2.15           0.016        1.25  1.12
Manufacturing
                    Yes        1.78      1.72          -0.004        1.17  1.09
                   Total       1.50      1.46           0.081        1.16  1.08

                                        Census
                              Sales    Employment        log VA/worker        Age    Wage
     Wholesale               14,979       14.3                4.79            12.1    43.4
    Manufacturing            15,997       40.3                4.48            14.7    34.9
       Total                 15,420       25.6                4.66            13.2    39.6

 Note: FGP Status: Yes indicates that the plant did design and the primary activity was
 Manufacturing, Contracting, or Other, or that the plant did design and the primary activ-
 ity was Resales and the plant purchased contract manufacturing services; No indicates that
 the plant did not design or that the plant did design and the primary activity was Resales
 and the plant did not purchase contract manufacturing services. Census: Manufacturing
 indicates the plant was covered by the Census of Manufactures; Wholesale indicates the
 plant was covered by the Census of Wholesale Trade. Sales and Wage are in ’000s of 2007
 dollars.




                                            30
                    Factoryless Goods Producers in the US



            Table 7: Firm Counts by FGPF Status, 2002 and 2007
                                     Firm Type - 2002
                            Manufacturing Mixed Wholesale       Total
                   Missing      298,025     1,894     185,484 485,403
                      No           -        2,612     125,732 128,344
                      Yes          -          961      24,388  25,349
                     Total      298,025     5,467     335,604 639,096
  FGPF Status
                                        Firm Type - 2007
                                Manufacturing Mixed Wholesale                 Total
                    Missing       282,020      2,654     213,871            498,545
                      No             -         2,152     100,883            103,035
                      Yes            -           757      13,505             14,262
                     Total        282,020      5,563     328,259            615,842

Note: Firm Type: Manufacturing indicates ﬁrms with no wholesale plants; Mixed indicates
ﬁrms with both manufacturing and wholesale plants; Wholesale indicates ﬁrms with only
wholesale plants. FGPF Status: Missing indicates ﬁrms with no FGP wholesale plants
and at least one wholesale plant with missing FGP status; No indicates ﬁrms with no
FGP wholesale plants and no wholesale plants with missing FGP status; Yes indicates
ﬁrms with at least one FGP wholesale plant.




                                          31
                                      Table 8: Firm Characteristics by FGPF Status, Firm Type and Census, 2002
                                                                                 FGPF Status
                                           Sales     Employment       log VA/worker        Age      Imports     Intra-ﬁrm      M-Plants      W-Plants        Wage
     Missing                              5,703          22.8               3.83          11.9          514        0.092          0.67          0.43         30.6
                Manufacturing             4,691          27.1               4.07          12.8          291        0.096          1.07            -          30.3
                Mixed                   344,818          787                4.59          22.6       42,405        0.228          3.55          4.49         36.1
                Wholesale                 3,866          8.25               3.44          10.2          446        0.082            -           1.07         31.1

     No                                  30,320         46.4                4.64          12.8       2,873         0.135          0.11          1.40         37.8
                Mixed                   960,767         1,497               4.57          23.6     100,990         0.269          5.34          8.97         38.8
                Wholesale                10,991         16.2                4.65          12.6         835         0.125            -           1.24         37.8

     Yes                                 71,258          134                4.38          12.3       9,334         0.105          0.39         1.78          38.5
                Mixed                 1,651,635         2,983               4.59          22.9     203,373         0.271          10.3         16.9          37.5




32
                Wholesale                 8,984          21.9               4.37          11.9       1,688         0.089            -           1.19         38.5
     Total                               13,247          32.0               4.01          12.1       1,338         0.105          0.55         0.674         32.4

                                                                                                 Census
                                           Sales     Employment       log VA/worker        Age      Imports     Intra-ﬁrm      M-Plants      W-Plants        Wage
         Manufacturing                    4,691         27.1                4.07          12.8          291        0.096          1.07            -          30.3
                                                                                                                                                                    Factoryless Goods Producers in the US




            Mixed                       868,818         1,512               4.58          23.2       98,691        0.256          5.59         8.81          37.6
           Wholesale                      6,907         12.2                3.96          11.3          682        0.099            -           1.14         34.5
     Total                               13,247           32                4.01          12.1        1,338        0.105          0.55         0.674         32.4
             Note: Firm Type: Manufacturing indicates ﬁrms with no wholesale plants; Mixed indicates ﬁrms with both manufacturing and wholesale plants;
             Wholesale indicates ﬁrms with only wholesale plants. FGPF Status: Missing indicates ﬁrms with no FGP wholesale plants and at least one
             wholesale plant with missing FGP status; No indicates ﬁrms with no FGP wholesale plants and no wholesale plants with missing FGP status;
             Yes indicates ﬁrms with at least one FGP wholesale plant. Sales, Imports and Wage are in ’000s of 2002 dollars. Intra-ﬁrm is the share of ﬁrm
             imports from related parties abroad. M-Plants (W-Plants) is the number of manufacturing (wholesale) establishments in the ﬁrm.
                                      Table 9: Firm Characteristics by FGPF Status, Firm Type and Census, 2007
                                                                                 FGPF Status
                                          Sales     Employment        log VA/worker       Age      Imports      Intra-ﬁrm      M-Plants      W-Plants        Wage
     Missing                            11,146          24.0               4.00           13.5       1,436        0.075          0.63           0.50         35.7
                Manufacturing            6,279          26.9               3.80           14.7         516        0.070          1.07             -          33.3
                Mixed                  765,646          836                4.87           26.2     139,905        0.215          4.18           5.32         52.0
                Wholesale                8,202          10.1               4.24           11.7         931        0.075            -            1.10         39.0

     No                                 41,747         51.5                4.52           15.3       5,859        0.095          0.12           1.49         41.6
                Mixed                  960,767         1,497               4.57           23.6     100,990        0.269          5.34           8.97         38.8
                Wholesale               10,991         16.2                4.65           12.6         835        0.125            -            1.24         37.8

     Yes                              138,619           166                4.50           14.5      17,561        0.092          0.62           2.18         45.7
                Mixed                 2288467          2,692               4.92           27.3     286,731        0.247          11.7           19.8         53.0




33
                Wholesale              18,113          24.9                4.48           13.7       2,473        0.076            -            1.19         45.3
     Total                             19,218          31.9                4.10           13.8       2,549        0.080          0.54           0.71         36.9

                                                                                                 Census
                                          Sales     Employment        log VA/worker       Age      Imports      Intra-ﬁrm      M-Plants      W-Plants        Wage
         Manufacturing                  6,279           26.9               3.80           14.7         516        0.070          1.07             -          33.3
                                                                                                                                                                    Factoryless Goods Producers in the US




            Mixed                     1194406          1,370               4.85           26.8     181,869        0.224          5.71           9.18         51.5
           Wholesale                   10,419          13.5                4.33           12.8       1,257        0.080            -            1.17         40.0
     Total                             19,218          31.9                4.10           13.8       2,549        0.080          0.54           0.71         36.9
             Note: Firm Type: Manufacturing indicates ﬁrms with no wholesale plants; Mixed indicates ﬁrms with both manufacturing and wholesale plants;
             Wholesale indicates ﬁrms with only wholesale plants. FGPF Status: Missing indicates ﬁrms with no FGP wholesale plants and at least one
             wholesale plant with missing FGP status; No indicates ﬁrms with no FGP wholesale plants and no wholesale plants with missing FGP status;
             Yes indicates ﬁrms with at least one FGP wholesale plant. Sales, Imports and Wage are in ’000s of 2007 dollars. Intra-ﬁrm is the share of ﬁrm
             imports from related parties abroad. M-Plants (W-Plants) is the number of manufacturing (wholesale) establishments in the ﬁrm.
