                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    HOW DO CEOS SEE THEIR ROLE? MANAGEMENT PHILOSOPHY AND STYLES
                    IN FAMILY AND NON-FAMILY FIRMS

                                          William Mullins
                                          Antoinette Schoar

                                        Working Paper 19395
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19395


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2013




For outstanding research assistance we thank Francesca Guidi, Bridgette Hayes, David Krause, Sahar
Parsa, Suzanne Salas, and Shannon White. We thank the IFC and especially Simeon Djankov for
providing infrastructure support for this project, and Nicholas Bloom, Sebastian Di Tella, Camelia
Kuhnen, Randall Morck, Francisco Pérez-González, Andrea Prat, Morten Sorensen, David Thesmar,
Belen Villalonga, and Ezra Zuckerman for valuable comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by William Mullins and Antoinette Schoar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
How do CEOs see their Role? Management Philosophy and Styles in Family and Non-Family
Firms
William Mullins and Antoinette Schoar
NBER Working Paper No. 19395
August 2013
JEL No. G3,G32,J62,M5

                                             ABSTRACT

Using a survey of 800 CEOs in 22 emerging economies we show that CEOs' management styles
and philosophy vary with the control rights and involvement of the owning family and founder:
CEOs of firms with greater family involvement have more hierarchical management, and feel more
accountable to stakeholders such as employees and banks than they do to shareholders. They also
see their role as maintaining the status quo rather than bringing about change. In contrast, professional
CEOs of non-family firms display a more textbook approach of shareholder-value-maximization.
Finally, we find a continuum of leadership arrangements in how intensively family members are
involved in management.


William Mullins
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-678
Cambridge, MA 02142
wmullins@mit.edu

Antoinette Schoar
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-638
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu
1      Introduction

Most companies start out as family firms, with only a small fraction eventually becoming widely held
firms with professional management and no significant family involvement. The literature suggests
that family firms differ in important ways from non-family firms: Starting with the seminal paper
by La Porta et al. (1999) these studies document that family firms on average tend to be smaller
than nonfamily firms, have weaker performance, and worse governance structures.1 In addition,
family firms are reportedly slower to adopt managerial best practices than non-family firms (see for
example Bloom et al., 2012a). While this literature suggests that differences in the performance of
family firms are associated with the involvement of family members in the top management (and
control) of the company, we know very little about the types of CEOs that select into these different
leadership positions.

In this paper we show that CEOs’ business philosophies, their management styles and backgrounds
vary systematically with the control rights and the influence that the family has on the business.
We also document that the simple dichotomy between family and non-family firms which is often
used in the literature masks much more complex dynamics of how leadership structures differ across
firms.

Our data come from a unique survey of over 800 CEOs of the largest public and private firms in 22
emerging market countries, which we undertook jointly with the World Bank.2 These rich, CEO
level data provide insight into the heterogeneity in CEO beliefs, their objectives, and the way they
manage and organize the firm across countries and industries.

We first show that firms broadly fall into four distinct categories which are directly associated with
the characteristics of their CEOs: (1) firms run by the original founder, (2) family firms with a
family member as CEO, (3) family firms with a professional CEO, and (4) non-family firms run
by professional CEOs. This proposed CEO type classification explains a substantial fraction of the
variation in CEO survey responses, and is complementary (and of comparable importance to) the
fraction explained by country fixed effects.3

We then show that CEOs’ management styles and philosophy varies with the involvement of family
members in the firm: In firms where the founder or the family owners are more involved in the
management and control, the CEO tends to run a more hierarchical management structure, places
less weight on protecting minority shareholder rights, more weight on protecting stakeholders such
1
    See in particular Morck, Stangeland, and Yeung (2000); Claessens et al. (2002); Faccio and Lang (2002); Anderson
    and Reeb (2003); Villalonga and Amit (2006); Bertrand and Schoar (2006); and Bennedsen et al. (2007).
2
    The countries are: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ghana,
    Guatemala, Hong Kong (China), India, Kenya, Malaysia, Mexico, Nigeria, Peru, Singapore, South Africa, Turkey,
    Venezuela, and Zimbabwe.
3
    The average adjusted R2 of all the regressions in the paper rises from 8% when only SIC and country fixed effects
    are included, to 13.6% when the CEO type variables are added. Moreover, when only CEO type and SIC fixed
    effects are included the average adjusted R2 is 8.6%.


                                                          1
as workers, and feels most accountable to banks as outside investors. In addition, these CEOs see
their role as maintaining the status quo rather than bringing about change. In contrast, profes-
sional CEOs of widely held firms are at the other end of the spectrum and display a management
philosophy and style that resembles the textbook view of a shareholder-value-maximizing CEO. In
the following we discuss our findings in more detail.

Several overarching themes emerge from the data. First, founder CEOs are more likely to have
much higher cash flow and control rights within their firms than all other types of CEOs, especially
compared to professional CEOs. These CEOs are also more likely to be on their company Board,
to serve as the Chairman of the Board, and to name the directors. This centralization of control
seems to go hand in hand with a more hierarchical management style and organization. When
compared to that of the other CEO types, founder CEOs have the fewest number of managers
reporting directly to them: 45% have fewer than 5, in contrast to the 80% of professional CEOs
that have between 5 and 10 managers reporting to them. Furthermore, founder CEOs are more
likely than professional CEOs to see their main task as being to supervise and monitor decisions,
so they put much less weight on selecting and appraising managers.

Founder CEOs’ relative insulation from outside governance seems to have implications for their
business philosophy and view of governance. Compared to other CEOs, founders are less likely
to report that they feel accountable to shareholders or to consult large shareholders before major
investment decisions. By contrast, they are more likely than professional CEOs to consult banks
before major investment decisions and to feel accountable to banks. This suggests that founders
retain most of the de facto control within the firm, and that the main constraints they face are from
third parties such as their banks, rather than from shareholders. In addition, founder CEOs show
much less concern for shareholder value: they are 24% more likely than professional CEOs to answer
that they would prioritize stable employment over maintaining dividends for shareholders. While
this reveals that founder CEOs place less emphasis on protecting value for (minority) shareholders,
it also suggests that they have a broader set of stakeholders in mind – since founders tend to be large
shareholders in their firms, they themselves will be affected by foregoing dividends. Additionally,
founder CEOs are 26% more likely than professional CEOs to see their leadership role as maintaining
existing strategies and values, rather than bringing change to the firm; they may have crafted the
strategy themselves.

A different portrait emerges of professional CEOs of non-family firms. Although they are
significantly less likely to own equity and to be on the Board than related CEOs, they are just as
likely to be Chairman of the Board, indicating relatively high internal control rights. Interestingly,
professional CEOs view their role as agents of change for their organizations rather than to maintain
traditions and values, and they appear to have sufficient power to do so. Of all CEO types, they
are most likely to replace upper-level managers in their first two years as CEO.

Professional CEOs of non-family firms are around 15% less likely than professional CEOs of family

                                                  2
firms and related CEOs to view family relationships as important to successful business, and report
that the founders of their firms are less likely to have a role in naming directors, or advising on
major investment decisions. Unlike founder CEOs (and to a lesser extent the other two CEO types),
professional CEOs of non-family firms view large shareholders as more important stakeholders than
banks, perhaps reflecting the high preponderance of foreign multinational control of this type of
firm. The professional backgrounds of such professional CEOs also reflect a different career path:
they are more likely to have been CEOs of other firms and to have held senior positions in finance
than founders or related CEOs, and are around 14% less likely than all other CEO types to view
specific industry knowledge as one of the two most important factors for success, which is suggestive
of a generalist background.

Related CEOs and professional CEOs of family firms fall between these first two CEO types on
all dimensions. Related CEOs tend to be closer to founder CEOs in their responses, as they
maintain a high fraction of cash flow and control rights in the firm they run: they are almost as
likely to own equity in the firm as founders (60% more likely for founders, and 50% for related
CEOs in comparison to both types of professional CEO) and also to own over 5% of the firm (75%
more likely for founders, and 60% for related CEOs). They are also the CEO type most likely to
be on the Board of their firm, although they are less likely to be the Chairman of the Board than
founder CEOs.

In contrast to founders, and even to professional CEOs of non-family firms, related CEOs appear
to be less empowered, since they are often supervised by a powerful founder. Related CEOs are
more likely than other CEOs to report that the founder is still involved before major investment
decisions, that the founder, rather than the Board, terminated the last CEO, and also that they
themselves were appointed by the founder. The active presence of the founder might explain
why related CEOs seem to resemble founder CEOs in their approach to governance and business
philosophy. Like founder CEOs, related CEOs are more likely to feel accountable to banks and are
more likely to involve banks in major investment decisions than professional CEOs of non-family
firms. Also like founder CEOs, related CEOs are more likely to favor maintaining the firm’s values
over bringing change, and are approximately 11% more likely to say they would choose to prioritize
maintaining employment over paying dividends. The point estimates on all these dimensions are
smaller than those for founder CEOs, but they are consistently and significantly different from the
answers of professional CEOs, suggesting a systematic difference in business philosophy. Related
CEOs are also more likely than other CEOs to say that family relationships facilitate access to
business information, perhaps reflecting their personal experience.

Despite this similarity to founder CEOs in governance and business philosophy, the management
style of related CEOs seems to be closer to that of professional CEOs. Related CEOs are much
more likely than founder CEOs to view the selection of senior managers as important, and are less
likely to answer that supervision of senior managers is a high priority. When looking at the number
of managers reporting directly to the CEO, related CEOs are much more likely than founders to

                                                 3
have more than 5 managers report to them, but less likely than professional CEOs (although the
last difference is not statistically significant).

Lastly we look at professional CEOs of family firms. Based on their business philosophy, man-
agement strategies, and attitudes toward governance, they seem very similar to professional CEOs
of non-family firms. They are more likely than founder CEOs to feel accountable to shareholders
and to favor shareholder value maximization over maintaining employment. They are also more
likely than founders to see their most important task as selecting top talent rather than monitoring
managers. Moreover, like professional CEOs of non-family firms, and unlike both founder CEOs
and related CEOs, they see their role as bringing about change in the business rather than main-
taining established strategies. Finally, the number of managers reporting directly to them is the
same as for professional CEOs of non-family firms (i.e., relatively high), reflecting a less hierarchical
organization than that of firms run by founders or related CEOs.

However, the ambitions of professional CEOs to effect change may be harder to translate into action
within a family firm: our results suggest that professional CEOs of family firms have fewer explicit
or implicit control rights than other CEOs. Like professional CEOs of non-family firms, they have
lower ownership of their firm on average, and are less likely to sit on the Board; they are the CEO
type least likely to be the Board Chairman or to name directors. Furthermore, professional CEOs
within family firms also appear to have fewer effective control rights: in comparison to professional
CEOs of non-family firms they have less scope to replace the top management team when they
come into the job. This suggests a discrepancy between the reported ambitions of professional
CEOs and how much they are empowered to actually implement them.

Finally, we explore the family backgrounds of the CEOs in our sample. On average the CEOs in
our sample grew up in predominantly middle or higher income families, with only 14% describing
their parental home as low income. The majority have fathers who were businessmen themselves
(59%) or even had paternal grandfathers in business (39%). However, there is a sharp difference
between the background of founders and professional CEOs of non-family firms on the one hand,
and the more privileged background of related CEOs and professional CEOs of family firms on the
other. In comparison to the other CEO types, founder and professional CEOs of non-family firms
are (i) more likely to come from low income families, and are (ii) less likely to have had fathers
who were business managers. In contrast, family firms tend to hire CEOs that come from a more
privileged background, or to promote their own descendants into these positions (who by definition
come from higher income classes). These results may suggest that family firms tend to hire people
through their social networks, but that positions as founders and as CEOs of non-family firms
provide opportunities for upward mobility in these economies.

This paper contributes to both the literature on family firms, and the literature on the impact of
CEOs on firm performance. By examining the heterogeneity in governance arrangements across
firms of different types, and how it maps onto CEOs’ business philosophies and management styles,

                                                     4
this paper aims to shed some light on the determinants of the reported differences in firm perfor-
mance associated with the CEO and with family firm status. The large sample size and wide regional
coverage relative to existing CEO surveys make it possible to remove country and industry-specific
variation and to explore the relationship between firm governance and CEO business philosophies
and management styles. Interestingly, we show that the CEO/firm level variation accounts for the
most robust patterns in the data, rather than traditional country-level variables such as GDP per
capita, legal origin, corruption, and property rights, suggesting that the CEO/firm level variables
are of first order importance.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The related literature is reviewed in Section 2, while
Section 3 describes the data and provides summary statistics. Section 4 describes the regressions
and discusses the results. Section 5 examines CEO family backgrounds in further detail, and Section
6 concludes.



2      Related Literature

A large literature has focused on differences between family and non-family firms, starting with the
influential paper by La Porta et al. (1999). These studies document that family firms, on average,
tend to be smaller than non-family firms, have lower performance, weaker governance structures,
and are often concentrated in older, more regulated industries (e.g. Morck, Stangeland, and Yeung,
2000, Claessens et al., 2000, 2002; Faccio and Lang, 2002; Anderson and Reeb, 2003; Bertrand and
Schoar, 2006). Attention has also focused on the importance to firm outcomes of the CEO position
(e.g. Bennedsen et al., 2010, 2012) and on the individual characteristics and styles of CEOs (e.g.
Bertrand and Schoar, 2003; Malmendier and Tate, 2008; Schoar and Zuo, 2011).

At the intersection of these literatures, a number of papers have studied the performance impli-
cations of leadership transitions within family firms: the reported lower average rates of return
and stock market valuation of family firms seem to be associated with the passing of control from
the founder to the heirs (e.g. Pérez-González, 2006; Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007; Bertrand et
al., 2008).4 Furthermore, some studies have found that when management control within family
firms is transferred to professional CEOs rather than a descendant of the founder, the decrease in
performance is less pronounced (see the important contributions of Villalonga and Amit, 2006 and
Bennedsen et al., 2007).

While survey-based data such as that used in this paper have some well-known limitations, they
also provide a window into the beliefs, attitudes and governance environments of CEOs that are
4
    A few studies have argued that family firms, in fact, perform better than non-family firms: Khanna and Palepu
    (2000), Anderson and Reeb (2003), Sraer and Thesmar (2007), and Mehrotra et al. (2011). Moreover, firms led by
    founder CEOs appear to also perform better (Villalonga and Amit, 2006; Fahlenbrach, 2009), although Bloom et
    al. (2012a) report lower management practice scores.


                                                         5
otherwise entirely inaccessible to researchers (see Graham and Harvey, 2001, Brav et al., 2005, and
Graham, Harvey, and Puri, 2011, for short discussions). This is especially true for CEOs of leading
firms in developing countries, which are often private. As such, our results are complementary
to some of the recent work on differences in management practices across firms and countries
(particularly Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007 and Bloom et al., 2012a), and also with recent work by
Bandiera et al. (2012) on the time use of CEOs. The latter paper identifies two distinct styles of
time use, and reports that the least productive of the two styles is associated with family CEOs
in their sample of Indian manufacturing firms. They also find systematic differences between the
time use of family CEOs, and that of professional managers, and that family CEOs work shorter
hours and are more likely to shirk when temptation arises. In unreported regressions we examine
CEO time use reported in the survey and find that in our sample it is founder CEOs that are more
likely to work the most (over 60 hours per week), and some weak evidence that related CEOs are
more likely to work fewer hours.

The results in this paper are directly relevant to research on the unique role of founder CEOs
(Adams et al., 2005; Anderson et al., 2009), to the links between family firms and the political
system (Morck and Yeung, 2004), and to the increasingly important issue of family management
transitions as large cohorts of family firms mature, as highlighted in Tsoutsoura (2013). Relatedly,
the patterns in our data point to many of the problems that firms face when evolving from a
founder-run firm into a more established family firm, and finally into a non-family firm in some
cases.

Potential problems may have been imprinted into the structure and composition of the organization
from the beginning (Baron, Hannan, and Burton, 1999), since founder-led firms appear to concen-
trate implicit and explicit power in the hands of the founder CEO. This organizational structure
might perform well when the firm is run by an exceptional leader – which founder CEOs often are.
However, such a structure is likely to be detrimental when a family successor is less exceptional
(which will occur if there is reversion to the mean in ability over generations), or when a leadership
transition to a change-oriented professional CEO is triggered by a change in the skills required of the
CEO (as in Eisfeldt and Kuhnen, 2013). Kaplan et al. (2012) report that variation in the abilities
of (professional) CEOs for buyout and VC-backed firms are primarily explained by two factors: one
approximating general ability, and another that contrasts communication and interpersonal with
execution skills. They report that the latter skills are valuable only in some settings, providing
support for the idea that CEO abilities have to match the changing needs of their firms. This fits
well with our evidence that there is substantial heterogeneity in CEO types, as measured by their
governance environment, styles and business philosophies, and that this is closely associated with
each firm’s stage in its lifecycle: from founder-run to, potentially, a widely held firm with wholly
professional management.




                                                  6
3      Data Description

Our survey covers leading CEOs in 24 emerging markets and was conducted in the first half of 2007
in association with the World Bank. Questionnaires were sent to the CEOs or Managing Directors
of the largest 100 companies in each country. These firms were selected using D&B International,
Amadeus, and OneSource databases, stock market information, World Bank country directories,
and local lists of incorporation.

The final survey contained eight sections: company information, personal information, educational
background, prior work experience, the CEO’s business approach, family background, country
culture, and company structure. The survey is in the appendix. We ran a pilot for Australia and
South Africa in 2006, which served to refine the survey instrument and implementation. A team
of MBA students conducted phone interviews with CEOs over a four-month period. All the firms
in our sample were contacted by one of the callers to set up a time for a phone interview with the
CEO. In almost all cases we reached the Assistant to the CEO. If the CEO was not available for a
phone conversation, we asked the Assistant to give the CEO a copy of our survey to fill out, or to
forward an online link to the survey. Those CEOs that did not answer were then sent a reminder
email or fax ten days after the initial contact, and then subsequently called by a survey team of
MBA students up to a maximum of three times. Survey responses relating to firms’ industries (at
the two-digit SIC code level) and ownership of the firm by multinationals and the Government were
verified and augmented with information obtained from firms’ websites and annual reports.

We keep observations from countries where we have at least 15 completed surveys, so our final
sample is composed of 823 CEOs from 22 countries: eleven are in Latin America, six are in Africa,
and the remainder in Asia (see the appendix for observations by country).5 This is a large sample
relative to the managerial surveys in the finance literature.6 The average response rate is 37.4%
of the top 100 CEOs in 22 countries and has no correlation with GDP (the Spearman’s rank
correlation is -0.15 with a p-value of 0.51). Our response rate compares favorably to those in
other senior management survey studies that range from 9% (e.g., Graham and Harvey, 2001) to
approximately 16% (e.g., Brav et al., 2005), and is large enough to mitigate concern about potential
response biases.


3.1      Classifying CEOs into types

We group CEOs into four mutually exclusive categories based on the responses to our survey and
information about the firm:

5
    Australia and Romania were dropped because we obtained less than 10 observations for them.
6
    Recent papers using surveys in the finance literature include Graham and Harvey (2001), Brav, Graham, Harvey,
    and Michaely (2005), and Graham, Harvey, and Puri (2011).


                                                        7
(i)            Founder CEOs (12.6% of the sample)

(ii)           Related CEOs (18%)

(iii)          Professional CEOs of family firms (21%)

(iv)           Professional CEOs of non-family firms (48.4%)


Founder CEOs (founders henceforth) are identified from a direct question as to whether the CEO
is the founder of the firm. We classify a CEO as a related CEO if he or she either answers in
the survey that they are a relative either of the founder or of shareholders who own at least twenty
percent of the firm. To classify a CEO as a professional CEO we require him or her to be neither
the founder, nor related to the founder, and that his or her family does not own more than 20%
of the firm’s equity. We also separate firms into either family or non-family firms; founder-led and
related CEO-led firms are classified as family firms. Professional CEOs are classified as leading
family firms if the founder or his family is one of the firm’s three largest shareholders. If this is
not the case, we classify them as professional CEOs of non-family firms. This implies that we
may be mistakenly classifying family firms as non-family if either the controlling family is unrelated
to the founder, or if the CEO himself – but not his or her family – is the majority owner of the
firm but is not the founder. This would reduce our ability to detect differences between family and
non-family firms, leading to attenuation bias in our results because our baseline category for the
analysis that follows is professional CEOs of non-family firms (approximately half of the sample).

Two other papers use similar classification schemes for CEO types: Anderson and Reeb (2003) and
Sraer and Thesmar (2007).7 In comparison to both papers, our sample has more professional CEOs
(of both family and non-family firms) and fewer founder-run firms. The firms in our sample are
spread over a wide array of two-digit SIC code industries, but the top ten industries account for
60% of firms in our sample, while the top twenty account for 82%. The top five two-digit industries
are: (1) food and kindred products; (2) chemicals and allied products; (3) depository institutions
(i.e., banks); (4) general building contractors; and (5) electric, gas, and sanitary services.



3.2      Summary Statistics

Table 1 suggests that company characteristics covary directly with the type of CEO leading the
firm. In unreported regressions we find that founder and related CEO firms are significantly smaller
than non-family firms in terms of (survey-reported) sales, in line with the literature, which reports
7
    Bloom et al. (2012a) also makes use of a similar classification, but focuses on the organization’s management
    practices rather than those of the CEO with regard to his/her top management team. Burkart et al. (2003) model
    managerial succession as the founder simultaneously choosing both how much equity to sell and, if she retains
    control, whether to appoint a related or a professional CEO. The choices faced by the founder in their model match
    the categories used in this paper.



                                                           8
that family firms are smaller on average8 and may be willing to forgo growth to maintain control.
The non-family firms in the sample are larger: both in terms of mean and median sales, we find
that non-family firms are at least double the size of founder-run firms and are at least 50% larger
than other family firms on average. Drawing data from Bloomberg for the subsample of firms that
are publicly listed we find a similar pattern for mean revenue, suggesting that the self-reported
sales data is broadly accurate. There is no difference in means for market capitalization in the
subsample of listed firms. In addition, founder-run firms are substantially younger on average than
all other types of firms, while non-family firms are more likely to be controlled by multinationals
(38%) than family firms (5% to 14%). The equity ownership of the largest three equity holders is
considered in detail in Table 4, and we are slightly less likely to see family firms with a professional
CEO in English legal origin countries.

In short, between younger, smaller, founder-run firms at one extreme, and larger, often multi-
national controlled non-family firms at the other, we have family firms run by either related or
professional CEOs, harder to distinguish along the dimensions in the table.

TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE

Table 2 displays individual characteristics by CEO type. In unreported regressions we find that
founder CEOs are significantly different from the other types of CEOs on average: they are older,
are (naturally) more likely to have been CEO from the start of their time at the firm, have much
longer average and median tenures, and are much more likely to own more than 5% of the firm
than all the other CEO types. Moreover, founders are less likely to have undergraduate degrees.

Perhaps reflecting an apprenticeship period at the family business, related CEOs are much less
likely than all other CEO types to have begun their time at the firm as CEOs, but have both longer
tenures and are more likely to own at least 5% of the firm’s equity than the two professional CEO
types. They are also more likely than all other CEO types to have a degree from a foreign country,
potentially because they were groomed for a role at the family firm from an early age, and because
of the economic advantages of being related to a successful founder CEO.

Clear and statistically significant differences emerge between founder and related CEOs on one
hand, and the two professional CEO types on the other. Founders and related CEOs are significantly
less likely to have held a prior position as a CEO or in a financial field9 , and have much longer
tenures (the median is ten years or more in comparison to five or fewer), which is potentially related
to their higher likelihood of owning over 5% of their firms.
8
    For example, Anderson and Reeb (2003), in a sample of US S&P 500 members, find that family firms are smaller
    than non-family firms. Villalonga and Amit (2006) find that family firms are smaller, but not significantly so, and
    report that they are younger. Sraer and Thesmar (2007) also report that family firms are smaller and slightly
    younger.
9
    Survey respondents were asked to “list the three positions (business and non-business related, academia, government,
    military etc.) you held the longest prior to becoming” CEOs of their firms. These were then classified into CEO
    positions (CEOs, Executive Chairman, etc.), Board positions (Director, Chairman, etc.), and Financial positions
    (Finance manager, Comptroller, Treasurer, VP(Finance), etc.) if it was possible to do so.


                                                            9
By contrast, Professional CEOs (at both family and non-family firms) are statistically indistin-
guishable from each other on all dimensions in the table. Thus, the personal characteristics and
professional experience of the two types of professional CEOs are very similar.

TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE

The characteristics of the different types of CEOs in our sample match those reported in the
literature. As noted earlier, we find that most types of family firms in our sample have lower sales
than non-family firms, a standard result, and that founder-run firms are younger. We find that
related CEOs themselves are also younger than other CEO types on average, and by approximately
the same amount (eight years) as reported by Pérez-González (2006) at the time of CEO transition.
Related CEOs in the sample tend to have significantly longer tenures than professional managers,
as also noted by Sraer and Thesmar (2007) who report differences of similar magnitudes, and we
find CEO personal shareholdings are positively correlated with tenure.



4     CEO Management Style, Business Philosophy, and Governance
      Structures

4.1   Description of regressions

A linear probability model (LPM) is used to describe the correlations of the survey responses with
explanatory variables. We code the responses as indicator variables which take a value of 1 if the
respondent is in agreement with the question or chooses a specific answer from a list of potential
answers, and 0 otherwise. We generate a separate indicator variable for each response, e.g., a
variable equal to one for all those who choose the answer “Shareholders”, and zero otherwise. Each
indicator variable is then used as a dependent variable in a LPM regression structured as follows:



                    Survey response   ijcs   = α + Γ × CEOtypej + βXcs + εijcs


Where i indexes individual CEO-firm pairs, j indexes the CEO types, c indexes the country of the
firm’s headquarters, and s indexes the firm’s 2 digit SIC code. The CEO type variables are binary
indicators for three CEO types: founders, related CEOs and professional CEOs of family firms.
The omitted CEO category is professional CEOs of non-family firms (48.4% of the sample). Taking
the question: “Do you feel accountable to shareholders?” as an example, the estimated coefficient
on the CEO type indicator (γ̂) should be interpreted as the additional likelihood of the specific
CEO type answering “I feel accountable to shareholders,” in comparison to the likelihood of such
an answer from the omitted CEO type: professional CEOs of non-family firms.


                                                  10
The X vector contains four controls for the overall development of the country of each firm. These
are the natural logarithm of GDP per capita from the IMF World Economic Outlook, the average
score on the Transparency International Corruption Index over 2003-2007 (the scale runs from 0
(most corrupt) to 10 (least corrupt)), the Property Rights index from the Heritage Foundation’s
2004 Index of Economic Freedom (a higher score means more secure property rights), and an
indicator variable denoting either English (1) or French (0) legal origin. Finally, the X vector also
contains a fixed effect for each two-digit SIC industry.

An additional regression was run for each survey response including the natural logarithm of firm
sales in 2006 as an independent variable, winsorized at 5% and 95% to protect against data coding
errors.10 For observations missing sales (18%) we replace sales with a zero and add a missing sales
indicator variable. It is important to control for firm size since the descriptive statistics show that
family firms tend to be smaller than non-family firms, although including observations with missing
sales values instead of dropping them from the sample does not materially affect our results.

Standard errors are clustered at the country level, resulting in twenty two clusters, a number low
enough to warrant concern that our standard errors are biased downwards (see Cameron, Gelbach,
and Miller (2008) and the references therein). To allay this concern we re-ran all regressions
clustering by country*SIC code, an economically meaningful unit which results in around 350
clusters, and we also separately re-ran all regressions using non-parametric block bootstrap by
country. Both sets of estimates provide the same or smaller standard errors, so to be conservative
we retain the method that produces the largest standard errors: clustering by country.

Finally, to assess the robustness of our results to the regression specification we estimated the
regressions using country fixed effects instead of country controls (in addition to SIC code fixed
effects), and also separately estimated them using a probit specification instead of the LPM. In
both cases we obtained very similar results, confirming that the results are not sensitive to the
inclusion of country fixed effects, or to the linearity assumption of the LPM.



4.2       Confirming firm classifications: the Appointment Process of the CEO

To confirm that our CEO type classification is picking up real differences between the categories, we
first look at the appointment process of the CEO and how the current CEO sees the influence of the
founder and family relationships. To that end we run regressions on a set of survey questions that
were not used to generate the categories, but that should predictably vary between the different
CEO categories as well as on CEO type indicator variables and our standard set of control variables.
These are reported in Table 3.
10
     Firm sales are the best measure of firm size available to us, because stock markets are underdeveloped in many
     of the countries under consideration and many of the sample firms are not publicly listed, ruling out the use of
     market values. Earnings measures are distorted by international differences in accounting.



                                                          11
The first two columns focus on the question: “Who appointed you as the CEO of            Company-
Name? ” Professional CEOs of family firms are approximately 7% more likely to answer, “the
Founder or his/her relatives” than the omitted category, professional CEOs at non-family firms.
This is to be expected, since the founder probably retired long ago at most non-family firms. Ad-
ditionally, in columns 3 and 4 we confirm the status of family firms for those firms run by founders
and related CEOs: they are (46 and 77% respectively) more likely to answer affirmatively to the
question “Were any of your relatives ever employed in an upper-level management position at your
firm? ” than professional CEOs of either type.

CEOs were asked, “Who appoints the board members in your company? ” In columns 5 and 6 we
see that the founder is 17 to 18% more likely to appoint directors at family firms with professional
CEOs compared to non-family firms. These results lend support to our differentiating professional
CEOs by the type of firm they run: family versus non-family firms. Firms run by related CEOs are
also 16 to 17% more likely to report that directors are appointed by the founder than professional
CEOs of non-family firms, which is consistent with our classification of firms as “family firms” when
they are run by either related CEOs or what we have called professional CEOs of family firms.

Two regressions in Table 8 are also relevant here. The question is: “In many countries around the
world, mutual support of family members in business transactions is essential for efficient business
operations. In your view, how important are family relationships for conducting successful business
in your country? ” Columns 5 and 6 of Table 8 show that both professional CEOs of family firms
and related CEOs are 14 to 17% more likely to answer that family background and contacts are
important compared to the excluded category, professional CEOs of non-family firms, and also to
founder CEOs.

Another dimension that lends support to our classification is whether the founder of the firm is
alive, (irrespective of whether he/she is CEO). While we did not ask this explicitly, we can infer
it from certain questions, albeit with error. Founders are alive at 51% of related CEO firms, at
44% of family firms with professional CEOs, and at only 23% of non-family firms with professional
CEOs. In sum, the results in this section suggest that the four categories of CEOs that we use
throughout correspond to real differences in the internal organization of the firms.

TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE



4.3   Ownership and Governance

We now turn to how governance arrangements vary across firm types. Founder and related CEOs
have significantly higher equity ownership, which also translates into substantially more power at
the Board level. At the other extreme, professional CEOs that lead family firms seem to have less
implicit and explicit control, which might affect their ability to independently manage their firms.


                                                 12
In the first two columns of Table 4, we consider responses to the question: “As the CEO of
CompanyName do you hold equity in the firm (stock options)? ” We generate an indicator variable
equal to one if CEOs answer that they own equity in the firm by answering either “Yes, I hold
more than 5% of the company’s stock,” or “Yes, I hold less than 5% of the company’s stock ”.
Founders and related CEOs have much higher propensities than both types of professional CEOs
to own equity (60% and 52% respectively from columns 1 and 2). In the following two columns we
focus exclusively on CEO responses of “Yes, I hold more than 5% of the company’s stock ”. Again,
founders and related CEOs have much higher propensities to own over 5% of their firms (77% and
62% respectively from columns 3 and 4), in line with Table 2.

We then regress whether CEOs answer “Yes, I receive stock and stock options as part of my com-
pensation” on our standard explanatory variables. Columns 5 and 6 suggest that founder and
related CEOs are less likely to receive stock or options as part of their compensation, perhaps be-
cause their holdings are already large on average. However, this effect disappears when we control
for multinational ownership in an unreported regression, suggesting that it is driven by multina-
tional firms – which are overwhelmingly non-family firms – choosing equity-linked compensation
(for their disproportionately professional CEOs) rather than by differences between CEO types
along this dimension.

The number of different types of blockholders present in each firm is obtained from the question:
“Please indicate if any of the three largest equity holders is/are: The founder or relatives of the
founder/ Foreign investors/ Foreign corporations/ Domestic corporations/ The government.” Note
that the question does not provide the number of blockholders; if more than one exists in the
same category they are counted as a single blockholder. The dependent variable is then coded
as the number of separate categories identified by each respondent, which we term the number
of “blockholder types.” We also obtain the total equity holding (as a percentage) of the largest
three shareholders from the following question: “How concentrated is the ownership of your com-
pany? That is, what fraction of equity in your company is held by the three largest shareholders? ”
Thus, these two dependent variables (unlike all the others) are not indicator variables, making the
regressions OLS rather than LPM.

Interestingly, for family firms run by both related and professional CEOs, we observe a higher
number of blockholder types (approximately 0.3 and 0.4 more blockholder types respectively in
columns 7 and 8), while the total equity holdings of the top three shareholders are 11% lower for
firms run by related CEO (columns 9 and 10). This suggests some equity dispersion may have
occurred when moving from founder-run to family firm structures in this sample, perhaps due to
the impact of inheritance taxes or the natural dispersion of ownership from a single founder to
more numerous descendants.

TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE



                                                13
Table 5 reports regressions of answers to additional questions on firm governance. The first two
columns are regressions of the response to the question “Do you sit on your company’s Board of
directors? ” while the following two columns are regressions of the response to the question “Are
you the Chairman of the Board? ” Founder and related CEO equity ownership is reflected in their
high propensities to be on the Board of directors (9% more likely for founders, 13% for related
CEOs – see columns 1 and 2), and to be Chairman of the Board (24% more likely for founders – see
columns 3 and 4). The survey also includes the question: “Who appoints the Board members in your
company? Please choose up to three alternatives.” We generate an indicator variable equal to one
if the respondent answers, “I select most of the Board members” and this is the dependent variable
for the following two regressions in the table. The high average equity ownership of founders and
related CEOs is also reflected in their propensity to answer that they select most of the Board
members, which is 16% more likely for founders and 8% more likely for related CEOs (see columns
5 and 6) than for both types of professional CEOs. Thus, the governance structure of founder and
related CEO firms appears to differ markedly from those of firms with professional CEOs.

These regressions also suggest that professional CEOs of family firms are relatively disempowered
in comparison to the other CEO types. They are the least likely CEO type to be Chairman of
the Board (21% less likely – see columns 3 and 4), and to name directors (6% less likely – see
columns 5 and 6). By contrast, non-family firm professional CEOs are as likely as related CEOs to
be Chairman of the Board, despite having lower equity holdings on average, as reported in Table
4.

The results also suggest that related CEOs are often monitored by a powerful founder figure.
Consider the results from Table 3: related CEOs are the most likely to have been appointed by
the founder (over 30% more likely than all other CEO types), and at such firms, founders are over
16% more likely to appoint directors than at non-family firms run by professional CEOs. Moreover,
founders are just as likely to appoint directors if a relative or a professional is CEO as they are when
they themselves are CEO. Returning to Table 5, the previous CEO was more likely to have been
terminated by the founder: in columns 7 and 8 we report the results of regressions of an indicator
variable equal to one if respondents answer, “Company founder terminated his appointment” to
the question “Why did the previous CEO leave       CompanyName? ” Related CEOs are 10% more
likely to answer this than the omitted category, professional CEOs of family firms.

In addition to this increased ability to hire and fire the CEO and name directors, company founders
are also more influential in major business decisions at family firms with related CEOs than at firms
with other CEO types. We ask CEOs: “Which of the company’s stakeholders are you most likely
to involve before deciding to undertake a large-scale investment project, such as the acquisition of
a plant or a company? Please select up to two” and make an indicator variable for when CEOs
answer “Founder”. Related CEOs are 13 to 14% more likely to consult the founder before major
investment decisions than other CEO types (columns 9 and 10). All the other answers (except for
major shareholders and banks, which are discussed later) show no significant differences between

                                                  14
CEO types.    11   Thus, related CEOs appear more likely to be directly supervised by the company
founder, and consequently appear to be less empowered than professional CEOs at non-family firms
and, naturally, founder CEOs.

TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE



4.4    CEO Management Style

Table 6 analyzes difference in management approaches between the four types of CEOs concerning
their reporting structure, most important tasks, and responsibilities. In comparison to other CEO
types, founders appear to disproportionately favor direct management over delegation when asked
the question: “As the CEO of        CompanyName, what do you perceive as your most important
operational tasks? ” Founders are 8 to 10% more likely to answer that their most important oper-
ational task is “Supervising operational, strategic, and financial planning decisions” (in columns 1
and 2) and 14 to 16% less likely to answer “Selecting and appraising other top managers in the
company” (in columns 3 and 4). Moreover, they choose to design their organizations to have fewer
subordinates directly reporting to them than any other CEO types – the most hierarchical struc-
ture. They are 17 to 20% less likely than other CEO types to have five or more managers reporting
directly to them (see columns 5 and 6) in response to the question “How many managers in your
company report directly to you? ”

Our results are in line with some recent findings for the US. Like Rajan and Wulf (2006) who
exclusively examine public firms, we find that professional CEOs in both widely held firms and
in family firms manage flatter organizations and have more managers reporting directly to them.
By contrast, founder CEOs have the most hierarchical reporting structures. Guadalupe and Wulf
(2010) and Bloom et al. (2010, 2012b) provide evidence that increased competition leads firms to
decentralize decisions, and to improve management practices. Moving the founder out of the CEO
position may be the response of family firms to such challenges.12 As in Bloom et al. (2012a) we
find that founder run firms seem to have the weakest organizational management practices of all
firm types in the sample, perhaps reflecting a reliance on the idiosyncratic management structures
put in place by the founder.

In contrast to founders’ autonomy in structuring their management teams, Professional CEOs of
family firms appear to have more limited freedom to fire top executives in their initial years as CEO.
In response to the question “How many of the upper-level managers did you replace in the first two
years after you took office as the CEO of       CompanyName? ” we generate an indicator variable
11
   The other available answers were the parent company CEO, the Government, members of the board, or other top
   executives in the company
12
   Particularly because Bloom, Eifert, Mahajan, McKenzie, and Roberts’ (2011) experiment providing management
   consultancy to Indian firms suggests firms are more likely to adopt new management practices in bad times.



                                                     15
equal to zero if the answer was “None” and one for the other answers (All/More than half/Less
than half). Professional CEOs of family firms are 9% less likely to report dismissing any senior
managers in the first two years of their tenure (see columns 7 and 8). This suggests constraints on
professional CEOs’ ability to bring their professional expertise to bear on firms originally structured
by the founding CEO, potentially due to organizational imprinting (Baron, Hannan, and Burton,
1999).

Founder CEOs are less likely to report having fired any top executives in their first two years
(a largely mechanical result as they are likely to have hired all the executives themselves), but
interestingly, related CEOs are also less likely to report firing top managers, albeit only at the 10%
level of statistical significance. This again suggests limits on their ability to effect changes to the
structure they inherit from the founder.

Finally, professional CEOs of non-family firms appear to have a more generalist background than
the other types of CEO. In response to the question “Which do you consider to be the most important
factors to being a successful CEO in your country? ” they are 12 to 15% less likely than all other
CEO types to answer “specific industry knowledge” (see columns 9 and 10).

TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE



4.5      CEO Business Philosophy

Table 7 reports responses to questions about CEOs’ business philosophy and strategic focus. CEOs
were asked “Which of the following alternatives best describes your strategic focus for    Company-
Name in the next five years? Please select one: Diversify into new industries/ Expand into
international markets/ Strengthen focus in core businesses.” Founder CEOs are 17% more likely
than other CEO types to express a preference for international expansion over the alternatives
(columns 1 and 2). When asked whether executives should “Maintain payments to shareholders,
even if they must lay off a number of employees” or should instead choose to “Maintain stable em-
ployment, even if they must reduce payments to shareholders,” founders come out strongly in favor
of maintaining stable employment: they are 23 to 26% more likely to do so than the other CEO
types (columns 3 and 4). This fits with the result in Sraer and Thesmar (2007) that heir-managed
family firms in France smooth the effects of industry sales shocks on labor demand, although here
the result is present at founder-run firms rather than for firms with related CEOs. It is also in
line with the idea in Shleifer and Summers (1988) that family control makes possible implicit or
relational contracts with a firm’s workforce, and Mueller and Phillipon’s (2011) argument for the
beneficial effect on firms’ labor relations of family control.

However, on other dimensions, founder CEOs have similar views to related CEOs, and both differ
in their responses from professional CEOs of either type. In particular, both founders and related


                                                   16
CEOs are more likely to see their leadership role at the firm as “Guaranteeing the stability of the
company’s traditions and values” instead of “Bringing about changes in the way the company is
run,” unlike professional CEOs (columns 5 and 6). This view is more pronounced for founders
(for whom it is 27% more likely versus 14% for related CEOs), which is to be expected from the
individual who likely created these traditions and instilled the values. However, it may also be a
symptom of the monitoring performed by a powerful founder (as discussed in the ownership and
governance section). Related CEOs’ freedom of action may be limited by this monitoring, and so
they may see their mandate to be administering the firm as they received it from the founder. By
contrast, Professional CEOs of family firms, as “outsiders”, are more inclined to make changes,
which are likely essential to their ability to contribute to the firm and may be why they were
initially appointed. Professional CEOs of non-family firms also see their leadership role in terms of
making changes rather than maintaining values and traditions.

Turning to CEOs’ views on accountability, banks (rather than shareholders) appear to be viewed as
the key stakeholders by both founders and – to a lesser extent – related CEOs. In response to the
question “As the CEO of    CompanyName, who do you feel the most accountable to? ” founders
and related CEOs are more likely to report feeling accountable to banks than professional CEOs
(11% and 6% respectively in columns 7 and 8). Moreover, both CEO types are more likely to report
involving banks before major investment decisions (12% and 8% respectively in columns 9 and 10)
in response to the question: “Which of the company’s stakeholders are you most likely to involve
before deciding to undertake a large-scale investment project, such as the acquisition of a plant or
a company? ” This may reflect the smaller size of their firms (as measured by average sales) and
consequently more limited access to capital, or perhaps a closer working relationship.

In contrast to their attitude towards banks, founders – but not related CEOs – are 7 to 12% less
likely than other CEO types to feel accountable to shareholders (in columns 11 and 12). Moreover,
they are 18% less likely to report involving large shareholders before major investment decisions
than other CEO types (columns 13 and 14). Thus, founder CEOs are particularly likely to view
banks, not shareholders in general (or even large shareholders), as their most important external
stakeholders, perhaps because founders themselves are large or controlling equity holders. Related
CEOs appear to share founder CEOs’ concern for banks.

TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE


4.6   Politics and Family Ties

A final group of regressions considers questions about the links between politics and family firms
and are reported in Table 8. CEOs were asked “How would you describe the relationship between
major companies and political parties in your country? ” Related CEOs are 21% more likely to
answer “most business leaders try to maintain close relationships with all political parties and

                                                 17
candidates” (as opposed to only one or none at all) than all other CEO types (columns 1 and 2).
In columns 3 and 4 they are also 18% less likely than the other CEO types to answer that “most
business leaders do not have close relationships with any political party or candidate.” That related
CEOs in particular should see contacts with politicians across the political spectrum as central to
his or her role is consistent with the Morck and Yeung (2004) hypothesis that family controlled
firms are best suited to the role of counterparties in rent-seeking games with long-serving officials
in Government, due to the prospect of repeated games and the many points of contact between
these firms and the Government.

In a similar vein, columns 5 and 6 show that both professional CEOs of family firms and related
CEOs are 14 to 17% more likely to answer that family background and contacts are important
for conducting successful business compared to both professional CEOs of non-family firms, and
to founders. Moreover, related CEOs are also about 11% more likely than other CEOs to say
that family relationships facilitate access to business information in their country (columns 7 and
8), in response to the question “In your view, which of following transactions are most commonly
facilitated through family relationships in your country? ” This is unsurprising if, as is probable,
their families are wealthier and thus better connected than those of other CEO types. There are no
differences between CEO types on any of the other available alternative answers: access to credit,
relationship with the Government and regulators, hiring, sale and purchase of assets, or supplier
and customer relationships. In sum, the results in this section lend support to the view that family
firms (but not founder-run firms) see political interaction and family contacts as a key factor for
success.

TABLE 8 ABOUT HERE



5    The Family Backgrounds of CEOs

We describe our CEOs’ family backgrounds in Table 9. We regress survey responses regarding
CEOs’ parental income and occupation on CEO type indicator variables and our standard set of
control variables. The first two columns focus on the question “How would you classify the income
level of your parents when you were growing up (compared to other families in your country of
residence)? Please select one (lower, middle, upper).” They show that related CEOs are over 16%
less likely to have been brought up in a low income household (and are over 30% more likely than
all other CEO types to be brought up in a high income household in unreported regressions). Thus,
related CEOs appear to have more privileged backgrounds, which is not surprising given that they
are related to the founder of a firm that was one of the 100 largest firms in their country at the
time of the survey.

Additionally, professional CEOs of family firms are also around 6% less likely to have been brought


                                                 18
up in low income households than either founder CEOs or professional CEOs of non-family firms,
although unlike related CEOs they are no more likely to be brought up in high income households.

Fathers’ occupation is an alternative measure of CEO family background. CEOs were asked “What
is/was your father’s main occupation? ” which we classify into three broad occupation categories:
business people, blue-collar workers, and professionals. CEOs whose fathers were medical doctors,
judges, engineers, teachers, high or middle income Government officials, or other clearly identifiable
professionals were grouped into the professional category. Those whose fathers were business owners
or managers – whether large (¿100 employees) or small – or high or middle income farmers were
categorized as being in business, while fathers who were salesmen, clerks, manual workers, or
artisans were categorized as blue-collar workers, along with low income farmers or low income
Government officials (combinations of the answer to this question and the previous question).
Indicator variables for each of these three categories were regressed on the CEO type indicator
variables and standard controls.

Columns 3 and 4 show that related CEOs’ fathers, unsurprisingly, are 19% less likely to have been
blue-collar workers than the other CEO types’ fathers and are approximately 40% more likely to
have been in business (in unreported regressions). Further, in columns 5 and 6 we see that both
founders and related CEOs are respectively 14% and 23% less likely than professional CEOs to
have had a professional father (although for different reasons).

We then focus on a smaller grouping of responses to the question “What is/was your father’s main
occupation? ” In particular, we look at the likelihood of responding either “Large business manager
(¿100 employees)” or “Small business manager (¡100 employees)” and group them into an indicator
variable for business managers. We do the same for the business owner variable with the responses
“Large business owner (¿100 employees)” or “Small business owner (¡100 employees).”

In columns 7 and 8 we see that Professional CEOs of family firms were 8% more likely to have
had a father who was a business manager than either professional CEOs of non-family firms or
founders. However, there are no statistically significant differences for such CEOs in the likelihood
of having fathers who were business owners (in columns 9 and 10). There is a mechanical effect for
related CEOs, while founder CEOs are 17% more likely to have had a father who owned a business
at the 10% significance level, which fits with the entrepreneurship literature’s finding that a major
determinant of self-employment is parental self-employment (e.g., Sørensen, 2007).

Thus, the CEO types appear to coalesce into two groups with regard to family backgrounds: less
privileged founders and professional CEOs of non-family firms, in contrast to more privileged related
CEOs and professional CEOs of family firms, both of which are more likely to have had fathers
who were business managers (and owners in the case of related CEOs). These results suggest that
positions as founders and as CEOs of non-family firms provide opportunities for upward mobility
in these countries. In contrast, family firms tend to promote their own descendants into these
positions or to hire professional CEOs that come from higher income classes.

                                                 19
TABLE 9 ABOUT HERE

The survey allows us to examine the family backgrounds of the CEOs in our sample in greater detail.
A large literature focuses on inter-generational social mobility and the resulting income distribution
(see Solon, 2002, for a review of the economic literature on intergenerational earnings mobility).
CEOs’ pay levels and their privileged position atop the income distribution have also generated
a large literature (e.g. Piketty and Saez, 2003). We analyze the socio-economic backgrounds of
CEOs by examining their fathers’ and paternal grandfathers’ occupations, which are key proxies for
the social status of the CEO’s family, and perhaps the most reliable measure available in countries
lacking comprehensive longitudinal data series.13

The survey also contains a broad measure of CEOs’ paternal income when the CEO was growing up,
which is an additional measure of their parents’ economic status. Parental economic standings are
directly relevant to CEOs’ social origins, as the intergenerational mobility literature finds them to
be a significant source of advantage (e.g. Erikson and Goldthorpe, 2002; Solon, 2002). This measure
was obtained from the question: “How would you classify the income level of your parents when
you were growing up (compared to other families in your country of residence)? (Low/ Middle/
High)” and so can be viewed as a measure of their parents’ permanent income at the time.

Table 10 shows that the CEOs in this sample overwhelmingly come from middle (52%) or high
income (34%) families, suggesting important limits to inter-generational social mobility even for this
selected sample of successful managers. However, there are economically important and statistically
significant differences between the CEO types. Firstly, and perhaps unsurprisingly, related CEOs
are more likely to have grown up in a high income household (63%) and less likely to be from
middle income households compared to the other CEO types. More interestingly, founder CEOs
and professional CEOs of non-family firms are significantly more likely to have grown up in low
income households in comparison to the other two CEO types (related CEOs and professional CEOs
of family firms), as noted in the regressions in the origins section. These results suggest that the
entrance of professional CEOs either as founders or the heads of non-family firms allows talented
individuals from less privileged backgrounds to become involved in the management of the largest
firms within a country. If we believe that there is regression to the mean in managerial abilities,
allowing a transition of managerial power to people outside the narrow circle of family members
is likely to be a net improvement, since the firm can draw from the full talent distribution in the
country.

These results find broad support when we turn to the occupational backgrounds of the CEOs’
parents and grandparents. Table 10 also separates the fathers of CEOs into three broad occupation
categories: business people, blue-collar workers, and professionals, as described earlier. CEOs
13
     The sociology literature has a long history of examining inter-generational mobility as measured by occupational
     categories (e.g., see Erikson and Goldthorpe, 2002, for a sociological perspective). We are aware that by focusing
     on fathers and grandfathers we exclude the intergenerational linkages due to mothers and grandmothers, but our
     data make this inevitable.


                                                           20
whose fathers were medical doctors, judges, engineers, teachers, high or middle income Government
officials, or other clearly identifiable professionals were grouped into the professional category.
Those whose fathers were business owners or managers – whether large (¿100 employees) or small
– or high or middle income farmers were categorized as being in business, while fathers who were
salesmen, clerks, manual workers or artisans were categorized as blue-collar workers, along with
low income farmers or low income Government officials.

We then repeat the same classification for the CEOs’ grandfathers. But we also separate out the
categories “Government worker” and “farmer” for the paternal grandfathers because of their high
frequency and because we have no measure of income for grandfathers.14

The fathers of the CEOs in our sample were principally businesspeople (59%), again suggesting it
may be harder to make the occupational leap from a non-business family environment to top CEO
status in a single generation. In addition, related CEOs are less likely to have a blue-collar father
and are (mechanically) more likely to have a father in business (71% are either sons/daughters or
grandsons/granddaughters of founders) than all other CEO types.

When we move to the occupation of the CEOs’ parental grandfathers, there are fewer professional
and business people and many more farmers. The latter made up only 8% of the fathers’ occupations
and were coded together with the business and blue-collar categories as described earlier. As
expected, related CEOs’ grandfathers are more likely to be in business compared to the other CEO
types’ grandfathers’ occupations.

TABLE 10 ABOUT HERE



5.1       Paternal-Grandfather-to-Father Occupational Transition Matrices

We now examine the occupational transitions between the fathers and paternal grandfathers of
the CEOs in our sample. These transition matrices are unusual in that we are looking back from
a highly selected sample of CEOs to the occupational transitions of their fathers and paternal
grandfathers. The aim is to understand how much income and occupational mobility happened in
generations prior to the current period, or whether the current CEO represents a unique jump in
attainment that could have occurred from any point in the occupation distribution.

52% of CEOs’ fathers worked in a different occupational category than their fathers (i.e., CEOs’
paternal grandfathers). While this may appear to be a high degree of mobility, much is driven by
the secular shift away from farming into other occupations that occurred across the world. Table
14
     Long and Ferrie (2007) use a similar four category classification scheme with (much older) British and US census
     data from 1860 to 1900. These are (1) white collar (professional and technical workers, as well as retail and clerical
     workers; (2) farm owners; (3) skilled and semi-skilled workers (craftsmen and factory operatives); and (4) unskilled
     workers (including farm laborers). They note that using more categories alters none of their substantive findings.


                                                             21
11 shows CEOs’ fathers’ occupations as a percentage of their fathers’ occupations and should be
read by rows rather than by columns: i.e., for all professional paternal grandfathers, 47% of their
sons (whose sons, in turn, were CEOs) were also professionals, while 6% became blue-collar workers
and 35% went into business.

Whatever the occupation of CEOs’ paternal grandfathers, there was a striking movement by the
fathers of CEOs into the business occupation category: it is the largest occupational category
choice for all except those fathers whose own father was a professional, and even in that case 35%
chose to work in business.15 Thus only 22% of blue-collar grandfathers had a blue-collar son in
our sample, and the proportions are similar for grandfathers that were farmers and Government
officials.16 In conjunction with the very low proportion of CEOs with a blue-collar father (15%),
or low parental income (14%), this suggests it was difficult to move from the lower strata of society
to CEO positions in a single generation.

TABLE 11 ABOUT HERE

One way to think about this matrix is to consider what would occur if this transition matrix was
a steady state transition matrix for a population. In such a scenario, what proportion of each
occupational class would result from it in the long run? By iterating it hundreds of times, we
obtain the steady state distribution of people across the five occupation classes (Table 12).

TABLE 12 ABOUT HERE

This means that, if the people in our CEO sample were just like their fathers, and faced similar
obstacles and opportunities, we would have seen a distribution somewhere in between the two in
the table above. That is, we would have observed between 55% and 65% of our sample in business
occupations, instead of observing 100% in business. As this is a sample of people who are selected
based on their CEO position – which suggests natural ability coupled with opportunity – this
difference between the steady state proportion in business suggested by their fathers’ transition
matrix and the actual proportion does not seem unduly large. Indeed, perhaps the opposite: it
may be evidence in favor of the inter-generational transmission of CEO ability, i.e., that their
fathers were, as a group, already showing evidence of above-average talent for business.

When we draw up the paternal grandfather’s occupation to father’s income transition matrix in
Table 13, we see a clear grouping of fathers in the middle income category, regardless of the
grandfather’s occupation. The particularly low proportion of low income fathers with the grandfa-
ther in business (7%) suggests that the latter were already at least moderately successful, if some
15
   For all transition tables, the pattern and magnitudes are essentially unchanged if we exclude related CEOs because
   of concerns that the transition matrix of related CEOs is less informative (as we already know that many of their
   fathers and/or grandfathers were CEOs).
16
   The status of farmers and Government workers in CEOs’ grandparents’ generation is unclear, so moving from those
   occupations and into business may not necessarily have implied an improvement in social standing.



                                                         22
economic advantage is transmitted between generations as the literature suggests. At the other ex-
treme, approximately half of low income fathers had farmer fathers themselves (i.e., CEO paternal
grandfathers).

TABLE 13 ABOUT HERE

The literature on family firms has also focused on the distance in generations between the founder
and the current controlling family members. For example, in their study of Thai family business
groups Bertrand et al. (2008) note that they have been around for an average of 2.5 generations,
while Villalonga and Amit (2006) report of their sample of Fortune 500 firms that approximately
a third were in their first generation, a further third were in their second generation, and the
remainder were older still. While this information is not available in our sample for family firms
run by professional CEOs, it is available for firms with related CEOs: approximately 60% of related
CEOs are a single generation younger than the founder (i.e., are the son, daughter, or nephew),
while a further 18% are two generations younger (i.e., grand-children of the founder).17



6       Conclusion

In this paper we show that firms broadly fall into four distinct categories: (1) firms run by the
founder, (2) family firms with a family member as CEO, (3) family firms with a professional
CEO, and finally (4) non-family firms run by professional CEOs. This categorization holds across
geographic regions and may track the stages of a firm’s lifecycle. Founder-run firms concentrate
cash flow and control rights in the hands of the founder CEO to a large extent, and show a
more hierarchical organizational structure, less delegation to other top managers and more direct
monitoring of employees. This centralization of power may explain why founder CEOs report
feeling less accountable to shareholders than other CEO types, although they are more likely
to acknowledge feeling accountable to banks. It also gives them the freedom to adopt a more
stakeholder-centric view, as illustrated by their preference for maintaining stable employment at
the firm over paying out dividends.

This structure might be beneficial while the founder CEO is in place, since they are often individuals
of exceptional talent. However, the existence of such a centralized management structure appears
to create distortions once the founder is no longer running the firm, and may be part of the
explanation for the reduced performance reported in the literature on transitions from founders to
family CEOs. We find that family CEOs broadly mimic the approach of the founder and often
still consult the founder for important decisions, which might reflect that they do not have the
same business acumen as professional CEOs or the founder. A potential expectations mismatch
17
     The remaining related CEOs are either in the same generation as the founder – 4% of related CEOs – (e.g., wife,
     brother, sister) or their generation could not be determined from their survey responses.



                                                          23
emerges for professional CEOs leading family firms. These individuals see their role as bringing
about change, and they aim to implement a modern business philosophy. However, their ability to
implement change seems to be significantly curtailed, since the founder appears to retain control
of many major management decisions and also limits the CEO’s de facto power. For example,
such CEOs must take over the existing management team instead of being allowed to hire their
own team, in contrast to professional CEOs at non-family firms. Ultimately, such provisions might
reduce the decision authority of the CEO position and may make it more difficult to attract a
high-quality professional CEO to a family firm.

These results suggest that family firms and widely held firms are different not only in their explicit
governance structures, but also in terms of the softer factors that affect management effectiveness,
such as the way they set up their operations or their business philosophy. These differences also
highlight that the importance and mandate of the CEO position seems to vary based on the type
of firm they are hired into, and this internal firm dynamic, in turn, can affect the type and quality
of managers that select into each firm type. The results add to our understanding of why we see
the differences in performance and managerial outcomes across family and non-family firms that
have been documented in the literature. However, much remains to be learned about the internal
dynamics of family firms, and how such firms transition into professionally managed and widely
held firms.




                                                  24
References

Adams, R.B., Almeida, H., Ferreira, D., 2005. Powerful CEOs and their impact on corporate
performance. Review of Financial Studies, 18:4.

Anderson, R. C., Duru, A., Reeb, D. M., 2009. Founders, heirs, and corporate opacity in the United
States. Journal of Financial Economics 92, 205-222.

Anderson, R. C., Reeb, D. M., 2003. Founding-family ownership and firm performance: evidence
from the S&P 500. Journal of Finance 58:3, 1301-1328.

Baron, J. N., Hannan, M. T., Burton, D. M., 1999. Building the iron cage: determinants of
managerial intensity in the early years of organizations. American Sociological Review 64:4, 527-
547.

Bennedsen, M., Neilsen, K. M., Pérez-González, F., Wolfenzon, D., 2007. Inside the family firm:
the role of families in succession decisions and performance. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122:2,
647-691.

Bennedsen, M., Pérez-González, F., Wolfenzon, D, 2010. Do CEOs Matter? Working paper.

Bennedsen, M., Pérez-González, F., Wolfenzon, D, 2012. Estimating the Value of the Boss: Evi-
dence from CEO Hospitalization Events. Working paper.

Bertrand, M., Schoar, A., 2003. Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers on Firm Policies.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 1169-1208.

Bertrand, M., Schoar, A., 2006. The role of family in family firms. Journal of Economic Perspectives
20:2, 73–96.

Bertrand, M., Johnson, S., Samphantharak, K., Schoar, A., 2008. Mixing family with business: a
study of Thai business groups and the families behind them. Journal of Financial Economics 88:3,
466-498.

Bloom, N., Eifert, B., Mahajan, A., McKenzie, D., & Roberts, J., 2011. Does management matter?
Evidence from India. NBER Working Paper 16658.

Bloom, N., Genakos, C., Sadun, R., Van Reenen, J., 2012a. Management Practices across Firms
and Countries. Academy of Management Perspectives, February, 12-33.

Bloom, N., Van Reenen, J., 2007. Measuring and explaining management practices across firms
and countries. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122:4, 1351-1408.


                                                25
Bloom, N., Sadun, R., Van Reenen, J., 2010. Does Product Market Competition Lead Firms to
Decentralize? American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 100, 434–438.

Bloom, N., Sadun, R., Van Reenen, J., 2012b. Management as a Technology? Working paper.

Brav, A., Graham, J., Harvey, C. R., Michaely, R., 2005. Payout policy in the 21st century. Journal
of Financial Economics 77, 483-528.

Burkart, M., Panunzi, F., Shleifer, A., 2003. Family Firms. Journal of Finance, 58:5, 2167–2202.

Cameron, A. C., Gelbach, J. B., Miller, D. L., 2008. Bootstrap-based improvements for inference
with clustered errors. Review of Economics and Statistics 90:3, 414–427.

Claessens, S., Djankov, S., Fan, J. P. H., Lang, L. H. P., 2002. Disentangling the incentive and
entrenchment effects of large shareholdings. Journal of Finance 57:6, 2741-2771.

Claessens, S., Djankov, S., Lang, L. H. P., 2000. The separation of ownership and control in East
Asian corporations. Journal of Financial Economics 58, 81-112.

Eisfeldt, A. L., Kuhnen, C.M., 2013. CEO turnover in a competitive assignment framework. Forth-
coming, Journal of Financial Economics

Erikson, R., Goldthorpe, J. H., 2002. Intergenerational inequality: a sociological perspective.
Journal of Economic Perspectives 16:3, 31-44.

Faccio, M., Lang, L. H. P., 2002. The ultimate ownership of Western European corporations.
Journal of Financial Economics LXV, 365–395.

Fahlenbrach, R., 2009. Founder-CEOs, Investment Decisions, and Stock Market Performance.
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 44, 439-466.

Graham, J., Harvey, C. R., 2001. The theory and practice of corporate finance: evidence from the
field. Journal of Financial Economics 60, 187-243.

Graham, J.R., Harvey, C. R., Puri, M., 2011. Capital allocation and delegation of decision-making
authority within firms. NBER Working Paper 17370.

Guadalupe, M., Wulf, J., 2010. The Flattening Firm and Product Market Competition: The
Effect of Trade Liberalization on Corporate Hierarchies. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 2:4, 105–27.

Kaplan,S. N., Klebanov, M. M., Sorensen, M. 2012.Which CEO Characteristics and Abilities Mat-
ter? Journal of Finance, forthcoming.


                                                26
Khanna, T., Palepu, K., 2000. Is group affiliation profitable in emerging markets? An analysis of
diversified Indian business groups. Journal of Finance, 55:2, 867-91.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 1999. Corporate ownership around the world.
Journal of Finance 54:2, 471–517.

Long, J., Ferrie, J., 2007. The path to convergence: intergenerational occupational mobility in
Britain and the U.S. in three eras. The Economic Journal 117, C61-C71.

Malmendier, U., Tate, G., 2008. Who Makes Acquisitions? CEO Overconfidence and the Market’s
Reaction. Journal of Financial Economics 89:1, 20–43.

Mehrotra, V., Morck, R., Shim, J., Wiwattanakantang, Y., 2011. Adoptive expectations: rising
sons in Japanese family firms. NBER Working Paper 16874.

Morck, R. K., Yeung, B., 2004. Family control and the rent-seeking society. Entrepreneurship:
Theory and Practice 28:4, 391-409.

Morck, R. K., Stangeland, D. A., Yeung, B., 2000. Inherited Wealth, Corporate Control and Eco-
nomic Growth: The Canadian Disease. In: Morck, R.K. (Ed.), Concentrated Corporate Ownership.
University of Chicago Press.

Mueller, H.M., Philippon, T., 2011. Family firms and labor relations. American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics 3, 218–245.

Pérez-González, F., 2006. Inherited control and firm performance. American Economic Review
96:5, 1559-1588.

Piketty, T., Saez, E., 2003. Income inequality in the United States 1913-1998. Quarterly Journal
of Economics 118:1, 1-39.

Rajan, R. G., Wulf, J. M., 2006. The flattening firm: evidence from panel data on the changing
nature of corporate hierarchies. Review of Economics and Statistics 88, 759–73.

Schoar, A., Zuo, L. 2011. Shaped by Booms and Busts: How the Economy Impacts CEO Careers
and Management Styles. NBER working paper 17590.

Shleifer, A., Summers, L. H., 1988. Breach of trust in hostile takeovers. In: Auerbach, A.J. (Ed.),
Corporate Takeovers: Causes and Consequences. University of Chicago Press.

Solon, G., 2002. Cross-country differences in intergenerational earnings mobility. Journal of Eco-
nomic Perspectives 16:3, 59–66.

Sørensen, J. B., 2007. Closure and exposure: mechanisms in the intergenerational transmission of
self-employment. Research in the Sociology of Organizations 25, 83-124.

                                                27
Sraer, D., Thesmar, D., 2007. Performance and behavior of family firms: evidence from the French
stock market. Journal of the European Economic Association 5:4, 709-751.

Tsoutsoura, M. 2013. The Effect of Succession Taxes on Family Firm Investment: Evidence from
a Natural Experiment. Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Villalonga, B., Amit, R., 2006. How do family ownership, control, and management affect firm
value? Journal of Financial Economics 80:2, 385-417.




                                              28
                                                                            # of obs used      Whole        Founder      Related     Prof. CEO of     Prof. CEO of
Table 1                                                                     in calculation     sample        CEO          CEO         family firm    non-family firm

Observations                                                                    823             823          104          148            173              398
% of each CEO type                                                                                          12.6%        18.0%          21.0%            48.4%
Sales (mean, M US$ in 2006)                                                     671             386          202          288            373              474
Sales (median, M US$ in 2006)                                                   671             116           42          100            100              148
Revenue (mean, M US$ in 2006, from Bloomberg)                                   229             938          332          517           1,023            1,181
Market capitalization (mean, M US$ in 2006, from Bloomberg)                     222            2,938        2,202        2,062          2,450            3,553
Firm age (mean, years)                                                          714              39           24           43             39               41
Firms owned by multinational company                                            823            23%           10%           5%            14%              38%
% ownership of largest 3 equity holders                                         656            78%           78%          70%            78%              81%
% English legal origin                                                          823            32%           33%          28%            22%              37%

Sales are winsorized at 5% and 95%. Firm age is winsorized at 5% to reduce the impact of respondent recall errors (i.e. date of founding versus date of incorporation
versus public listing). Results are virtually identical without winsorizing.




                                                                                 29
                                                        # of obs used in   Whole                                Prof. CEO of   Prof. CEO of non-
Table 2                                                   calculation      sample
                                                                                    Founder CEO   Related CEO
                                                                                                                 family firm      family firm

Age (mean, years)                                             816           52          56            50            51               52
% Men                                                         822          98%         97%           97%           96%              98%
CEO education:
  Undergrad. %                                                819          91%         82%           90%           92%              93%
  MBA or grad. degree %                                       823          46%         35%           46%           50%              48%
  International educ. %                                       807          50%         41%           62%           46%              50%
Prior position
  On a Board of Directors                                     823          14%         19%           15%           14%              12%
  As a CEO                                                    823          33%         21%           22%           41%              37%
  In Financial field                                          823          15%          6%            8%           20%              18%
1st job at current firm was as CEO                            732          42%         63%           17%           42%              47%
Tenure (mean, years)                                          738           8           15            12             6                5
CEO owns >5% of firm                                          766          26%         80%           67%            7%               3%

See the Appendix for selected summary statistics by region.




                                                                             30
Table 3
                                    CEO appointed by founder or his/her           Were any of your relatives ever in the
Dependent variable                                                                                                                      Founder names Directors
                                                relatives                           upper management of the firm?
                                            (1)                     (2)                     (3)                   (4)                    (5)                     (6)
Founder CEO                             0.236***               0.231***                0.461***               0.467***               0.175***               0.162***
                                         [6.461]                [6.346]                 [6.551]                [6.605]                [3.529]                [3.277]
Related CEO                             0.315***               0.310***                0.771***               0.770***               0.172***               0.160***
                                         [5.585]                [5.615]                [19.102]               [18.879]                [3.060]                [3.055]
Prof. CEO of Family firm                0.070***               0.066***                   -0.03                 -0.031               0.182***               0.174***
                                         [3.121]                [3.045]                 [-1.140]               [-1.152]               [6.237]                [6.369]
Ln(GDP per capita)                         0.013                   0.02                   0.032                  0.026                  0.004                  0.021
                                         [0.954]                [1.608]                 [1.590]                [1.285]                [0.135]                [0.726]
Anti-corruption index                     -0.020                 -0.019               -0.028***              -0.027***                 -0.014                 -0.013
                                         [-1.411]               [-1.267]                [-3.306]               [-3.360]               [-0.610]               [-0.511]
Property rights index                      0.001                  0.001                    0.00                  0.00                   0.00                   0.00
                                         [0.976]                [0.882]                 [1.295]                [1.525]                [0.763]                [0.691]
Legal origin (1=English)                   0.043                  0.049                  -0.035                 -0.046                  0.094                   0.11
                                         [1.259]                [1.441]                 [-1.032]               [-1.298]               [1.198]                [1.463]
Control for sales                            N                       Y                       N                     Y                      N                       Y
SIC code fixed effects                       Y                       Y                       Y                     Y                      Y                       Y
Observations                                802                    802                     733                    733                    786                    786
Adjusted R2                                20%                    20%                     57%                    57%                    10%                    11%

Regressions of survey responses on a constant, three CEO type indicator variables (the omitted category is professional CEO of a non-family firm), four country-level
variables, two-digit SIC code fixed effects, and in some specifications, the natural logarithm of firm sales in 2006, and an indicator for missing value of firm sales. The
country level variables are: the natural logarithm of per capita GDP, the Transparency International corruption index (higher values indicate low corruption), the Heritage
Foundation property rights index (higher scores indicate more secure property rights), and an indicator variable for English or French legal origin (1 denotes English). All
dependent variables are indicator variables, taking a value of 1 if the respondent is in agreement with the question or answers in the affirmative, and a 0 otherwise.
Regressions are estimated using the linear probability model. t-statistics are in parentheses below each coefficient. *, **, and *** denote coefficients significant at 10%,
5%, and 1% respectively. Standard errors are clustered by country.




                                                                                    31
Table 4
                                                                                            Does the CEO receive
                                                             Does CEO own>5% of                                         Number of blockholder      Equity % of largest 3
Dependent variable              Does CEO own equity?                                              stock/options in
                                                                    firm?                                                      types                  shareholders
                                                                                                  compensation?
                                      (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)                (5)            (6)          (7)        (8)           (9)           (10)
Founder CEO                      0.590***      0.600***      0.775***      0.771***        -0.215*** -0.194***           0.167**     0.167**        -3.58          -5.07
                                 [11.473]      [12.237]      [16.640]      [16.367]          [-3.250]        [-3.060]     [2.357]     [2.401]     [-1.172]       [-1.578]
Related CEO                      0.525***      0.524***      0.622***      0.616***        -0.199***        -0.181**    0.289***    0.291***    -10.686***     -11.884***
                                   [9.741]       [9.629]     [18.553]      [18.341]          [-2.888]        [-2.681]     [4.197]     [4.256]     [-3.484]       [-4.125]
Prof. CEO of Family firm             0.06          0.06         0.03         0.03           -0.106**         -0.095*    0.423***    0.425***        -3.54          -4.27
                                   [1.310]       [1.216]      [1.156]       [1.000]          [-2.165]        [-1.945]     [5.209]     [5.283]     [-1.238]       [-1.494]
Ln(GDP per capita)                 0.083*          0.08         0.01         0.01               0.06           0.01         0.02       0.02         -1.17           0.62
                                   [1.768]       [1.640]      [0.257]       [0.567]           [1.061]         [0.232]     [0.408]     [0.393]     [-0.525]        [0.302]
Anti-corruption index               -0.02         -0.02         0.00         0.00               0.02           0.02         0.01       0.01         -1.00          -0.64
                                  [-0.447]      [-0.502]      [0.089]       [0.123]           [0.441]         [0.477]     [0.358]     [0.340]     [-0.610]       [-0.449]
Property rights index                0.00          0.00         0.00         0.00               0.00           0.00         0.00       0.00          0.03           0.01
                                  [-0.962]      [-0.875]      [0.101]       [0.155]           [0.530]         [0.432]    [-0.152]    [-0.168]      [0.234]        [0.083]
Legal origin (1=English)          0.255**       0.239**         0.04         0.04          0.191***          0.173**      0.157*      0.160*        -7.28          -6.11
                                   [2.668]       [2.573]      [0.986]       [1.052]           [3.138]         [2.400]     [1.769]     [1.769]     [-1.554]       [-1.221]
Control for sales                      N             Y            N            Y                  N              Y            N          Y             N             Y
SIC code fixed effects              Y             Y             Y             Y                Y              Y            Y           Y             Y              Y

Observations                        821          821           765           765              577            577          748          748          655            655
           2
Adjusted R                         29%           30%           54%           54%              12%            14%          5%           4%           9%             11%

Regressions of survey responses on a constant, three CEO type indicator variables (the omitted category is professional CEO of a non-family firm), four country-level
variables, two-digit SIC code fixed effects, and in some specifications, the natural logarithm of firm sales in 2006, and an indicator for missing value of firm sales. The
country level variables are: the natural logarithm of per capita GDP, the Transparency International corruption index (higher values indicate low corruption), the Heritage
Foundation property rights index (higher scores indicate more secure property rights), and an indicator variable for English or French legal origin (1 denotes English). All
dependent variables are indicator variables, taking a value of 1 if the respondent is in agreement with the question or answers in the affirmative, and a 0 otherwise.
Regressions are estimated using the linear probability model. t-statistics are in parentheses below each coefficient. *, **, and *** denote coefficients significant at 10%,
5%, and 1% respectively. Standard errors are clustered by country. The dependent variables for regressions 7 to 10 are cardinal variables (not indicators), and so the
regressions are OLS.




                                                                                      32
Table 5
                                                                                                                      The previous CEO was         Founder is involved in
                                                                                            Does the CEO name
Dependent variable               Is CEO also on Board?'      Is CEO also Chairman?'                                       terminated by the            major investment
                                                                                              most directors?
                                                                                                                               founder                     decisions
                                       (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)             (8)          (9)             (10)
Founder CEO                      0.082***       0.092***     0.233***       0.240***      0.152***      0.159***         0.038           0.037        0.043           0.036
                                   [3.185]        [3.702]      [4.164]        [3.946]       [3.457]       [3.517]      [1.269]         [1.151]      [0.796]         [0.662]
Related CEO                      0.117***       0.129***         0.068           0.08        0.066        0.075*      0.099***       0.095***     0.137***         0.128**
                                   [3.046]        [3.429]      [1.257]        [1.398]       [1.623]       [1.768]      [3.536]         [3.507]      [2.952]         [2.728]
Prof. CEO of Family firm            -0.019         -0.011    -0.218***      -0.208***     -0.063***     -0.056***      0.039**        0.035**         0.054           0.046
                                  [-0.593]       [-0.336]     [-5.747]       [-5.358]      [-3.295]      [-2.873]      [2.561]         [2.448]      [0.854]         [0.724]
Ln(GDP per capita)                    0.08          0.064        0.053          0.039        0.019         0.009        -0.004          -0.003     0.118**         0.128**
                                   [1.629]        [1.332]      [1.101]        [0.815]       [0.428]       [0.183]      [-0.331]       [-0.219]      [2.181]         [2.555]
Anti-corruption index            -0.103**       -0.105**        -0.059       -0.061*         0.024         0.022        -0.006          -0.005        0.049            0.05
                                  [-2.525]       [-2.766]     [-1.570]       [-1.750]       [0.918]       [0.929]      [-0.746]       [-0.575]      [1.439]         [1.553]
Property rights index                0.004          0.004        0.00           0.00         (0.00)        (0.00)        0.00            0.00     -0.013***       -0.013***
                                   [1.208]        [1.302]      [0.677]        [0.737]      [-0.616]      [-0.671]      [0.439]         [0.575]     [-3.388]        [-3.570]
Legal origin (1=English)         0.321***       0.309***        -0.061         -0.071        0.117          0.11         -0.04        -0.046*        -0.145          -0.145
                                   [4.940]        [4.779]     [-0.756]       [-0.902]       [1.504]       [1.382]      [-1.611]       [-1.912]     [-1.143]        [-1.203]
Control for sales                       N             Y            N               Y            N             Y            N               Y            N               Y
SIC code fixed effects               Y             Y              Y             Y             Y             Y             Y             Y              Y             Y

Observations                        806           806            804           804           786           786           706           706            718           718
           2
Adjusted R                          14%           15%           13%           14%            5%            6%             5%            5%           21%           21%

Regressions of survey responses on a constant, three CEO type indicator variables (the omitted category is professional CEO of a non-family firm), four country-level
variables, two-digit SIC code fixed effects, and in some specifications, the natural logarithm of firm sales in 2006, and an indicator for missing value of firm sales. The
country level variables are: the natural logarithm of per capita GDP, the Transparency International corruption index (higher values indicate low corruption), the Heritage
Foundation property rights index (higher scores indicate more secure property rights), and an indicator variable for English or French legal origin (1 denotes English). All
dependent variables are indicator variables, taking a value of 1 if the respondent is in agreement with the question or answers in the affirmative, and a 0 otherwise.
Regressions are estimated using the linear probability model. t-statistics are in parentheses below each coefficient. *, **, and *** denote coefficients significant at 10%,
5%, and 1% respectively. Standard errors are clustered by country.




                                                                                     33
Table 6
                                                              Most important task is        CEO has >5 managers         Did CEO replace any top    Most important factor for
                                   Most important task is
Dependent variable                                                   selecting and             reporting directly to     managers in 1st 2yrs as       success is industry
                                   supervising decisions
                                                               appraising managers                  him/her?                       CEO?                     knowledge
                                        (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)          (5)              (6)          (7)           (8)         (9)             (10)
Founder CEO                         0.096**       0.083**     -0.160**        -0.139**     -0.199***       -0.169***    -0.179***     -0.173***     0.146**          0.140**
                                     [2.801]       [2.429]     [-2.680]        [-2.348]     [-3.640]         [-3.257]     [-3.861]      [-3.800]     [2.352]          [2.272]
Related CEO                           -0.021        -0.029       -0.042          -0.023       -0.087            -0.06     -0.093*       -0.093*    0.141***         0.137***
                                    [-0.714]      [-0.936]     [-0.803]        [-0.446]     [-1.693]         [-1.285]     [-1.769]      [-1.793]     [3.053]          [2.842]
Prof. CEO of Family firm              -0.018        -0.021       -0.069          -0.057       -0.038           -0.022    -0.085**      -0.086**     0.125**          0.122**
                                    [-0.568]      [-0.675]     [-1.263]        [-1.078]     [-1.181]         [-0.696]     [-2.367]      [-2.385]     [2.223]          [2.225]
Ln(GDP per capita)                    -0.008         0.006        0.033           0.004     0.058**             0.018        0.025         0.022   0.128***         0.135***
                                    [-0.466]       [0.348]      [0.748]         [0.091]      [2.636]          [0.986]      [0.977]       [0.893]     [3.180]          [3.536]
Anti-corruption index               0.023**     0.024***          0.005           0.002       -0.014           -0.018       -0.002        -0.002      0.016            0.017
                                     [2.624]       [2.854]      [0.158]         [0.086]     [-0.658]         [-1.240]     [-0.100]      [-0.094]     [0.541]          [0.580]
Property rights index              -0.002**     -0.002***         0.00            0.00      0.004**         0.004***         0.00          0.00    -0.012***       -0.012***
                                    [-2.806]      [-3.056]      [1.213]         [1.484]      [2.105]          [2.872]      [0.154]       [0.207]    [-4.471]         [-4.614]
Legal origin (1=English)          -0.102***      -0.087**       0.138*          0.110*         0.048            0.011    -0.132**      -0.138**       0.051            0.059
                                    [-2.966]      [-2.478]      [2.056]         [1.832]      [1.447]          [0.323]     [-2.312]      [-2.514]     [0.528]          [0.624]
Control for sales                        N             Y            N               Y            N                Y            N             Y           N               Y
SIC code fixed effects                Y             Y             Y             Y              Y              Y             Y            Y             Y              Y

Observations                         804           804           804           804            802            802           780           780          821            821
           2
Adjusted R                           4%            5%            5%            7%             8%             11%           2%            2%           14%           14%

Regressions of survey responses on a constant, three CEO type indicator variables (the omitted category is professional CEO of a non-family firm), four country-level
variables, two-digit SIC code fixed effects, and in some specifications, the natural logarithm of firm sales in 2006, and an indicator for missing value of firm sales. The
country level variables are: the natural logarithm of per capita GDP, the Transparency International corruption index (higher values indicate low corruption), the Heritage
Foundation property rights index (higher scores indicate more secure property rights), and an indicator variable for English or French legal origin (1 denotes English). All
dependent variables are indicator variables, taking a value of 1 if the respondent is in agreement with the question or answers in the affirmative, and a 0 otherwise.
Regressions are estimated using the linear probability model. t-statistics are in parentheses below each coefficient. *, **, and *** denote coefficients significant at 10%,
5%, and 1% respectively. Standard errors are clustered by country.




                                                                                      34
Table 7
                               CEO management            Prioritize stable     Leadership role is to       CEO feels          Banks are involved         CEO feels         Large shareholders are
Dependent variable            focus is international    employment over         bring change rather      accountable to          before major          accountable to      involved before major
                                   expansion                dividends          than maintain values          banks           investment decisions       shareholders        investment decisions
                                 (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)       (12)         (13)        (14)
Founder CEO                   0.169***    0.169***     0.263***   0.234***    -0.266***    -0.264***   0.108**    0.107**    0.117***   0.118***    -0.068*    -0.121**    -0.186***   -0.182***
                               [3.187]     [3.100]     [3.902]     [3.318]    [-4.299]      [-4.300]   [2.737]    [2.639]    [3.317]     [3.196]    [-1.871]    [-2.791]   [-3.453]     [-3.531]
Related CEO                    -0.015       -0.014     0.133**     0.108**    -0.139***    -0.138***   0.063**    0.061**    0.076***   0.076***     0.053       -0.01      -0.143*     -0.143*
                              [-0.267]     [-0.257]    [2.355]     [2.082]    [-3.150]      [-3.034]   [2.612]    [2.562]    [3.688]     [3.736]    [1.120]     [-0.189]   [-2.050]     [-2.032]
Prof. CEO of Family firm       0.028        0.028       -0.004      -0.02       0.007        0.007      0.005      0.003     0.049**     0.050**     0.067       0.017       -0.04        -0.04
                               [0.807]     [0.821]     [-0.084]    [-0.430]    [0.129]      [0.144]    [0.271]    [0.180]    [2.227]     [2.216]    [1.560]     [0.367]    [-1.010]     [-1.004]
Ln(GDP per capita)             -0.012       -0.013      -0.014      0.023       0.001        -0.001    -0.022*    -0.019      -0.023      -0.024    0.064***    0.057**      -0.01        -0.01
                              [-0.400]     [-0.421]    [-0.574]    [0.887]     [0.054]      [-0.024]   [-1.787]   [-1.451]   [-1.414]    [-1.466]   [2.833]     [2.228]    [-0.252]     [-0.319]
Anti-corruption index          0.042*       0.042*       0.01       0.013       0.004        0.004     -0.005     -0.005      0.007       0.007      0.001       -0.003     -0.037*     -0.037*
                               [1.881]     [1.857]     [0.540]     [0.573]     [0.302]      [0.278]    [-0.679]   [-0.656]   [1.140]     [1.107]    [0.081]     [-0.216]   [-2.059]     [-2.034]
Property rights index          -0.002       -0.002     -0.004**   -0.004**    0.004***     0.004***     0.00       0.00       (0.00)      (0.00)      0.00        0.00       0.00         0.00
                              [-1.349]     [-1.343]    [-2.427]    [-2.105]    [3.205]      [3.193]    [1.572]    [1.562]    [-1.472]    [-1.370]   [-0.211]    [-0.099]    [1.404]      [1.448]
Legal origin (1=English)       -0.024       -0.025      -0.011       0.02      -0.031        -0.033     0.005      0.006      0.003       0.003     0.136**     0.109*       -0.10        -0.11
                              [-0.388]     [-0.387]    [-0.220]    [0.442]    [-0.616]      [-0.622]   [0.196]    [0.255]    [0.099]     [0.079]    [2.424]     [1.806]    [-1.209]     [-1.232]
Control for sales                N            Y           N           Y          N             Y          N          Y          N           Y          N           Y          N            Y
SIC code fixed effects           Y            Y           Y           Y          Y             Y          Y          Y          Y           Y          Y           Y          Y            Y
Observations                    807          807         761         761        800           800        808        808        717         717        808         808        717          717
Adjusted R2                     5%           6%          7%          9%          7%           7%         8%         8%         7%          7%         3%          7%          4%          4%


Regressions of survey responses on a constant, three CEO type indicator variables (the omitted category is professional CEO of a non-family firm), four country-level
variables, two-digit SIC code fixed effects, and in some specifications, the natural logarithm of firm sales in 2006, and an indicator for missing value of firm sales. The
country level variables are: the natural logarithm of per capita GDP, the Transparency International corruption index (higher values indicate low corruption), the Heritage
Foundation property rights index (higher scores indicate more secure property rights), and an indicator variable for English or French legal origin (1 denotes English). All
dependent variables are indicator variables, taking a value of 1 if the respondent is in agreement with the question or answers in the affirmative, and a 0 otherwise.
Regressions are estimated using the linear probability model. t-statistics are in parentheses below each coefficient. *, **, and *** denote coefficients significant at 10%,
5%, and 1% respectively. Standard errors are clustered by country.




                                                                                              35
Table 8
                                          Business tries to maintain       Business generally does not         Family relationships are
                                                                                                                                             Family relationships facilitate
Dependent variable                      relationship with all political    have close relationships with     very/moderately important in
                                                                                                                                                access to information
                                                   parties                any political party or candidate            business
                                               (1)             (2)                (3)              (4)              (5)            (6)              (7)               (8)
Founder CEO                                   0.06            0.059            -0.012           -0.008            0.017           0.006           -0.023            -0.03
                                           [0.917]          [0.890]          [-0.185]         [-0.132]          [0.330]         [0.125]         [-0.308]         [-0.403]
Related CEO                              0.210***          0.218***         -0.182***        -0.182***        0.171***         0.161**          0.114**          0.115**
                                           [4.003]          [4.318]          [-3.391]         [-3.486]          [2.848]         [2.673]          [2.788]          [2.749]
Prof. CEO of Family firm                    -0.003            0.003             0.004            0.004        0.149***        0.143***            0.006              0.01
                                          [-0.073]          [0.066]           [0.086]          [0.080]          [3.560]         [3.670]          [0.111]          [0.160]
Ln(GDP per capita)                           0.023            0.018             0.019            0.017             0.01           0.025           0.017            0.022
                                           [0.453]          [0.349]           [0.442]          [0.395]          [0.179]         [0.437]          [0.658]          [0.932]
Anti-corruption index                       -0.035           -0.038            -0.018           -0.018         -0.049*         -0.047*            -0.003           -0.002
                                          [-0.951]          [-1.039]         [-0.471]         [-0.473]         [-1.976]        [-1.984]         [-0.136]         [-0.088]
Property rights index                        0.004            0.004              0.00             0.00            0.00            0.00             0.00              0.00
                                           [1.234]          [1.200]          [-1.021]         [-0.999]          [0.716]         [0.693]         [-0.564]         [-0.715]
Legal origin (1=English)                    -0.072           -0.062           0.196*             0.191           -0.113          -0.101        -0.121**         -0.111**
                                          [-0.642]          [-0.542]          [1.747]          [1.706]         [-1.027]        [-0.929]         [-2.614]         [-2.432]
Control for sales                               N               Y                  N                Y                N              Y                N                 Y
SIC code fixed effects                          Y               Y                  Y                Y                Y              Y                Y                 Y
Observations                                  720              720               720              720              796             796             821               821
Adjusted R2                                 6%                6%               5%               5%               3%              3%               3%               3%

Regressions of survey responses on a constant, three CEO type indicator variables (the omitted category is professional CEO of a non-family firm), four country-level
variables, two-digit SIC code fixed effects, and in some specifications, the natural logarithm of firm sales in 2006, and an indicator for missing value of firm sales. The
country level variables are: the natural logarithm of per capita GDP, the Transparency International corruption index (higher values indicate low corruption), the Heritage
Foundation property rights index (higher scores indicate more secure property rights), and an indicator variable for English or French legal origin (1 denotes English). All
dependent variables are indicator variables, taking a value of 1 if the respondent is in agreement with the question or answers in the affirmative, and a 0 otherwise.
Regressions are estimated using the linear probability model. t-statistics are in parentheses below each coefficient. *, **, and *** denote coefficients significant at 10%,
5%, and 1% respectively. Standard errors are clustered by country.




                                                                                     36
Table 9
                                             Parental income when         Father was a blue           Father was a         Father was a business     Father was a business
Dependent variable
                                              growing up was low            collar worker             professional               manager                    owner
                                                   (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)          (9)          (10)
Founder CEO                                       0.05         0.05        0.017       0.016      -0.144*      -0.140*         -0.05      -0.044       0.175*       0.171*
                                               [1.092]       [1.123]     [0.316]      [0.305]     [-1.992]     [-1.927]     [-1.523]     [-1.365]      [1.893]      [1.906]
Related CEO                                  -0.164***    -0.161***    -0.194***    -0.191***    -0.233***    -0.228***      0.130*       0.134*     0.346***     0.336***
                                               [-5.821]     [-5.695]    [-5.626]     [-5.286]     [-5.311]     [-5.230]      [1.740]     [1.813]       [5.115]      [4.910]
Prof. CEO of Family firm                      -0.065**     -0.063**       -0.032       -0.03        -0.025       -0.021      0.077*      0.081**         0.001       -0.007
                                               [-2.450]     [-2.370]    [-1.039]     [-0.926]     [-0.640]     [-0.530]      [2.010]     [2.096]       [0.029]     [-0.202]
Ln(GDP per capita)                               0.027        0.025        0.016       0.017        -0.037     -0.041*         0.019       0.013         0.011        0.016
                                               [1.337]       [1.257]     [0.485]      [0.523]     [-1.621]     [-1.903]      [0.681]     [0.424]       [0.492]      [0.644]
Anti-corruption index                            0.008        0.007        0.037       0.036        -0.005       -0.006       -0.004      -0.005        -0.014       -0.011
                                               [0.501]       [0.483]     [1.549]      [1.493]     [-0.390]     [-0.473]     [-0.224]     [-0.282]     [-1.029]     [-0.676]
Property rights index                          -0.003*     -0.003**     -0.003*      -0.003*         0.00         0.00          0.00        0.00         0.00         0.00
                                               [-2.059]     [-2.159]    [-1.815]     [-1.957]      [0.789]      [0.724]     [-1.150]     [-1.054]      [1.249]      [1.247]
Legal origin (1=English)                     0.207***     0.207***      0.125**      0.132**        -0.037       -0.036        0.027       0.024      -0.070*         -0.08
                                               [5.822]       [6.176]     [2.228]      [2.379]     [-0.685]     [-0.660]      [0.531]     [0.451]      [-1.839]     [-1.694]
Control for sales                                   N            Y           N           Y             N            Y             N           Y            N            Y
SIC code fixed effects                              Y            Y           Y           Y             Y            Y             Y           Y            Y            Y
Observations                                      759          759          693         693          693          693           694         694           694          694
Adjusted R2                                     10%          10%          6%             6%         4%           4%           1%           1%           8%           9%

Regressions of survey responses on a constant, three CEO type indicator variables (the omitted category is professional CEO of a non-family firm), four country-level
variables, two-digit SIC code fixed effects, and in some specifications, the natural logarithm of firm sales in 2006, and an indicator for missing value of firm sales. The
country level variables are: the natural logarithm of per capita GDP, the Transparency International corruption index (higher values indicate low corruption), the Heritage
Foundation property rights index (higher scores indicate more secure property rights), and an indicator variable for English or French legal origin (1 denotes English). All
dependent variables are indicator variables, taking a value of 1 if the respondent is in agreement with the question or answers in the affirmative, and a 0 otherwise.
Regressions are estimated using the linear probability model. t-statistics are in parentheses below each coefficient. *, **, and *** denote coefficients significant at 10%,
5%, and 1% respectively. Standard errors are clustered by country.




                                                                                    37
                                                                                          Prof. CEO of   Prof. CEO of non-
Table 10                                   Whole sample       Founder CEO   Related CEO
                                                                                           family firm      family firm

CEO's Parental income
     % low                                     14%               23%              3%          9%              18%
     % middling                                52%               49%             34%         61%              57%
     % high                                    34%               28%             63%         30%              25%
Father's occupation
     Bluecollar worker (%)                     15%               19%              1%         15%              19%
     Professional (%)                          26%               17%              8%         31%              34%
     In business (%)                           59%               65%             92%         54%              46%
Paternal grandfather's occupation
     Bluecollar worker (%)                     11%               11%              8%         10%              13%
     Professional (%)                          13%               11%              6%         15%              14%
     In business (%)                           39%               39%             65%         38%              29%
     In Government (%)                          8%                4%              5%          9%               9%
     Farmer (%)                                29%               34%             16%         28%              35%


See the Appendix for selected summary statistics by region.




                                                                            38
Table 11
Origin: CEOs’ paternal                                                   Destination: CEOs’ fathers’ occupation
grandfathers’ occupation                       Blue-collar            Professional      Business            Govt.                             Farmer              Total
Blue-collar                                        22%                      7%                     54%                   16%                    1%                100%
Professional                                        6%                     47%                     35%                   10%                    2%                100%
Business                                            4%                     11%                     78%                    5%                    1%                100%
Govt.                                               8%                     22%                     43%                   24%                    4%                100%
Farmer                                             16%                     18%                     35%                    8%                    24%               100%

The table presents the inter-generational transition matrix of occupations. Rows sum to 100%, so for each category of paternal grandfather occupation, the table presents
the distribution of their sons’ (the CEOs’ fathers’) occupations. The diagonal, representing relative occupational stability over generations, is shaded grey. Cell values
over 30% are in bold.




Table 12
        Distribution:              Actual (CEOs' fathers')                    Steady state
     Blue-collar                              10.5%                               6.2%
    Professional                              17.8%                              18.3%
      Business                                54.3%                              65.1%
        Govt.                                 9.3%                                8.3%
       Farmer                                 8.1%                                2.1%

The first column of this table shows the distribution of CEOs’ fathers’ occupations. The second column iterates the occupational transition matrix in Table 11 to obtain the
steady state distribution of occupations suggested by the transition matrix. Note that this table does not use CEO fathers’ incomes to group them into just three categories,
which is why the numbers in the first column are different from those in Table 10.




                                                                                     39
Table 13

                                                                            Destination: CEOs' fathers' income
   Origin: CEOs' paternal grandfathers' occupation
                                                                    Low           Middle         High          Total
 Blue-collar                                                        20%            63%            17%         100%
 Professional                                                       11%            55%            34%         100%
 Business                                                            7%            44%            48%         100%
 Govt.                                                              12%            51%            37%         100%
 Farmer                                                             24%            54%            23%         100%

The table presents the inter-generational transition matrix from CEOs’ paternal grandfathers’ occupations to their sons’ (the CEOs’ fathers’) income levels when the CEO
was growing up. Rows sum to 100%, so for each category of paternal grandfather occupation, the table presents the distribution of their son’s income. Cell values over
30% are in bold.




                                                                                   40
APPENDIX

Country            # observations    %

Argentina                49          6%
Brazil                   52          6%
Chile                    38          5%
Colombia                 50          6%
Costa Rica               21          3%
Ecuador                  45          5%
Egypt                    32          4%
El Salvador              31          4%
Ghana                    26          3%
Guatemala                30          4%
Hong Kong, China         15          2%
India                    30          4%
Kenya                    60          7%
Malaysia                 20          2%
Mexico                   46          6%
Nigeria                  29          4%
Peru                     75          9%
Singapore                18          2%
South Africa             26          3%
Turkey                   46          6%
Venezuela                47          6%
Zimbabwe                 37          4%
TOTAL                   823         100%

                                           41
Selected summary statistics by region


                                          S. America   C. America   Africa   East Asia   Turkey-Egypt   Total

Observations by region                      43%             16%     22%        10%           9%         100%
CEO type
     Founder CEO                            10%             15%     15%         9%           18%        13%
     Related CEO                            20%             21%     16%        16%            9%        18%
     Prof. CEO of family firm               20%             29%     12%        21%           33%        21%
     Prof. CEO of nonfamily firm            49%             35%     57%        55%           40%        48%
Education
     Undergrad. %                           94%             94%     80%        90%           96%        91%
     MBA %                                  32%             46%     20%        28%           17%        30%
Parental income when growing up:
     % low                                   8%             13%     26%        23%            9%        14%
     % middle                               52%             50%     61%        54%           44%        52%
     % high                                 40%             38%     14%        23%           47%        34%
Father's occupation:
     Blue-collar worker (%)                 12%             15%     19%        30%            8%        15%
     Professional (%)                       27%             20%     29%        21%           31%        26%
     In business (%)                        61%             65%     51%        49%           61%        59%
          Father was a business owner       36%             42%     28%        34%           38%        35%
          Father was a business manager     22%             16%     19%        15%           16%        19%




                                                       42
Survey Appendix

Survey on Business Perspectives of Top Executives

COMPANY INFORMATION

Company name: «CompanyName»

Year of incorporation:

What is this company's main sector of operation? Please select one:

  Agriculture                                    Food processing
  Automobile                                     Household Equipment
  Construction                                   Non-Traded Services
  Consumption Goods                              Real Estate
  Corporate Services                             Retail and Wholesale Trade
  Energy                                         Transportation
  Finance                                        Mining/Metals
  Pharmaceuticals                                Other ______________

Company sales in 2006 (in millions of U.S. dollars): $

PERSONAL INFORMATION

Name: «Firstname» «Lastname»

Full job title:

Year of birth: 19

Place of birth: city:
               country:
Nationality:

Gender:             Male           Female

EDUCATIONAL BACKGROUND

Do you have an undergraduate university degree?      Yes         No
If yes, please specify:
School attended:
Location: city:
           country:
Field of study:


                                            43
Do you have a Masters Degree in Business Administration (MBA)?          Yes         No
If yes, please specify:
School attended:
Location: city:
           country:

Do you have any other postgraduate university degree?      Yes          No

If yes, please specify:
Degree type: Ph.D.           Masters
Field of study:
School attended:
Location: city:
           country:

Did you ever attend a military school?   Yes          No

PRIOR WORK EXPERIENCE

In which year did you first join «CompanyName»?

In which position did you first join «CompanyName»?

In which year did you become the «title» of «CompanyName»?

Please list the three positions (business and non-business related, academia, government,
military etc.) you held the longest prior to becoming «title» of «CompanyName»:

         Job Title              Company Organization        Start Year        End Year
         Country

1.

2.

3.

Who appointed you as the «title» of «CompanyName»? Please select one:

     Board of directors                                          Previous CEO
     Large Shareholder(s)                                        Government officials
     Founder or relatives of founder                             CEO of a parent company
     Other (please specify):                                     Nominating Committee

Do you sit on your company's board of directors?    Yes            No


                                           44
Are you the chairman of the board?      Yes           No

YOUR BUSINESS APPROACH

Which of the following alternatives best describes your strategic focus for
«CompanyName» in the next five years? Please select one.

  Diversify into new industries
  Expand into international markets
  Strengthen focus in core businesses

Which of the following two alternatives best describes your view? Executives should:

  Maintain payments to shareholders, even if they must lay off a number of
  employees
  Maintain stable employment, even if they must reduce payments to
  shareholders

As the «title» of «CompanyName», who do you feel the most accountable to? Please
select up to two alternatives:

  Customers                                        Parent Company
  Shareholders                                     Employees
  Government                                       Banks and other major lenders
  Other (please specify):

As the «title» of «CompanyName», what do you perceive as your most important
operational tasks? Please select up to two alternatives:

  Selecting and appraising other top managers in the company
  Supervising operational, strategic, and financial planning decisions
  Managing the company image and reputation with outsiders (such as customers,
media,
   banks, and other investors)
  Representing the interests of the company in front of government and regulatory
bodies
  Other (please specify):

How would you characterize your leadership role in «CompanyName»? Your task is to:

  Bring about changes in the way the company is run
  Guarantee the stability of the company's traditions and values

Consider the following tasks. At «CompanyName», how would you characterize the way
top level decisions are made for each of these tasks? For each category, please select one.



                                              45
1. Selection and appraisal of top employees are:

  Made by myself
  Delegated to other top executives with my final say
  Made jointly by a group of top executives including myself
  Made jointly by members of the board and myself
  Other (please specify): _____________________

2. Operational, strategic and business planning decisions are:

  Made by myself
  Delegated to other top executives with my final say
  Made jointly by a group of top executives including myself
  Made jointly by members of the board and myself
  Other (please specify): _____________________

3. Financial planning and budgeting decisions are:

  Made by myself
  Delegated to other top executives with my final say
  Made jointly by a group of top executives including myself
  Made jointly by members of the board and myself
  Other (please specify): _____________________

Which of the company’s stakeholders are you most likely to involve before deciding to
undertake a large-scale investment project, such as the acquisition of a plant or a
company? Please select up to two.

  Bankers                                                         Larger shareholders
  Parent company CEO                                              Founder
  Government                                                      Members of the board
  Other top executives in the company                             I do not involve anyone
  Other (please specify): __________

How many managers in your company report directly to you? Please select one.

  Less than five                                        Fifteen to twenty
  Five to ten                                           More than twenty
  Ten to fifteen

How many of the upper-level managers did you replace in the first two years after you
took office as the «title» of «CompanyName»? Please select one.

  All                                            Less than half
  More than half                                 None



                                            46
How many hours do you work in a typical week? Please select one.

  Forty hours or less                               Sixty to seventy hours
  Forty to fifty hours                              More than seventy hours
  Fifty to sixty hours

FAMILY BACKGROUND

For how many generations has your family been involved in the upper-level management
of large businesses? Please select one.

  One generation                                    Three generations
  Two generations                                   More than three generations

How would you classify the income level of your parents when you were growing up
(compared to other families in your country of residence)? Please select one.

  Lower income                                      Upper income
  Middle income

What is/was your father’s main occupation?

  Large business manager (>100 employees)                  Medical Doctor
  Small business manager (<100 employees)                  Engineer/Scientist
  Large business owner (> 100 employees)                   Teacher/Professor
  Small business owner (<100 employees)                    Government Official
  Administrative Clerk                                     Judge/Lawyer
  Sales person                                             Farmer
  Other (please specify): _______________

What is/was your paternal grandfather’s main occupation?

  Large business manager (>100 employees)                  Medical Doctor
  Small business manager (<100 employees)                  Engineer/Scientist
  Large business owner (> 100 employees)                   Teacher/Professor
  Small business owner (<100 employees)                    Government Official
  Administrative Clerk                                     Judge/Lawyer
  Sales person                                             Farmer
  Other (please specify): _______________

What is/was your maternal grandfather’s main occupation?

  Large business manager (>100 employees)                  Medical Doctor
  Small business manager (<100 employees)                  Engineer/Scientist
  Large business owner (> 100 employees)                   Teacher/Professor
  Small business owner (<100 employees)                    Government Official

                                          47
   Administrative Clerk                                         Judge/Lawyer
   Sales person                                                 Farmer
   Other (please specify): _______________

In many countries around the world, mutual support of family members in business
transactions is essential for efficient business operations. In your view, how important are
family relationships for conducting successful business in your country? Please select
one.
   Very important                                                 Not important at all
   Moderately important                                           A hindrance to success

In your view, which of following transactions are most commonly facilitated through
family relationships in your country? Please select up to two options:

  Access to business information
  Access to credit for company
  Dealing with government and regulators
  Hiring of top managers and other employees
  Sale and purchase of assets
  Supplier and customer relationships
  Other (please specify):

Are you the founder of «CompanyName»?                    Yes          No

Are you a relative of «CompanyName»’s founder?          Yes          No
If yes, please specify family relationship:

  Son/Daughter                                   Brother/Sister
  Grandson/Granddaughter                         Other (please specify): ______________

Were any of your relatives ever employed in an upper-level management position at
«CompanyName»? Please specify:

  Father                                                Maternal grandfather
  Father-in-law                                         Paternal grandfather
  Uncle                                                 Brother/Sister

  Other (please specify):

Are/were any of your following relatives a majority equity owner (at least 20 percent
ownership stake) in «CompanyName»? Please specify:

  Father                                                Maternal grandfather
  Father-in-law                                         Paternal grandfather
  Uncle                                                 Brother/Sister



                                            48
  Other (please specify):


COUNTRY CULTURE

Suppose that the government is deliberating to pass a new law that would substantially
hinder business activities in your industry. What mechanisms, if any, do business leaders
in your country have to prevent the government from making a major mistake? Please
choose the answer that most closely reflects your view:

   There is no way to influence the government's decisions
   There is a formal lobbying process through which firms can exchange information and
  opinions with the government
   The government will generally consult business leaders in advance about any changes
that
  may affect their industry
   Most business leaders have contacts in the government who listen to their opinions

In general, how would you describe the current government's attitude towards business in
your country? Please specify one.

  Supportive                    Indifferent                   Hostile

How would you describe the relationship between major companies and political parties
in your country? Most business leaders:

  Try to maintain close relationships with all political parties and candidates
  Support only one political party or candidate and do not maintain close relationships
with
   other parties
  Do not have close relationships with any political party or candidate

Which do you consider to be the most important factors to being a successful «title» in
your country? Please select the up to two alternatives:

  Business contacts
  Family background and family contacts
  Formal business training and business experience
  Political contacts
  Specific industry knowledge
  Ability to communicate ideas and persuade others
  Other (please specify):

In your view, which of the following occupations carries the most social prestige in your
country? Please select the top two alternatives:



                                              49
  Business manager                                        Lawyer
  Engineer                                                Medical doctor
  Entrepreneur                                            Government official
  Other (please specify):


COMPANY STRUCTURE

As the «title» of «CompanyName» do you hold equity in the firm (stock options)?

  Yes, I hold more than 5% of the company’s stock
  Yes, I hold less than 5% of the company’s stock
  Yes, I receive stock and stock options as part of my compensation
  No, I do not hold equity in the firm

Is your company majority-owned by a parent corporation?          Yes       No
If yes, please give the name of that parent corporation:

How concentrated is the ownership of your company? That is, what fraction of equity in
your company is held by the three largest shareholders?

Shareholder 1             %
Shareholder 2             %
Shareholder 3             %

Please indicate if any of the three largest equity holders is/are:

  The founder or relatives of the founder
  Foreign investors
  Foreign corporations
  Domestic corporations
  The government


In general, how are other top managers appointed in this company? Mostly through:

  Internal promotions
  External hires
  Both

Who appoints the board members in your company? Please choose up to three
alternatives.

  I select most of the board members
  Company founder
  CEO of the parent company

                                              50
  Large shareholders
  Government
  Other, please specify:

Why did the previous «title» leave «CompanyName»?

  Retired for age, health or family-related reasons
  Decided to leave for a non-business position
  Decided to leave for another business position
  Board of directors terminated his appointment
  Company founder terminated his appointment
  CEO of a parent company terminated his appointment
  The government terminated his appointment
  Other (please specify):




                                        51
