                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       PATENT COMMONS, THICKETS, AND OPEN SOURCE SOFTWARE ENTRY
                           BY START-UP FIRMS

                                             Wen Wen
                                          Marco Ceccagnoli
                                           Chris Forman

                                        Working Paper 19394
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19394


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2013

We thank Ajay Agrawal, Ashish Arora, Tim Bresnahan, Alberto Galasso, Stuart Graham, Patrick
Legros,Josh Lerner, Megan MacGarvie, Marc Rysman, Timothy Simcoe, Salvatore Torrisi, Nicolas
Van Zeebrock,Feng Zhu, and participants at the NBER Patents, Standards, and Innovation Conference,
the 2011Workshop on Information Systems and Economics (WISE), the 2011 Conference on Information
Systemsand Technology (CIST), the 2011 REER conference at the Georgia Institute of Technology,
the 2012European Policy for Intellectual Property (EPIP) conference, the Université Libre de Bruxelles
(ECARES),the 2012 Academy of Management Conference Symposium, the 2013 Platform Strategy
ResearchSymposium at the Boston University. We gratefully acknowledge funding from a Kauffman
Foundation/GeorgiaResearch Alliance grant for the study of entrepreneurship and productivity. We
thank Nirmalya Choudhury,Matthew Espy, Emily Getreu, Bridget M. Gorta, Sujay Mehta, Daniel
Mitchell, and Jian Zhao foroutstanding research assistance. Wen Wen thanks the Kauffman Foundation
for providing fundingfor this research through a Kauffman Dissertation Fellowship. Chris Forman
acknowledges fundingfrom the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation through an Industry Studies Fellowship.
The views expressedherein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of EconomicResearch.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Wen Wen, Marco Ceccagnoli, and Chris Forman. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Patent Commons, Thickets, and Open Source Software Entry by Start-Up Firms
Wen Wen, Marco Ceccagnoli, and Chris Forman
NBER Working Paper No. 19394
August 2013
JEL No. L86,O34

                                           ABSTRACT

We examine whether the introduction of a patent commons, a special type of royalty free patent pool
available to the open source software (OSS) community influences new OSS product entry by start-
upsoftware firms. In particular, we analyze the impact of The Commons—established by the Open
SourceDevelopment Labs and IBM in 2005. We find that increases in the size of The Commons
related toa software market increase the rate of entry in the market by start-ups using a new product
based onan OSS license. The marginal impact of The Commons on OSS entry is increasing in the
cumulativenessof innovation in the market and the extent to which patent ownership in the market
is concentrated.


Wen Wen                                           Chris Forman
The University of Texas at Austin                 Georgia Institute of Technology
McCombs School of Business                        Scheller College of Business
2110 Speedway Stop B6500                          800 West Peachtree Street, NW
Austin, TX 78712                                  Atlanta, GA 30308
Wen.Wen@mccombs.utexas.edu                        chris.forman@scheller.gatech.edu

Marco Ceccagnoli
Scheller College of Business
Georgia Institute of Technology
800 West Peachtree Street, NW
Atlanta, GA 30308
marco.ceccagnoli@scheller.gatech.edu
1. Introduction
         While patents play an important “property rights” role in facilitating transactions in markets for
technology (e.g., Arora et al. 2001, Gans et al. 2002), the strategic use of patents and the appearance of
dense, overlapping webs of property rights known as patent thickets may also work to stifle innovation
(e.g., Bessen and Meurer 2008, Jaffe and Lerner 2004, Shapiro 2001). Empirical evidence on this issue is
still mixed, with implications varying across industries and firms.1 The presence of patent thickets may be
a particular issue for developers of information technology (IT) products like computing hardware and
software, where innovation is often highly cumulative and products rely on standards of heterogeneous
inventions for whose patent rights are often owned by many different firms. 2 Small firms often find
navigating such patent thickets difficult, as they will typically not have a large intellectual property rights
(IPR) portfolio that they can use to cross-license with existing IPR holders.
         A range of institutional mechanisms have appeared to help companies navigate patent thickets,
including standard setting organizations (SSOs) and patent pools. Some of these mechanisms will lower
the transaction costs of identifying and negotiating licensing agreements for related technologies, but may
also increase the incentives for some patentees to litigate (e.g., Lampe and Moser 2013, Simcoe et al.
2009). As a result, they have had mixed effects on inventive activity that builds upon earlier patented
technologies.3
         An alternative approach is to offer IPR through a patent commons, a special type of patent pool
that offers royalty-free usage of patents to any firm that promises not to assert their IPR against the
commons’ beneficiaries (Hall and Helmers 2013, Lévêque and Ménière 2007, Serafino 2007). While the
number and size of such donations have been growing rapidly, thus far we have little evidence on whether
they in fact contribute to increased innovative activity.4 This is an important gap in understanding. The
literature suggests that inventors may have insufficient incentives to provide intellectual property as a
public good to the community (Gambardella and Hall 2006), so patent commons may contain few or low-


1
  For example, Hall and Ziedonis (2001) study on the semiconductor industry finds that the pro-patent shift in U.S. policy in the
1980s spawned an increase in strategic patenting among capital-intensive firms, but also facilitated entry by specialized design
firms. Cockburn and MacGarvie (2011) find that, following expansions in the patentability of software in the mid-1990s, average
entry rates declined but the likelihood of entry by firms holding patents increased.
2
  For example, Biddle et al. (2012) identify 251 technical interoperability standards in a modern laptop. Of these 251 standards,
112 were developed by consortia, 90 by formal standards development organizations, and 49 were developed by individual
companies.
3
  For example, Rysman and Simcoe (2008) show that citations to patents increase significantly after disclosure that they are part
of a standard, while Lampe and Moser (2010) study the sewing machine patent pool and find that the pool decreased patenting
and innovation, particularly among members of the pool.
4
  One recent exception is Hall and Helmers (2013), whose recent study of the “Eco-Patent Commons” showed that “making
patents accessible royalty-free did not result in any significant increase in diffusion as measured by citing patents” (Hall and
Helmers 2013). However, their results must be interpreted with caution, given the short period of time following the
establishment of this particular patent commons in 2008.



                                                                                                                               1
quality patents that have little impact on innovative activity.5 In addition to the potential low quality issue
associated with poor incentives, the patents pledged in the commons may not contain all of the
technologies necessary to produce and commercialize a new invention. If other necessary technologies are
not held within the commons, barriers to commercialize the invention may still be high. In short, our
research speaks to the efficacy of a growing mechanism to help firms navigate patent thickets.
         Motivated by these observations, we take a first step to evaluate how the creation of a patent
commons affects innovation in the open source software (OSS) setting. In particular, we examine
implications of the introduction of The Patent Commons (commonly referred to as “The Commons”),
initiated by the Open Source Development Labs and IBM in 2005. While innovation can be examined
from many perspectives, in this study we focus on start-up entry into a market through new product
introductions. We show that introduction of The Commons influences new product entry by start-ups
using an OSS license (which we refer to as “OSS entry”). Our key argument is that because The
Commons could potentially mitigate licensing cost and litigation threats caused by patent thickets, start-
ups that have access to it would expect lower sunk costs of entry than otherwise and thus be more likely
to enter into downstream markets. Using a similar logic, we argue that such institutional mechanisms will
be particularly valuable in environments with high licensing and litigation costs. We highlight the
following two settings where such costs would be the highest and thus The Commons will have the
greatest impact on OSS entry—when innovations are highly cumulative and when IPR ownership
(particularly patent ownership) is very concentrated.
         To test these hypotheses, we assemble data on OSS entry using longitudinal press releases from
2,054 U.S. start-up software firms contained in the Gale database “PROMT”. Using count data
conditional fixed effects models, our empirical strategy examines whether time series variation in the
number of patents contributed to The Commons related to a narrowly defined software market is
associated with changes in the amount of OSS entry into that market. A key and challenging task in
assembling our dataset was to identify patents relevant to entry in product markets. Following prior work
that has examined the extent to which patents deter entry into the software industry (Cockburn and
MacGarvie 2009, 2011), we allocate patents to software product markets based upon the technological
classes of patents and their key words.
         Our results show that a 10% increase in The Commons’ patent claims in a software market is
associated with a 1.3%-2.9% increase in the rate of OSS entry by start-ups into that market.6 However,


5
  While we do not explicitly focus our research on the question of why firms may contribute some of their patents to the
commons, we do discuss IBM’s incentives for establishing a patent commons in 2005 to motivate our analysis as well as to probe
our identification strategy (see sections 3.2 and 6.3).
6
  All marginal effects are evaluated at mean values of covariates.


                                                                                                                            2
introduction of The Commons influences entry only in those markets where innovations are highly
cumulative and when patent ownership is concentrated. Figures 1, 2 and 3 foreshadow our main results.
Figure 1 shows that there is significant OSS entry after introduction of The Commons in markets where
the number of claims-weighted patents in The Commons is large, while there is no change in OSS entry
in other markets. Figures 2 and 3 motivate our results demonstrating differential benefits for The
Commons in markets with high cumulativeness and concentration. Figures 2a and 3a show that there is
little growth in OSS entry after the introduction of The Commons in all markets where The Commons has
few patents. Figures 2b and 3b examine growth in entry in markets where The Commons is well
represented; Figure 2b shows that the introduction of The Commons is associated with greater OSS entry
but only in markets where innovation is cumulative, while Figure 3b shows that growth in entry post-
Commons is higher in markets with high IPR concentration.
                                                 Figure 1: Average OSS entry by claims-
                                                   weighted patents in The Commons
                                                                               Markets where The Commons is
                                         14                                    large (above 75th percentile)

                                         12
                                         10
                                          8
                                          6        Markets where The
                                                   Commons is small
                                          4        (below 25th percentile)
                                          2
                                          0
                                                        Pre-Commons              Post-Commons

Notes: For markets with large size of The Commons, the t-test statistic for the mean difference between pre-Commons and post-Commons OSS
entry is 1.313 with a p-value 0.1.


                                 Figure 2: Average OSS entry by claims-weighted patents in
                                      The Commons and cumulativeness of innovation

                      10          Figure 2a: Markets where                   Figure 2b: Markets where
                                  The Commons is small                       The Commons is large
                        8         (below 25th percentile)                    (above 75th percentile)

                        6
                        4
                        2
                        0
                                 Low              High          Low           High
                             cumulativeness cumulativeness cumulativeness cumulativeness
                                             Pre-Commons     Post-Commons
Notes for Figure 2b: In markets with high cumulativeness, the t-test statistic for the mean difference between pre-Commons and post-Commons
OSS entry is 1.970 with a p-value 0.04.


                                                                                                                                              3
                                  Figure 3: Average OSS entry by claims-weighted patents
                                   in The Commons and patent ownership concentration

                        10
                                  Figure 3a: Markets where                 Figure 3b: Markets where
                          8       The Commons is small                     The Commons is large
                                  (below 25th percentile)                  (above 75th percentile)
                          6
                          4
                          2
                          0
                                    Low                  High                 Low                   High
                                concentration        concentration        concentration         concentration

                                                   Pre-Commons            Post-Commons

Notes for Figure 3b: In markets with high concentration, the t-test statistic for the mean difference between pre-Commons and post-Commons
OSS entry is 1.311 with a p-value 0.1.

          A particular concern is that donations to The Commons could be correlated with unobserved
market characteristics that vary over time. We examine the robustness of our results to a variety of
changes to our estimation approach. We first show that our results are robust to controlling for market-
specific time trends. We next implement a series of falsification exercises. We first examine the timing of
the effects of The Commons. We find that growth in The Commons is not associated with increased entry
from 1999 to 2003, but do find that it is associated with entry in 2004, one year prior to its introduction in
2005. We argue that that this finding reflects the implications of other activities that IBM was engaged in
to promote open source over the same period, including public announcements of IBM’s support of OSS.
These activities were in turn prompted by the SCO’s lawsuit against IBM in 2003, which increased the
perceived legal risks to developers of OSS.7 As we discuss in further detail below, one of the benefits of
The Commons to developers of OSS is as a signal of the commitment of IBM to provide support to the
OSS community in the face of these legal uncertainties. We do not attempt to separately identify these
benefits from others provided by The Commons, but instead acknowledge that The Commons will lower
the expected legal costs of developing OSS through multiple channels. We further show that growth in
The Commons is not associated with increased entry from products that should not see entry costs fall
with its introduction, namely products offered under a proprietary license.
          Last, we examine the robustness of our results to the use of instrumental variables. Our
identification strategy uses variation across markets and time in the extent to which IBM holds valuable
blocking patents, as proxied by IBM patents opposed at the European Patent Office (EPO). We also


7
 On March 7, 2003 IBM was sued by the SCO Group, which asserted that IBM’s contributions to Linux infringed on SCO’s
UNIX System V source code.


                                                                                                                                             4
exploit an additional source of time variation associated with changes in the perceived risks to OSS that
occurred during our sample period. Our results using these models are consistent with the baseline
described above.
2. Theoretical Framework
2.1 How patent commons facilitates OSS entry
         Patent thickets can increase at least three broad types of sunk costs of entry for start-ups: (1) the
costs of inventing around existing patents; (2) the costs of infringement, which may include the costs of
licensing the infringed technology and the costs of litigation such as acquiring a defensive patent portfolio
as well as injunction and damages; and (3) the transaction costs of acquiring patents owned by others.
         While firms that have a defensive patent portfolio may be able to navigate the patent thicket
through cross-licensing their own patents with those of other IPR holders, this strategy will be harder to
implement for small firms appropriating value from OSS. Firms that rely on the OSS community8 for
innovation inputs need to conform to the norms of the OSS developers, who are often philosophically
opposed to software patents, considering them antithetical to the spirit of freedom that imbues OSS
development (Marson 2004, Schultz and Urban 2012, Stallman 2011).9 Further, the costs of writing and
administering patents may be too high for small firms relative to their benefits. For example, they may
have insufficient resources to hire legal staff.
         As has been noted elsewhere, incumbent firms with significant patent portfolios and who use
traditional appropriability mechanisms to commercialize new technologies in other settings will
sometimes also contribute to open source communities under a so-called “private-collective model of
innovation” (von Hippel and von Krogh 2003). Under this model, incumbent firms may contribute to
public goods such as OSS. While they may be unable to appropriate value directly from the public good,
they may be able to create and appropriate value from complementary products and services such as
downstream application software that interfaces with open source or support for OSS.10 While such firms
may be able to navigate patent thickets by using their own patent holdings in cross-licensing agreements,
the inability of other small firms to similarly navigate the thicket may reduce the extent of complementary
innovation and in so doing reduce the value of the public good.



8
  We commonly refer to this type of firms as an OSS firm. More specifically, an OSS firm is defined as one that uses and
commercializes source code that meets the Open Source Initiative definition of open source software.
9
  OSS firms may even fear the existence of patents that are even pledged to the community for purely defensive purposes; while
the initial motivates may be altruistic, it remains possible that the original patent holder may have a change in strategy, in
particular a change in ownership or management may initiate a change in how patents are used within the organization (e.g.,
Schultz and Urban 2012).
10
   For example, Fosfuri et al. (2008) find that firms will be more likely to produce OSS products when they have large stocks of
complementary patents or downstream complementary capabilities.


                                                                                                                              5
        One institutional mechanism that these incumbents have used to stimulate complementary
innovation is to donate patents to a commons for use only within OSS community. Such donations go
beyond the requirement that contributors to OSS products automatically grant a license to use, modify,
and redistribute contributed code to all other legitimate users of the code but also extends to
complementary technologies that may be used in conjunction with existing OSS products. Contributors
not only incur the opportunity cost of foregone profits from not enforcing the IPR, but also bear an
explicit cost of maintaining and renewing the patent. While the motivations to contribute to patent
commons are in themselves interesting, it is not our goal to explore them, as they have been investigated
elsewhere (Alexy and Reitzig 2013).
        Contributions to patent commons can have direct and indirect benefits to the OSS community.
For the start-up firms that we study (i.e. those that intend to enter into a market with OSS products), one
direct benefit will be the reduction in expected invention and licensing costs related to the donated
technology. Instead of inventing around, start-ups can directly use the technology described by the
commons’ patents. Moreover, start-ups can use the pledged patent to substitute for protected technologies
that may block entry but are not in the commons, avoiding the costs of transacting and negotiating with
patentees. These benefits will be increasing in the number of patents that are made available to the start-
ups. Second, as incumbents increase their contributions it will signal their commitment to generate profits
as a private-collective (p-c) innovator through the production of complementary goods and services,
rather than through direct enforcement of IPRs. While the contributor retains the right to enforce other
patents not included in the donation, doing so would harm its reputation to the OSS community,
decreasing its ability to create and appropriate value as a p-c innovator. As a result, the perceived threat of
litigation will decline, or, to use a widespread terminology among software industry practitioners, there
will be less “fear, uncertainty, and doubt” (FUD, cf. Auza 2011).
        There may be other indirect benefits. As Alexy and Reitzig (2013) describe, the donation of
patents may encourage reciprocal behavior from other industry participants that may benefit p-c
innovation. For example, other firms involved in p-c innovation may also choose to pledge patents for use
by the community, and may acquire additional patent rights to prevent proprietary innovators from
acquiring the same and using them against the community. As more patents in a technology area are
pledged in the commons, it is more likely to create norms of non-enforcement and encourage other p-c
innovators’ contribution. One way to view this result is through the lens of public goods. The contribution
of patents represents a commitment not to assert IPR with the goal of fostering the development of new
software by entities who are unable to protect themselves against IPR enforcement by traditional means.
This goal is more likely to be accomplished when contributions are made by multiple firms. However, in
an asymmetric information environment, firms have an incentive to under-contribute (Coase 1960). To

                                                                                                             6
provide the public good, actors with high valuations must contribute more than those with lower
valuations (Mailath and Postlewaite 1990). In our setting, this corresponds to the initiator of the commons
providing more than other firms, and so the likelihood of forming successful patent commons will be
increasing in the initial contribution.
          In sum, we expect that patent commons may effectively reduce licensing costs and litigation
threats for start-ups that intend to enter into a market with new OSS products (i.e. OSS entry), and such
benefits will be increasing in the size of the original pledge. It is also worth noting that these positive
effects on OSS entry will be reinforced as firms enter and produce complementary OSS products, as these
complementary products would create a platform of interlocking components, which increases the value
of OSS products and services to potential buyers and thus further facilitate entry.
2.2 How the value of patent commons varies with market characteristics
          In the previous section we showed how a patent commons can promote OSS entry by reducing
expected invention costs or by alleviating infringement costs and transaction costs of negotiating with
patentees. In this section we explore market circumstances where the effects of such a patent commons on
reducing entry costs, and so encouraging entry, will be greatest.
           A body of literature has attempted to quantitatively characterize patent thickets in specific
technology areas and examined their implications for innovation and competition (Hall et al. 2012, von
Graevenitz et al. 2011, Ziedonis 2004). We focus on two observable dimensions of patent thickets that
influence the ex ante costs of entry. The first is the cumulativeness of innovation, which has been defined
as the extent to which an innovator builds on prior developments and discoveries (e.g., Green and
Scotchmer 1995, Scotchmer 2004: 127). In an environment with high cumulativeness, the boundaries of
potential blocking patents are usually blurred. This makes it difficult to build upon existing patents and
leads to high costs of inventing around. Further, the presence of many cumulative innovations also
suggests high infringement costs and transaction costs, as start-ups could easily infringe and may need to
obtain licenses for a large set of related patents to enter into a technology space.11 Therefore, because
patent commons could reduce these costs, its effects on OSS entry will be greatest in environments where
these ex ante costs are highest, as is the case for environments with cumulative innovations.
          The second market characteristic that we study is the concentration of patent ownership within a
software market, defined as the extent to which patents are distributed across different holders. Two

11
  It is worth noting that the “cumulativeness of innovation” in our context is different from the “royalty stacking” discussed by
Lemley and Shapiro (2007). Royalty stacking refers to situations in which a single product potentially infringes on many patents,
and thus the royalty rate to one patent holder is affected by the rates to the holders of other patents reading on that product. While
high cumulativeness also suggests an innovation is built upon many others, it does not focus on the interaction among the
potential licensee and many patent holders, and the resulting royalty rate. We will focus on this in the next paragraph—how the
ownership of existing patents faced by a start-up affects the costs of licensing negotiations.


                                                                                                                                    7
views have recently been set forth about how patent ownership influences the costs of licensing
negotiations. One view holds that increases in fragmentation of patent ownership (i.e., decreases in
concentration of patent ownership) will increase the transaction costs of licensing patents, creating an
“anti-commons” effect (Heller and Eisenberg 1998). Under this view, when there are many small
exclusionary patents held by many firms, the transaction costs of coming to terms with many patent
holders will influence a firm’s strategic response to potential expropriation risks. For example, Ziedonis
(2004) shows that firms will patent more aggressively when patent ownership is fragmented. In sum,
under this view, the transaction costs of acquiring patents owned by others are particularly high when
patent ownership is fragmented.
            Recent work has challenged the anti-commons view. Under this view, concentration of patent
ownership increases the value of the negotiation for the patent holder, resulting in an increase in
incentives to litigate (Galasso and Schankerman 2010, Lichtman 2006). For example, consider the case
where patents are alternatively held by 1000 firms or 1 firm. While transaction costs are potentially higher
in the former setting, the potential licensee may not need to obtain licenses from each of the 1000 firms as
some patentees may not litigate the patent if there are non-zero costs to litigation and some uncertainty of
whether the focal patent will be upheld. Galasso and Schankerman (2010) formalize this intuition,
showing in the context of a bargaining game that fragmentation reduces the negotiation value of a patent
that is potentially infringed and reduces the time to settlement in a patent dispute. In short, under this
second view, the expected costs of infringement are highest when patents are highly concentrated, and the
formation of a patent commons will have a particularly strong effect in reducing entry costs. We will
allow the data to inform which of these alternative views shapes the implications of the patent commons,
and so indirectly contribute to the ongoing debate on fragmentation of patent holdings and litigation risk.
3. Research Setting
3.1 The Commons
            We focus on one major patent commons—the Open Source Development Labs’ Patent Commons
project (commonly referred to as “The Commons”). In January 2005, IBM pledged access to 500
software patents to “any individual, community, or company working on or using software that meets the
Open Source Initiative (OSI) definition of open source software now or in the future.” Subsequent to
IBM’s action, several other incumbents pledged an additional 29 patents to The Commons.12 “Pledge” in
this context means that “patent holders agree they will not, under certain terms and conditions, assert
patent rights against third parties who are engaging in activities that might otherwise give rise to a claim



12
     Example companies include Computer Associates International Inc. and Open Invention Network, LLC.


                                                                                                              8
of patent infringement.”13 IBM announced in its press release that it believed this was the largest patent
pledge of any kind. All pledged patents are explicitly listed on an online public database, and users of the
technologies embedded in the patents are not required to sign any formal agreement with The Commons.
            While we found a series of recent patent pledging events based on a search of major news outlets
(see Appendix A for a detailed summary of these events), our choice of The Commons as the focus of our
analysis is guided by several factors. First, The Commons is economically important in the sense that it
comprises a large collection of patents. Second, The Commons covers multiple software technology
markets, allowing us to use variation over time within software markets for identification. Third, The
Commons was introduced in 2005, allowing sufficient time to observe changes in entry behavior after its
introduction. Fourth, The Commons specifies contributed patents at a very detailed level, listing each of
their patent numbers. We could find no other patent donation that similarly met all of these criteria.
Nevertheless, in our empirical analysis we control for the effects of other commons-like institutions.
3.2 IBM historical support for open source software
            The establishment of The Commons is consistent with IBM’s strategy since the late 1990s of
supporting OSS (Campbell-Kelly and Garcia-Swartz 2009, Capeck et al. 2005, Samuelson 2006). IBM
initially announced its commitment to Linux in 1999, and in 2001 announced that it would invest $1
billion over the following three years to make Linux more suitable for enterprise applications (Campbell-
Kelly and Garcia-Swartz 2009). In keeping with this commitment, IBM has made all of its hardware
platforms compatible with Linux, released Linux versions of its software products, and developed Linux-
focused service capabilities. IBM explicitly supports OSS to promote open standards in areas that are
complementary to its profitable businesses (Capek et al. 2005). Over time, it has focused less on operating
systems that might compete with open source alternatives, and focused more on developing and
marketing middleware or application software. IBM’s business model now focuses on selling high end
hardware, proprietary software running on top of Linux, and systems integration and other customized
services to enterprise customers (Samuelson 2006).
            IBM’s contributions to create and license OSS throughout our sample period may cast doubt
about the real effects The Commons has on innovation by other OSS firms. As a practical matter, an OSS
contributor implicitly grants a license to any patents that author holds that read on the OSS that has been
developed; otherwise any users of that OSS may become inadvertent infringers of the patent. However,
while some OSS licenses, such as the General Public License v3 (GPL v3), include an explicit grant of a
patent license, many do not (Capek et al. 2005). Further, IBM may own IPRs that do not directly cover



13
     For more details, see http://www.patent-commons.org/resources/about_commitments.php.


                                                                                                          9
contributed technology but may be closely related to it. This creates legal uncertainties for both producers
and users of OSS.
          In summary, our analysis of IBM’s involvement with OSS suggests that its support for OSS starts
before and continues throughout our sample period (1999 to 2009, as explained below). However, the
establishment of The Commons represents a significant discontinuity in terms of IBM’s explicit legal
support for OSS. The only similar event that occurs during our sample period was IBM Senior Vice
President Nick Donofrio’s announcement in August 4, 2004 during a keynote at the LinuxWorld
conference that IBM would not assert its patents against the Linux kernel (Scannell 2004).14 We will
examine the effect of this 2004 announcement and its relationship with the establishment of The
Commons in 2005 when we study the robustness of our empirical results.
4. Data
4.1. Sample
          Our sample consists of 2,054 US software firms from the 2004 and 2010 editions of the
CorpTech Directory of Technology Firms15 (denoted as CorpTech 2004/2010 hereafter) that primarily
operate in the prepackaged software industry. We combine this sample with data from the National
Establishment Time Series (NETS) Database, which includes 100,000 US-based firms with primary SIC
7372. Our use of two data sources reflects constraints with each. The CorpTech data have detailed
information on the product markets of firms, but have little time variation, while the NETS data have
limited product market information but vary over time.
          As noted above, the focus of our study is on start-up firms. As a result, we restrict our sample to
firms that were founded after 1990 and that have fewer than 1000 employees and less than $500 million
in annual sales.16 Our sample period is from 1999 to 2009, with 6 years before the establishment of The
Commons and 5 years after. We believe this time window is sufficiently long to capture the impact of The
Commons on OSS entry.
4.2. Identifying software markets and the matching patent classes
          We use the product code classification system embedded in the Gale database “PROMT” (Fosfuri
et al. 2008) as our primary source to define software markets.17 Because of certain drawbacks of only
relying on the PROMT classifications (we describe these in further detail in Appendix B), we further

14
   It is believed that this announcement was made in response to a finding by the Open Source Risk Management organization
that several large companies, including IBM, held patents that might affect the Linux kernel (Scannell 2004).
15
   Our choice of 2010 CorpTech data reflects a constraint with the data—we have contacted CorpTech and there are no historical
data from 2005 to 2009, the core years of our sample period. The combination of CorpTech 2004 and 2010 is to address potential
survivor bias.
16
   Our results are robust to the use of alternative thresholds for inclusion in our sample. For example, our results are robust to an
alternative sample of start-ups that includes firms founded after 1990 that have fewer than 500 employees and less than $500
million annual sales.
17
   A few examples of PROMPT product codes are included in Table B-1 in Appendix B.


                                                                                                                                  10
match PROMT’s software-related product categories with CorpTech’s “SOF” product classes18 to create a
PROMT-CorpTech concordance so that each PROMT software product code is associated with a detailed
set of keywords. The keywords for each product class are used to (i) manually assign PROMT product
codes to PROMT news articles with missing codes and (ii) match software markets with the most relevant
patent classes as described below.
         An important part of our data construction involves matching product markets to patents. This
allows us to identify both the cumulativeness of innovation and the concentration of patent ownership in a
software market. As is well-established in the literature, this type of matching is difficult (e.g., Griliches
1990, Silverman 1999). We follow Cockburn and MacGarvie (2006, 2011) and match software patents to
CorpTech “SOF” product classes to create a patent-CorpTech concordance. Because our software markets
are classified through PROMT categories, in order to create the final mapping between software markets
and patent classes, we then combine the PROMT-CorpTech concordance and patent-CorpTech
concordance to form the PROMT-patent concordance. The final concordance that we use in the empirical
analysis consists of 33 software markets matched to 422 patent class-subclass combinations 19 (see
Appendix B for a detailed discussion of our data construction process).
5. Measures
5.1. Dependent variable: OSS entry
         We measure OSS entry for software market j in year t as the number of events in which start-ups
introduce their first OSS product into that market and year. We use a three-step procedure to identify OSS
entry in a software market based on the press releases of the 2,054 firms in the PROMT database. First,
following the work by Fosfuri et al. (2008) and Bessen and Hunt (2007), we searched for a set of
keywords within PROMT articles to identify articles related to OSS. Appendix B includes the full set of
keywords. Second, we manually read all search results that included words from the first step to identify
new OSS product introductions. We identified an article as referring to an introduction of a new OSS
product when the article indicated that either of the following took place: (i) the introduction of a new
software product that offered one or more of its module(s)20 under an open source license (we label such
modules as open source modules); and (ii) the introduction of a new version of an existing software
product with open source modules. Third, to identify OSS entry, we kept only the events in which the
start-up introduced an open source module into a market in which it did not previously have OSS

18
   There are more than 290 software product codes (denoted as SOF categories) defined by CorpTech Directory. Each firm in this
directory is associated with a set of self-reported product codes selected from these 290 SOF categories. For further details on
this classification system, see Cockburn and MacGarvie (2006).
19
   Table B-3 in Appendix B lists examples of this final concordance between software markets and US patent class-subclass
combinations.
20
   In software, a module is a part of a program. A software product is composed of one or more modules that are linked together
but preform different functions (e.g., the calendar module available in the Microsoft Office's Outlook).


                                                                                                                             11
        products. In total, we have 242 new OSS product entry events made by 85 start-up firms from 1999 to
        2009.21 We aggregated these new OSS product entry events by software market and year. The data are
        structured as a balanced panel. Table 1 includes a brief description of measures and summary statistics for
        the main variables used in our empirical analysis.
                                                          Table 1: Summary Statistics
Variable name             Measure (Market-year)                                                    Obs.   Mean     Std. Dev.     Min         Max
Dependent variable
                          The number of start-up entry events through releasing new OSS
OSS entry                                                                                          363     .667     1.344         0           11
                          products related to market j in year t
Independent variables and controls
                          Log of The Commons’ claims-weighted patent count related to market
The Commons                                                                                        363    2.413     2.936         0          7.911
                          j cumulated up to year t
Cumulativeness            Log of cumulativeness of innovation in market j up to year t             363     .808      .613        .095        3.454
Concentration             Four-assignee citation concentration ratio in market j up to year t      363    0.227     0.075       0.076        0.458
Sales growth              The growth of market j’s sales from year t-1 to year t                   363    1.007     0.150       0.631        2.112
                          Log of total claims-weighted patent count related to market j                                                      13.48
Total patents                                                                                      363    10.817    1.232       6.870
                          cumulated up to year t                                                                                               6
                          Log of average quality of patents related to market j cumulated up to
Patent quality                                                                                     363    2.832      .402       1.839        4.051
                          year t
                          Log of Open Invention Network’s claims-weighted patent count in
OIN patents                                                                                        363    1.125     2.053         0          6.690
                          market j cumulated up to year t
                          Log of standard-setting organizations’ claims-weighted patent count in
SSO patents                                                                                        363    1.628     2.118         0          5.908
                          market j cumulated up to year t
                          Log of cumulated downloads at SourceForge for OSS applications                                                     22.36
OSS demand                                                                                         363    14.340    5.721         0
                          related to market j up to year t                                                                                     5
Instrument variables
                          IBM’s patents opposed at the European Patent Office (EPO) related to
IBM’s opposed patents                                                                              363    5.804     5.666         0           28
                          market j cumulated up to year t
IBM’s opposed patents     IBM’s opposed patents * afteryear2003 dummy, where afteryear2003
                                                                                                   363    3.856     5.539         0           28
X afteryear2003           dummy turns on for years 2003, 2004, …, 2009


        5.2. Independent variables
        The Commons. This variable is equal to the log of claims-weighted patent counts in The Commons related
        to software market j in year t.22 We use the claims-weighted count to measure the size of The Commons
        for several reasons. First, since one potential effect of The Commons is to reduce invention and licensing
        costs for start-ups, using a claims-weighted measure may more precisely capture the scope of
        technologies donated by the incumbent. In particular, as noted in Cohen and Lemley (2001: p. 6), “the
        scope of a patent is defined by its claims, which set out each element of the invention”.23 Moreover, since
        patent claims reflect an inventor’s effort to make the patent more resistant to invalidation challenges
        (Allison et al. 2004, Bessen 2008), the number of claims may serve as a proxy for patent value. In short,
        21
           This procedure implicitly assumes there is no OSS entry by firms prior to 1999. We believe this assumption is supported by
        empirical evidence. For example, SourceForge, a major repository of OSS, was started in November 1999.
        22
           We also use raw patent counts as a robustness check. The results are qualitatively similar to the claims-weighted measure and
        are reported in Table C-2 and Table C-3 in the Appendix.
        23
           While we use patent claims as a proxy for patent scope, we by no means argue that the correlation is necessarily positive. For
        instance, Allison et al. (2004) suggests claims may be negatively correlated with patent scope.


                                                                                                                                        12
by weighting by claims, we will be able to better capture variance in the value and scope of patents
contributed to The Commons. We further take the logged value of this variable24 to reduce skewness.
         Cumulativeness. This variable refers to the cumulativeness of innovation within market j in year t.
We use patents’ backward citations, which provide information about “existing ideas used in the creation
of new ideas” (Caballero and Jaffe 1993) and indicate “some form of cumulative technological impact”
(Jaffe et al. 1998). Following Clarkson (2005), we measure it based on the average propensity for patents
in market j and year t to backward cite patents within the same market j. This is roughly similar to the
way economists have measured the cumulative nature of innovation at the firm level, e.g. using the extent
to which firms self-cite their own patents (Hall et al. 2005). In our setting, we proceed as follows. If we
sort the N patents within a software market j chronologically (with m=1 being the oldest patent and m=N
being the youngest), the cumulativeness for each patent n (i.e., the propensity for patent n to cite
                                                                                            
preceding patents within the same market) is calculated as C = ∑                           
                                                                                                ,   where        is a dummy

variable equal to one if patent n back-cites patent m, and zero otherwise (with both patents belonging to
the same market), (n-1) is the total number of possible citations, and n>1, since C1 is undefined. In other
words, the cumulativeness of a focal patent in market j is based on the share of potential backward
citations to patents belonging to the same market that are actually cited by the focal patent. The
cumulativeness of innovation for software market j is then the average of all N-1 patents’
                                      
                             ∑    
                               ∑
cumulativeness:25 C =              
                                        
                                              . This measure varies over time based on the grant year of the market
j patents under consideration. 26 Notice that the older patents in a market tend to have greater
cumulativeness since the potential number of patents that can be cited is smaller. As a robustness check,
we also used an alternative weighting scheme, one that provides relatively lower importance to the
                                                                                                                 ∑    
                                                                                                                   ∑ 
cumulativeness measure of older patents. As in Clarkson (2005), it is calculated as C =                              /
                                                                                                                               .

For both measures, we take the logged value to reduce skewness.
         Concentration. This variable indicates the extent of concentration of patent ownership in a market.
Following Noel and Schankerman (2006) and Cockburn and MacGarvie (2011), we use the four-assignee
citation concentration ratio to measure the concentration of patent ownership in a software market.
Backward citations indicate the extent to which a technological area has already been covered by prior art,
so the share of backward citations owned by an assignee suggests the extent to which the assignee holds
existing patented technologies and therefore the importance of negotiating with the assignee. To construct
24
   We add 1 to the variable when taking the log.
25
   The average only considers N-1 patents since C is undefined.
26
   We acknowledge this measure also captures the extent to which knowledge is focused in a software market, which is slightly
different from how cumulativeness of innovation is defined in this study. As a result, there may exist some nuance in interpreting
the empirical results based on this measure.


                                                                                                                               13
this variable, we first calculate the number of citations made by patents in market j up to year t that are
held by the cited assignee n (denoted as  ). Then we arranged  in descending order. The total
citations owned by the four firms that received the top four largest number of citations made by patents in
market j in year t (i.e. the top four  , where n=1,2,3,4) is ∑                 .Thus, the four-assignee citation
                                                                   ∑    
concentration ratio for market j in year t is calculated as !"#_%&"&! , where total_citationsjt is the total
                                                                                     

                                                                         27
number of citations made by patents in market j up to year t.
5.3. Control variables
         Sales growth. One important factor that may correlate with both the behavior of firms
contributing to The Commons and OSS entry is the rate of market growth for software market j, which is
proxied by the sales change from year t-1 to year t in market j. Because we do not have CorpTech data
between 2005 and 2009, we use NETS data to measure this variable. Roughly 4,500 software firms in the
NETS data are assigned to one of the eight-digit SIC categories (e.g., 73729901) that correspond to eight
broad categories in the software industry. We compute the yearly sales change for each of the eight SIC
categories and then map them to our 33 software markets to approximate the overall sales growth for each
market for a given year.
         Total patents. Although we are most interested in two of the most important features of patent
thickets—the cumulativeness of innovation and the concentration of patent ownership, the total number of
patents related to a market has also been used as a measure of the density of patent thickets (Cockburn
and MacGarvie 2011). We add this variable as an additional control and measure it using the cumulative
number of granted patents that are not included in The Commons but related to software market j. To be
consistent with how we measure The Commons, we use the log of the claims-weighted patent count.
         Patent quality. This variable is a control for the quality of patents in market j in year t. As has
been noted elsewhere, higher quality patents suggest superior technological capabilities possessed by
existing incumbents in the market, which leaves less room for start-ups to innovate further. This variable
is equal to the log value of the cumulative stock of citations received by the patents in market j (adjusted
for truncations) divided by total number patents in j up to year t.
         Open Invention Network (OIN) patents. At the end of our sample period, another institution
similar to patent commons—OIN—was established. Similar to The Commons, OIN offers contractually
royalty-free usage of its patents to OSS participants as long as users promise not to file suit against
software associated with the Linux System.28 We do not focus on the implications of the introduction of

27
   We also use an eight-assignee citation concentration ratio as a robustness check. The results are qualitatively similar to this
four-assignee citation concentration ratio measure.
28
   For the detailed definition of the Linux system, see http://www.openinventionnetwork.com/pat_linuxdef.php.


                                                                                                                               14
this institution in our main analysis as it was introduced too late in our sample period to have a
measureable effect.29 However, we include it as a control. We measure this variable as the log of the
claims-weighted patent count of OIN patents related to software market j cumulated up to year t.
         Standard-setting organization (SSO) patents. As mentioned earlier, another important mechanism
to address the anti-commons problem is SSOs. Such institutions promote coordination of innovation by
providing a forum for collective decision-making among firms, facilitating the introduction of standards
(Rysman and Simcoe 2008). If any patent is incorporated into the standards, the patent owner can gain
significant power to control the diffusion of such standards and even deter market entry (Shapiro 2001,
Rysman and Simcoe 2008). To prevent this blocking effect, most SSOs require patent holders
contributing to the standard to license their patents on “Fair, Reasonable, and Non-Discriminatory
(FRAND)” terms. Firms can even choose to license their patents on royalty-free terms. We control for the
incidence of SSO patents that are licensed royalty-free because we expect that such patents might also
have some effect on OSS entry. Therefore, we collect all patents disclosed under royalty-free licenses by
the major eight SSOs (e.g., IEEE, ITU) from 1971 to 2008 (Rysman and Simcoe 2008)30. We compute the
claims-weighted patent count of the SSO patents that are distributed under royalty-free licenses and are
related to software market j cumulated up to year t.
         OSS demand. While Sales growth could potentially control for the market growth for software
market j in year t in general, the market demand for OSS products may deviate from the demand for
proprietary software products. We capture the demand for OSS using the total OSS downloads at
SourceForge.net (SourceForge), which is the largest repository for OSS projects over the world. We first
match over 0.2 million OSS projects at SourceForge to the 33 software markets according to the projects’
categories. Then we measure this variable by computing the total number of downloads for all OSS
applications related to software market j cumulated up to year t.
6. Empirical Strategies and Results
         We first motivate our empirical analyses by characterizing the quality of patents in The Commons
as well as their distribution across markets, and then document the characteristics of software markets
before and after the formation of The Commons for markets where The Commons has few and many
patents. Next, we establish a baseline relationship between OSS entry and the size of The Commons, and
demonstrate how the marginal impact of The Commons varies with the cumulativeness of innovation or
patent ownership concentration. We then show that our baseline results are robust to a variety of
specifications and robustness checks.

29
  For the 130 patents contributed to OIN from year 2006 to 2009, 70 percent were contributed in 2008 and 2009.
30
  We are grateful to the generous offer of the SSO patent data set by Tim Simcoe and Christian Catalini. These data are available
for download under a creative commons license at www.ssopatents.org.


                                                                                                                              15
6.1. Characteristics of software markets and patents in The Commons
        Figure 4 below shows the distribution of patents in The Commons across 33 software markets.
The markets with the greatest concentration of patents from The Commons are operating systems and
utilities, disk/file management, and database software, followed by software development tools and
system management software. Because 95% of patents in The Commons were contributed by IBM, we
compared it with the distribution of IBM’s patent holdings across market, and the two are quite similar.
        We next examine the quality of patents in The Commons relative to comparison groups. We first
compare patents in The Commons to similar market patents. Following the matching method employed
by Thompson and Fox-Kean (2005), we pair each patent in The Commons with a randomly selected
control patent that matches the primary classification of The Commons’ patent at the subclass level and
that was applied for in the same year or within a one year window. As shown in Table 2a, there is no
statistically significant difference between the two groups in terms of forward citations or backward
citations. The patents in The Commons have lower number of claims than other market patents,
suggesting The Commons may be less resistant to invalidation challenges (Bessen 2008).
        We next compare the quality of IBM’s donated patents to other patents in its portfolio using the
same procedure described above. As shown in Table 2b, there is no significant difference in forward
citations between the two groups. Similar to the comparison with similar market patents, the patents in
The Commons have a slightly lower number of claims than IBM’s other patents. Moreover, the patents in
The Commons show a lower number of backward citations, which may suggest these patents are less
derivative than comparable IBM patents (Lanjouw and Schankerman 2004). Nevertheless, the lower
number of backward citations made by The Commons’ patents could also imply they are more subject to
the challenges by prior art they possibly missed (Bessen 2008).
        In general, these comparisons suggest that while patents in The Commons may be less resistant to
invalidation challenges, they have similar quality and may be somewhat less derivative.
        We also examine the characteristics of markets where the number of claims-weighted patents in
The Commons is small (below the 25th percentile) and where it is large (above the 75th percentile), before
and after the Commons was introduced. As in Table 3, in markets where The Commons patents are well
represented, OSS entry is greater during both pre-Commons and post-Commons period. However, during
the pre-Commons period, the sales growth is lower in markets where the incumbents were about to donate
large number of patents to The Commons; it became greater in these markets after The Commons was
established. In markets where The Commons patent are well represented, cumulativeness of innovation
and patent quality are lower while patent ownership concentration and total number of market patents are
greater. These differences persist before and after The Commons was introduced.



                                                                                                           16
                Figure 4: Distribution of patents in The Commons and in IBM’s portfolio by market
                                  IBM’s total patent portfolio Patents in the Commons
                       Operating systems and utilities
                       Disk/file management software
                                   Database software
                          Software development tools
                       Systems management software
                      Network management software
                                    Graphics software
                                 Workgroup software
                                      Desktop utilities
                                     Internet software
                     Personal multimedia productivity
                     Computer data transfer software
                      Voice communications software
                                    Network software
                             Data encryption software
                                 Personal productivity
                   Engineering and scientific software
                        Artificial intelligence software
                                        Image analysis
                             Peripheral device drivers
                            Network security software
        Manufacturing and business process software
                              Printer support software
                Foreign language translation software
                                          Fax software
                          Videoconferencing software
  Accounting, financial and business practice software
                                Video server software
                            Medical practice software
                      Geographic information systems
                          Insurance industry software
                    Telephone management software
                              Electronic mail software

                                                           0%          5%             10%             15%             20%             25%


                    Table 2a: Patents in The Commons compared to other similar market patents
                                                                Patents in The Commons        Other similar market patents        T-test
                                          Obs.                  517                           517
Forward citations as of Dec 2004          Mean (Std.Err.)       11.393 (.683)                 12.334 (.788)                       -0.903
Backward citations                        Mean (Std.Err.)       9.718 (.314)                  9.739 (.394)                        -0.042
Claims                                    Mean (Std.Err.)       17.321 (.496)                 19.400 (.686)                       -2.458***
Note: 1) For each of the patents in The Commons, we paired it by randomly selecting a control patent from all market patents that matched the
primary classification of The Commons patent at the subclass level and that were applied in the same year or within one-year window of The
Commons patent. 2) To eliminate any effect of contributing to The Commons on the increase in forward citation, when comparing the forward
citations, we only count the total forward citations received by December 2004, as The Commons was formed in January 2005. Because 57% of
the patents in Commons are granted before 1998 and 97% of the patents are granted before 2002, we believe the truncation on forward citations is
not a major issue in this setting. 3) ***: significant at 1%.




                                                                                                                                              17
                   Table 2b: IBM’s Patents in The Commons compared to IBM's other similar patents
                                                               IBM’s Patents in The Commons           IBM’s other similar patents      T-test
                                          Obs.                 407                                    407
  Forward citations as of Dec 2004        Mean (Std.Err.)      11.044 (.784)                          10.341 (.702)                    0.668
  Backward citations                      Mean (Std.Err.)      9.683 (.358)                           11.545 (.509)                    -2.992***
  Claims                                  Mean (Std.Err.)      16.813 (.501)                          18.646 (.612)                    -2.319**
  Note: 1) For each of IBM’s patents in The Commons, we paired it by randomly selecting a control patent from all IBM’s patents that matched the
  primary classification of the focal patent at the subclass level and that were applied within one-year window of The Commons patent. 2) To
  eliminate any effect of contributing to The Commons on the increase in forward citation, when comparing the forward citations, we only count
  the total forward citations received by December 2004, as The Commons was formed in January 2005. Because all IBM’s patents in Commons
  are granted in year 1993, 1997, or 2001, we believe the truncation on forward citations is not a major issue in this setting. 3) ***: significant at
  1%, **: significant at 5%.


                        Table 3: Market characteristics in pre-Commons and post-Commons periods
                                    Pre-Commons (1999-2004)                                             Post-Commons (2005-2006)
                      Markets Where The    Markets Where The                              Markets Where The Markets Where The
                                                                             T-test                                                             T-test
                      Commons is small      Commons is large                              Commons is small      Commons is large
OSS entry                .278 (.100)          1.389 (.273)                 3.823***          .155 (.055)          1.844 (.330)               5.045***
Cumulativeness           1.506 (.107)          .552 (.045)                 -8.188***         1.091 (.094)          .326 (.029)              - 7.745***
Concentration            .213 (.011)           .295 (.007)                 6.729***          .182 (.012)           .256 (.007)               5.557***
Sales growth             1.051 (.013)          .985 (.021)                 -2.616***          .978 (.020)         1.041 (.028)                1.801**
Total patents            9.392 (.154)         11.262 (.118)                 9.667***        10.286 (.136)         12.207 (.115)             10.806***
Patent quality           3.253 (.054)         3.121 (.031)                  -2.116**         2.665 (.045)          2.553 (.026)              -2.156**
  Note: 1) Markets where The Commons is small (large) are those where the number of claims-weighted patents in The Commons are below the
  25th percentile (above the 75th percentile). 2) The definitions of these market characteristics are shown in Table 1. 3) ***: significant at 1%, **:
  significant at 5%.


  6.2. Baseline results and robustness checks
             We first seek to establish whether increases in the size of The Commons are associated with
  increasing entry in related markets. Our estimation framework is motivated by recent research that has
  studied how patent thickets influence market entry in the software industry (e.g., Cockburn and
  MacGarvie 2011). We model OSS entry using count data models with conditional fixed effects. Suppose
  the number of OSS entry events in software market j in year t (denoted as Yjt) follows a Poisson process
  with parameter λjt taking the form λjt = exp(Xjt’β). Also suppose αj is a market-specific and time-constant
  variable that incorporates unobserved heterogeneity across markets. Thus, E(Yjt | Xjt , αj) = λjt = αj
  exp(Xjt’β), where Xjt’β = β1The Commonsjt + γ1PatentThicketjt-1+ γ2SalesGrowthjt + γ3MarketPatentsjt-1
                         + γ4OtherFreePatentsjt + γ5OSSdemandjt + τt                                                                             (1)
             The vector PatentThicketjt-1 includes the two patent thicket variables cumulativenessjt-1 and
  concentrationjt-1; the vector MarketPatentsjt-1 includes the Total patentsjt-1 and Patent qualityjt-1.The two
  vectors are lagged by one year to allow for any lagged effects on OSS entry. The vector
  OtherFreePatentsjt represents the patents from OIN and SSOs—OIN patentsjt and SSO patentsjt. τt
  includes 10 year dummies to control for time-varying factors that may influence OSS entry. The model is
  then estimated using maximum likelihood with robust standard errors clustered at the market level. We
  are interested in the estimate for β1 which, if positive, suggests The Commons have some positive impact
  on OSS entry. Our identification assumption in this section is that there are no unobserved market-level
  factors that are correlated both with entry and with the size of The Commons. This assumption will be
                                                                                                                                                   18
violated and thus the estimate will be biased if, for example, the contribution decision by IBM and other
contributors is driven by market growth that is not adequately captured by our control variables.31 We will
examine the implications of weakening this assumption in a variety of ways in the analyses below.
         Columns (1) and (2) in Table 4 report the estimation results for specification (1). Column (1)
shows the specification with baseline controls including SalesGrowthjt, PatentThicketjt-1, and
MarketPatentsjt-1 as well as with market and year fixed effects. We include SalesGrowthjt in all
specifications because it is an important determinant of start-up entry.32 We further control for market-
level patent holdings through the controls PatentThicketjt-1 and MarketPatentsjt-1. The coefficient in
column (1) suggests that a 10% increase in The Commons’ patent claims related to a software market is
associated with a 1.3% increase in OSS entry in that market. Results are robust when we add other
controls such as OtherFreePatentsjt and OSSdemandjt, as shown in column (2) in Table 4.
         We next investigate whether the impact of The Commons is greater in markets with high
cumulativeness of innovation and the concentration of patent ownership in a market. Our key
identification assumption here is somewhat weaker—that growth in claims-weighted patents in The
Commons are not correlated with unobservable factors that influence entry that are differentially trending
in markets with high cumulativeness and concentration. We begin by examining whether the impact of
The Commons is higher when the cumulativeness of innovation in a market is high. The specification for
Xjt’β becomes: Xjt’β = β1The Commonsjt + β2The Commonsjt*cumulativenessjt-1 + γ1PatentThicketjt-1
         + γ2SalesGrowthjt + γ3MarketPatentsjt-1 + γ4OtherFreePatentsjt + γ5OSSdemandjt + τt.                           (2)
         As shown in columns (3) and (4) in Table 4, a 10% increase in the size of The Commons is
associated with a 2.8%-3% increase in OSS entry, with the effect computed at the average level of
cumulativeness of innovation. Further, while the marginal effect of The Commons is insignificant when
evaluated at the 10th percentile of the cumulativeness, the effects are statistically and economically
significant when evaluated at the 90th percentile. Specifically, a 10% increase in the size of The Commons
is associated with a 5.2%-5.4% increase in OSS entry when cumulativeness of innovation is at its 90th
percentile. A test for the difference of the two marginal effects (at the 10th and 90th percentiles) is
statistically significant. As described earlier, we also constructed alternative measures of the
cumulativeness of innovation and our results are robust to these changes.33 The results suggest that the
impact of The Commons is greater when the cumulativeness of innovation is high.

31
   It is worth noting that there could be multiple unobserved market characteristics that may bias the estimates upward or
downward. For example, if IBM and other incumbents are interested in contributing patents to markets where the OSS growth is
the fastest, the estimated coefficient is biased upward. On the other hand, if IBM and other incumbents intend to promote the
development of OSS, it may have to focus on markets where the OSS growth is slow, leading to a downward estimate.
32
   We have experimented with other controls for market growth such as the number of incumbents and sales volume. Regressions
using these other controls yield qualitatively similar results for the main parameters of interest.
33
   The regression results based on the robust measure of cumulativeness are available upon request.


                                                                                                                          19
                 To explore how the effect of The Commons on patent ownership concentration, the specification
    for Xjt’β is: Xjt’β = β1The Commonsjt + β2The Commonsjt* concentrationjt-1 + γ1PatentThicketjt-1+
    γ2SalesGrowthjt + γ3MarketPatentsjt-1 + γ4OtherFreePatentsjt + γ5OSSdemandjt + τt.                                                        (3)
                 The empirical results for this specification are reported in columns (5) and (6) in Table 4. While
    the marginal effect of The Commons is insignificant when concentration is at its 10th percentile or mean
    value, a 10% increase in the size of The Commons is associated with a statistically significant 1.1%-1.2%
    increase in OSS entry when concentration is at its 90th percentile. The test for the difference of marginal
    effects of The Commons between concentration evaluated at the 10th percentile and the 90th percentile is
    statistically significant at the 10% level.
                               Table 4: Baseline results, conditional fixed-effect Poisson regression
                                                                                                                                 Add interaction with
                                     Specification testing          Add interaction with           Add interaction with             cumulativeness of
Dependent variable: OSS              direct impact of The            cumulativeness of            concentration of patent         innovation and with
entry                                   Commons only                    innovation                     ownership               concentration of patent
                                                                                                                                        ownership
                                       (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)           (5)            (6)              (7)            (8)
                                     .127*           .145*           .033             .052         -.079          -.098            -.080          -.071
The Commons
                                     (.083)          (.087)         (.119)           (.124)        (.114)         (.135)           (.120)         (.164)
The Commons *                                                      .330***         .331***                                       .308***        .306***
Cumulativeness                                                      (.096)          (.098)                                         (.095)         (.100)
The Commons *                                                                                       .566*           .660*           .309           .336
Concentration                                                                                       (.322)         (.369)          (.270)         (.377)
                                       .965          1.010        3.194***        3.303***          1.063           1.030       3.116***      3.142***
Cumulativeness
                                      (.977)        (1.156)         (.858)          (.983)          (.886)        (1.024)          (.854)         (.990)
                                     -6.961         -7.625        -11.238**       -12.196*        -11.293*        -10.709      -13.251**       -13.375*
Concentration
                                     (5.273)        (7.219)        (4.812)         (7.097)         (6.552)        (7.459)         (5.539)        (6.878)
                                      -.412          -.400          -.571*          -.567           -.454           -.470         -.585*          -.590
Sales growth
                                      (.338)         (.366)         (.379)          (.406)          (.354)         (.381)          (.384)         (.415)
                                      -.707          -.713           .797            .852          -1.096          -1.157           .510           .527
Total patents
                                     (1.408)        (1.505)        (1.430)         (1.465)         (1.443)        (1.560)         (1.439)        (1.519)
                                     -1.435         -1.599          -1.224         -1.361          -1.529          -1.684         -1.284         -1.401
Patent quality
                                     (2.453)        (2.387)        (2.401)         (2.335)         (2.523)        (2.422)         (2.445)        (2.350)
                                                     -.066                          -.069                           -.076                         -.073
OIN patents
                                                     (.071)                         (.065)                         (.070)                         (.066)
                                                     -.010                          -.016                            .029                          .005
SSO patents
                                                     (.078)                         (.065)                         (.083)                         (.078)
                                                      .062                           .055                            .062                          .056
OSS demand
                                                     (.095)                         (.083)                         (.100)                         (.086)
Log pseudolikelihood                -227.909       -227.351        -223.884       -223.327        -226.961       -226.270       -223.630       -223.082
Marginal Effects
                                     .127*           .145*          .278**          .297**          .046           .048          .217**         .230**
The Commons (average)
                                     (.083)          (.087)          (.115)          (.120)        (.072)         (.081)          (.085)         (.114)
The Commons                                                           .095            .114                                         .047           .061
(cumulativeness=10%)                                                 (.114)          (.119)                                       (.091)         (.110)
The Commons                                                        .519***         .540***                                      .442***        .454***
(cumulativeness=90%)                                                 (.149)          (.154)                                       (.119)         (.153)
The Commons (concentration                                                                         -.005          -.011          .190**          .200*
=10%)                                                                                              (.084)         (.098)          (.091)         (.134)
The Commons (concentration                                                                         .104*          .115*         .249***        .265***
=90%)                                                                                              (.071)         (.074)          (.086)         (.100)
    Notes: 1) All regressions include year dummies and market fixed effects. Number of observations=286. This number of observations is lower
    than 363 because of the use of conditional fixed effects Poisson models, which drops markets without OSS entry over the entire sample period. 2)
    Robust standard errors, clustered by market, are in parentheses. 3) * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.


                                                                                                                                                 20
            In columns (7) and (8) of Table 4 we present the results of a specification including the
interactions with both cumulativeness and concentration. In these models, a 10% increase in the size of
The Commons is associated with a 4.4%-4.5% increase in OSS entry when the cumulativeness of
innovation is at its 90th percentile; the marginal effect of The Commons is significantly different at the 1%
level when evaluated at high versus low level of cumulativeness. In this specification, while there is no
statistically significant difference between the marginal effects evaluated at the 10th and 90th percentiles of
concentration, the sign for the interaction between The Commons and patent ownership concentration
remains positive across specifications. We suspect this non-significance is likely caused by the
multicollinearity between the two interactions.34
            We implemented a series of additional analyses to study the robustness of our results. We
estimated all of our models using OLS models with market fixed effects. We substituted our claims-
weighted count of number of Commons patents in the market with a raw patent count. Because of the
decline in the rate of new OSS product entry after 2006 (as shown in Figure 5 below), we re-estimated the
baseline model using a sample endpoint of 2007 and 2008. As detailed in Appendix C Tables C-1 through
C-4, our results are robust to all of these changes.
            Because our measure of patent ownership concentration could be confounded with the
concentration of market structure, we constructed a measure of market structure concentration using the
share of top 4 incumbents’ sales in each market in each year. We found that adding this measure as an
additional control did not affect our finding that The Commons had a stronger positive effect on entry in
markets with high patent concentration. Further, we interacted the new market structure control with The
Commons variable, in regressions both including and excluding our interaction of patent ownership
concentration with The Commons. In both Poisson regression (in Table C-5) and linear models (in Table
C-6) we find that changes in market structure concentration have no significant impact on the marginal
effect of increases in the size of The Commons. However, even when controlling for the effects of market
structure, changes in The Commons have a stronger effect on entry when patent concentration is high.
This set of tests supports the view that it is the concentration of IPR holdings, not concentration of market
structure, that influences the marginal effect of The Commons on OSS entry.
6.3. Examining the potential implications of omitted variables
            This section provides the results of a variety of additional tests we run to examine how time-
varying omitted variables might influence our results. We first control for time-varying market-specific
trends using a model that includes a linear time trend interacted with the market fixed effects. The results
are presented in Table 5.

34
     In the pooled sample, the simple correlation coefficient between the two interaction terms is 0.66.


                                                                                                            21
          In column 1 we show the results of a model with market-specific time trends but excluding the
interactions with cumulativeness and concentration. The results are qualitatively similar to our baseline,
though the size of the marginal effect is somewhat smaller. We next interact the size of The Commons
with cumulativeness and concentration. Consistent with the baseline results, while the marginal effect of
The Commons is insignificant when either cumulativeness of innovation or concentration is at its 10th
percentile, a 10% increase in the size of The Commons is associated with a 2%-4% increase in OSS entry
when cumulativeness is at its 90th percentile and is associated with a 1.1%-1.5% increase in OSS entry
when concentration is at its 90th percentile, as shown by columns (2) through (4). The test of the
difference between high and low cumulativeness and the test of the difference between high and low
concentration are also largely consistent with the baseline results.
     Table 5: Robustness test using market-specific time trends, conditional fixed-effect Poisson regression
                                                                                                                        Add interaction with
                                             Specification testing     Add interaction          Add interaction          cumulativeness of
                                             direct impact of The    with cumulativeness      with concentration        innovation and with
Dependent variable: OSS entry                   Commons only            of innovation         of patent ownership      concentration of patent
                                                                                                                            ownership
                                                      (1)                     (2)                      (3)                      (4)
The Commons                                     .093** (.041)             -.048 (.079)           -.235** (.102)             -.267 (.183)
The Commons * Cumulativeness                                             .298** (.118)                                      .172* (.112)
The Commons * Concentration                                                                     1.072*** (.389)              .909 (.663)
Cumulativeness                                                            .612 (1.380)                                      -.273 (1.323)
Concentration                                                                                   17.016** (8.210)           17.734 (7.912)
Log pseudolikelihood                               -231.251                -229.011                 -223.827                  -223.018
Marginal Effects
The Commons (average)                           .093** (.041)           .174*** (.045)             .002 (.044)               .062 (.057)
The Commons (cumulativeness=10%)                                          .009 (.061)                                       -.033 (.067)

The Commons (cumulativeness=90%)                                        .391*** (.114)                                      .188* (.115)

The Commons (concentration =10%)                                                                  -.093 (.060)              -.019 (.105)

The Commons (concentration =90%)                                                                  .112** (.055)            .155*** (.052)
Notes: 1) All regressions include market-specific time trends and market fixed effects. Number of observations=286. 2) Robust standard errors,
clustered by market, are in parentheses. 3) “Market-specific time trend” is measured by a linear time trend times 33 market dummies. 4) Given
our sample size of only 286 observations, it is difficult to incorporate any other controls besides these 33 market-specific time trends. 5) *
significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.

          Next we conduct a series of falsification exercises to see whether our results are consistent with a
causal interpretation. We first examine whether the effects of the Commons exhibit the “right” timing. In
particular, we should not observe a benefit from the intensity of contributions to The Commons prior to
when it was initiated. Figure 5 shows the time series of OSS entry for markets with small and large size of
The Commons. The Figure shows little variance over time in entry patterns in market segments with few
(claims-weighted) Commons patents. The Figure shows that markets where Commons contributions are



                                                                                                                                            22
large see little benefits to entry between 1999-2003, however there is a significant increase in entry in
2004, one year prior to the introduction of The Commons.
                                Figure 5: OSS entry from 1999 to 2009, by the size of The Commons
 25
                                    Markets Where The Commons is small
 20                                 Markets Where The Commons is large

 15

 10

     5

     0
            1999        2000       2001        2002        2003       2004        2005        2006        2007        2008        2009

            Notes: Markets where The Commons is small (large) are those where the number of claims-weighted patents in The Commons are
            below the 25th percentile (above the 75th percentile).

            We believe this result reflects the effects of other actions taken by IBM in support of OSS shortly
before the introduction of The Commons. In particular, as mentioned earlier, one significant event in the
OSS community during this time period was the March 2003 lawsuit filed against IBM for alleged
incorporation of SCO’s proprietary UNIX code into the open-source Linux operating system. This lawsuit,
together with a well-publicized report in 2004 that suggested that Linux was potentially infringing on
several hundred patents35, initiated a series of actions by IBM that eventually lead to the introduction of
The Commons and other actions taken to provide additional legal protection for OSS firms. This included
the initiation by IBM of a legal defense fund for Linux in January 2004 and IBM Senior Vice President
Nick Donofrio’s announcement that IBM would not assert its patents against the Linux kernel in August
2004. The appearance of these other events may cause us to identify an effect for The Commons before it
actually appears. Further, Figure 4 suggests IBM’s donations to The Commons were highly correlated
with its technological holdings as proxied by its patent portfolio. As a result, the pattern observed in
Figure 5 may capture the effects of current and expected future activities by IBM in support of OSS that
are correlated with IBM’s technological presence. This result would be consistent with our discussion in
section 2 that a patent commons may provide a signal of the donator’s commitment to providing support
to the OSS community. Table 6 shows the results of a series of specifications that we use to explore how
these other events might influence our results.
            We first construct a variable, denoted as “False Commons”, by interacting The Commons with a
time dummy that turns on for years 2003 and 2004. Column (1) of Table 6 shows that if we add this
variable to our baseline specification the coefficient for False Commons is significantly positive, which is


35
     See Alexy and Reitzig (2013) for detailed discussion about this event.


                                                                                                                                   23
consistent with the descriptive evidence summarized in Figure 5. Column (2) shows that False Commons
does not differentially affect OSS entry in markets with high cumulativeness and concentration, however.
           To explore whether the results in columns (1) and (2) reflect other activities by IBM in support of
open source, we add to regression model in column (1) the cumulative number of claims-weighted IBM
patents in the market that are not in The Commons and its interaction with a dummy that turns on for
years 2003 and 2004 (denoted as IBM patents X 2003_2004) As shown in column (3), the coefficient on
IBM patents is large and statistically significant, possibly picking up changes in OSS market opportunities
over time across segments. Moreover, IBM patents X 2003_2004 is significantly and positively correlated
with OSS entry, reflecting how IBM’s other actions during this time of legal uncertainty affected OSS
entry. Despite the addition of these variables, the effects of The Commons remain statistically significant
and its interactions with cumulativeness and concentration (cf. column 4) are qualitatively similar.
       Table 6: Falsification test by adding “False Commons”, conditional fixed-effect Poisson regression
 Dependent variable: OSS entry                         (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)               (6)
                                                    .373***            .168          .383***           .093          .426***             .209
 The Commons
                                                     (.117)           (.178)          (.140)          (.164)          (.134)            (.172)
                                                    .463***          .623**                                            .260              .506
 False Commons
                                                     (.137)           (.282)                                          (.200)            (.324)
                                                                                     .908***         .867***         .909***          .855***
 IBM patents
                                                                                      (.249)          (.203)          (.257)            (.202)
                                                                                     .565***         .504***           .308              .297
 IBM patents X 2003_2004
                                                                                      (.160)          (.184)          (.251)            (.404)
                                                                       .207                            .076                              .120
 The Commons X Cumulativeness
                                                                      (.132)                          (.121)                            (.136)
                                                                     .026                                                                .077
 False Commons X Cumulativeness
                                                                     (.136)                                                             (.208)
                                                                       .302                            .646                              .423
 The Commons X Concentration
                                                                      (.470)                          (.405)                            (.465)
                                                                      -.531                                                             -.638
 False Commons X Concentration
                                                                      (.670)                                                            (.703)
                                                      -.272           1.371            -.145           .497            -.413             .546
 Cumulativeness
                                                     (1.174)         (1.402)          (1.113)         (1.217)         (1.061)          (1.420)
                                                    -12.659*       -17.654**        -14.613**       -17.900**       -15.932**       -20.170***
 Concentration
                                                     (6.569)         (7.055)          (7.245)         (6.933)         (6.949)          (7.029)
 Log pseudolikelihood                               -222.405        -219.586         -219.448        -218.066        -218.754        -216.825
 Marginal effects
                                                    .373***          .389**          .383***         .292***         .426***          .392***
 The Commons (average)
                                                     (.117)           (.119)          (.140)           (.121)         (.134)            (.124)
                                                                     .275**                           .250**                           .326**
 The Commons (cumulativeness=10%)
                                                                      (.127)                           (.127)                           (.128)
                                                                    .540***                           .347**                          .480***
 The Commons (cumulativeness=90%)
                                                                      (.168)                           (.162)                           (.177)
                                                                     .362**                            .234*                           .355**
 The Commons (concentration =10%)
                                                                      (.140)                           (.138)                           (.144)
                                                                    .420***                          .358***                          .435***
 The Commons (concentration =90%)
                                                                      (.111)                           (.113)                           (.116)
Notes: 1) All regressions include year dummies and market fixed effects. Number of observations=286. 2) All regressions include the full set of
controls. The complete results including estimates for the controls are reported in Appendix Table C-7. 3) Robust standard errors, clustered by
market, are in parentheses. 4) * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant. 5) False Commons is measured by interacting the patent
density in The Commons across markets with a time dummy that turns on for year 2003 and 2004. 6) 2003_2004 is a dummy that turns on for
years 2003 and 2004. 7) IBM patents is measured by log of claims-weighted patent count of all IBM patents (excluding IBM patents contributed
to The Commons) related to market j cumulated up to year t.



                                                                                                                                                 24
          In columns (5) and (6) we include False Commons, IBM patents, and IBM patents X 2003_2004.
After controlling for the effect of IBM’s IPR commitments and its actions in 2003 and 2004, False
Commons becomes insignificant while The Commons (whose effect “turns on” in 2005) remains
significantly positive. These findings corroborate our hypothesized effect, suggesting that IBM’s pledge
to The Commons go beyond these earlier OSS support actions and announcements, by identifying a
specific set of complementary technologies that may be valuable to Linux and existing OSS projects.
          The next set of falsification exercises examines the effects of The Commons on type of market
entry. Because the introduction of The Commons will only benefit producers of OSS, we should not
observe a positive effect of The Commons on entry of proprietary software products. Again using
PROMT articles, we identified entry with proprietary products by start-ups into 29 software markets from
year 2002 to year 2009.36 Unlike our analysis using OSS entry, for this entry variable we measured entry
using only PROMT product codes. That is, because of the very large number of potential entrants, we
were unable to supplement our variable construction through manual reading of product articles as we did
for OSS. This is a significant limitation, as 45% of product introduction events are missing PROMT
product codes. Still, while this variable is measured with error, we are able to capture significant variance
in proprietary product entry in our sample. The mean number of proprietary entry events per software
market per year is 10.276 for proprietary software, compared with a mean number of 0.74637 for OSS
entry identified through both PROMT code and manual reading and a mean number of 0.134 for OSS
entry identified using PROMT codes only. This comparison suggests that we are able to capture
significant proprietary product entry in our data.
          The results of this analysis, reported in Table 7, suggest that The Commons has no significant
effect on proprietary entry; further, the interaction of The Commons with cumulativeness or concentration
plays little role in proprietary entry as well.
          Throughout this paper we have used cross-sectional variance in the intensity of contribution to
The Commons to identify its effects across OSS markets. Another identification approach is to assume
that the benefits of The Commons are equal across markets (i.e., they do not vary with intensity of
contribution) and to use differences in product entry across equivalent OSS and proprietary markets to
identify the effects of The Commons. Specifically, suppose each software market category (e.g., operating

36
   We use the press releases of the 2,054 start-up firms from 2002 to 2009 in the PROMT database to identify new proprietary
software product entry. For each start-up, we only use the firm’s first product in a market to capture entry. This results in 2,384
proprietary product entry events. Because of data limitations, we have incomplete product code information for most press
releases before 2002, forcing us to focus on years from 2002 to 2009 only. We also adjust for a change in the assignment of
product codes during our sample. Specifically, between 2007 and 2009 application-related software products were systematically
assigned to a higher product code level in the PROMT database (i.e. assigned to 7372400, Applications Software). This forced us
to group several application markets together, leaving us with 29 software markets.
37
   This mean value is different from the number reported in Table 1, as we focus on years 2002 to 2009 across 29 software
markets for this set of falsification tests.


                                                                                                                                25
systems and utilities, database software) consists of both an OSS and proprietary market, and assume the
product entry events in both OSS or proprietary software market j in year t follows a Poisson process. The
Xjt’β in specification (1) should now be written as:
           Xjt’β =β1Post-Commonst*OSS-marketj +γ1PatentThicketjt-1+γ2SalesGrowthjt +γ3MarketPatentsjt-1
           + TimeTrendjt                                                                                                                     (4)
where Post-Commons is a dummy variable that is equal to one in 2005 and thereafter, and OSS-market is
a dummy that is equal to one for OSS market. This regression is estimated using a conditional fixed
effects Poisson model over a pooled data set with OSS and proprietary markets for each of the 29
different categories of software, i.e. with 58 separate markets (j=58 in specification (4)). TimeTrend is
market-specific time trend, measured by a linear time trend times market dummies. We use market-
specific time trend instead of baseline controls to address time-varying heterogeneity between OSS and
proprietary markets. The results, reported in Table C-9 in the Appendix, suggest a greater increase in new
product entry in OSS markets when compared with proprietary markets after 2005, though these effects
do not increase significantly with cumulativeness and concentration.
   Table 7: Falsification test on the effect of The Commons on proprietary software entry, conditional fixed-
                                              effect Poisson regression
Dependent variable: Proprietary software
                                                           (1)                     (2)                     (3)                        (4)
product entry
The Commons                                           .062 (.054)             .051 (.074)              .131 (.096)               .122 (.101)
The Commons * Cumulativeness                                                  .017 (.094)                                       0.051 (.090)
The Commons * Concentration                                                                            -.182 (.244)             -.236 (.244)
Cumulativeness                                      -3.566* (2.034)          -3.285 (2.890)          -3.941* (2.188)           -3.241 (2.900)
Concentration                                        -3.505 (6.283)          -3.671 (6.538)           -2.195 (6.593)           -2.292 (6.574)
Observations                                              232                     232                      232                       232
Log pseudolikelihood                                    -443.038                -442.993                 -442.390                  442.066
Marginal Effects
The Commons (average)                                 .062 (.059)             .062 ( .054)             .090 (.059)               .100* (.056)
The Commons (cumulativeness=10%)                                              .054 (.064)                                         .078 (.066)
The Commons (cumulativeness=90%)                                              .072 (.082)                                        .131* (.081)
The Commons (concentration =10%)                                                                        .105 (.069)              .119* (.067)
The Commons (concentration =90%)                                                                       . 075 (.051)              .080* (.051)
Notes: 1) All regressions include year dummies and market fixed effects. 2) All regressions include other baseline controls such as sales growth,
total patents, and patent quality. The complete results including estimates for the controls are reported in Appendix Table C-8. 3) Robust standard
errors, clustered by market, are in parentheses. 4) Robust standard errors, clustered by market, are in parentheses. 5) * significant at 10%, **
significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.

           We next discuss the results of a series of instrumental variable (IV) estimates. Following the
quasi-differencing method developed by Wooldridge (1997) and later employed by Windmeijer (2000)
and Kim and Marschke (2005), we employ a count data model with IVs estimated using Generalized
Method of Moments (GMM). Since 95% of the patents in The Commons were contributed by IBM in
January 2005, our choice of IV mostly focuses on factors that influence IBM’s decision on what to
contribute and the timing of the contribution behavior.
           Our first IV is the cumulated number of IBM’s patents that were opposed at the European Patent
Office (EPO) up to year t and related to software segment j (denoted as IBM’s opposed patents). We

                                                                                                                                                26
argue that because IBM’s strategic intent behind its contribution to The Commons is to support OSS
innovation, its propensity to contribute in each market will be increasing in the extent to which it holds
blocking patents across those markets. EPO oppositions will be a good proxy for the extent to which IBM
holds blocking patents because of the institutional mechanisms through which oppositions are conducted.
Different from US legal procedures, the EPO allows patents to be opposed up to nine months after the
grant date and at a much lower cost than that of patents opposed through formal legal procedures. Third
parties tend to oppose EPO granted patents that are more valuable, and oppositions are more likely to
occur in areas characterized by cumulative innovation and uncertainty (Harhoff and Reitzig 2004).
           The identification assumption for this IV is that IBM patents issued and opposed at the EPO are
uncorrelated with OSS entry in the US market. This will be true when two conditions hold. First, among
such EPO opposed patents, those with a related grant within the US are appropriately controlled for in the
regression. Our variable Total Patents does include all relevant market patents, including patents granted
to IBM in the US that may have been extended from or to the EPO. Second, industry conditions such as
demand and technological opportunities driving EPO oppositions that are correlated across Europe and
the US are similarly controlled for. While we have several controls for industry conditions, including OSS
Demand and Total Patents, the controls are less than perfect and could still give rise to omitted variable
biases in our estimates.
           Our second instrument captures how changes in the perceived legal risks to developing OSS
influenced the timing of IBM’s contribution. We interact IBM opposed patents with a time dummy that is
equal to one in 2003 and thereafter (denoted as afteryear2003) to construct our second IV (denoted as
IBM’s opposed patents X afteryear2003). The motivation to use afteryear2003 dummy is driven by the
SCO lawsuit against IBM on March 7, 2003. This was the first major IPR enforcement lawsuit targeting
firms developing OSS-related product and attracted significant publicity. As such, it is expected to
influence the timing of IBM’s patent contribution decision.
           Table 8 shows the results of an auxiliary first stage OLS regression of the number of claims-
weighted patents in The Commons on each of our instruments separately and then together.
         Table 8: Results of OLS regression of Claims-weighted patents in The Commons on instruments
                                                                                               IV: IBM’s opposed
                                                      IV: IBM’s opposed patents                                              The full set of IVs
Dependent variable: The Commons                                                              patents X afteryear2003
                                                                   (1)                                 (2)                            (3)
IBM’s opposed patents                                        .226*** (.069)                                                       .115 (076)
IBM’s opposed patents X afteryear2003                                                             .066*** (.016)               .051*** (.018)
First Stage F-statistic, p-value                              10.73, .001                           17.53, .001                  9.71, .001
Notes: 1) All regressions include other baseline controls such as sales growth, total patents, and patent quality. The complete results including
estimates for the controls are reported in Appendix Table C-10. 2) The full set of IVs include IBM’s opposed patents and IBM’s opposed patents
X afteryear2003. 3) The first stage OLS IV Regressions are used as auxiliary regressions to test for weak IVs, as there is no such test in using the
GMM estimator. 4) Robust standard errors, clustered by market, are in parentheses. 5) * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant
at 1%.



                                                                                                                                                 27
            The direction of the coefficient estimates is as expected; the number of claims-weighted
 Commons patents is increasing in the number of IBM’s patents opposed at the EPO, and this is
 particularly so after 2003. The joint F-test of instruments in the first stage shows the F-statistics ranging
 between 9.71 and 17.53, suggesting the IVs have some power in explaining the endogenous variable.
            Table 9 below reports the GMM estimation results where we instrument for The Commons using
 all two IVs. As shown in column (1), the marginal effect of The Commons is significantly positive,
 consistent with our baseline estimates38. The result from the Hansen J-statistic fails to reject the null that
 the instruments used are uncorrelated with the error term.
                         Table 9: GMM estimates of count data regression using the full set of IVs
                                                                                                                            Add interaction with
                                                    Specification          Add interaction
                                                                                                    Add interaction          cumulativeness of
                                                    testing direct              with
                                                                                                  with concentration        innovation and with
Dependent variable: OSS entry                      impact of The          cumulativeness of
                                                                                                  of patent ownership      concentration of patent
                                                   Commons only              innovation
                                                                                                                                ownership
                                                          (1)                     (2)                      (3)                       (4)
                                                        .269*                    .150                    -.157                    -.495**
The Commons
                                                        (.150)                  (.254)                   (.261)                    (.199)
                                                                                 .217                                             .497**
The Commons * Cumulativeness
                                                                                (.228)                                             (.199)
                                                                                                        1.315*                    1.550**
The Commons * Concentration
                                                                                                         (.808)                    (.800)
                                                       -4.644**                -2.367                   -3.029*                     .855
Cumulativeness
                                                        (1.702)                (2.639)                  (1.681)                   (1.305)
                                                         .467                   .336                     -2.330                    -2.686
Concentration
                                                        (4.366)                (4.563)                  (5.178)                   (5.169)
Over-identification, p-value                             .273                   .465                      .313                      .463
Marginal Effects
The Commons (average)                                .269* (.150)           .292** (.139)             .138 (.168)               .189** (.092)
The Commons (cumulativeness=10%)                                             .193 (.211)                                         -.038 (.088)
The Commons (cumulativeness=90%)                                           .490*** (.183)                                      .643*** (.231)
The Commons (concentration =10%)                                                                       .014 (.193)               .042 (.099)
The Commons (concentration =90%)                                                                      .282* (.182)             .358*** (.129)
 Notes: 1) All regressions include other baseline controls such as sales growth, total patents, and patent quality. The complete results including
 estimates for the controls are reported in Appendix Table C-11. 2) The full set of IVs include: IBM’s opposed patents and IBM’s opposed patents
 X afteryear2003. 2) Robust standard errors, clustered by market, are in parentheses. 3) * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant
 at 1%. 4) We use Wooldridge’s quasi-differencing transformation to remove market fixed effects.


            The remaining columns in Table 9 show the results of instrumental variables regressions in which
 the endogenous variables are The Commons interacted with Cumulativeness and Concentration and the
 instruments are the two instruments described above and their interactions with Cumulativeness and
 Concentration. Largely consistent with the baseline results, the estimated coefficients and implied
 marginal effects suggest a greater effect of The Commons when cumulativeness of innovation or patent
 ownership concentration is high; columns 3 and 4 show that the marginal effect of The Commons is
 significantly different when evaluated at high versus low level of cumulativeness and when evaluated at

 38
   In this set of GMM estimations, we only use baseline controls (i.e. the controls used in column (1) in Table 4, as adding more
 controls tends to lead to non-convergent results.


                                                                                                                                                 28
high versus low level of concentration. For robustness, we also run GMM estimation using each of the
two IVs individually. The results are in Table C-12 in the Appendix and are qualitatively similar to the
results based on the full set of instruments. 39
7. Conclusions
         In this study we provide the first large sample evidence of how the provision of a patent
commons shapes OSS entry by start-ups. In particular, we examine the introduction of The Commons, a
patent commons initiated by the Open Source Development Labs and IBM in 2005. We show that
increases in the size of The Commons related to a software market are associated with increases in OSS
entry by start-up software firms in that market. Furthermore, the impact of The Commons is magnified
when two features of patent thickets are present in the market: cumulativeness of innovation and
concentration of patent ownership. We observe a particularly strong relationship between the size of The
Commons and OSS start-ups’ entry in markets with high cumulativeness of innovation; the marginal
effect of The Commons is also greater when concentration is high.
         Our study has implications for our understanding of the impact of formal IPR on OSS, an area in
which our knowledge is still quite limited (Lerner and Tirole 2005, von Hippel and von Krogh 2003).
Despite the rapid growth in the commercialization of OSS, 40 OSS contributors and users are easily
targeted by proprietary holders of IPR because of the cumulative nature of the development process and
the difficulty in identifying the provenance of source code ownership. The existence of fear, uncertainty,
and doubt (FUD) arising from the threat of litigation will be important for the commercialization of OSS.
This research advances our understanding of how the existence and exercise of formal IPR influences the
rate and direction of OSS innovation (Graham and Mowery 2005, Lerner and Tirole 2005, Maurer and
Scotchmer 2006). This study also sheds some light on recent work that studies firm decisions to
appropriate value from OSS (Bonaccorsi et al. 2006, Fosfuri et al. 2008).
         Related, our research has important implications for technology management. Contributors to
patent commons forego potential opportunities to license their IPR in hopes of increasing innovative
activity that will spur demand for complementary products and services from which the contributor can
appropriate value. If contributions do not lead to entry of new OSS products, then the benefits to
contribution will be isolated to the positive publicity in the OSS community. Our results show that such
contributions will have an effect on commercial activity in OSS, particularly in markets where patent
thickets are most likely to raise ex ante entry costs.

39
   We have also implemented a Hausman test for the necessity of using GMM estimation with IVs. The chi-square obtained from
comparing the estimates of our baseline Poisson model and GMM with IVs is 6.331, and insignificant, suggesting the estimates
from the GMM with IVs do not reject the Poisson estimates.
40
   For example, a recent survey has indicated that worldwide revenue from commercializing OSS reached $1.8 billion in 2006
and is expected to reach $5.8 billion in 2011 (Broersma 2007).


                                                                                                                         29
         Our results differ significantly from that in some recent research on traditional patent pools. Such
pools allow firms to combine their patents as if they were a single firm, reducing transaction costs and
licensing fees for a set of patented technologies. Different from the patent commons that we study, patent
pools require some combination of donations to the pool and/or license fees for firms to use protected
technologies. Recent research on patents pools has demonstrated that they can lead to a decline in
innovation (Flamm 2013, Lampe and Moser 2010), and a change in the direction of innovation toward
substitute technologies (Lampe and Moser 2013). One hypothesized reason for their result is differential
licensing fees for access to patents for pool members and non-members. In contrast, the royalty-free
patents pools that we study lead increases in the introduction of new commercial technologies in
segments where commons patents are particularly concentrated.
         Our findings also inform recent work on the impacts of patent thickets on start-up entry (e.g.,
Cockburn and MacGarvie 2011). Unlike large firms, start-ups usually lack the R&D capabilities and
financial resources required to expand their own patent portfolios, so it is difficult for them to navigate
patent thickets using other approaches such as cross-licensing agreements.41 However, start-ups may be
offering complementary technologies within different platforms and may be unaware of the extent to
which they are infringing patents or to which patents in the commons offer a means to avoid patent
infringement. Our results are consistent with recent findings that the commercialization strategies of start-
up firms are sensitive to the distribution of IPRs in the market (e.g., Gans et al. 2002, Huang et al. 2013).
         We also contribute to the literature by examining the potential anti-commons problems from
strategic patenting and the impact of patent thickets on entry into the software industry (e.g., Cockburn
and MacGarvie 2011, Ziedonis 2004). While the patent thickets problem can be examined from different
perspectives, we highlight the roles of cumulativeness of innovation and patent ownership concentration
as two different and important dimensions of patent thickets. We propose mechanisms under which these
characteristics may interact with patent commons to determine start-up entry costs. Our research also
provides empirical evidence that patent commons may be used as another mechanism, in addition to
traditional patent pools or SSOs (Shapiro 2001, Rysman and Simcoe 2008), to effectively mitigate the
anti-commons problem.
         Our study is subject to limitations. One particular concern is how our results may be influenced
by time-varying market unobservables that can affect both OSS entry and donations to The Commons.
While we demonstrate that our results are robust to a range of analyses, we acknowledge that our
empirical results may reflect different mechanisms through which The Commons may influence entry.

41
  As noted by Matt Asay, the chief operating officer at Canonical (the company behind the Ubuntu Linux operating system),
“this [type of patent collective] may be the only refuge for start-ups and others, like Red Hat, that don’t have an aggressive
patent-acquisition policy.” (Matt Asay 2010)


                                                                                                                           30
First, the technologies contained in The Commons may directly reduce invention and licensing costs for
start-ups. However, another mechanism is that through deploying a specific set of IPR, the contribution
by IBM provides a signal for its broader efforts to protect OSS developers from litigation risks. We do not
explicitly disentangle these different mechanisms, but we believe this is an important question for future
study.
          Our study also points to many other opportunities for future research. In particular, we analyze
the impact of patent commons on the behavior of those firms whose entry decisions are most likely to be
affected by the change in licensing and negotiation costs: start-up firms considering entry as an OSS
competitor.42 The introduction of patent commons may have secondary implications for two groups of
firms that we do not study: large firms and those who sell software under a traditional proprietary license.
Understanding the implications of patent commons on these other groups will have important
implications for the rate and direction of inventive activity in software. We hope our findings stimulate
additional research in this important area.
References
Alexy, O., M. G Reitzig. 2013. Private–collective Innovation, Competition, and Firms’ Counterintuitive
     Appropriation Strategies. Research Policy 42 (4): 895-913.
Allison J. R., M. A. Lemley, K. A. Moore, R. D. Trunkey. 2004. Valuable Patents. Georgetown Law
     Journal 92: 435-479.
Arora, A., A. Fosfuri, A. Gambardella. 2001. Markets for Technology: Economics of Innovation and
     Corporate Strategy. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Asay, Matt. 2010. What Apple's and Microsoft's patent threats mean for start-ups. CNET. Available at
     http://news.cnet.com/8301-13505_3-10466670-16.html
Auza, Jun. 2011. Infamous Microsoft FUD Campaigns Against Linux. Available at www.junauza.com,
     posted on July 18, 2011.
Bessen, J. E., R. M. Hunt. 2007. An Empirical Look at Software Patents. Journal of Economics &
     Management Strategy 16(1): 157-89.
Bessen, J. 2008. The value of U.S. patents by owner and patent characteristics. Research Policy 37(5):
     932-945.
Bessen, J., M. J. Meurer. 2008. Patent Failure: How Judges, Bureaucrats, and Lawyers Put Innovators at
     Risk. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Biddle, B., A. White, S. Woods. 2012. How Many Standards in a Laptop? (And Other Empirical
     Questions) Working Paper, Sandra Day O’Connor College of Law, Arizona State University.
Bonaccorsi, A., S. Giannangeli, C. Rossi. 2006. Entry Strategies Under Competing Standards: Hybrid
     Business Models in the Open Source Software Industry. Management Science 52(7): 1085-1098.
Broersma, M. 2007. IDC: Open-Source Market to Be Worth $5.8B by 2011. CIO. Available at
     http://www.cio.com/article/116201/IDC_Open_Source_Market_to_Be_Worth_5.8B_by_2011
Caballero, R.J., A.B. Jaffe. 1993. How High are the Giants' Shoulders: An Empirical Assessment of
     Knowledge Spillovers and Creative Destruction in a Model of Economic Growth. In O. Blanchard

42
  A natural and interesting extension to this study is to look at how the size of The Commons influences the survival rate of start-
up firms producing OSS products. However, of the firms introducing new OSS products in our sample, only one firm exited
before the end of the sampling period. As a result, there is insufficient variance in our data to measure the impact of The
Commons on the survival of start-up firms who produce OSS.


                                                                                                                                 31
     and S. Fischer, eds., National Bureau of Economic Research Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 8, pp.
     15-86, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Campbell-Kelly, M., D.D. Garcia-Swartz. 2009. Pragmatism, not ideology-Historical perspectives on
     IBM’s adoption of open-source software. Information Economics and Policy. 21(3): 229–244.
Capek, P. G., S. P. Frank, S. Gerdt, and D. Shields. 2005. A history of IBM’s open-source involvement
     and strategy. IBM Systems Journal 44(2): 249-257.
Clarkson, G. 2005. Patent Informatics for Patent Thicket Detection: A Network Analytic Approach for
     Measuring       the   Density       of   Patent    Space.      Working     Paper.     Available    at:
     http://w4.stern.nyu.edu/emplibrary/ACFltbnmV.pdf
Coase, R. 1960. The Problem of Social Cost. Journal of Law and Economics 3(1): 1-44.
Cockburn, I. M., M. MacGarvie. 2006. Entry, Exit and Patenting in the Software Industry. NBER
     Working paper 12563, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Cockburn, I. M., M. MacGarvie. 2009. Patents, Thickets and the Financing of Early-Stage Firms:
     Evidence from the Software Industry. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 18(3): 729-773.
Cockburn, I. M., M. MacGarvie. 2011. Entry and Patenting in the Software Industry. Management
     Science 57(5): 915-933.
Cohen, J. E., M. A. Lemley. 2001. Patent scope and innovation in the software industry. California Law
     Review, 89(1): 1-57.
Flamm, K. 2013. A Tale of Two Standards: Patent Pools and Innovation in the Optical Disk Drive
     Industry. NBER Working Papers No 18931 National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA
Fosfuri, A., M. S. Giarratana, A. Luzzi. 2008. The Penguin Has Entered the Building: The
     Commercialization of Open Source Software Products. Organization Science 19(2): 292-305.
Galasso, A., M. Schankerman. 2010. Patent Thickets, Courts, and the Market for Innovation. RAND
     Journal of Economics 41(3): 472-503.
Gambardella, A., B. H. Hall. 2006. Proprietary versus public domain licensing of software and research
     products. Research Policy 35(6): 875-892.
Gans, J. D. Hsu, and S. Stern. 2002. When does start-up innovation spur the gale of creative destruction?
     RAND Journal of Economics 33(4): 571-586.
Graham, S. J. H., D. Mowery. 2005. The Use of USPTO “Continuation” Applications in the Patenting of
     Software: Implications for Free and Open Source. Law & Policy 27(1): 128-151.
Green, J. R., S. Scotchmer. 1995. On the division of profit in sequential innovation. The RAND Journal of
     Economics 26(1): 20-33.
Griliches, Z. 1990. Patent statistics as economic indicators: a survey. Journal of Economic Literature 27:
     1661–1707.
Hall, B.H., C. Helmers. 2013. Innovation and diffusion of clean/green technology: Can patent commons
     help? Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 66(1):33-51.
Hall, B.H., C. Helmers, G. von Graevenitz, C. Rosazza-Bondibene. 2012. A Study of Patent Thickets:
     Final report prepared for the UK Intellectual Property Office.
Hall B.H., A. Jaffe, M. Trajtenberg. 2005. Market value and patent citations. RAND Journal of Economics
     36 (1): 16-38.
Hall, B. H., R. H. Ziedonis. 2001. The patent paradox revisited: An empirical study of patenting in the
     U.S. semiconductor industry, 1979-1995. RAND Journal of Economics 32(1): 101-128.
Harhoff, D., M. Reitzig. 2004. Determinants of opposition against EPO patent grants—the case of
     biotechnology and pharmaceuticals. International Journal of Industrial Organization 22(4): 443-480.
Heller, M. A., R. S. Eisenberg. 1998. Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons in Biomedical
     Research. Science 280 (5364): 698-701.
Huang, P., M. Ceccagnoli, C. Forman, D. J. Wu. 2013. Appropriability Mechanisms and the Platform
     Partnership Decision: Evidence from Enterprise Software. Management Science 59(1): 102–121.
Jaffe, A.B, M.S. Fogarty, B.A. Banks. 1998. Evidence from Patents and Patent Citations on the Impact of
     NASA and Other Federal Labs on Commercial Innovation. Journal of Industrial Economics 46(2):
     183-205.
                                                                                                        32
Jaffe, A. B., J. Lerner. 2004. Innovation and Its Discontents: How Our Broken Patent System Is
     Endangering Innovation and Progress, and What to Do About It. Princeton University Press,
     Princeton, NJ.
Kim, J., G. Marschke. 2005. Labor Mobility of Scientists, Technological Diffusion, and the Firm's
     Patenting Decision. RAND Journal of Economics 36(2): 298-317.
Lampe, R., P. Moser. 2010. Do Patent Commons Encourage Innovation? Evidence from the Nineteenth-
     Century Sewing Machine Industry. The Journal of Economic History 70(4): 898-920.
Lampe, R., P. Moser. 2013. Patent Pools and Innovation in Substitutes - Evidence from the 19th Century
     Sewing Machine Industry. RAND Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Lanjouw, J. O., M. Schankerman. 2004. Patent Quality and Research Productivity: Measuring Innovation
     with Multiple Indicators. The Economic Journal 114(495): 441-465.
Lemley, M. A., C. Shapiro. 2007. Patent Hold-Up and Royalty Stacking. Available at
     http://escholarship.org/uc/item/8638s257
Lerner, J., J. Tirole. 2005. The Economics of Technology Sharing: Open Source and Beyond. Journal of
     Economic Perspectives 19 (Spring): 99-120.
Lévêque, F., Ménière, Y. 2007. Copyright versus Patents: The Open Source Software Legal Battle.
     Review of Economic Research on Copyright issues 4(1): 27-46.
Lichtman, D. 2006. Patent Holdouts in the Standard-Setting Process. U Chicago Law and Economics,
     Olin Working Paper No. 292.
Mailath, G., A. Postlewaite. 1990. Asymmetric Information Bargaining Problems with Many Agents.
     Review of Economic Studies 57(3): 351-367.
Maurer, S. M., S. Scotchmer. 2006. Open Source Software: The New Intellectual Property Paradigm.
     Hendershott, T eds. Handbook of Economics and Information Systems 285-319, Elsevier.
Marson, Ingrid. 2004. Linus Torvalds speaks out against EU Patent Law. ZDNet. Available at
     http://www.zdnet.com/linus-torvalds-speaks-out-against-eu-patent-law-3039174746/. Accessed April
     30, 2013.
Noel, M.D., M.A. Schankerman. 2006. Strategic Patenting and Software Innovation: Theory and evidence
     from a panel of U.S. firms. CEPR Working Paper 5701, Center for Economic Policy Research,
     Washington, DC.
Rysman, M., T. Simcoe. 2008. Patents and the Performance of Voluntary Standard Setting Organizations.
     Management Science 54(11): 1920-1934.
Samuelson P. 2006. IBM's pragmatic embrace of open source. Communications of the ACM, 49(10): 21-
     25.
Scannell, Ed. 2004. IBM says it won’t assert patents against Linux kernel. InfoWorld Daily News, August
     4, 2004.
Schultz, J., J. M. Urban. 2012. Protecting Open Innovation: The Defensive Patent License as a New
     Approach to Patent Threats, Transaction Costs, and Tactical Disarmament. Harvard Journal of Law
     and Technology 26(1): 1-67.
Scotchmer. 2004. Innovation and Incentives. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Serafino, D. 2007. Survey of Patent Commons Demonstrates Variety of Purposes and Management
     Structures. KEI Research Note 6.
Shapiro, C. 2001. Navigating the Patent Thicket: Cross Licenses, Patent Commons, and Standard-Setting.
     A. Jaffe, J. Lerner, S. Stern, eds. Innovation Policy and the Economy, Vol. 1. MIT Press, Cambridge,
     MA.
Silverman, B. S. 1999. Technological Resources and the Direction of Corporate Diversification: Toward
     an Integration of the Resource-Based View and Transaction Cost Economics. Management Science
     45(8): 1109-1124.
Simcoe, T. S., S. J. H. Graham, M. P. Feldman. 2009. Competing on Standards? Entrepreneurship,
     Intellectual Property, and Platform Technologies. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy.
     18(3):775-816.


                                                                                                      33
Stallman, R. 2011. Europe’s “unitary patent” could mean unlimited software patents. Available at
     http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/europes-unitary-patent.html. Access April 30, 2013.
Thompson P., M. Fox-Kean. 2005. Patent Citations and the Geography of Knowledge Spillovers: A
     Reassessment. The American Economic Review 95(1): 450-460.
von Graevenitz G., S. Wagner, D. Harhoff. 2011. How to measure patent thickets—A novel approach.
     Economics Letters 111(1): 6-9.
von Hippel, E., G. von Krogh. 2003. Open Source Software and the ‘Private-Collective’ Innovation
     Model: Issues for Organization Science. Organization Science 14(2): 209-223.
Windmeijer, F. 2000. Moment Conditions for Fixed Effects Count Data Models with Endogenous
     Regressors. Economics Letters 68(1): 21-24.
Wooldridge, J.M. 1997. Multiplicative Panel Data Models without the Strict Exogeneity Assumption.
     Econometric Theory 13: 667-678.
Ziedonis, R.H. 2004. Don't Fence Me In: Fragmented Markets for Technology and the Patent Acquisition
     Strategies of Firms Management Science 50(6): 804-820.




                                                                                                  34
APPENDIX A: Patent Pledging Events

Event Date       Pledging Firm(s)          Pledged Patent(s)               Potential licensees                                          Notes
                                     More than 500 specified
                                                                    Anyone developing code under
Jan 2005     IBM                     patents (contributed to The                                     This pledging event has been included in our analysis
                                                                    an OSI approved license
                                     Commons)
                                                                                                     Two main criticisms of this pledge: 1. The CDDL doesn’t permit
                                                                                                     mingling its code with code under GNU GPL, which governs Linux.
                                                                    Developer working on any
                                                                                                     This means developers can’t use these patents on Linux – the freely
                                     1670 (unspecified) patents     approved project under the
Jan 2005     Sun Microsystems                                                                        granted patents can only enable idea-sharing among programmers for
                                     related to Sun’s Solaris       Common Development and
                                                                                                     Solaris-related projects. 2. Sun’s announcement was too broad and
                                                                    Distribution License (CDDL)
                                                                                                     didn’t specify these 1670 patents or respond to any developers’
                                                                                                     questions about what rights the developers have to these patents.
             Computer Associates     14 patents (contributed to     Anyone developing code under
Sep 2005                                                                                             This pledging event has been included as a control in our analysis.
             International Inc.      The Commons)                   an OSI approved license
                                                                                                     Criticism: Because of Nokia’s stance on Linux only, developers
                                                                    Developers working for the       questioned why it did not apply to directly related projects such as
Nov 2005     Nokia                   Any of its patents
                                                                    Linux Kernel only                GNOME and KDE and why it did not apply to application projects that
                                                                                                     are not necessarily directly related to Linux.
             Open Invention                                         Any company, institution or
             Network, founded by                                    individual that agrees not to
                                                                                                     This pledging event has been included in our analysis as a control, as
             IBM, Novell,                                           assert its patents against the
                                     Any of OIN’s patents                                            many of its patents have been pledged only recently and toward the end
Nov 2005     Koninklijke Philips                                    Linux operating system or
                                                                                                     of our sample period.
             Electronics, Sony and                                  certain Linux-related
             Red Hat                                                applications
                                     Patent 6,988,138, 7,493,396,
                                                                    Anyone contributing to OSS
                                     7,558,853; pending patent                                       For the commercially developed open source add-on applications to
                                                                    projects, OSS initiatives,
                                     applications: 12/470,739;                                       proprietary products, if the software’s end license is open, then it is
Feb 2007     Blackboard Inc.                                        commercially developed open
                                     10/443,149; 10/643,075;                                         covered by the pledge; if it is partly open and partly proprietary, it is
                                                                    source add-on applications to
                                     10/653,074; 11/142,965;                                         not covered.
                                                                    proprietary products
                                     10/373,924; 10/918,016.




                                                                                                                                                                   35
APPENDIX B: Identification of Software Markets and the Matching Patent Classes
Step 1: Identify Software Markets
         To measure entry with new OSS products related to different software markets in each year, a
crucial step is to divide the software market into different markets that are reasonably distinct from each
other. One main source of software markets is the product code classification system embedded in the
PROMT database. For a portion of news articles from PROMT, there are a few product codes assigned to
each new article that indicate what product category/categories are associated with that article. All these
product categories are organized as a hierarchical structure by PROMT and are defined both in terms of
customer markets and technologies. Table B-1 shows some examples of PROMT codes.
         However, there are two drawbacks to just relying on PROMT classifications. First, a significant
percentage (about 60%) of OSS product introduction news articles from PROMT is missing the product
code field. Thus, we must manually assign product codes for this set of articles. Second, the PROMT
classes do not include keywords, making it difficult to manually match articles to PROMT classes. Thus,
we further match PROMT product code classes with CorpTech product code classes43 to take advantage
of the keywords defined for each CorpTech product code. The resulting concordance table (denoted as the
PROMT-CorpTech concordance hereafter) consists of about 80 PROMT codes matched to CorpTech’s
six-digit or seven-digit product codes. Each product code is associated with a set of technology phrases
specific to that product code. This is used as a basis for us to identify (i) the PROMT articles with missing
product codes and (ii) the related patents across a variety of software markets. Table B-2 shows some
examples of the PROMT-CorpTech concordance.
Step 2: Identify Patent Classes across Software Markets
         Using the NBER patent data project and USPTO database, we constructed our patent dataset,
which consists of all patents granted from 1976 to 2009. Our sample period is from 1999 to 2009. To
identify the related patents across a range of markets from the PROMT-CorpTech concordance, we first
examined specialist firms that produce in only one CorpTech six- or seven-digit code44. The sample of
single specialists is from the CorpTech directory, over 1992 to 2004 and 2010.45 We found 3500 patents
held by about 700 specialists that have products associated with CorpTech codes from the PROMT-
CorpTech concordance. The 3-digit USPTO classes to which the 3500 patents and their forward citations
belong served as a starting point for us to map patent classes to each product code: for each product code,
the top decile of these 3-digit US classes was used as candidates representing the core technologies for


43
   There are more than 290 software product codes (denoted as SOF) defined by CorpTech Directory. Each firm in this directory
is associated with a set of self-reported product codes selected from these 290 SOF categories.
44
   Examples of CorpTech code are provided in Table B-2.
45
   Unfortunately, data from the CorpTech Directory from 2005 to 2009 was not available.



                                                                                                                          36
that code. While such endeavor to identify patent classes across software markets has been undertaken by
prior research, in particular Cockburn and MacGarvie (2006, 2011), we constructed our own classification
for several reasons. First, our sample period is more recent than theirs, so the mapping between patent
technologies and product markets may have changed over time. Second, Cockburn and MacGarvie (2006,
2011) examined 28 specific CorpTech product codes that have incomplete overlap with the open source
product markets that we study. Finally, we took the intersection of the patent classes from the patents in
The Commons with the above mapping, which lead to 34 US patent classes and their corresponding
product codes.
Step 3: Match Software Markets with Patent Class-subclass Combinations
        Because most of the 3-digit US patent classes contain quite heterogeneous technologies, we then
further generated a more detailed mapping between software product codes and US patent subclass levels
by searching for technology phrases associated with each product code in patent class and subclass
description. After identifying possible patent class-subclass, we then decided the concordance between
product codes and patent class-subclass manually. This process generated the final mapping between
software markets and patent class-subclass combinations. We further consolidated all product codes into
33 software markets based on whether they are supported by the same technologies (similar patent
classes), as we are most interested in whether the supply of certain technologies by The Commons helps
start-ups move into new technology area. The final concordance that we used in the empirical analysis
consists of 33 software markets matched to 422 patent class-subclass combinations. Table B-3 shows
some examples of this final concordance between software markets and US patent class-subclass
combinations. To boost our confidence, we compared our concordance with the concordance by
Cockburn and MacGarvie (2006, 2011). Among the 28 CorpTech codes examined by Cockburn and
MacGarvie (2006, 2011), 18 of them closely relates to 12 software markets defined by us, though some of
our software markets are broader. We compared the patent class-subclass combinations matched to the 18
product codes by Cockburn and MacGarvie (2006, 2011) with the patent class-subclass combinations
matched to the 12 markets by us. As shown in Table B-4, overall, our concordance has good overlap with
theirs. Figures B-1 and B-2 present a more concrete view on the above three steps.


Keywords used to identify OSS entry
         We used the following set of keywords to search in PROMT news articles for introduction of
software products that are licensed as open source. A software product is tagged as open source if it
contains any of these keywords. We first implement automatic search and then manually check the results
to ensure it is licensed as open source. Our choice of open source license terms is based on the
distribution of open source licenses used by OSS projects at SourceForge.net, which is the largest



                                                                                                       37
repository of OSS. Over 230,000 projects and over 3 million users and developers were registered before
the end of year 2009 (SourceForge 2009).

                          open source , open-sourced, OSS, FLOSS, source code, GPL-compatible, non-
 Keywords related to
                          copyleft, copyleft, free software license, open source license, open-source
 generic terms of OSS:
                          license, public domain
                          GPL, General Public License , GNU, Lesser General Public License, LGPL,
 Keywords related to
                          BSD, FreeBSD, Apache License, Apache Software License, Artistic License,
 open source licenses:
                          MIT License, Mozilla Public License

                               Table B-1: Examples of PROMT Codes

                    7372502    Operating systems
                    7372503    Operating system enhancements
                    7372504    Graphical user interface software
                    7372505    Portable document software
                    7372510    Software development tools
                    7372511    CASE software
                    7372512    Programming utilities
                    7372513    Application development software
                    7372514    Debugging & testing software
                    7372520    Peripheral support software
                    7372521    Device driver software
                    7372522    Data acquisition software
                    7372523    Printer support software
                    7372530    Disk/file management software

                    Table B-2: Examples of the PROMT-CorpTech Concordance

                CorpTech Code        PROMT Product Code
                SOF-CS-F             7372650 Fax software
                SOF-DM-M             7372421 DBMS
                SOF-HL-M             7372466 Medical practice software
                SOF-ME-S             7372544 Sound/audio software
                SOF-OA-MB            7372662 BBS software
                SOF-OA-MC            7372674 Videoconferencing software
                SOF-OA-ME            7372605 Electronic mail software
                SOF-OA-MG            7372630 Workgroup software
                SOF-OA-P             7372441 DTP software
                SOF-TS-EC            7372433 Civil engineering software
                SOF-TS-EE            7372434 Electrical engineering software
                SOF-TS-ER            7372423 Geographic information systems
                SOF-UT-H             7372521 Device driver software
                SOF-UT-O             7372561 Data center management software
                SOF-UT-Q             7372513 Application development software
                SOF-UT-X             7372691 Data encryption software


                                                                                                      38
                Table B-3: Examples of the Concordance between Software Markets and US Patent Class-subclass Combinations
Software Market                    US class  Subclass Level 0                                  Subclass Level 1
Artificial Intelligence Software    706      Fuzzy Logic Hardware                              Fuzzy Neural Network
Artificial Intelligence Software    706      Knowledge Processing System                       Creation Or Modification
Artificial Intelligence Software    706      Knowledge Processing System                       Knowledge Representation And Reasoning Technique
Artificial Intelligence Software    706      Neural Network                                    Learning Method
Artificial Intelligence Software    706      Neural Network                                    Learning Task
Artificial Intelligence Software    706      Neural Network                                    Neural Simulation Environment
Artificial Intelligence Software    706      Neural Network                                    Structure
Artificial Intelligence Software    706      Plural Processing Systems
Data Encryption Software            380      Communication System Using Cryptography           Having Compression
Data Encryption Software            380      Communication System Using Cryptography           Time Market Interchange
Data Encryption Software            380      Facsimile Cryptography                            Including Generation Of An Associated Coded Record
Data Encryption Software            380      Key Management                                    Having Particular Key Generator
Data Encryption Software            380      Key Management                                    Key Distribution
Data Encryption Software            380      Particular Algorithmic Function Encoding         NBS/DES Algorithm
Data Encryption Software            380      Particular Algorithmic Function Encoding         Public Key
Data Encryption Software            380      Video Cryptography                                Copy Protection Or Prevention
Data Encryption Software            726      Access Control Or Authentication                  Network
Data Encryption Software            726      Access Control Or Authentication                  Stand-Alone
                                             Monitoring Or Scanning Of Software Or Data
Data Encryption Software             726     Including Attack Prevention                       Intrusion Detection
Data Encryption Software             726     Protection Of Hardware                            Theft Prevention
  Note: 1) US patent class 706 is described as “Data processing: artificial intelligence”; US patent class 380 is described as “Cryptography”; US
  patent class 726 is described as “Information security”. 2) All subclasses within each US patent class are structured hierarchically. “Subclass level
  0” means the subclass is on the highest level and “Subclass level 1” means the subclass is on the second highest level. Our mapping is based on
  subclass level 1.




                                                                                                                                                    39
                            Table B-4: Validation of market-patent concordance with Cockburn and MacGarvie (2006, 2011)
                             Concordance by Cockburn and MacGarvie (2006, 2011)                                                             Our concordance
                                                                                     Patent                                                        Patent
#    Software code   Code description                                                         Patent subclass   Software market                            Patent subclass
                                                                                     Class                                                         class
1    SOF-DM-MH       Software to present data to users in a tree-like structure      707      1-10;100-104.1
                     Software to present data to users in the form of tables of rows                                                               707      1-10;100-102;104.1;200-
2    SOF-DM-MR                                                                       707      1-10;100-104.1    Database software
                     and columns                                                                                                                            206
3    SOF-DM-Q        Database query language software                                707      1-10;100-104.1
                                                                                     709      206;
4    SOF-OA-ME       Electronic message systems software                                                        Electronic mail software           709      206;
                                                                                     705      008;009
                                                                                     701      2XXX              Geographic information
5    SOF-TS-ER       Geographic information systems software                                                                                       701      117-223;300
                                                                                     702      005               systems
                                                                                                                                                   710      8-19
6    SOF-UT-H        Software to control the operation of peripheral devices        710       1-74;             Peripheral device drivers
                                                                                                                                                   719      321;324;328
7    SOF-AC-B        Invoicing and billing software                                 705       001-045           Accounting, financial and
                                                                                                                                                   705      16-45;51-59;64-80
8    SOF-AC-T        Tax preparation and reporting software                         705       019;031           business practice software
                                                                                                                Voice communications                        200-256;256.1-
9    SOF-AI-A        Voice technology software                                      704       <=278                                                704
                                                                                                                software                                    256.8;257-278
                                                                                                                Foreign language translation
10   SOF-AI-L        Natural language software                                      704       8;9                                                  704      1-10
                                                                                                                software
11   SOF-AI-N        Software that simulates the neural pathways of the brain       706       15-44
                                                                                                                Artificial intelligence software   706      2;10;12;14-62
12   SOF-SV-AR       Artificial intelligence R&D                                    706       15-62
                                                                                                                Disk/file management               711      100-173
13   SOF-DM-F        File management software                                       707       1-10;200-206
                                                                                                                software                           707      1-10;200-206
14   SOF-MA-Q        Software to control product quality                            700       108-115           Manufacturing and business         700      28-55;95-244;266-274
15   SOF-WD-I        Inventory management software                                  705       28;10             process software                   705      7-11;28;29
                                                                                    345       418-427                                                       418-428;440-443;467-
16   SOF-OA-GD       Three dimensional representation software                                                  Graphics software                  345      475;502-
                                                                                    700       98;118;119;120
                                                                                                                                                            506;519;520;536-689
17   SOF-OA-P        Desktop publishing software                                    715       500-542
                                                                                    715       5XX               Personal productivity              715      5XX
18   SOF-OA-W        Word processor/text editor software
                                                                                    707       200-206




                                                                                                                                                                             40
      Figure B-1: Identification of Software Markets



Software Market              PROMT Product Code                                   CorpTech Product Code


                                                                                  SOF-DM (Database/file mgmt. software)
                             (NT5) 7372420 Database software
                                                                                  Keywords: Database/file management
                             (NT6) 7372421 DBMS
Database software                                                                 software, DBMS, Relational DBMS,
                             (NT6) 7372422 DBMS utilities
                                                                                  Information storage and retrieval systems
                                                                                  software (ISRS)

                             (NT5) 7372450        Image     processing
                                                                                  SOF-OA-GI (Image processing software)
                             software
Image analysis software                                                           Keywords: Image processing software,
                             (NT6) 7372459        Image     processing
                                                                                  Image   analysis    software,   Image
                             software NEC
                                                                                  enhancement software
                                                                          Step1


                             (NT6) 7372414 Business information
Manufacturing          and                                                        SOF-MA(Manufacturing software)
                             management software
business process software                                                         Keywords: Manufacturing automation
                             (NT6)        7372416        Manufacturing,
                                                                                  protocol software, Operations planning
                             distribution and retailing software
                                                                                  software,    Manufacturing    planning
                                                                                  software, Process control manufacturing
                                                                                  systems software, Software to control
                                                                                  product quality, Production scheduling
                                                                                  software


                                                                                  SOF-PD (Program development soft.)
                             (NT5) 7372510 Software development
                                                                                  Keywords:      Software   development
                             tools
                                                                                  systems, Development environment sof,
                             (NT6) 7372511 CASE software
                                                                                  IDEs, Language compilers, Program
                             (NT6) 7372512 Programming utilities
                                                                                  translator, program translators, Cross
                             (NT6) 7372513 Application development
Software     development                                                          assemblers
                             software
tools                                                                             SOF-UT-C (Debugging and testing soft.)
                             (NT6) 7372514 Debugging & testing
                                                                                  Keywords: Debugging and testing
                             software
                                                                                  software




                                                                                                                              41
Figure B-2: Mapping Software Markets to Patent Subclasses



          CorpTech Product Code                         Patent Class                     Patent Subclass


    SOF-DM                                             Step3
    Keywords: Database/file management                                         Database or file accessing
    software, DBMS, Relational DBMS,                                           Database schema or data structure
    Information storage and retrieval            707        Data processing:   File or database maintenance
    systems software (ISRS)                      database and file             Information retrieval
                                                 management or data            Database structures
                                                 structures


    SOF-OA-GI                            Step2
    Keywords: Image processing
    software, Image analysis software,                                         Image compression or coding
    Image enhancement software                   382       Image analysis      Image enhancement or restoration
                                                                               Image segmentation
                                                                               Image transformation or
                                                                               preprocessing

    SOF-MA
    Keywords: Manufacturing automation
    protocol software, Operations                700        Data processing:
    planning software, Manufacturing             generic control systems or
    planning software, Process control           specific applications         Product assembly or manufacturing
    manufacturing systems software,              705        Data processing:   Inventory management
    Software to control product quality,         financial, business           Operations research
    Production scheduling software               practice, management, or
                                                 cost/price determination


    SOF-PD
    Keywords: Software development                                             Code generation
    systems, Development environment                                           Editing
    sof, IDEs, Language compilers,               717        Data processing:   Linking
    Program translator, program                  software development,         Managing software components
    translators, Cross assemblers                installation, and             Programming language
    SOF-UT-C                                     management                    Software project management
    Keywords: Debugging and testing                                            Testing or debugging
    software                                                                   Translation of code




                                                                                                                   42
     APPENDIX C: Supporting Empirical Results

                               Table C-1: Baseline results, linear fixed-effects regression
                                                                                                                  Add interaction with
                               Specification testing      Add interaction with       Add interaction with            cumulativeness of
Dependent variable: OSS        direct impact of The        cumulativeness of        concentration of patent        innovation and with
entry                             Commons only                innovation                 ownership               concentration of patent
                                                                                                                         ownership
                                 (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)           (7)             (8)
                               .112*         .132*          .075         .095           -.091        -.074         -.121           -.106
The Commons
                               (.071)        (.082)        (.080)       (.091)          (.082)       (.068)       (.091)          (.080)
The Commons *                                              .112*        .111*                                      .106*          .107*
Cumulativeness                                             (.061)       (.066)                                    (.062)          (.064)
The Commons *                                                                            .724*       .730*         .708*          .719*
Concentration                                                                            (.405)      (.384)       (.396)          (.375)
                                  .381        .583        1.235*        1.400*            .673        .810       1.475**        1.591**
Cumulativeness
                                (.672)       (.780)        (.727)        (.787)          (.621)      (.729)       (.726)          (.791)
                                  .366        .243          .888          .742           1.730       1.596        2.195           2.053
Concentration
                               (3.722)      (3.567)       (3.570)       (3.486)         (3.593)     (3.524)      (3.445)         (3.441)
                                -.479*       -.500         -.515*        -.529*          -.552*      -.567*       -.584*          -.594*
Sales growth
                                (.316)       (.332)        (.317)        (.331)          (.354)      (.365)       (.352)          (.362)
                                 -.337       -.193          .214          .310            -.171       -.098         .346           .384
Total patents
                                (.731)       (.829)        (.777)        (.839)          (.757)      (.798)       (.752)          (.775)
                                 -.738       -.784          -.718         -.802           -.848       -.939        -.827           -.953
Patent quality
                               (1.179)      (1.201)       (1.210)       (1.237)         (1.166)     (1.180)      (1.198)         (1.217)
                                             -.026                        -.020                       -.033                        -.027
OIN patents
                                             (.037)                      (.036)                      (.035)                       (.034)
                                             -.037                        -.037                       -.023                        -.024
SSO patents
                                             (.074)                      (.071)                      (.058)                       (.056)
                                              .003                        .009                        .012                         .018
OSS demand
                                             (.015)                      (.016)                      (.023)                       (.022)
Year dummies                    Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes
Market fixed effects            Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes
Observations                    363           363           363          363             363          363           363           363
R-squared                       0.58          0.59         0.59          0.59            0.59         0.60         0.60           0.60
Marginal Effects
                               .112*          132*        .166**        .185**          .073*        .091*        .125***       .143***
The Commons (average)
                               (.071)        (.082)        (.078)        (.091)         (.049)       (.053)        (.047)        (.055)
The Commons                                                 .100          .119                                      .062          .079
(cumulativeness=10%)                                       (.077)        (.087)                                    (.054)        (.058)
The Commons                                               .253**        .271**                                    .207***       .226***
(cumulativeness=90%)                                       (.101)        (.116)                                    (.073)        (.083)
Test of the difference
between high and low                                           .067        .091                                    .087           .094
cumulativeness, p-value
The Commons                                                                              .003          .021         .057         .073*
(concentration =10%)                                                                    (.046)        (.041)       (.048)        (.047)
The Commons                                                                             .151*        .170**       .201***       .220***
(concentration =90%)                                                                    (.079)        (.085)       (.075)        (.083)
Test of the difference
between high and low                                                                     .074         .057         .073           .055
concentration, p-value
     Notes: 1) Robust standard errors, clustered by market, are in parentheses. 2) *    significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, ***
     significant at 1%. 3) R-squared includes fixed effects in R-squared computation.




                                                                                                                                  43
      Table C-2: Robustness test using raw number of patents, conditional fixed-effect Poisson regression
                                                                                                                     Add interaction with
                                 Specification testing       Add interaction with       Add interaction with            cumulativeness of
Dependent variable: OSS          direct impact of The         cumulativeness of        concentration of patent        innovation and with
entry                               Commons only                 innovation                 ownership              concentration of patent
                                                                                                                            ownership
                                   (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)             (7)             (8)
                                  .040          .086          -.132         -.080        -.411        -.564*          -.250           -.282
The Commons
                                 (.139)        (.152)        (.142)        (.150)        (.265)       (.297)         (.243)           (.316)
The Commons *                                               .686***       .725***                                  .645***          .646***
Cumulativeness                                               (.162)        (.170)                                    (.179)           (.208)
The Commons *                                                                           1.255**      1.824***          .349            .612
Concentration                                                                            (.600)        (.709)        (.579)           (.873)
                                 1.613*         1.646      3.886***      4.357***       2.085**      2.053**       3.890***        4.184***
Cumulativeness
                                  (.939)       (1.254)       (.832)        (.983)        (.804)       (1.004)        (.841)          (1.146)
                                  -5.203        -3.850     -10.581**      -9.905*      -10.325*       -7.960      -11.664**        -10.644*
Concentration
                                 (5.298)       (6.315)      (4.877)       (6.375)       (6.728)       (6.866)       (5.411)          (6.325)
                                   -.439         -.446       -.642*        -.690*        -.500          -.551        -.648*           -.700
Sales growth
                                  (.342)        (.368)       (.407)        (.458)        (.359)        (.401)        (.408)           (.464)
                                    .663         -.775       2.113         2.756          .790          .870         2.076            2.574
Total patents
                                 (2.030)       (2.287)      (2.107)       (2.270)       (1.928)       (2.073)       (2.100)          (2.290)
                                    .109         -.095        .288          .333          .541          .596           .398            .524
Patent quality
                                 (3.232)       (3.241)      (3.165)       (3.130)       (3.195)       (3.045)       (3.120)          (3.040)
                                                 -.259                    -.339**                      -.327*                       -.353**
OIN patents
                                                (.203)                     (.168)                      (.189)                         (.169)
                                                  .038                      -.009                       .214                           .054
SSO patents
                                                (.197)                     (.143)                      (.207)                         (.200)
                                                  .053                      .020                        .064                           .028
OSS demand
                                                (.096)                     (.093)                      (.093)                         (.093)
Year dummies                       Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes
Market fixed effects               Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes
Observations                       286          286           286           286           286          286           286             286
Log pseudolikelihood            -228.451      -227.505      -223.332      -223.024     -227.076      -225.177      -223.246       -223.835
Marginal Effects
                                  .040          .086        .377***       .457***        -.133        -.158         .306*           .333*
The Commons (average)
                                 (.139)        (.152)        (.144)        ( .149)       (.163)       (.177)        (.185)          (.226)
The Commons                                                   -.002         .056                                     -.051          -.024
(cumulativeness=10%)                                         (.132)        (.139)                                   (.153)          (.174)
The Commons                                                 .879***       .988***                                  .778***         .805**
(cumulativeness=90%)                                         (.223)        (.229)                                   (.280)          (.346)
Test of the difference
between high and low                                          .001          .001                                        .001         .001
cumulativeness, p-value
The Commons                                                                               -.245         -.322           .275         .278
(concentration =10%)                                                                     (.199)        (.220)          (.223)       (.291)
The Commons                                                                               -.005         .029          .342**       .395**
(concentration =90%)                                                                     (.136)        (.147)          (.152)       (.166)
Test of the difference
between high and low                                                                       .036          .009           .547         .483
concentration, p-value
      Notes: 1) Robust standard errors, clustered by market, are in parentheses. 2) * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, ***
      significant at 1%. 3) The number of observations is lower than 363 because of the use of conditional fixed effects Poisson models,
      which drops markets without OSS entry over the entire sample period.




                                                                                                                                    44
                Table C-3: Robustness test using raw number of patents, linear fixed-effects regression
                                                                                                                  Add interaction with
                               Specification testing      Add interaction with       Add interaction with            cumulativeness of
Dependent variable: OSS        direct impact of The        cumulativeness of        concentration of patent        innovation and with
entry                             Commons only                innovation                 ownership               concentration of patent
                                                                                                                         ownership
                                 (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)           (7)            (8)
                                .136          .176          .005         .045           -.322*       -.315*       -.373*          -.351*
The Commons
                               (.126)        (.140)        (.131)       (.139)          (.166)       (.163)       (.178)          (.171)
The Commons *                                             .388**        .401*                                      .319*          .319*
Cumulativeness                                             (.177)       (.200)                                    (.176)          (.188)
The Commons *                                                                           1.633**     1.758**       1.427*          1.515*
Concentration                                                                            (.786)      (.811)       (.760)          (.771)
                                  .406         .698       1.957**      2.426**           .965*       1.103       2.173**        2.419**
Cumulativeness
                                (.656)       (.834)        (.784)      (1.054)           (.551)      (.724)       (.808)          (.985)
                                  .897         .502        2.255        1.863            1.738       1.350        2.751           2.313
Concentration
                               (3.760)      (3.681)       (3.606)      (3.583)          (3.210)     (3.320)      (3.010)         (3.172)
                                -.493*       -.544*        -.563*       -.622*           -.564*      -.612*       -.612*          -.664*
Sales growth
                                (.322)       (.347)        (.334)       (.361)           (.356)      (.377)       (.357)          (.379)
                                 -.132         .212        1.312        1.832             .353        .473        1.482           1.723
Total patents
                                (.976)      (1.248)       (1.296)      (1.595)          (1.021)     (1.185)      (1.251)         (1.442)
                                 -.434        -.347         .157         .301             -.217       -.296         .243           .212
Patent quality
                               (1.506)      (1.557)       (1.630)      (1.696)          (1.548)     (1.534)      (1.617)         (1.637)
                                             -.204*                    -.210**                      -.229**                      -.230**
OIN patents
                                             (.111)                     (.099)                       (.104)                       (.099)
                                              -.017                      -.066                        .054                         .005
SSO patents
                                             (.189)                     (.178)                       (.139)                       (.134)
                                              -.002                      -.003                        .011                         .009
OSS demand
                                             (.017)                     (.017)                       (.021)                       (.021)
Year dummies                    Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes
Market fixed effects            Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes
Observations                    363           363           363          363             363          363           363           363
R-squared                       0.52          0.52         0.53          0.53            0.53         0.53         0.54           0.54
Marginal Effects
                                .136          .176        .318**        .369**           .048         .083        .208**        .250**
The Commons (average)
                               (.126)        (.140)        (.145)        (.171)         (.095)       (.103)        (.087)        (.103)
The Commons                                                 .089          .132                                      .020          .062
(cumulativeness=10%)                                       (.119)        (.130)                                    (.096)        (.102)
The Commons                                               .620**        .682**                                    .456**        .498**
(cumulativeness=90%)                                       (.252)        (.298)                                    (.197)        (.222)
Test of the difference
between high and low                                           .028        .045                                    .070           .090
cumulativeness, p-value
The Commons                                                                             -.110        -.086          .071          .104
(concentration =10%)                                                                    (.096)       (.096)        (.095)        (.098)
The Commons                                                                              .224        .273*        .362***       .413***
(concentration =90%)                                                                    (.150)       (.164)        (.137)        (.159)
Test of the difference
between high and low                                                                     .037         .030         .060           .049
concentration, p-value
     Notes: 1) Robust standard errors, clustered by market, are in parentheses. 2) *    significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, ***
     significant at 1%. 3) R-squared includes fixed effects in R-squared computation.




                                                                                                                                  45
     Table C-4: Robustness test using sample with different ending year, conditional fixed-effect Poisson
                                                regression
Dependent variable: OSS                       Sample ends at year 2008                                 Sample ends at year 2007
entry                                (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)           (6)            (7)             (8)
                                    .123          .025         -.162          -.126         .152          .094          -.127           -.013
The Commons
                                   (.091)        (.133)        (.137)         (.173)       (.111)        (.155)         (.155)         (.214)
The Commons *                                   .351***                     .318***                     .348***                      .321***
Cumulativeness                                   (.096)                       (.101)                     (.099)                        (.109)
The Commons *                                                  .770**          .411                                    .716**           .258
Concentration                                                   (.381)        (.405)                                    (.361)         (.409)
                                   1.004        3.523***        1.008       3.296***        1.030       3.436***        1.028       3.277***
Cumulativeness
                                  (1.244)        (1.100)       (1.113)       (1.141)       (1.194)       (1.182)       (1.100)        (1.193)
                                  -11.016      -16.289**      -14.951*     -17.811**        -9.434     -15.160**      -13.143*      -15.989**
Concentration
                                  (8.088)        (8.099)       (8.432)       (7.876)       (7.568)       (7.726)       (8.012)        (7.373)
                                   -.418          -.590         -.506         -.620          -.533        -.680         -.616*         -.698*
Sales growth
                                   (.398)         (.451)        (.418)        (.461)        (.354)        (.407)        (.359)         (.411)
                                   -.584          1.111        -1.070          .716          -.204        1.336          -.560         1.127
Total patents
                                  (1.559)        (1.470)       (1.585)       (1.511)       (1.531)       (1.502)       (1.526)        (1.527)
                                   -.851          -.645         -.820         -.631           .136         .316           .392          .397
Patent quality
                                  (2.524)        (2.437)       (2.526)       (2.433)       (2.785)       (2.437)       (2.785)        (2.666)
                                   -.032          -.038         -.040         -.041          -.012        -.025          -.016          -.025
OIN patents
                                   (.071)         (.065)        (.069)        (.066)        (.080)        (.074)        (.080)         (.075)
                                   -.020          -.027          .024         -.003           .013         .009           .052          .022
SSO patents
                                   (.081)         (.068)        (.086)        (.082)        (.084)        (.069)        (.087)         (.082)
                                    .082           .073          .084          .074           .090         .079           .094          .081
OSS demand
                                   (.093)         (.080)        (.098)        (.084)        (.091)        (.082)        (.095)         (.084)
Year dummies                        Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
Market fixed effects                Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Observations                        260           260           260            260           225           225           225           225
Log pseudolikelihood             -212.433       -208.056      -211.016      -207.709      -188.505      -184.602      -187.404      -184.490
Marginal Effects
                                    .123         .294**         .013         .211*          .152         .363**          .037         .294*
The Commons (average)
                                   (.091)         (.132)       (.079)        (.125)        (.111)         (.163)        (.102)        (.177)
The Commons                                        .095                       .031                         .166                        .112
(cumulativeness=10%)                              (.128)                     (.116)                       (.154)                      (.156)
The Commons                                     .556***                     .449***                     .634***                      .544**
(cumulativeness=90%)                              (.167)                     (.169)                       (.167)                      (.231)
Test of the difference
between high and low                              .001                         .001                       .001                          .003
cumulativeness, p-value
The Commons                                                    -.054           .175                                    -.027            .271
(concentration =10%)                                           (.096)         (.147)                                   (.118)          (.202)
The Commons                                                     .091         .253**                                     .109          .320**
(concentration =90%)                                           (.074)         (.108)                                   (.094)          (.154)
Test of the difference
between high and low                                             .043          .310                                      .047           .527
concentration, p-value
                Notes: 1) Robust standard errors, clustered by market, are in parentheses. 2) * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%,
                *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                                                                       46
      Table C-5: Robustness test adding “Top 4 incumbents market share”, conditional fixed-effect
                                          Poisson regression
Dependent variable: OSS entry                                 (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)
                                                            -.113          -.088         .199          .122        -.069         -.048
The Commons
                                                            (.140)        (.170)        (.128)        (.159)       (.148)        (.174)
                                                                         .305***                     .302***                   .294***
The Commons * Cumulativeness
                                                                          (.101)                      (.097)                     (.097)
                                                            .665*           .344                                  .946**          .601
The Commons * Concentration
                                                            (.361)        (.375)                                   (.447)        (.442)
                                                                                         -.121        -.147        -.214         -.188
The Commons * Top 4 incumbent market share
                                                                                         (.150)       (.140)       (.147)        (.143)
                                                            1.078       3.195***         1.079      3.153***     1.192***     3.209***
Cumulativeness
                                                           (1.032)        (1.015)       (1.218)       (.878)      (1.044)       (1.022)
                                                           -10.542      -13.167*                                  -9.879      -12.543*
Concentration
                                                           (7.553)        (6.951)                                 (7.256)       (6.726)
                                                             -.598         -.716*        -.405          -.579      -.311         -.441
Sales growth
                                                            (.423)         (.408)        (.508)        (.497)      (.465)        (.467)
                                                            -1.066           .624        -.133         1.570        .973          .633
Total patents
                                                           (1.578)        (1.516)       (1.538)       (1.341)     (1.578)       (1.466)
                                                            -1.731         -1.438       -1.546         -1.190     -1.965        -1.672
Patent quality
                                                           (2.422)        (2.342)       (2.347)       (2.245)     (2.418)       (2.310)
                                                            1.294          1.280         1.483         1.574       1.649         1.549
Top 4 incumbents market share
                                                           (1.277)        (1.129)       (1.283)       (1.112)     (1.225)       (1.139)
                                                             -.080          -.076        -.069          -.072      -.079         -.075
OIN patents
                                                            (.069)         (.066)        (.071)        (.066)      (.069)        (.065)
                                                              .027           .004         .003           .009       .033          .010
SSO patents
                                                            (.083)         (.078)        (.064)        (.050)      (.084)        (.078)
                                                              .062           .060         .063           .055       .063          .058
OSS demand
                                                            (.099)         (.086)        (.091)        (.078)      (.095)        (.082)
Year dummies                                                  Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes
Market fixed effects                                          Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes
Observations                                                  286            286           286           286         286           286
Log pseudolikelihood                                      -226.032      -222.856       -227.163     -223.643     -224.945     -222.031
                                                              .034          .215*        .151*        .287**        .054         .227*
The Commons (average)
                                                            (.086)         (.123)        (.092)        (.130)      (.085)        (.121)
                                                                             .046                        .120                     .064
The Commons (cumulativeness=10%)
                                                                           (.118)                      (.125)                    (.115)
                                                                         .438***                     .508***                   .442***
The Commons (cumulativeness=90%)
                                                                           (.162)                      (.165)                    (.159)
Test of the difference between high and low
                                                                           .003                       .002                       .003
cumulativeness, p-value
                                                            -.025           .184                                   -.030         .173
The Commons (concentration =10%)
                                                            (.103)         (.143)                                  (.107)       (.141)
                                                             .102         .250**                                   .150*       .288**
The Commons (concentration =90%)
                                                            (.079)         (.108)                                  (.079)       (.112)
Test of the difference between high and low
                                                            .066           .358                                      .034         .174
concentration, p-value
The Commons (Top 4 incumbent market share                                                 .181*      .324**         .107        .274**
=10%)                                                                                     (.112)      (.151)       (.094)        (.132)
The Commons (Top 4 incumbent market share                                                  .118      .248**         -.003         .177
=90%)                                                                                     (.084)      (.115)       (.092)        (.120)
Test of the difference between high and low top 4
                                                                                           .421        .295          .148         .189
incumbents market share, p-value
  1) Robust standard errors, clustered by market, are in parentheses. 2) * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at
  1%.




                                                                                                                                   47
   Table C-6: Robustness test adding “Top 4 incumbents market share”, linear fixed-effects regression
Dependent variable: OSS entry                                   (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
                                                              -.075          -.106          .112          .072         -.055         -.086
The Commons
                                                              (.066)         (.078)        (.097)        (.112)        (.079)        (.090)
                                                                             .103*                       .106*                        .098
The Commons * Cumulativeness
                                                                             (.065)                      (.065)                      (.065)
                                                              .700*          .693*                                     .887**       .863**
The Commons * Concentration
                                                              (.383)         (.375)                                     (.399)       (.399)
                                                                                            .012          .022           -.128       -.116
The Commons * Top 4 incumbent market share
                                                                                           (.178)        (.176)         (.166)       (.167)
                                                               .828         1.581**         .625         1.402*           .921     1.625**
Cumulativeness
                                                              (.733)         (.778)        (.774)        (.772)         (.711)       (.779)
                                                              1.678          2.108                                      2.567        2.893
Concentration
                                                             (3.650)        (3.533)                                    (3.448)     (3.380)
                                                              -.619*         -.637*        -.589         -.618           -.482       -.512
Sales growth
                                                              (.373)         (.373)        (.473)        (.472)         (.466)       (.467)
                                                               -.024           .431        -.115          .317            .025        .451
Total patents
                                                              (.843)         (.808)        (.689)        (.682)         (.822)       (.800)
                                                               -.874          -.898        -.714         -.757          -1.098      -1.099
Patent quality
                                                             (1.183)        (1.221)       (1.188)       (1.224)        (1.292)     (1.326)
                                                               .981            .834        1.366         1.188          1.108         .957
Top 4 incumbents market share
                                                              (.922)         (.879)        (.846)        (.789)         (.839)       (.794)
                                                               -.031          -.026        -.024         -.019           -.034       -.029
OIN patents
                                                              (.034)         (.033)        (.036)        (.035)         (.035)       (.034)
                                                               -.021          -.021        -.033         -.034           -.012       -.014
SSO patents
                                                              (.059)         (.057)        (.078)        (.076)         (.064)       (.062)
                                                               .011            .017         .002          .009            .009        .014
OSS demand
                                                              (.023)         (.023)        (.017)        (.018)         (.022)       (.022)
Year dummies                                                    Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes
Market fixed effects                                            Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes
Observations                                                    363            363          363           363             363         363
R-square                                                        .527           .529         .521          .523            .529        .529
                                                              .084*         .134**         .116*        .166**           .098*      .144**
The Commons (average)
                                                              (.053)         (.056)        (.073)        (.083)         (.054)       (.062)
                                                                               .074                       .104                        .087
The Commons (cumulativeness=10%)
                                                                             (.059)                      (.082)                      (.061)
                                                                            .215**                      .249**                      .221**
The Commons (cumulativeness=90%)
                                                                             (.085)                      (.108)                      (.092)
Test of the difference between high and low
                                                                              .109                        .103                       .135
cumulativeness, p-value
                                                               .017           .068                                       .012        .061
The Commons (concentration =10%)
                                                              (.041)         (.048)                                     (.047)      (.054)
                                                              .159*         .209**                                     .193**        .237
The Commons (concentration =90%)
                                                              (.086)         (.085)                                     (.084)      (.090)
Test of the difference between high and low
                                                               .067           .064                                      .026         .031
concentration, p-value
                                                                                            .114         .161*         .126*        .170**
The Commons (Top 4 incumbent market share =10%)
                                                                                           (.081)        (.092)        (.068)        (.077)
                                                                                            .120         .172*          .061         .111*
The Commons (Top 4 incumbent market share =90%)
                                                                                           (.091)        (.097)        (.068)        (.070)
Test of the difference between high and low top 4
                                                                                             .947          .903          .440         .486
incumbent market share, p-value
    1) Robust standard errors, clustered by market, are in parentheses. 2) * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at
    1%.




                                                                                                                                     48
   Table C-7: Complete results of falsification test by adding “False Commons”, conditional fixed-
                                       effect Poisson regression
 Dependent variable: OSS entry                         (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)
                                                     .373***                         .383***            .093          .426***           .209
 The Commons                                                       .168 (.178)
                                                      (.117)                          (.140)           (.164)          (.134)          (.172)
                                                     .463***         .623**                                             .260            .506
 False Commons
                                                      (.137)          (.282)                                           (.200)          (.324)
                                                                                     .908***          .867***         .909***         .855***
 IBM patents
                                                                                      (.249)           (.203)          (.257)          (.202)
                                                                                     .565***          .504***           .308            .297
 IBM patents X 2003_2004
                                                                                      (.160)           (.184)          (.251)          (.404)
                                                                                                        .076                            .120
 The Commons X Cumulativeness                                      .207 (.132)
                                                                                                       (.121)                          (.136)
                                                                     .026                                                               .077
 False Commons X Cumulativeness
                                                                     (.136)                                                            (.208)
                                                                                                        .646                            .423
 The Commons X Concentration                                       .302 (.470)
                                                                                                       (.405)                          (.465)
                                                                                                                                        -.638
 False Commons X Concentration                                     -.531 (.670)
                                                                                                                                       (.703)
                                                       -.272           1.371           -.145                             -.413
 Cumulativeness                                                                                    .497 (1.217)                     .546 (1.420)
                                                     (1.174)          (1.402)         (1.113)                          (1.061)
                                                    -12.659*        -17.654**       -14.613**       -17.900**        -15.932**       -20.170***
 Concentration
                                                     (6.569)          (7.055)         (7.245)         (6.933)          (6.949)         (7.029)
                                                       -.547                                            -.596            -.492           -.607
 Sales growth                                                      -.704 (.462)    -.501 (.375)
                                                      (.421)                                           (.395)           (.389)          (.417)
                                                      -2.394          -1.393         -2.657*         -2.539*          -3.051**         -2.655*
 Total patents
                                                     (1.516)         (1.560)         (1.485)         (1.508)           (1.518)         (1.580)
                                                      -3.259          -2.953          -2.656          -2.527            -3.129          -3.103
 Patent quality
                                                     (2.334)         (2.370)         (2.192)         (2.174)           (2.310)         (2.350)
                                                       -.055                                            -.059            -.052           -.060
 OIN patents                                                       -.064 (.066)    -.050 (.064)
                                                      (.069)                                           (.064)           (.066)          (.064)
                                                       -.021                                             .038            -.008            .007
 SSO patents                                                       -.013 (.083)    -.001 (.071)
                                                      (.071)                                           (.080)           (.068)          (.084)
                                                        .047                          .156*
 OSS demand                                                        .047 (.096)                     .153* (.094)    .158* (.096)     .154* (.093)
                                                      (.099)                          (.093)
 Year dummies                                          Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
 Market fixed effects                                  Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
 Observations                                          286             286             286              286             286             286
 Log pseudolikelihood                               -222.405        -219.586         -219.448        -218.066        -218.754         -216.825
 Marginal effects
                                                     .373***          .389**         .383***          .292***         .426***         .392***
 The Commons (average)
                                                      (.117)           (.119)         (.140)            (.121)         (.134)           (.124)
                                                                      .275**                           .250**                          .326**
 The Commons (cumulativeness=10%)
                                                                       (.127)                           (.127)                          (.128)
                                                                     .540***                           .347**                         .480***
 The Commons (cumulativeness=90%)
                                                                       (.168)                           (.162)                          (.177)
 Test of the difference between high and low
                                                                       .118                            .531                             .377
 cumulativeness, p-value
                                                                      .362**                           .234*                           .355**
 The Commons (concentration =10%)
                                                                       (.140)                          (.138)                           (.144)
                                                                     .420***                          .358***                         .435***
 The Commons (concentration =90%)
                                                                       (.111)                          (.113)                           (.116)
 Test of the difference between high and low
                                                                       .520                             .110                             .363
 concentration, p-value
Notes: 1) Robust standard errors, clustered by market, are in parentheses. 2) * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant. 3) False
Commons is measured by interacting the patent density in The Commons across markets with a time dummy that turns on for year 2003 and 2004.
4) 2003_2004 is a dummy that turns on for years 2003 and 2004. 5) IBM patents is measured by log of claims-weighted patent count of all IBM
patents (excluding IBM patents contributed to The Commons) related to market j cumulated up to year t.




                                                                                                                                                 49
    Table C-8: Complete results of falsification test on the effect of The Commons on proprietary
                   software entry, conditional fixed-effect Poisson regression
Dependent variable: Proprietary software
                                                   (1)                  (2)                   (3)                    (4)
product entry
                                                   .062                 .051                 .131                    .122
The Commons
                                                  (.054)               (.074)               (.096)                 (.101)
                                                                        .017                                       0.051
The Commons * Cumulativeness
                                                                       (.094)                                      (.090)
                                                                                             -.182                  -.236
The Commons * Concentration
                                                                                            (.244)                 (.244)
                                                 -3.566*              -3.285               -3.941*                 -3.241
Cumulativeness
                                                 (2.034)              (2.890)              (2.188)                (2.900)
                                                  -3.505              -3.671                -2.195                 -2.292
Concentration
                                                 (6.283)              (6.538)              (6.593)                (6.574)
                                                   .193                 .197                 .194                    .206
Sales growth
                                                  (.247)               (.259)               (.241)                 (.252)
                                                  5.055*              5.099*                5.866*                6.234**
Total patents
                                                 (2.796)              (2.808)              (3.076)                (3.152)
                                                  7.730*              7.632*                8.736*                 8.754*
Patent quality
                                                 (5.160)              (5.277)              (5.446)                (5.514)
                                                  0.063                .063*                 .056                    .056
OIN patents
                                                  (.055)               (.055)               (.053)                 (.053)
                                                   -.073               -.074                 -.080                  -.086
SSO patents
                                                  (.065)               (.068)               (.066)                 (.070)
                                                   -.204               -.206                 -.239                  -.254
OSS demand
                                                  (.191)               (.192)               (.216)                 (.222)
Year dummies                                        Yes                 Yes                   Yes                    Yes
Market fixed effects                               Yes                  Yes                  Yes                    Yes
Observations                                       232                  232                  232                    232
Log pseudolikelihood                            -443.038             -442.993              -442.390               442.066
Marginal Effects
                                                   .062                .062                  .090                  .100*
The Commons (average)
                                                  (.059)              ( .054)               (.059)                 (.056)
                                                                       .054                                         .078
The Commons (cumulativeness=10%)
                                                                      (.064)                                       (.066)
                                                                       .072                                        .131*
The Commons (cumulativeness=90%)
                                                                      (.082)                                       (.081)
Test of the difference between high and
                                                                       .852                                         .571
low cumulativeness, p-value
                                                                                              .105                 .119*
The Commons (concentration =10%)
                                                                                            (.069)                 (.067)
                                                                                             . 075                 .080*
The Commons (concentration =90%)
                                                                                            (.051)                 (.051)
Test of the difference between high and
                                                                                               .457                  .334
low concentration, p-value
Notes: 1) We use the press releases of the 2,054 firms in the PROMT database to identify new proprietary software product entry.
To identify products related to each market, we focus only on introduction events associated with PROMT product codes. For
each start-up, we only use the firm’s first product in a market to capture entry. This results in 2,384 proprietary product entry
events from 2002 to 2009. We also adjust for a change in the assignment of product codes during our sample. Specifically,
between 2007 and 2009 application-related software products were systematically assigned to a higher product code level in the
PROMT database (i.e. assigned to 7372400, Applications Software). This forced us to group several application markets together,
leaving us with 29 software markets. 2) Robust standard errors, clustered by market, are in parentheses. 3) * significant at 10%,
** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                                                             50
    Table C-9: Falsification test on product entry using market-specific time trends, conditional fixed-
                                         effect Poisson regression
                                                                                                                  Add interaction with
                               Specification testing
                                                          Add interaction with        Add interaction with         cumulativeness of
Dependent variable:              direct impact of
                                                           cumulativeness of         concentration of patent      innovation and with
Product entry by start-         Post-Commons*
                                                              innovation                  ownership              concentration of patent
ups                                OSS-market
                                                                                                                       ownership
                                 (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)
Post-Commons*                2.021***      1.948***      1.910***      1.720***        2.076         1.557        1.781         1.613
OSS-market                     (.317)        (.330)        (.621)        (.660)       (1.849)       (1.727)      (1.790)       (1.745)
Post-Commons*
                                                           .424          .560                                      .026          .515
OSS-market*
                                                          (1.209)       (1.223)                                   (1.174)       (1.251)
Cumulativeness
Post-Commons*
                                                                                       -.192         1.584         1.206         .507
OSS-market*
                                                                                      (6.446)       (6.198)       (6.348)       (6.401)
Concentration
                                             16.818        5.634       16.871*                       16.819        5.415        16.867
Cumulativeness
                                            (10.552)      (5.869)      (10.562)                     (10.548)      (6.145)      (10.565)
                                           28.008***                  27.958***      20.926*       27.938***     20.067*      27.940***
Concentration
                                             (7.925)                    (7.938)      (12.827)        (7.927)     (11.668)       (7.923)
                                               -.051                      -.052                        -.051                      -.052
Sales growth
                                              (.523)                     (.523)                       (.523)                     (.523)
                                              3.696                      3.703                        3.684                      3.698
Total patents
                                             (6.976)                    (6.976)                      (6.980)                    (6.983)
                                              -2.731                     -2.736                       -2.743                     -2.739
Patent quality
                                             (5.400)                    (5.403)                      (5.405)                    (5.407)
Market-specific time
                                Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
trend
Market fixed effects            Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
Observations                    320           320           320          320            320           320           320           320
Log pseudolikelihood         -722.515      -680.232      -717.518      -680.170      -713.354      -680.212      -708.919      -680.169
Marginal Effects
Post-Commons*                 2.021***      1.948***      2.173***      2.068***       2.032***      1.925***      2.077***      2.051***
OSS-market (average)            (.317)        (.330)        (.391)        (.371)         (.405)        (.383)        (.450)        (.502)
Post-Commons*
                                                          1.988***      1.823***                                   2.066***      1.826***
OSS-market
                                                            (.446)        (.476)                                     (.451)        (.461)
(cumulativeness=10%)
Post-Commons*
                                                           2.424**      2.400**                                    2.093**        2.356**
OSS-market
                                                            (.990)        (.964)                                    (1.071)       (1.121)
(cumulativeness=90%)
Test of the difference
between high and low                                         .726          .647                                       .982          .680
cumulativeness, p-value
Post-Commons*
                                                                                        2.047**       1.795**      1.978**        2.009**
OSS-market
                                                                                         (.897)        (.823)        (.948)        (.961)
(concentration =10%)
Post-Commons*
                                                                                       2.015***      2.063***      2.182***      2.095***
OSS-market
                                                                                         (.313)        (.388)        (.389)        (.381)
(concentration =90%)
Test of the difference
between high and low                                                                       .976         .798          .849          .937
concentration, p-value
   Notes: 1) Robust standard errors, clustered by market, are in parentheses. 2) * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, ***
   significant at 1%. 3) While we expand our original 29 software markets to 29 OSS markets and 29 proprietary software markets,
   18 markets are automatically dropped because of no entry observed throughout the sampling years, which gives us 320
   observations in total. 4) These results need to be interpreted with caution, as in this test we only used entry events (for both OSS
   and proprietary products) identified through PROMPT articles assigned with product codes (as mentioned earlier, on average 45%
   of product introduction events miss product codes).


                                                                                                                                    51
  Table C-10: Complete results of OLS regression of claims-weighted patents in The Commons on
                                          instruments
                                                                                  IV: IBM’s
                                                            IV: IBM’s                                 The full set of
                                                                              opposed patents X
           Dependent variable: The Commons                opposed patents                                  IVs
                                                                                afteryear2003
                                                                 (1)                  (2)                   (3)
                                                              .226***
           IBM’s opposed patents                                                                        .115 (076)
                                                               (.069)
                                                                                    .066***              .051***
           IBM’s opposed patents X afteryear2003
                                                                                      (.016)               (.018)
                                                             5.383***              5.388***             5.252***
           Cumulativeness
                                                               (.523)                 (.523)               (.526)
                                                             -6.818**              -6.392**             -7.045**
           Concentration
                                                              (3.180)                (2.922)              (2.985)
                                                                .138                   .242                 .186
           Sales growth
                                                               (.285)                 (.280)               (.282)
                                                             4.857***              4.507***             4.560***
           Total patents
                                                               (.749)                 (.745)               (.749)
                                                             3.775***              2.908**              3.153**
           Patent quality
                                                              (1.184)                (1.221)              (1.242)
           Year dummies                                         Yes                    Yes                  Yes
           Market fixed effects                                 Yes                   Yes                  Yes
           First Stage F-statistic, p-value                 10.73, .001            17.53, .001          9.71, .001
Notes: 1) The full set of IVs include IBM’s opposed patents and IBM’s opposed patents X afteryear2003. 2) The first stage OLS
IV Regressions are used as auxiliary regressions to test for weak IVs, as there is no such test in using the GMM estimator. 3)
Robust standard errors, clustered by market, are in parentheses. 4) * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at
1%.




                                                                                                                               52
  Table C-11: Complete results of GMM estimates of count data regression using the full set of IVs
                                                                                                            Add interaction with
                                             Specification       Add interaction      Add interaction
                                                                                                             cumulativeness of
                                             testing direct           with           with concentration
                                                                                                            innovation and with
Dependent variable: OSS entry               impact of The       cumulativeness of         of patent
                                                                                                           concentration of patent
                                            Commons only           innovation            ownership
                                                                                                                ownership
                                                   (1)                  (2)                  (3)                      (4)
                                                 .269*                 .150                 -.157                 -.495**
The Commons
                                                 (.150)               (.254)               (.261)                   (.199)
                                                                       .217                                        .497**
The Commons * Cumulativeness
                                                                      (.228)                                        (.199)
                                                                                           1.315*                 1.550**
The Commons * Concentration
                                                                                           (.808)                   (.800)
                                               -4.644**              -2.367               -3.029*                    .855
Cumulativeness
                                                (1.702)              (2.639)              (1.681)                 (1.305)
                                                  .467                 .336                -2.330                  -2.686
Concentration
                                                (4.366)              (4.563)              (5.178)                 (5.169)
                                                1.140**                .736                 .500                     .011
Sales growth
                                                 (.478)               (.509)               (.556)                   (.723)
                                                -1.327*               -.194                 -.728                 1.505**
Total patents
                                                 (.786)              (1.523)               (.785)                   (.746)
                                               3.430***             2.963***               2.049*                   1.815
Patent quality
                                                (1.173)              (1.024)               (1.203)                (1.137)
Year dummies                                      Yes                  Yes                   Yes                     Yes
Observations                                      363                  363                  363                     363
Over-identification, p-value                      .273                 .465                 .313                    .463
Marginal Effects
                                                 .269*                .292**                .138                   .189**
The Commons (average)
                                                 (.150)                (.139)              (.168)                   (.092)
                                                                        .193                                         -.038
The Commons (cumulativeness=10%)
                                                                       (.211)                                       (.088)
                                                                     .490***                                      .643***
The Commons (cumulativeness=90%)
                                                                       (.183)                                       (.231)
Test of the difference between high and
                                                                       .341                                         .012
low cumulativeness, p-value
                                                                                            .014                    .042
The Commons (concentration =10%)
                                                                                           (.193)                  (.099)
                                                                                           .282*                  .358***
The Commons (concentration =90%)
                                                                                           (.182)                  (.129)
Test of the difference between high and
                                                                                              .103                    .050
low concentration, p-value
 Notes: 1) The full set of IVs include IBM’s opposed patents and IBM’s opposed patents X afteryear2003. 2) Robust standard
 errors, clustered by market, are in parentheses. 3) * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%. 4) We use
 Wooldridge’s quasi-differencing transformation to remove market fixed effects.




                                                                                                                              53
              Table C-12: GMM estimates of count data regression using each subset of IVs
 Dependent variable:                 IV: IBM’s opposed patents                 IV: IBM’s opposed patents X afteryear2003
 OSS entry                   (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)
                           . 223         -.020       -.845         -.483        .235         .088        -.900        -.512*
 The Commons
                           (.165)        (.278)      (.707)       (.324)       (.154)       (.247)       (.715)       (.274)
 The Commons *                            .374                   .476**                      .278                    .572**
 Cumulativeness                          (.266)                   (.239)                    (.272)                    (.265)
 The Commons *                                       2.474*      1.881**                                2.379**      1.692**
 Concentration                                       (1.301)      (.911)                                (1.154)       (.807)
                          1.056**          .592        .216        -.065      1.188**         .942*       .427         -.208
 Sales growth
                            (.462)        (.540)      (.446)      (.555)        (.555)        (574)      (.618)       (.843)
                         -4.415***        -1.602     -2.942       -1.531     -5.196***       -2.871      -2.820        -.162
 Cumulativeness
                           (1.519)       (2.895)     (2.852)     (2.853)       (1.750)      (2.731)     (2.501)      (2.762)
                             .647         1.172      -1.652       -1.424        1.037          .555       .053        -1.334
 Concentration
                           (4.233)       (4.665)     (4.775)     (5.147)       (4.663)      (4.534)     (5.847)      (4.887)
                           -1.349*         .093       -.840        -.034       -1.487*        -.286       -.532       1.089
 Total patents
                            (.760)       (1.596)     (1.401)     (1.508)        (.821)      (1.546)     (1.220)      (1.479)
                          3.149***      3.075***     2.234*      2.278**      4.370***     3.777***     3.049**      2.581*
 Patent quality
                            (.913)        (.950)     (1.149)     (1.070)       (1.101)      (1.141)     (1.280)      (1.314)
 Year dummies                Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
  Observations               363           363          363          363         363           363          363          363
  Over-identification,
                             .309         .488          .764         .776        .159          .307         .505         .342
  p-value
Notes: 1) The full set of IVs include IBM’s opposed patents and IBM’s opposed patents X afteryear2003. 2) Robust standard
errors, clustered by market, are in parentheses. 3) * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%. 4) We use
Wooldridge’s quasi-differencing transformation to remove market fixed effects.




                                                                                                                               54
