NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE VALUE OF DEMOCRACY:
EVIDENCE FROM ROAD BUILDING IN KENYA
Robin Burgess
Remi Jedwab
Edward Miguel
Ameet Morjaria
Gerard Padró i Miquel
Working Paper 19398
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19398
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013

We would like to thank Gani Aldashev, Alberto Alesina, Tim Besley, Oriana Bandiera, Konrad Burchardi,
Denis Cogneau, Taryn Dinkelman, Ruben Durante, Eliana La Ferrara, Greg Fisher, Paul Gertler, James
Habyarimana, Asim Khwaja, Michael Kremer, Guy Michaels, Stelios Michalopoulos, Suresh Naidu,
Benjamin Olken, Torsten Persson, Jean-Philippe Platteau, Daniel Posner, Jim Robinson, Gerard Roland,
Jim Snyder, Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, and seminar audiences at U.C. Berkeley, CEPR Development
Economics Symposium, Harvard, LSE, NEUDC, MIT, Namur University, PSE, Warwick and World
Bank ABCDE for very helpful comments. This research was funded by the ESRC-DFID Poverty Alleviation
Fund, the DFID funded Institutions for Pro-Poor Growth (iiG) Research Consortium, and the International
Growth Centre. The views expressed here are those of the authors alone and do not necessarily reflect
those of DFID, the World Bank, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. This research was
funded by the ESRC-DFID Poverty Alleviation Fund, the DFID funded Institutions for Pro-Poor Growth
(iiG) Research Consortium, and the International Growth Centre.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Robin Burgess, Remi Jedwab, Edward Miguel, Ameet Morjaria, and Gerard Padró i Miquel.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Value of Democracy: Evidence from Road Building in Kenya
Robin Burgess, Remi Jedwab, Edward Miguel, Ameet Morjaria, and Gerard Padró i Miquel
NBER Working Paper No. 19398
September 2013
JEL No. H41,H54,O18,O55
ABSTRACT
Ethnic favoritism is seen as antithetical to development. This paper provides credible quantification
of the extent of ethnic favoritism using data on road building in Kenyan districts across the 1963-2011
period. Guided by a model it then examines whether the transition in and out of democracy under the
same president constrains or exacerbates ethnic favoritism. Across the 1963 to 2011 period, we find
strong evidence of ethnic favoritism: districts that share the ethnicity of the president receive twice
as much expenditure on roads and have four times the length of paved roads built. This favoritism
disappears during periods of democracy.
Robin Burgess
R524, Department of Economics and STICERD
LSE Research Laboratory
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE UNITED KINGDOM
r.burgess@lse.ac.uk
Remi Jedwab
George Washington University
Economics Department
2115 G Street NW, Suite #310
Washington, DC 20052
jedwab@email.gwu.edu
Edward Miguel
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
emiguel@econ.berkeley.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19398

Ameet Morjaria
World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
ameet.morjaria@gmail.com
Gerard Padró i Miquel
STICERD
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London, WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
g.padro@lse.ac.uk

1

Introduction

Ethnic favoritism refers to a situation where coethnics benefit from patronage and public
policy decisions, and thus receive a disproportionate share of public resources, when
members of their ethnic group control the government. It has been argued by historians,
political scientists, and economists that this phenomenon has hampered the economic
performance of many countries, particularly in Africa (Bates 1983; Mamdani, 1996;
Easterly and Levine 1997; Herbst, 2000; Posner, 2005; Franck and Ranier, 2012).1 In
fact, the widespread belief among citizens that ethnic favoritism is prevalent can “poison”
local political culture and make the phenomenon self-sustaining (see Horowitz’s 1985;
Esman 1994; Fearon 1999; La Porta et al 1999; Wamwere 2003; Chandra 2004; Padró i
Miquel 2007; Caselli and Coleman 2013).2 According to several of these accounts, ethnic
favoritism ultimately emerges because weak political institutions are unable to constrain
governments from discriminating among citizens. Therefore, to understand the recent
political and economic performance of many African countries, it is crucially important
to determine to what extent ethnic favoritism is prevalent, and whether the emergence
(or in many cases, re-emergence) of democracy has helped mitigate it.
In this paper we make two contributions. First, we quantify the extent of ethnic favoritism in public resource allocation in a representative African country for the
post-independence period. Second, we examine whether the transition into and out of
multiparty democracy affects the extent of ethnic favoritism.
These issues have been difficult to address so far due to a number of factors. To
begin with, it is challenging to determine which ethnic group is getting what share
of public expenditure. This problem is particularly acute in Africa where government
statistical agencies have been underfunded for decades, where data on the allocation of
government spending is typically patchy at best and where, even when the data does
exist, there is a reluctance to release disaggregated data that could allow the populace
to uncover evidence of ethnic favoritism. Moreover, estimation of ethnic bias requires
observing what happens with public expenditure when there are switches of the ethnic
group in power. In many African countries this is difficult given the long tenures of
post-independence leaders and the fact that particular ethnic groups have tended to be
1

Easterly and Levine (1997) present econometric evidence evidence that ethnic diversity is negatively
associated with economic growth. Mamdani (1996) argues that nation creation by colonists in Africa
left tribal allegiances largely intact which, in turn, made countries difficult to govern in the post-colonial
world. Herbst (2000) points to improper design of national borders leading to ethnic strife and the
inability of African countries to develop the necessary fiscal capacity to support economic development.
For other recent studies linking ethnic composition with economic performance, see for instance Alesina
et al 2003; Alesina and La Ferrara 2005; Alesina et al 2012; Miguel and Gugerty 2005; Nunn and
Wantchekon 2011; Michalopoulos and Papaioannou 2011.
2
Horowitz’s (1985) voluminous scholarly work highlights that ethnicity is a powerful force in the
politics of divided societies and observes that these have profound effects on the prospects for democracy,
economic development and the distribution of public goods. Specifically, Esman (1994) observes that
“when an ethnic group gains control of the state, important economic assets are soon transferred to the
members of that community”.

2

dominant for extended periods. Finally, to estimate the impact of institutional changes
such as democratization on ethnic favoritism one would ideally observe switches between
democracy and autocracy under the same leader, which is far from common.
To address these difficulties we pick an appropriate context: road building across
Kenyan districts. This setting is attractive for a number of reasons. First, there is
dramatic ethnic segregation across districts in Kenya, which is the result of the design
of colonial era borders in the period before Kenya’s independence in 1963. Each postindependent district was dominated by a single ethnic group, and this pattern remains
stable over time. Therefore we can directly assess, using road spending or road construction by district, whether or not ethnic groups which shared the ethnicity of the president
disproportionately benefited from roads.
Second, road expenditure can be directly measured. We have carried out extensive
historical archival work to recover road expenditure data at the project level. This has
enabled us to construct district level panel data on road expenditure for all 41 Kenyan
districts across the entire post-independence period, 1963-2011. In addition, we have
constructed a panel of road presence in each of the 41 Kenyan districts using historical
maps. We can therefore cross-check the district road expenditure data (from the road
projects) with the district road construction data (from the maps). Having this level of
detailed data on two independent measures of the same public good is extremely rare in
low-income countries, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Third, roads are the largest single element of public expenditure in Kenya, constituting about 15% of total expenditure over our sample period. This is three times what the
Kenyan central government spends on health, education or water. Roads expenditure is
centrally allocated and a highly visible form of public investment and thus a prime area
for political patronage. Road building, therefore, represents an ideal setting in which to
carry out an analysis of ethnic favoritism.3
Fourth, the post-independence history of Kenya provides us both with switches in
the ethnicity of the president, and switches into and out of multiparty democracy under
the same president. During our study period, we observe (i) a transition into autocracy
from democracy under the first President of Kenya (Jomo Kenyatta, an ethnic Kikuyu),
(ii) a transition from a Kikuyu President to a Kalenjin President (Daniel arap Moi)
under an autocratic regime (iii) a transition out of autocracy into democracy under Moi,
and (iv) a democratic succession of a Kalenjin President to a Kikuyu President (Mwai
Kibaki). These changes both in the ethnicity of the president and in the political regime
allow us to identify the effect of political transitions on ethnic favoritism holding the
identity of the leader constant.
Fifth, as is apparent in Figure 1, democratic change in Kenya mirrors the pattern
3

Furthermore, a new literature (see Michaels 2008; Donaldson 2012; Faber 2012) shows that, by facilitating trade, roads and other forms of transportation infrastrucuture can boost economic performance.
Better connected districts in Kenya might therefore carry a growth advantage.

3

seen across Sub-Saharan Africa. Kenya, like many African countries, was reasonably
democratic post-independence in the 1960s, became autocratic in the 1970s and 1980s,
and then returned to democracy in the 1990s and 2000s. Our results for Kenya might
thus provide insights into the broader post-independence pattern of economic and political development across Sub-Saharan Africa. For example, if we find that democracy
has value in terms of imposing constraints on the executive (which in turns limits ethnic
favoritism), then this might help explain why economic growth has been higher in democratic (1960s, 1990s, 2000s) relative to autocratic (1970s, 1980s) periods. We return to
a discussion of this issue in the conclusion to this paper.
Our unique set-up therefore allows us to assess whether there is ethnic favoritism in
roads investment, to quantify the magnitude of this effect, and to estimate the extent
to which favoritism is affected by democratization. To help us interpret our results, we
set up a model of centralized presidential public resource allocation across districts. The
model shows how the degree of ethnic favoritism is determined by the constraints on
executive action that characterize different political regimes. Our empirical results can
therefore be directly linked to the magnitude of ethnic favoritism and to the constraints
on the executive as captured in the model, providing novel theoretically-grounded quantitative evidence on the extent of these phenomena.
What we find is striking. Across the 1963 to 2011 period, Kenyan districts that
share the ethnicity of the president receive twice as much expenditure on roads and have
four times the length of paved roads built relative to what would be predicted by their
population share. This is unequivocal evidence of an extreme degree of ethnic favoritism.
However, these biases are not constant. While in periods of autocracy, coethnic districts
receive three times the average expenditure in roads and five times the length of paved
roads, both these biases disappear entirely during periods of democracy. Thus, the
political regime is an important determinant of ethnic favoritism. We subject these
results to several robustness checks and show that they hold both with the project level
expenditure data and with the historical map data. Our results are also robust to using
different normalizations and measures of coethnicity.
These results suggest that even “imperfect” democratic institutions, like those found
in Kenya during the 1960s, 1990s and 2000s, have value by imposing constraints on the
executive.4 A key insight from our theoretical model is that these constraints prevent
politicians from taking decisions which, though optimal for the leader concerned, run
counter to citizens interests and economic efficiency. In the context of the many African
countries where presidential power has an ethnic base, this may translate to lessened
favoritism towards coethnics during periods of democracy as political leaders are forced
to share public goods across the wider population.
Closer examination of recent Kenyan history sheds light on how the re-emergence
4

Indeed, we show that the executive constraint parameter derived from our model (and estimated
using our data) moves in parallel with Polity IV measures of constraints on the executive.

4

of multiparty democracy in the 1990s changed the nature of constraints on Kenyan
leaders and altered the allocation of public resources. Multiparty democracy heralded
an increase in mass political participation as well a lessening of constraints on popular
expression, including by increasingly vocal civil society groups. There was a reduction in
press censorship, and an explosion of private print and electronic media. These changes
led to far greater scrutiny of the actions of executive authorities starting in the 1990s,
which helps make sense of why ethnic favoritism was dramatically reduced during periods
of multiparty democracy.
This paper contributes to a small but growing body of studies trying to estimate the
extent of ethnic favoritism. Following on Kudamatsu’s (2012) work, Frank and Rainer
(2012) use the Demographic and Health Surveys to construct retrospective time-varying
ethnic-level measures of educational and health attainment for 18 countries. They show
that the ethnic identity of the president is correlated with higher coethnic attainment
in these dimensions. Kramon and Posner (2012) use a similar technique to focus on
the Kenyan case and trace whether the ethnic identity of key ministers matters for
education. Hodler and Raschky (2011) use light images from satellites to see whether
the birth regions of national leaders are favored when they take power and whether
this effect is more muted under democracy versus autocracy.5 Our paper advances this
literature by directly measuring public investment in road building rather than relying
on living standard outcomes such and health and education attainment where many
factors (beyond public investment) are involved in determining the outcome measure.
Developing a framework of presidential allocation of public good across districts allows
us to link constraints on the executive with ethnic favoritism. We can derive estimates of
these constraints from the model (for different presidential regimes) which we can then
compare to the Polity IV constraints on the executive score for Kenya across time. The
construction of independent series on road expenditure and road length for all Kenyan
districts across the 1963 to 2011 is thus a key contribution of the paper. This data,
coupled with changes in presidential ethnicity and in political regime is critical to our
ability to determine the extent of ethnic favoritism in road building and whether it is
affected by moves into and out of multiparty democracy.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a theoretical framework. Section 3 presents the historical background on roads and politics in
Kenya and the data collected. Section 4 presents the methods, results and discusses
and interprets these findings in light of our model and recent Kenyan history. Section 5
concludes and links our results to the broader literature on the effect of ethnic diversity
on economic growth.
5

Morjaria (2012) looks at whether deforestation and land encroachment in Kenyan forests became
more or less pronounced after the return to multi-party democracy in 1992.

5

2

Theoretical Framework

Consider a repeated economy populated by infinitely lived agents that discount the
future at rate δ. There is a continuum of citizens of size 1. Citizens belong to one of
two ethnic groups, i ∈ {A, B}, and the population share of group A is π A . These two
groups live in two separate districts, and each group also has an infinitely countable
set of potential country presidents. At any point in time, one of these presidents is in
power and they are all identical except for their ethnic identity. We thus have two types
of presidents, j ∈ {A, B}. The president in power decides on taxation τ , and on the
amount of district-specific public goods to be provided. Denote by η ij the per capita
public goods expenditure that group i receives if the president belongs to group j.
For simplicity, we assume that the president can only charge a lump-sum tax τ on all
citizens and cannot use taxation to discriminate across groups.6 The president can direct
spending to his preferred district, but is limited by institutional and societal constraints.
Following Besley and Persson (2010) we capture these constraints on the executive in a
simple way as follows:
η ij ≤ θ π A η Aj + π B η Bj



(1)

where θ ∈ [1, ∞] denotes the weakness of constraints on the executive. This formulation
ensures that per capita spending in favor of group i cannot exceed average per capita
spending by more than a factor θ. If θ = ∞, institutions are so weak that they do not
constrain the president in any way and all spending can be targeted to one district. At
the opposite extreme, θ = 1 implies that no discrimination across districts is possible.
We assume that electoral institutions are also relatively weak, and the active support of one’s coethnics is necessary to keep power.7 As in Padró i Miquel (2007), we
assume that an acting president who receives the support of his ethnic group has strong
incumbency advantage and stays in power with probability γ̄. In contrast, if the acting
president does not receive coethnic support, he loses power with probability 1. In this
case, an open succession follows, and the new ruler belongs to the same ethnic group
as the ousted president with probability γ, for 1 > γ̄ ≥ γ > 0. Since transitions are
often weakly institutionalized and may involve coups and violence, we assume that in
the period while such a transition is being resolved, the state cannot perform its public
spending or taxation functions.8
6

We make this assumption for a number of reasons. First, the empirical evidence is mixed on African
governments’ capacity to effectively discriminate with taxation (see Bates 1981 and Kasara 2007), so this
simplifying assumption is a useful benchmark. Moreover, τ here includes legal taxes and also indirect
ways of extracting rents. The assumption of no tax discrimination is therefore equivalent to assuming
that the cost of rent-seeking falls equally on all citizens. For a similar model in which discrimination in
taxation is possible, see Padró i Miquel (2007).
7
To capture a wide variety of political institutions, we do not take a strong stance on what this
support means in practice. It can range from ethnic voting for the appropriate candidate to exerting
violence in order to deny other ethnic groups the full exercise of their democratic rights.
8
In this simple formulation, the weakness of electoral rules is captured by γ̄ − γ. A large difference
captures a system where the personality of the ruler is very important, as would be the case if the ruling
clique can easily manipulate the political contest. If this difference is zero, the mapping between group

6

We assume that presidents maximize the amount of resources they can extract by
being in power. Each period, the amount of resource extraction by a leader of type j is
given by


π A τ − η Aj + π B τ − η Bj ,
which, for each group, takes into account the taxes taken in and the expenditures on
public goods. Presidents receive zero utility when out of power and, for simplicity, we
assume that once they are ousted they cannot come back to power.
The citizens of group i pay taxes τ and enjoy public expenditure η ij , which gives
them the following simple instantaneous utility:
R(η ij ) − τ,
where R(·) is increasing and concave and satisfies R0 (0) = ∞ and R0 (∞) = 0.9 Denote
by ωt ∈ {A, B} a state variable that captures the ethnic type of the president at time t.
The timing of the game, given ωt , is as follows:
1. The president announces the policy vector Pt = (τ ωt , η Aωt , η Bωt )
2. The citizens of group ωt decide whether to support the leader, st = 1 or not st = 0
3. If st = 1, Pt is implemented and payoffs are realized. Next period starts with
ωt+1 = ωt with probability γ̄. With probability 1 − γ̄ the president loses power
and the next president is from the other group.
4. If st = 0, the leader is immediately ousted and the transition policy vector P =
(0, 0, 0) is implemented. After the transition, with probability γ the new ruler belongs to the same group as the ousted ruler and hence ωt+1 = ωt . With probability
1 − γ the new president belongs to the other group.
We solve for the Markov Perfect Equilibrium (MPE) of the game. Strategies can
therefore only be conditioned on the payoff relevant state variables and past play within
the stage game. Note that the only payoff-relevant state variable is ωt .
The following proposition, proven in the appendix, characterizes policy in the unique
MPE.
Proposition 1 Assume θ < max{ π1A , π1B }. There is a unique MPE in which
1. (1) is binding for both types of presidents
power and electoral power is not mediated by the current ruler. For simplicity and to save on notation,
we assume that both ethnic groups are symmetric in political terms. This might, of course, not be true
in reality and both γ̄ and γ could differ across groups, capturing differences in their populations, internal
structure, or hold on power. Allowing for this will not change any of the results of interest (see Padró i
Miquel, 2007).
9
Note that this formulation implies that the optimal path of public expenditure equalizes expenditures
per capita across both districts.

7

2. R0 (η ii ) = R0 (η jj ) =

1
θ

i

3. η ji = η ii 1−θπ
and η ij = η jj 1−θπ
θπ j
θπ i

j

In the unique MPE of the game, the president benefits his own group as much as he
can, and he does so in order to be able to increase taxes. Increasing patronage to his
group allows him to increase taxes for both groups, and hence the rents he can extract
increase. In equilibrium, this logic makes constraint (1) bind. This constraint forces the
president to provide public goods to non-coethnics, which reduces his rents. The more
patronage he is forced to provide to the other group (i.e., the smaller θ is), the less he
can appropriate and hence the lower the incentives to manipulate public good provision
to his advantage. For this reason, the amount of public goods provided to the president’s
coethnics is increasing in θ.
In the empirical section, we use the fact that (1) is binding in equilibrium to provide empirical estimates of θ across different regimes in Kenya’s recent political history.
There is a direct relationship between our empirical estimates and the constraints on the
executive modeled in our framework. For a group A president in power (without loss of
generality), we will estimate
β=

η AA − η BA
π A η AA + π B η BA

which can be rewritten as10 :
θ = 1 + β(1 − π A )

3

Background and Data

3.1

Districts and Ethnicity in Kenya

Kenya’s population comprises a mix of more that forty ethnic groups. According to
the 1962 Population Census, conducted immediately prior to independence, Kenya’s
main ethnic groups were the Kikuyu (18.8%), Luo (13.4%), Luhya (12.7%) and Kalenjin
(10.8%). The shares of these main ethnic groups have remained very stable since then
despite the fact that the national population has increased nearly fivefold (see Appendix
Table 1, Panel A).
While these ethnic groups predate the arrival of the British in what is today Kenya,
boundaries between them were not clearly delineated and have been described as “fluid”
in the pre-colonial period (Sheriff, 1985). Leading up to the British colonial era, there
were few centralized political structures in the interior of Kenya. Instead, authority was
typically personal and local, often a function of lineage, age and wealth and not of ethnic
allegiance (for illustrations, see Herbst (2000) and Mamdani (1996)). The region’s new
10

transformation uses the fact that η AA
=
A AA
B BA
[π η +π η ]−πA ηAA
θ−1
to generate the expression β = πB
πB
The

8

θ π A η AA + π B η BA



and

η BA

=

British rulers, however, imposed the provincial administration model in the early 20th
century, a structure that was used throughout colonies of British Africa. The country
was divided into provinces, provinces were in turn divided into districts and districts into
divisions, and further into locations and sub-locations. The boundaries of these localities
were based in part on the economic needs of white settlers, but a second important
consideration was the administration’s understanding of African ethnic groups.
In the early years of the Colony, districts were clearly defined in racial terms. The
“White Highlands”, the most suitable land for agriculture, was declared Crown property and reserved for white settlers only, despite their substantial pre-existing African
populations. African reserves, on the other hand, were for indigenous Africans. There
were restrictive rules on the residential mobility of Africans who were working as hired
labor or “squatters” on the land now owned by the whites (land which had previously
belonged to them). Further, all Africans had to carry an identification card to travel
outside their allotted reserves.
The creation of these administrative units, initially for racial segregation, laid the
foundation for ethnic politics in later years. From the early years of the Colony, there
was differentiation and targeting of public policies to different districts depending on
their agriculture potential and link to trade, which implied differential treatment for
the various ethnic groups. As the ethnic dimension became increasingly salient, district
borders were redrawn to accommodate the demands of local African chiefs and notables.
Boundary commissions were formed to incorporate these evolving views. As we see in
Appendix Figure 1, district boundaries in 1909 bear little relation to the 1963 ethnic
boundaries at independence. But by 1933 this situation had begun to change. The alignment of interests between the British and local chiefs – both of whom preferred greater
district ethnic homogeneity – meant that 1933 district borders now begin to resemble
1963 ethnic boundaries. Things move further in this direction so that by 1963 district
and ethnic boundaries tightly coincide (see Appendix Figure 1). At independence, 38
out of 41 districts in Kenya had a single ethnic group constituting more than 50% of
the population, and this remains the case up until the present. The only districts that
were not dominated by a single ethnic group were Nairobi, Mombasa and Trans-Nzoia;
Nairobi and Mombasa were (and are) the two largest cities in Kenya and Trans-Nzoia
is a highly urbanized district. Economic opportunities in these agglomerations drew in
individuals from many tribes as migrants.
In our analysis, we use the 1963 district boundaries. Districts in Kenya, in effect,
serve as stable ethnic markers thus allowing us to precisely assign expenditures or road
length to particular ethnic groups. This, in turn enables us to establish whether districts
that share the ethnicity of a given president receive more road investment and also to
establish whether this bias differs across democratic versus autocratic periods.

9

3.2

Ethnic Politics in Kenya

There was already differentiation and targeting of public policies to different ethnic
groups in the colonial period. The Kikuyus had the most prolonged exposure to discriminatory British policies, as large areas of their original homeland was “alienated” to
become the “White Highlands” and many were forced into “squatter” status. There was
increasing discontent within the Kikuyu group as internal inequalities rose, contributing to support for the so-called “Mau-Mau” uprising against the Europeans as well as
against those Africans who worked closely with the colonial authorities (Anderson 2005).
The Mau-Mau uprising brought with it a state of emergency in Kenya and set the
stage for Kenya’s independence. Following the Lancaster House Conference in 1960, the
Legislative Council was restructured to allow for an African majority as well as to allow
for the legal formation of African political parties. In May 1960, the Kenya Africa National Union (KANU) was formed and led by Jomo Kenyatta (an ethnic Kikuyu). Soon
after, driven by the fear of Kikuyu and Luo domination, the Kenya Africa Democratic
Union (KADU) was formed. KADU was composed largely by members of numerically
smaller ethnic groups, and led by Daniel arap Moi, an ethnic Kalenjin. These parties
contested in the first post-independence election of 1963. KANU won the election convincingly and in less than two years KADU MPs had all joined KANU, resulting in the
temprorary end of opposition representation in Parliament.
In the mid-1960s, however, several members of KANU defected to a new left-leaning
Luo-led party, the Kenya People’s Union (KPU), which opposed the perceived growing
conservatism and pro-Western orientation of Kenyatta and the KANU leadership. However, the anti-communist logic of the Cold War meant that the KPU was banned in 1969,
ostensibly on national security grounds. This banning institutionalized the single-party
autocracy and it is clearly captured in measures of democratic political institutions such
as Polity IV.11 As shown in Figure 1, the Polity IV score for Kenya falls from 0 to -7
at this point. The banning of KPU also arguably marked the beginning of unchecked
Kikuyu political domination (Widner, 1992).
Kenyatta died unexpectedly of natural causes in 1978 and Moi (his former VicePresident, and a Kalenjin) took power, as specified in the Constitution. Moi continued
in the footsteps of Kenyatta and further consolidated the one-party state. However,
following an attempted coup in 1982 led by Kikuyu officers, he switched from a KikuyuKalenjin coalition to an alliance between Kalenjins, Luhyas and numerically smaller
groups, similar to the KADU alliance he had once led. Heads of parastatal enterprises,
the military, police and the security apparatus were rapidly replaced with Kalenjins
(Widner 1992).
The early 1990s saw an increase in both internal and external pressures for African
leaders to introduce democracy, with the end of the Cold War being a catalyst for this
11

Recall that polity is on a -10 to +10 scale, with scores below -5 typically considered “autocratic”.

10

change (Barkan 1994). The suspension of overseas development assistance from the Paris
Group of Donors forced Moi to legalize opposition parties, and Kenya held multiparty
elections in 1992 for the first time since the 1960s. However, while Moi had amended
the constitution to allow for multiparty competition, in parallel he had also successfully
consolidated the strength of the Office of the President. His abuse of the state machinery
and widespread vote fraud, together with the inability of the opposition to coordinate
on a single candidate, handed Moi victory in both the 1992 and the 1997 multiparty
elections.
Despite this electoral fraud and abuse of the newly established democratic political
institutions, the return to multiparty democracy is widely accepted to have brought
significant changes in the nature of Kenyan politics and civil society. The emergence of
a freer press, including private ownership of media, the growth of civil society forums
and of parliamentary accountability committees, as well as a reduction in blatant human
rights abuses by the security apparatus, were all arguably triggered by the emergence
of political competition. These trends are not unique to Kenya, as illustrated by the
Africa-wide changes in democratic governance in Figure 1. The process put in motion
by these civil society changes helped make possible the relatively free national election
of 2002, which was won by the opposition for the first time, namely by Mwai Kibaki,
an ethnic Kikuyu (under the NARC party), marking the first democratic transition of
power in independent Kenya (Posner 2005). Moi himself did not run for President in the
2002 elections, adhering to the constitutional provision barring a third term in office.
Kenya’s emerging democracy has been tested since 2002. The social and political
salience of ethnicity in Kenya has not diminished. The 2007 general election was tightly
fought between the incumbent Kibaki (an ethnic Kikuyu) and Raila Odinga (an ethnic
Luo), who was in coalition with leading Kalenjin figures. Leading up to the election, exit
polls all pointed to a relatively close but clear Odinga victory, but the electoral results
kept Kibaki in power amid credible claims of electoral fraud. This resulted in nearly two
months of widespread ethnic violence, with thousands killed and hundreds of thousands
displaced from their homes (Gibson and Long 2009).
This brief discussion of recent Kenyan political history shows that, while representative of broader African political trends, the case of Kenya is particularly helpful for
our analysis. More specifically, there are two key ingredients that enable us to identify
ethnic favoritism and its relationship with multiparty democracy. Firstly, the alternation of power (as illustrated in Figure 2) between Kikuyu and Kalenjin leaders over time
allows us to test for ethnic favoritism and quantify its magnitude. In practice, we test for
favoritism by estimating whether districts that share the president’s ethnicity received
more roads investments. Secondly, within ethnic ruling periods there are switches between autocracy and multiparty democracy, allowing us to test whether the existence of
democratic institutions (even if imperfect) constrains or exacerbates ethnic favoritism.

11

3.3

Roads Investment Data in Kenya

Road building is the single largest development expenditure item in Kenya’s Annual Development Budget.12 Over the period of study, 1963-2011, new road development budget
on average represents 15.2% of the total central government’s development budget, compared to figures of 5.5%, 5.7% and 6.5% for expenditures in education, health and water,
respectively. Unlike other forms of development expenditure (e.g., schools and water)
that derive in large part from local village funding (called harambee funding in Swahili),
funding for road expenditure is almost entirely provided by the central government. By
looking at the distribution of road spending and road construction across districts across
time we are thus able to test for ethnic favoritism by the central government.
In theory, the decision-process behind road construction is partially bottom-up. The
Provincial and District Commissioners are supposed to pass up requests for projects to
the Ministry of Public Works.13 The Ministry of Public Works handles these requests
and prepares a national road building strategy. The Ministry of Finance then oversees
and resolves competing claims from the different ministries and actual road projects are
then implemented. However, it is important to note that this process takes place under
strict oversight exercised by the Office of the President at all stages. In fact, Provincial
Commissioners themselves are nominated by the Office of the President, which guarantees their loyalty by rewarding them with wide-ranging authority in their province.14
Given the high visibility of road projects both in terms of physical infrastructure as well
as large financial outlays, it is likely that the president himself took a personal interest
in major road projects.
Our main measure of road building is expenditures on new roads annually by district
during 1963-2011, obtained from the Kenya National Development budget reports. This
is technical data compiled by project engineers that details the expenditure on a comprehensive list of individual road projects on an annual basis (i.e., a paved road from
location A to location B through location C, at total cost X). When a road project spans
locations in more than one district, we use GIS to understand the layout of the road
project and the relative kilometers in each district. We then decompose expenditure
across the relevant districts assuming an equal distribution of costs along the construction of the total length of the road (see Appendix 1 for greater detail on the construction
of this data series).
A convenient feature of roads is that they are easy to observe on the ground. Our
12
Kenya’s Total Annual Budget in our study period is composed of the Development Budget and
the Recurrent Expenditure. Unfortunately the Recurrent Expenditure is only reported as national
aggregates.
13
The Ministry of Public Works was in charge of planning and building roads from 1963-1978, in 19791988 the road portfolio moved to the Ministry of Transport and Communications, and in 2008-2011 a
separate Ministry of Roads was created.
14
As a result, there was disproportionate representation from the president’s ethnic group in the share
of both provincial and district commissioners in the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s (see Barkan and Chege
1989).

12

second measure of road investment thus comes from Michelin Maps, which capture the
actual physical extent of paved roads. Paved roads account for the majority of road expenditures, and their spread can be reliably tracked across our period. As these maps are
made by French engineers in Paris assisted by Michelin offices (mainly gas stations and
tire outlets) throughout East Africa, they are an independent non-governmental source
of data on road investment. This data should therefore not be affected by the concern
that road spending, as reported by the government, might not be accurately reported.
It is simply a measure of the physical manifestation of paved roads. Digitization of the
Michelin maps thus provides us with an independent check on whether there is ethnic
favoritism in road building and whether such favoritism is affected by democracy.
The limitation of this second source of data is the availability of these maps only
in some years and only until 2002, resulting in a smaller sample. In particular, maps
were produced for the following years: 1961, 1964, 1967, 1969, 1972, 1974, 1979, 1981,
1984, 1987, 1989, 1992 and 2002. In order to use the Michelin Maps to create a GIS
dataset, we initially start with a Global GIS map containing contemporary roads. We
then use the various maps to recreate the evolution of roads backwards in time. Due
to the consistency of legend labels on paved roads, we are able to create a district-year
panel dataset of the length of paved roads by splicing the historical road maps with the
district boundaries.
Figure 3 depicts the evolution of the road network across key years in Kenya’s political
history. The year 1964 is the first year the Michelin map is available post-independence
and shows the colonial interest in connecting the most agriculturally fertile area of Kenya
(the White Highland areas) to Nairobi; the maps of 1969-1979 illustrate the Kenyatta
period, 1969 being the end of multiparty democracy and the beginning of the single-party
state in Kenya. The year 1979 is immediately after the unexpected death of Kenyatta
and the beginning of Moi’s (ethnic Kalenjin) single party era. The year 1992 serves to
illustrate the end of Moi’s single party era and the beginning of multiparty democracy.
Finally, 2002 illustrates the stock of road development at the end of Moi’s multiparty
era.
Comparison of the paved road maps for 1979 and 1992 gives a first visual indication
of ethnic favoritism. The paved road network in and around the green Kikuyu districts
appears largely frozen between these two years. In contrast the network in and around
the pink Kalenjin areas expands dramatically. After 1992, in contrast, the expansion in
and around the green and pink areas is much more equal.
Panel A of Appendix Table 2 provides summary statistics for both the main outcomes
of interest (road development expenditures per population share, using project data) and
the secondary measure (paved road construction per population share, using maps data).
Note that the difference in the number of observations is driven by the different data
sources: road expenditure data is available every year between 1963-2011, while the

13

maps are less frequent.
We normalize the road expenditure measure taking into account population. More
specifically, the main outcome variable in the analysis is the share of road expenditure
received by a district (out of the total national road development budget that year)
divided by the population share of the district in the national population (in 1962).
This summary statistic has a natural interpretation: a value of one implies that a district received road spending that is exactly proportional to its population.15 Values
greater than (less than) one denote spending that is above (below) the national average.
Specifically, a value of two for this measure denotes a district that is receiving twice
as much road spending as the national per capita average, while a value of 1.3 denotes
expenditures 30% above the national per capita average. To be more precise, let road
spending in district d and year t be denoted by EXPdt and district population in 1962
be P OPd,1962 , while total national road spending is EXPt and national population in
1962 is P OP1962 . The main road spending measure can be expressed as:


EXPdt
P OPd,1962

roaddt = 

EXPt
P OP1962



We construct a parallel measure for paved road construction (in km) per capita by
district, using a measure of paved road length per capita in the district divided by average
paved road length per capita nationally, as an alternative district road outcome. This
measure has the same interpretation, with one denoting road construction on par with
the national average, and values greater than one denoting additional construction. As
a robustness check, we also explore normalizing district road spending by district land
area.
In relating these measures of road investment to whether districts are coethnic with
the president (as defined by the district’s population of the president’s ethnic group being
above 50%), we control for a number of other factors that may affect the placement of
roads. These variables are measured at the district level, including population, area,
urbanization rate, formal earnings, formal employment as share of total population,
value of cash crops, whether the district lies along the pre-existing Mombasa-NairobiKampala rail and road corridor, whether the district is a national border district, and
the distance to Nairobi. All these controls are measured either just at independence or
soon after, depending on data availability.16
15

This empirical benchmark lines up with our theoretical model where the optimal path of public
expenditure equalizes expenditures per capita across districts. Deviations from this benchmark are
therefore interpretable as evidence of ethnic favoritism.
16
Note that we obtain district population and urbanization rates from the reports of the Population and
Housing Census in 1962. District area (sq km) is estimated using GIS tools on the 1963 administrative
boundaries. We use the annual Statistical Abstracts of Kenya to reconstruct total district employment
(available in 1963) and total district earnings (in 2000 USD, available for 1966) in the formal sector. The
Development Plan of Kenya 1964-1970 reports cash crop production (coffee, tea and sisal) at the district
level for the year 1964-1965. We then use the 1965 export price in 2000 USD (FAO 2011) to calculate

14

4

Methods and Results

4.1

Methods

We seek to estimate the relationship between the ethnicity of the president and public
expenditures in districts demographically dominated by his coethnics. In the period
under examination, we have Kikuyu presidents (1963-1978 and 2003-2011) and Kalenjin
presidents (1979-2002). There are seven Kikuyu dominant districts and six Kalenjin
dominant districts, out of 41 in total. We present our results using two approaches, a
graphical approach and a regression approach.
In our first approach, we graphically examine how the ratio of a district’s share of
road spending or road construction relative to its population share (i.e. roaddt ) varies
in the post-independence period. We divide districts in two ways. First by whether or
not, in a given year, the majority ethnic group in a district is the same as that of the
president, as discussed above. This allows us to visually examine whether or not districts
that are coethnic with the president receive a higher share of national spending on roads
relative to their share in the national population. We are particularly interested in
analyzing whether this bias is more or less pronounced in democratic periods relative to
autocratic periods. Second, we examine the evolution of ethnic majority of Kikuyu and
Kalenjin districts. Since all Kenyan presidents were either ethnic Kikuyu or Kalenjin
during the 1963-2011 study period, this allows us to examine what happens to road
spending in districts when they shift in and out of being coethnic with the president.
A focus here again is on whether being coethnic during autocratic periods results in
districts attracting a higher share of road resources relative to democratic periods. This
comparison is of particular interest as the transition from democracy to autocracy in 1969
took place under the same president, as did the transition from autocracy to democracy
in 1992.
In the regression approach, our main estimating equation takes the following form:
roaddt = γd + αt + β(coethnic districtdt )
+ δ(coethnic districtdt × democracyt ) + θ(Xd1963 × [t − 1963]) + udt
where the dependent variable is the road spending or road construction measure for year
t and district d as described above.17 To capture coethnicity with the president, we use
an indicator variable (coethnic districtdt ) that takes a value of one for districts where
at least 50% of the population has the same ethnic affiliation as the serving president.
The democracyt term is an indicator variable which takes a value of one during periods
the district total value of cash crop exports in 1965. We use GIS tools to create: (i) an indicator variable
whose value is one if any part of the district is on the Mombasa-Nairobi-Kampala rail and road corridor,
(ii) an indicator variable whose value is one if the district borders Uganda or Tanzania, (iii) a variable
capturing the Euclidian distance (in km) from each district centroid to Nairobi.
17
For both spending and construction we have 41 districts as defined by the 1963 district boundaries.
For spending we have annual data for 49 years and hence our sample is 2009 observations. For paved
road construction there are 11 Michelin maps between 1963 and 2002 and hence 451 observations.

15

of multiparty democracy (1963-1969 and 2003-2011, see Figure 4). Xd1963 is a vector
of baseline demographic, economic and geographic variables all obtained in the early to
mid 1960s that might affect road spending and construction. We interact these initial
conditions with linear time trends [t-1963] to allow their impact over time to vary across
different districts. The regression also controls for district fixed effects (γd ), year fixed
effects (αt ) and standard errors are clustered at the district level.

4.2
4.2.1

Results
Graphical Analysis

The first results are presented in Figure 4. We plot our average roaddt measure for
districts that are coethnic with the president in year t and for those that are not. The
solid vertical lines, in 1969 and 1992, capture regime transitions away from multiparty
democracy and back to multiparty democracy, respectively. The broken vertical lines, in
1979 and 2002, capture presidential transitions. Two interesting patterns emerge. The
first is that during periods of autocracy (basically, the 1970s and 1980s) the ratio of
district share of road expenditures to district share of population is always above one
for coethnic districts and below one for non-coethnic districts, which is strongly indicative of ethnic favoritism.18 The second is that during periods of multiparty democracy
(basically, the 1960s, 1990s and 2000s) the ratio is consistently lower and tends to be
near one on average for both types of districts, implying little or no favoritism.
Three transitions in Figure 4 are particularly noteworthy. The first is the rapid
post-1969 rise of average roaddt from 1 to above 2. Even with the same president
in power (Kenyatta), the switch from democracy to autocracy leads to road spending
more than doubling in coethnic districts over the course of a few years. The second
is that this favoritism is maintained and intensified after 1979, despite the fact that
the set of districts that are coethnic with the president is now completely distinct from
those pre-1979. The third is that when democracy returns in 1992 the roaddt measure
gradually falls from above 2 to around 1 even though the same president (Moi) is in
place. Democracy clearly has value in terms of spreading the single biggest component
of public expenditures in Kenya more evenly across districts dominated by different
ethnic groups. The stark “1-2-1” pattern we observe in presidential coethnic districts
as Kenya enters and then exits autocracy is extremely difficult to square with spending
being driven mainly by concerns of economic efficiency.
Only two ethnic groups, the Kikuyus and the Kalenjins, produced presidents during
the study period. Figure 5 categorizes districts by whether the majority of the district
population is Kikuyu, Kalenjin or from another ethnic group. Kikuyu districts receive
road spending in line with their population share during the early democratic period.
18
Note that the fact that the coethnic line rises to nearly 3 whereas the non-coethnic line falls to only
around 0.8 is due to the fact that the bulk of the districts in a given year are not coethnic with the
president.

16

Following the banning of opposition political parties in 1969, road spending concentrates
in these districts, rising to more than double that predicted by population share. This
trend of favoring Kikuyu districts ends when the Kikuyu president (Kenyatta) dies in
1978. In fact, there is a striking decline in Kikuyu district road funding, and a corresponding increase in Kalenjin road funding timed exactly after Kenyatta’s death in 1978,
suggesting that Moi had the authority to rapidly target road resources to his coethnic
districts.
The rise in spending on Kalenjin districts is truly meteoric: roaddt rises from around
0.5 pre-1978 to close to 3 post-1978, representing a six-fold increase in relative road
spending per capita in these districts. This highly elevated roaddt level is maintained
throughout the Moi autocratic period, as the Kikuyu roaddt falls back down towards
unity. The return of democracy under Moi in 1992 seems to reduce his ability to maintain
this high degree of ethnic favoritism, and the Kalenjin district roaddt measure drifts
back down towards unity as democracy gradually strengthens. Diminished favoritism
for districts that are coethnic with the president during periods of democracy is also
associated with greater spending for the majority of districts in Kenya which are neither
majority Kikuyu nor Kalenjin. As Figure 5 demonstrates, the “‘other” ethnic districts
line has a “U-shaped” pattern, being close to unity in the 1960s, then falling below
unity in the 1970s and 1980s, and rising back towards unity in the 1990s and 2000s.
Democracy seems to have a leveling influence in ensuring that Kenyan districts receive
roads resources roughly in line with their share of population irrespective of whether or
not they share the ethnicity of the president.
The fact that the majority of districts who are never coethnic with any president
across the 1963-2011 period, but which nonetheless contain the bulk (around 85%) of
the Kenyan population, get road spending allocations well below the national average
during periods of autocracy and at best achieve parity during democratic periods is very
difficult to square with any notion that road spending across districts being is being
driven by concerns with economic efficiency.19
4.2.2

Regression Analysis

In Table 1, we move beyond the graphical analysis and employ the regression framework
specified above. In Panel A of Table 1, Column 1 confirms that, for our 1963-2011 period
as a whole, there is strong evidence of ethnic favoritism in Kenya. A coefficient of 1 in
this specification implies that, on average, districts that are coethnic with the president
receive double the amount of roads investment relative to their share in the population.
Recall that the districts with a majority Kikuyu or Kalenjin population each account
19

The investment pattern in autocratic periods where “other” districts consistently receive less road
investment than the national average and Kikuyu and Kalenjin districts receive road investment which
is significantly above the national average is difficult to square with our theoretical model where the
optimal path of public expenditure equalizes expenditures per capita across districts.

17

for roughly 15% of all Kenyan districts. The coefficient in column 1 implies that, on
average, across our period these districts receive roughly 30% of national spending on
roads. Given that roads account for approximately one sixth of all central government
spending, this represents a highly consequential degree of ethnic bias.
This central result remains robust when we sequentially add controls for demography
(district population, area, urbanization rate – column 2), economic activity (district
total earnings and employment in the formal sector, value of cash crop production for
export – column 3), economic geography (being on the main Mombasa-Nairobi-Kampala
corridor, bordering another country, distance to Nairobi – column 4). These controls,
which are either time invariant or are measured at the start of our period, are interacted
with linear time trends to allow for initial district differences to evolve over time as a
function of these differences. These interactions should control for many of the economic
factors that might influence where road investments take place in Kenya. Our preferred
specification is Column 4, which contains the full set of interactions, and has a nearly
identical coefficient estimate to that in column 1, suggesting that ethnic favoritism in
road spending is largely orthogonal to the influence of these other factors. In column 5
we observe that the ethnic favoritism result is even robust to including district specific
time trends. Regardless of econometric specification, the central result that coethnic
districts, on average, receive twice the level of road expenditure between 1963 and 2011
is highly robust.
We next test if ethnic favoritism is affected by whether a national democratic or
autocratic regime is in place. In Panel B of Table 1, column 1 indicates that ethnic
favoritism in road spending falls significantly during democratic periods. Indeed the F
test at the bottom of the column indicates that there is no significant evidence of ethnic
favoritism within periods of democracy in Kenya (p-value = 0.31). This is the second
main result of the paper. Democracy, involving at a minimum some legal competition
between political parties, limits the ability of the president to favor coethnics, in effect
forcing him to share public resources more evenly across the population. This is equivalent to a drop in θ in our theoretical model towards unity. That even imperfect forms
of democracy, such as that experienced in Kenya in the 1960s and again post-1992, can
reduce ethnic favoritism in this way is a striking finding.
In the remaining columns of Panel B, we see that this second result is robust to
sequentially adding in controls for demography (column 2), economic activity (column
3) and economic geography (column 4). The result is also robust to inclusion of district
specific time trends (column 5). Across all columns, the F -test indicates that we cannot
reject the hypothesis that ethnic favoritism in road building is absent in Kenya during
periods of democracy. The coefficients on coethnicdt tell us that sharing the ethnicity
of the president in autocratic periods raises road favoritism by 157% to 174%. That is,
there is almost a three fold increase in road spending in these districts relative to those

18

that do not share the ethnicity of the president. This can be seen in Figure 4 where our
road favoritism measure rises from around 1 in the 1960s to almost 3 in the 1970s and
1980s and then falls back towards 1 in the post-1992 period. The coefficient estimates
of -1.08 to -1.32 on the (coethnicdt × democracyt ) term captures the near elimination of
ethnic favoritism during periods of democracy.
In Table 2 we use our second roaddt measure, the share of paved roads constructed
in a district relative to the population share of that district according to the digitized
Michelin maps data. Table 2 reproduces all the specifications in Table 1. In Panel A we
see that presidential coethnic districts receive between twice and five times the kilometers of paved roads per capita relative to national average. In our preferred specification
in column 4, the coefficient is 3.24, implying that coethnic districts have four times the
length of paved roads built. Ethnic favoritism as measured by paved road construction
is therefore twice as pronounced as that measured by total expenditure on roads. One
reason for this might be that paved roads are a highly visible element of road investment. Political leaders may feel that investing in these visible symbols of progress and
modernity represent a more viable means of securing the support of their coethnics than
investing in less visible elements, such as non-paved tracks or in road maintenance. This
pattern points to favoritism towards coethnics of an extreme form, and is once again
difficult to square with economic efficiency, especially conditional on the wide array of
baseline demographic, geographic and economic characteristics that we include. Our
benchmark that per capita road investment should be equalized across district is clear
violated by the evidence we see for road spending (Table 1) and paved road construction
(Table 2).
In Panel B of Table 2 we see that the tendency to favor coethnic districts with paved
roads is again radically diminished during periods of democracy. Indeed, across all the
specifications, we find that the reduction in this bias during democratic periods is such
that we cannot reject the hypothesis that there is no significant difference in the extent
to which paved roads are built between coethnic and non-coethnic districts. In column 4
we see that the coefficient on coethnicdt is 3.90, implying that in autocratic periods five
times the length of paved roads are built in coethnic districts relative to the national
average. A coefficient on (coethnicdt × democracyt ) of -2.71 implies that this bias is far
less pronounced in democratic periods and indeed the F -test (p-value = 0.56) confirms
that we cannot reject that there was no ethnic favoritism during these periods. The
coefficient estimates are similar in the specification with district time trends (column 5)
but standard errors rise somewhat.
The degree to which results match up using two independently collected data sets
on road expenditure (Table 1) and road building (Table 2) is reassuring. It increases
our confidence in the robustness of the two key findings of this paper: there is extensive favoritism towards the president’s coethnics in road investment in Kenya, and this

19

favoritism is eliminated during periods of democracy.
4.2.3

Robustness

Table 3 checks the robustness of these results to changes in normalization and in measures of coethnicity. Columns 1 and 2 of Panel A replicate the key results for road
expenditure (from column 4 of Table 1). In columns 1 and 2 of Panel B we move to a
continuous measure of coethnicity, where we measure the population share of the president’s ethnicity in a district, independent of whether or not this represents the majority
(>50%) ethnicity. The two main results hold when we do this. In columns 3 and 4 of
Panel A we normalize the road expenditure share by the district’s area share. It is clear
that the two main results are robust to normalizing road expenditure by area share as
opposed to population share. In columns 5 through 8, we show that our road building
results are robust to using a continuous measure of coethnicity and to normalizing by
area share. Across all the results in Table 3, we find that there is strong evidence of
ethnic favoritism in road spending and building, and we cannot reject the hypothesis
that this favoritism is largely eliminated during periods of democracy.
In Appendix Table 3, we carry out a further battery of robustness checks on our
main results on road spending. Column 1 replicates the results from our preferred
specification in column 4 of Table 1. In column 2, we see that including our baseline
controls on demography, economic activity and economic geography interacted with year
fixed effects does not significantly affect our results, although coefficient estimates are
less precisely estimated. In column 3 we include an additional control for the number
of years that a district has been coethnic with the president, to capture the possible
persistence of effects of coethnicity on road favoritism. Our results remain robust to
the inclusion of this control. In columns 4 and 5 we compute standard errors that are
corrected for spatial clustering (Conley, 1999) using 200 kilometer and 400 kilometer
thresholds, respectively. Again the pattern of results seen in column 1 remain robust.
It is informative to break down the results into the five leadership periods seen in
Figure 2 – Kenyatta democracy, Kenyatta autocracy, Moi autocracy, Moi democracy,
Kibaki democracy. This is needed to check whether what we are observing is a general
phenomena, or one related to a particular leadership regime in Kenya. For example,
we would want to know whether both early (1960s) and later (1990s, 2000s) democracy
were effective in mitigating ethnic favoritism. To look at this, for each of the leadership regimes shown in Figure 2, we regress our road spending favoritism index roaddt
on indicators that capture whether a district has a majority (>50%) Kikuyu or Kalenjin population. The comparison districts are those that do not have either of these
attributes. The results are reported in Table 4.
The comparison of the coefficients on Kikuyu/Kalenjin indicators across periods of
democracy and autocracy when the same Kikuyu or Kalenjin president is in power is

20

telling. During the Kenyatta democracy period (1963-1969), there is no significant difference between the coefficients on the Kikuyu and Kalenjin indicators (p-value = 0.70). In
the Kenyatta autocracy period (1970-1978) the Kikuyu indicator becomes positive and
statistically significant, and the Kikuyu-Kalenjin difference is also statistically significant
(p-value = 0.01). During the Moi autocracy period (1979-1992), things flip round and
now the Kalenjin indicator is positive and statistically significant, the Kikuyu indicator
is not and the two are marginally significantly different (p-value = 0.08). With the transition back to democracy during the Moi democracy period (1993-2002), both indicators
lose statistical significance, as does the difference between the two (p-value = 0.14) and
this pattern also holds under the Kibaki democracy period (2003-2011, p-value = 0.33).
The results in Table 4 indicate that there is no evidence of ethnic favoritism in either
the early (1960s) or later (1990s, 2000s) democratic periods. It is during periods of
autocracy that presidents are able to favor coethnics in the allocation of road spending
across Kenyan districts.
4.2.4

Extension: Coalition Politics

Our focus has been on the impact of being coethnic with the president on road spending and paved road construction within a district, and on whether this changes under
democracy. This makes sense given the nature of politics in many Sub-Saharan African
countries, where presidents traditionally enjoy considerable personal decision-making
authority. However, it is possible that other members of the president’s cabinet also influence where road investment takes place. This introduces a set of related but distinct
issues pertaining to inter-ethnic coalition formation. While a full treatment of these
issues is beyond the scope of this paper, and does not feature in our theoretical model in
section 2, we use our data to explore whether considering coalition politics significantly
changes any of our main conclusions.
We assembled a data set that codes the ethnicity of each cabinet member for each of
the thirteen central government cabinets between 1963 and 2011 (see Appendix Table 1).
In an exhaustive set of regressions, we tested whether districts that are coethnic with the
Public Works minister, or with ministers holding the most important cabinet portfolios
(e.g., Finance, Home) receive more road spending but cannot reject the hypothesis that
the effect is zero (not shown). This appears to be further confirmation of the overriding
power of presidents in post-independence Kenya.
However, in column 2 of Table 5 we show the one exception: we find that districts
that are coethnic with the vice president do have road expenditures significantly above
the national average. A coefficient of 1.46 on the V P -coethnicdt measure tells us that
during autocratic periods, districts receive two and a half times the average amount of
road expenditure relative to their population share, a large effect. The coefficient of
-1.42 on (V P -coethnicdt × democracy) implies that this ethnic favoritism is non-existent

21

during periods of democracy, as is also confirmed by the F -test in column 2. What is
also interesting in column 2 is that, during autocratic periods, districts that are coethnic
with the president receive three and half times the amount of road expenditure relative
to districts that are neither coethnic with the president or vice president. This finding
confirms that the president has been the dominant force in allocating road spending, but
also shows that the vice president (who throughout the post-independence period was
never of the same ethnicity as the president) is able, to a more limited extent, to skew
resources towards districts that share his ethnicity. The fact that both these forms of
favoritism largely disappear during democratic periods suggest that democracy ties the
hands of both top executives, the president and the vice president. In other words, our
main results on ethnic favoritism and the leveling effect of democracy are robust to also
considering the ethnic group of the vice president.
It is often argued that the typical way coalition politics play out in African politics is
in cabinet formation. In columns 3 and 4 of Table 5 we explore this possibility. To do so,
we exploit our data set on the ethnicity of all cabinet ministers for election years between
1963 and 2011 (see Appendix Table 1). The dependent variable is the cabinet share of
each ethnic group in year t divided by its population share in 1962. An index higher
than one means that an ethnic group is receiving more cabinet positions than its national
ethnic population share would predict. We then regress this index on a district indicator
which equals one if it is coethnic with the serving president, as well as its interaction
with the democracy indicator. We include ethnic group and time fixed effects, as well
as an ethnic group time trend. In column 3 of Table 5 we find that the president’s
ethnic group receives 64% more cabinet posts relative to what would be predicted by its
national population share. Therefore, Kenyan presidents do favor their ethnic group with
cabinet positions. When we interact the group indicator with democracyt , however, we
find no effect, indicating that the propensity to favor coethnics with cabinet positions is
not attenuated during periods of democracy. In column 4 we see that the ethnic groups
of both the president and vice president are favored with cabinet positions but that once
again that neither is affected by democracy. This is informative in two respects. First,
there is indeed a propensity for presidents and vice-presidents to “stuff” the cabinet
with coethnics. Second, this tendency is not checked by the arrival of democracy, which
suggests that the road favoritism effects across autocratic and democratic periods we are
estimating are unlikely to be driven by changes in cabinet composition.
These findings line up well with Francois, Rainer and Trebbi (2012), who argue that
cabinets in Africa are surprisingly representative of the underlying national population
even under autocratic regimes. They argue that allocating key cabinet posts to ethnic groups that are not coethnic with the president may help to reduce the threat of
revolutions from outsiders and of coups from insiders. Despite the largesse shown by
the president in allocating cabinet posts to ethnic groups other than his own, what our

22

results show is that it has primarily been the president (and to some extent the vice
president) who retains the power to allocate public roads resources in Kenya, and it is
democracy that ultimately constrains that power, rather than any shift toward a more
representative cabinet.

4.3

Interpretation

In our model, θ captures the ability of the executive to discriminate across ethnic groups.
If θ = 1 then all ethnic groups receive a public good allocation equal to the average per
capita allocation and ethnic favoritism is therefore eliminated. If θ = ∞, then the
executive is unconstrained as regards the extent to which public good allocation to
his ethnic group can exceed the average allocation. By transforming the different β
coefficient estimates from Table 4 into the analogous values of θ from our theoretical
model – namely, θ = 1 + β(1 − π A ) – we can trace the evolution of θ across the five
periods shown in Figure 2: Kenyatta democracy, Kenyatta autocracy, Moi autocracy,
Moi democracy, and Kibaki democracy.20 The results from doing this are presented
graphically in Figure 6. We also include the Polity IV score for Kenya from Figure 1 in
this figure.21
There is a remarkable correspondence between these two measures over time. The
early democratic period in the 1960s was characterized by relative democratic freedoms,
and essentially no evidence of ethnic favoritism towards President Kenyatta’s Kikuyu
ethnic group, with the estimated θ near 1. However, there is a sharp increase in θ
after 1970, when multiparty democracy was abandoned, with θ moving higher towards a
value of 2. Polity scores move in tandem dropping precipitously around 1970, signalling
a collapse in democratic freedoms, and staying low until the early 1990s. θ moves even
higher during the rule of President Moi’s single-party rule (1979-1992), reaching 2.5,
implying that the president’s coethnic districts received a staggering two and half times
more road funds on average than other groups. However, θ moves back towards 1 when
democracy was restored in late 1991 and ends up nearly equal to 1, indicating that
there is effectively no ethnic favoritism in the most recent period, which is the most
democratic on record for post-independence Kenya. Polity scores also rise sharply in
the early 1990s, signalling a return to democratic freedoms, and actually, by the 2000s,
achieve levels which exceed those seen in the 1960s.

Figure 6 thus indicates that,

during the autocratic 1970s and 1980s, presidents are less constrained in their ability to
skew road spending towards coethnic districts relative to the democratic 1960s, 1990s
and 2000s. The value of democracy lies in its ability to tie the hands of presidents so
that they cannot allocate public resources in a way seems inconsistent with economic
20 A
π captures the population share of the ethnic group which is coethnic with the serving president.
This value varies across periods as the president’s ethnicity changes.
21
Note that the θ score is presented with a reverse axis to facilitate comparison with the democracy
score.

23

efficiency.
The co-movement of θ and the polity measure of democracy in Figure 6 begs the
question of what underlies the changes in θ. Digging into the various components of
the polity measure (and its effect on triggering other changes in society) can shed some
light into the institutional changes occurring in Kenya during its political transitions.22
Closer examination of Figure 6 reveals that the combined polity score decreased from 0
to -7 in the transition out of democracy during Kenyatta’s leadership. Almost all subcomponents of the score changed at that time: competitiveness and openness of executive
recruitment worsened (there was only one party now, whose leader was chosen for life),
constraints on the chief executive weakened (the Office of the President could generally
bypass parliament), regulation of political participation became restrictive (participation
was restricted to life members of the single-party and civil society was heavily repressed)
and competitiveness of participation was eliminated (there was only one candidate for
the executive seat). It is little wonder that presidents under this regime felt free to
allocate resources largely as they wished.
The repeal of the constitution and the political institutional change of 1991 (when
Moi allowed multiparty democracy) led the combined polity score to improve from -7
to -5 and up to -2 in 1997 as parties were allowed to compete and KANU’s tight grip
on civil society gradually loosened (this process increased scores on both regulation and
competitiveness of political participation). This movement from -7 to -2 represents a very
significant improvement in fundamental democratic freedoms.23 After the democratic
presidential transition of 2002 other components of the polity score improve and push
the overall polity sharply higher to around 8 which is in the fully democratic range but
below the scores one would observe in mature democracies. Our estimated θ matches
this path: from 1992 to 2002, the estimated θ equals 1.75 but this drops to 1.08 after
2002. 1.75 represents a significant increase in constraints on the executive relative to the
Moi autocratic years (θ = 2.56) but falls short of the more fully constrained post 2002
setting (θ = 1.08) where ethnic favoritism has effectively been eliminated.
It is important to note that the development of Kenya’s civil society played a key role
in the institutional evolution that began in the early 1990s. A simple plot of the Freedom
House Freedom of the Press Index reveals that both press freedom and broadcast freedom
jumped from “not free” to “partly free” when the switch to multiparty politics occurred
(not shown). Indeed, the period since 1990 saw an increase in independent weekly
22

The combined polity score is computed by subtracting the polity AUTOC score from the DEMOC
score, the resulting scale ranges from +10 (strongly democratic) to -10 (strongly autocratic). Each of
the two components have their sub-components. AUTOC and DEMOC are constructed additively on a
eleven-point scale. Further, the individual sub-components are weighted differently and are derived from
coding the following 5 sub-components (i) the competitiveness of political participation (ii) regulation
of participation, (iii) the openness and (iv) competitiveness of executive recruitment and (v) constraints
on the chief executive (see the Data Appendix for further details).
23
Kenya during this period is classified by polity as an “anocracy” which is political regime akin to a
limited democracy.

24

magazines that often took anti-government stances. Similarly, in the early 1990s several
influential private newspapers, including the The Nation and The Standard, emerged.
This active opposition media survived the aggressive reaction of the Moi regime thanks
to widespread societal support, as well as Western donor protests against governmental
abuse.
Broadcast media on the other hand remained more firmly in the government’s grip, at
least at first. While the Kenya Broadcasting Company was officially semi-autonomous,
the Office of the President retained considerable editorial control. Its main competitor,
the Kenya Television Network, also suffered from constant interference from the State.
Independent commercial broadcasting did not emerge in Kenya during this early period,
as more than 20 TV broadcast applications submitted between 1985-1995 were rejected.
The situation was similar for radio, a major source of information for the rural majority,
which saw no independent radio licenses granted until 1996.
The period since 1998, however, saw the government end direct censorship of the
media, and by 2000, Kenya had nine private TV stations and 19 radio stations. While
state harassment has not totally disappeared (libel cases are common and harassment
of journalists and editors still occurs) it is undeniable that the media has become much
freer since the early 1990s.
Beyond the vital emergence of private media, several other aspects of civil society
helped to challenge the executive’s absolute authority. The number of non-governmental
organizations (NGO) grew rapidly in the 1990s. While Kenyan law does not allow
international donors to fund opposition political parties, they could fund governancefocused civil society organizations (e.g. USAID funded “pro-democracy” NGOs that in
practice had strong opposition leanings). Western bilateral agencies and foundations also
increasingly side-stepped the government in terms of resource allocation and distribution,
and by the late 1990s, Kenya had the highest concentration of NGOs per capita in SubSaharan Africa. The churches (often in tandem with NGOs) also played a crucial role in
giving voice to the need for impartial conduct of elections and voter registration reforms
in the 1990s.
A freer press and a stronger civil society, together with Western pressure, made
Moi realize that he had to accommodate demands for further openness. This brought
about three key reforms in 1997, the so-called Inter-Parliamentary Parties Group (IPPG)
reforms. The IPPG reforms reduced state internal security powers (e.g. preventative detention) and amended the Public Order, Broadcasting, and Societies Acts.24 The reform
package also contained amendments to electoral rules, explicitly classifying falsification
of voter registration, destruction, and sale of voting cards, as criminal offenses. The final
24

Reduced state authority implied an end to preventative detention and sedition laws. The Public
Orders Act was amended to remove the need for a license before meetings, replacing it with a need to
notify the police (three days before). The Broadcasting Act was also changed to provide free airtime to
all parties and to promote a balanced show of opinions. The Societies Act was amended to require the
registrar to respond reasonably to all requests for voter registration within 120 days.

25

years of the Moi regime also saw a rise in the power of parliament, with constitutional
amendments that increased its independence from the executive branch.
All in all, key political institutional changes in the early 1990s set the stage for the
emergence of an active civil society and a freer press which became strong proponents of
further institutional change that ultimately curtailed the machinery of Moi’s autocratic
state and allowed for a push towards a more democratic Kenya. This evolution has
continued since Moi stepped down in late 2002. A new constitution was ratified by
voters in 2010 which altered the division of powers between the central government and
newly created (and popularly elected) county governments, as well as consolidating a
more independent judiciary. Nowadays, Kenya’s increasingly well-informed, educated,
and connected population is consistently politically engaged. Parliamentary debates are
increasingly shown on national TV and discussion forums are held to allow for civil
society feedback. Misguided public investments and corruption remain widespread but
are more regularly bought to light by the press (Wrong 2009).
It is hardly surprising that the practice of ethnic favoritism in public resource allocation is now much more difficult to carry out than in the past. Ethnic divisions have
not disappeared, and they remain highly politically salient, as tragically demonstrated
in the post-election violence in 2007/2008. However, tight scrutiny from a free press, a
vocal civil society and an independent parliament all severely curtail the ability of the
executive to blatantly discriminate between different districts in choosing where to place
roads projects. This is succinctly captured in our estimated θ = 1.08 for the post-2002
period.

5

Conclusion

For ethnic favoritism to be a viable political strategy the president must be able to
manipulate the allocation of public expenditure with few constraints. Ethnic favoritism
and weak controls on the chief executive thus go hand in hand. As democracy becomes
consolidated in many low-income countries, including many in Sub-Saharan Africa, not
only does political competition become better regulated, but the constraints on executive
action are also strengthened due to the scrutiny that parliament and civil society are
able to exercise. In this paper we examine this logic in detail by asking two empirical
questions. First, can we detect quantitative evidence of ethnic favoritism in an African
country? Second, does the transition into and out of democracy under the same leader
exacerbate or constrain this ethnic favoritism?
Though many of Africa’s ills have been blamed on ethnic favoritism, it has been
surprisingly difficult to find concrete evidence of this behavior, mostly due to lack of
data. Therefore, to address these questions we construct two new datasets through the
geographic coding of road project data and through the innovative use of historical maps.
We are helped in this respect by the fact that each Kenyan district is dominated by a
26

particular ethnic group, which allows us to precisely assign expenditures or road length
to ethnic groups. In answering the second question, we are helped by the fact that there
have been multiple switches of power between leaders of different ethnic groups in Kenya
and, within each ethnic regime, switches between democracy and autocracy.
There are two main empirical results. First, central government investments in roads
across Kenyan districts have been subject to a very high degree of ethnic favoritism, with
districts coethnic to the President receiving three times the average expenditure in roads
and five times the length of paved roads during periods of autocracy. Second, that both
these biases disappear entirely during periods of multiparty democracy.
As we discuss in the introduction, numerous scholars link ethnic favoritism to poor
economic outcomes. Taking this link as given, we would expect that in periods of democracy, when we estimate ethnic favoritism to be non-existent, the economic performance
of Kenya should be better than in periods of autocracy, when we find ethnic favoritism
to be highly pronounced. Figure 7 suggests that this is the case. Per capita growth rates
in Kenya fell towards zero during autocratic periods (1970s, 1980s). This was also the
case in the rest of Sub-Saharan Africa. In contrast, per capita growth rates were positive
during democratic periods (1960s, 1990s and 2000s) both in Kenya and in Sub-Saharan
Africa as a whole. What is also striking in Figure 7 is that the collapse in growth (in the
early 1970s) coincides with the spread of autocracy across Africa whereas the return to
growth (for both Kenya and Sub-Saharan Africa) begins the early 1990s precisely when
democracy is spreading across the continent (see Figure 1).
In a speculative exercise, we conclude by exploring whether democracy does appear
to mitigate the negative effects of ethnic divisions on economic performance. We follow
an influential article, Easterly and Levine (1997), which attributes much of the poor
economic performance seen in Sub-Saharan Africa up until the end of the 1980s to the
political frictions and economic mismanagement associated with ethnic fractionalization.
More specifically, we take a second look at the data to see if the cross-country correlation
between ethnic fractionalization and growth that Easterly and Levine (1997) uncover
varies as a function of the spread of democracy.
The results are presented in Table 6. In column 1, we replicate the key result from
Easterly and Levine (1997) using data from the 1960s to the 1980s for the whole world.
More specifically we find, as they established, that ethnic diversity is negatively associated with economic growth. Column 2 extends the Easterly-Levine data set to the
2000s and shows that this relationship is weaker when the whole period is taken into
account. In column 3 we test whether the association between ethnic fractionalization
and economic growth varies with the presence of democracy. The results are striking:
while the negative, statistically significant, relationship still holds for autocracies, there
is no association between ethnic fractionalization and economic growth in democracies.
Column 4 shows that if we restrict the sample to Africa not only does this continue to

27

be the case but the interaction between ethnic fractionalization and democracy also becomes positive and statistically significant, suggesting that democracy serves to largely
eliminate the negative growth effects of ethnic diversity, thus paralleling our findings for
Kenya.
Obviously, these results should not be taken as causal, since democratization is clearly
correlated with other important changes and is far from randomly assigned. Nonetheless, we view these patterns as thought-provoking, and as suggestive of the relevance
of our empirical results beyond ethnic favoritism in Kenya. Ethnic divisions appear
to contribute to poor economic policies (and consequently contribute to poor economic
performance) when political institutions are sufficiently weak that politicians can exploit
ethnic fractionalization for their own benefit. Yet ethnic divisions cease to be a salient
problem for economic performance under democracy. These results are consistent with
a view that democracy helps countries limit downside political risk.
The findings also highlight some useful avenues for future research. First, while we
find that multiparty democracy dampens ethnic favoritism, it is not clear which particular institutional dimension is most critical for this result. Is this simply a consequence
of heightened electoral competition, or are the strong civil society and free press that
simultaneously took root in Kenya also important? Second, it is important to consider
the relevance of the observability of the public good in question for our results. Roads are
highly salient and observable investments, and this is relevant in at least two ways. On
the one hand, roads are prime targets for favoritism, because it is easy for a politician to
point to them and take credit for them. On the other hand, it is also easy for opposition
parliamentarians, the media and civil society groups to spot blatant imbalances in the
allocation of these large infrastructure investments, which might make the allocation of
roads particularly sensitive to democratic reform. The lower degree of observability for
some other public investments, such as those in education or health, might lead them to
be less responsive to the institutional changes wrought by democratization.

References
Alesina, A., Devleeschauwer, A, W. Easterly, S. Kurlat and R. Warzciarg (2003). Fractionalization, Journal of Economic Growth, 8(2) 155-194.
Alesina, A., and La Ferrara, E (2005). Ethnic Diversity and Economic Performance,
Journal of Economic Literature, 43(3), 762-800.
Alesina, A., Michalopoulos, S. and Papaioannou, E. (2012).

Ethnic Inequality.

NBER Working Papers 18512, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Anderson, D. (2005). Histories of the Hanged: The Dirty War in Kenya and the
End of Empire. W. W. Norton.
Barkan, J. D. and Chege, M. (1989). Decentralising the state: District focus and
the Politics of Reallocation in Kenya. The Journal of Modern African Studies, 27 (03),
28

431-453.
Barkan, J. D. (1994). Beyond Capitalism Vs. Socialism in Kenya and Tanzania.
Lynne Rienner Publications.
Bates, R.H. (1981). Markets and States in Tropical Africa. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Bates, R. H. (1983). Modernization, Ethnic Competition, and the Rationality of Politics in Contemporary Africa. In State versus Ethnic Claims: African Policy Dilemmas,
ed. Donald Rothchild and Victor A. Olunsorola. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Besley, T. and Persson, T. (2010). State Capacity, Conflict, and Development Econometrica, 78 (1) 1-34.
Caselli, F. and Coleman, F.W (2013). On the Theory of Ethnic Conflict. Journal of
the European Economic Association
Chandra, K. (2004), Why Ethnic Parties Succeed: Patronage and Ethnic Headcounts
in India. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Conley, T. G. (1999). GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence. Journal
of Econometrics, 92 (1), 1-45.
Donaldson, D. (2012). Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation; forthcoming American Economic Review.
Easterly, W. and Levine, R. (1997). Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic
Divisions. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112 (4), 120350.
Esman, M. (1994). Ethnic Politics, Cornell University Press.
Faber, B. (2012). “Trade Integration, Market Size, and Industrialization: Evidence
from China’s National Trunk Highway System”, Manuscript, LSE.
Fearon, James D., (1999), “Why Ethnic Politics and “Pork” Tend to Go Together”,
Working Paper, Stanford University.
Franck, R. and Ranier, I (2012), Does the Leader’s Ethnicity Matter: Ethnic Favoritism, Education and Health in Sub-Saharan Africa. American Political Science Review 106(2), 294-325.
Francois, P., Rainer, I., and Trebbi, F. (2012). “How is Power Shared in Africa?”,
Manuscript, NBER Africa Success Project.
Gibson, C.C., and Long, J.D. (2009). The Presidential and Parliamentary Elections
in Kenya, December 2007, Electoral Studies, 28: 492-517.
Herbst, J. (2000). States and Power in Africa. Princeton University Press.
Hodler, R. and Raschky, P. A. (2011). “Foreign Aid and Enlightened Leaders”.
Working Papers 10.05, Swiss National Bank, Study Center Gerzensee.
Horowitz, D.L. (1985). Ethnic Groups in Conflict. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Kasara, K. (2007). Tax Me If You Can: Ethnic Geography, Democracy, and the
Taxation of Agriculture in Africa. The American Political Science Review, 101 (1), pp.

29

159-172.
Kramon, E. and Posner, D. N. (2012). “Education For All? The Political Economy
of Primary Education in Kenya”, Manuscript, Massachussets Institute of Technology.
Kudamatsu, M. (2012). Has Democratization Reduced Infant Mortality in SubSaharan Africa? Evidence from Micro Data. Journal of the European Economic Association, 10(6) 1294-1317.
La Porta at al (1999). The Quality of Government. Journal of Law Economic and
Organizations, 15 (1999): 222-279.
Mamdani, M. (1996). Citizen and Subject: Contemporary Africa and Legacy of Late
Colonialism. Princeton University Press.
Michaels, G. (2008). The Effect of Trade on the Demand for Skill: Evidence from
the Interstate Highway System. Review of Economics and Statistics, 90 (4), 683-701.
Michalopoulos, S. and Papaioannou, E. (2011). The Long-Run Effects of the Scramble for Africa. NBER Working Papers 17620, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Inc.
Miguel, E. and M. K. Gugerty (2005). Ethnic Diversity, Social Sanctions, and Public
Good in Kenya. Journal of Public Economics, 89 (11-12), 2325-2368.
Morjaria, A. (2012). “Democracy and Deforestation: Evidence from Kenya”, Manuscript,
Harvard University.
Nunn, N. and Wantchekon, L. (2011). The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust
in Africa. American Economic Review, 101(7), 3221-52.
Padró i Miquel, G. (2007). The Control of Politicians in Divided Societies: The
Politics of Fear. Review of Economic Studies, 74 (4), 1259-1274.
Posner, D. (2005). Institutions and Ethnic Politics in Africa. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Sheriff, A.M. H. (1985). Social Formations in Pre-Colonial Kenya. In Hadith 8:
Kenya in the 19th Century, ed. Ogot b. A. Kisumu: Anyange Press.
Wamwere, K.W. (2003). Negative Ethnicity: From Bias to Genocide. New York:
Seven Stories Press.
Widner, J. (1992). The Rise of a Party-State in Kenya: From ”Harambee!” to
”Nyayo!”. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Wrong, M. (2009). It’s Our Turn to Eat: The Story of a Kenyan Whistle-Blower.
London: Fourth Estate.

30

Figure 1: Evolution of Political Regimes in Sub-Saharan Africa, 1963-2011

Notes: This figure plots the revised combined polity score for Sub-Saharan Africa (average) and Kenya. Polity IV
defines three regime categories: autocracies (-10 to -6), anocracies (-5 to +5) and democracies (+6 to +10). The
vertical lines represent regime changes in Kenya: December 1969 is the transition from democracy to autocracy,
while December 1992 is the return of democracy. Source: authors’ calculations and Polity IV Project, Political
Regime Characteristics and Transitions, 1800-2011. See Online Data Appendix for data sources.

Figure 2: History Timeline of Political and Leadership Transitions

Notes: This figure shows the history timeline of political transitions and leadership transitions. Political transitions: December 1969 is the transition from democracy to autocracy, while December 1992 is the return of
democracy. Leadership transitions: from Kenyatta (Kikuyu) to Moi (Kalenjin) in August 1978, and from Moi
(Kalenjin) to Kibaki (Kikuyu) in December 2002.

31

32

Notes: These figures show the evolution of Kenya’s paved road network for selected years = [1964, 1969, 1979, 1992, 2002]. The year 1964 is the first year for which we have GIS data after
Kenya became independent in December 1963. Years for political transitions: December 1969 is the transition from democracy to autocracy, and December 1992 is the return of democracy.
Years for leadership transitions: from Kenyatta (Kikuyu) to Moi (Kalenjin) in August 1978 (we only have maps for 1979), and from Moi (Kalenjin) to Kibaki (Kikuyu) in December 2002. We
have no data post 2002. Nairobi is the capital city. All the road maps are layered on top of ethnic demographics - we illustrate the two coethnic areas, the Kikuyu and Kalenjin districts. The
coethnic districts are defined as districts whose the ethnicity of the president is more than 50% of the population. See Appendix Table 2 and Online Data Appendix for data sources.

Figure 3: Evolution of Kenya’s Paved Road Network for Selected Years, 1964-2002

Figure 4: Road Investment in Coethnic and Non-Coethnic Districts, 1963-2011

Notes: This figure plots the ratio of the share of road development expenditure in year t to the share of population
in 1962 for coethnic and non-coethnic districts d. A district d is defined as coethnic if more than 50% of its
population is from the ethnic group of the president at time t. The two vertical solid lines represent political
transitions: December 1969 is the transition from democracy to autocracy, while December 1992 is the return
of democracy. The two vertical dotted lines represent leadership transitions: from Kenyatta (Kikuyu) to Moi
(Kalenjin) in August 1978, and from Moi (Kalenjin) to Kibaki (Kikuyu) in December 2002. See Appendix Table
2 and Online Data Appendix for data sources.

Figure 5: Road Investment in Kikuyu, Kalenjin and Other Districts, 1963-2011

Notes: This figure plots the ratio of the share of road development expenditure in year t to the share of population
in 1962 for coethnic and non-coethnic districts d. Coethnic districts are as defined in figure 3, except they are now
disaggregate into the two different leading groups. The president is Kikuyu during 1963-1978, Kalenjin during
1978-2002 and Kikuyu during 2002-2011. A district is defined as Kikuyu (Kalenjin) if more than 50% of its
population is Kikuyu (Kalenjin). The vertical lines represent political transitions, while the vertical dotted lines
represent leadership transitions (see figure 3). See Appendix Table 2 and Online Data Appendix for data sources.

33

Figure 6: Ethnic Favoritism and Political Regimes in Kenya, 1963-2011

Notes: This figure plots theta, our estimate of ethnic favoritism, and the revised combined polity score for Kenya
annually from 1963 to 2011. The two vertical solid lines represent political transitions: December 1969 is the
transition from democracy to autocracy, while December 1992 is the return of democracy. Source: authors’
calculations and Polity IV Project, Political Regime Characteristics and Transitions, 1800-2011. See Online
Data Appendix for data sources.

Figure 7: Evolution of GDP per capita growth in Sub-Saharan Africa, 1963-2011

Notes: This figure plots GDP per capita growth (%) for Sub-Saharan Africa (average) and Kenya. We take a
5-year moving average to smooth fluctuations. The vertical lines represent regime changes in Kenya: December
1969 is the transition from democracy to autocracy, while December 1992 is the return of democracy. See Online
Data Appendix for data sources.

34

35
2009
Y
Y
N
N
N

0.76
[0.39]

1.62***
(0.49)
-1.24*
(0.63)

0.96***
(0.35)

(2)

2009
Y
Y
Y
N
N

0.73
[0.40]

1.64***
(0.49)
-1.27**
(0.63)

0.96***
(0.35)

(3)

2009
Y
Y
Y
Y
N

0.90
[0.35]

1.74***
(0.49)
-1.32**
(0.63)

1.02***
(0.35)

(4)

2009
Y
N
N
N
Y

1.22
[0.28]

1.56***
(0.51)
-1.08*
(0.59)

0.97**
(0.38)

(5)

Notes: OLS regressions using data on 41 districts annually from 1963 to 2011. Standard errors corrected for clustering at the
district level are reported in parentheses; *** denotes significance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 1%. Coethnic District Indicator
[d,t] is an indicator variable whose value is one if more than 50% of the population of district d is from the ethnic group of
the president at time t. Democracy Indicator [t] is an indicator variable whose value is one if year t is a democracy year. The
F-test is used to test the null hypothesis of joint equality between a coethnic and a non-coethnic district during democracy.
Columns (2)-(4) include controls interacted with a time trend (1963-2011). These controls are: [i] demographic (district
population in 1962, district area in sq km, and urbanization rate in 1962). [ii] economic activity (district total earnings in
1966, employment in the formal sector in 1963 and value of cash crop exports in 1965). [iii] economic geography (an indicator
variable whose value is one if any part of the district is on the Mombasa-Nairobi-Kampala corridor, an indicator variable
whose value is one if the district borders Uganda or Tanzania, and the Euclidean distance in km to Nairobi). See Appendix
Table 2 and Online Data Appendix for data sources and construction of variables.

2009
Y
N
N
N
N

F-test [p-value]
Coethnic + Coethnic x Democracy = 0

Observations
Year and district fixed effects
(Population, area, urbanization rate) x trend
(Earnings, employment, cash crops) x trend
(Main highway, border, dist.Nairobi) x trend
District time trends

1.07
[0.31]

Coethnic District Indicator [d,t]
x Democracy Indicator [t]

0.97***
(0.36)

(1)

Share of road development expenditure [d,t]
Population share [d,1962]

1.57***
(0.49)
-1.11*
(0.61)

Panel B:
Coethnic District Indicator [d,t]

Panel A:
Coethnic District Indicator [d,t]

Dependent Variable:

Table 1: Road Expenditure, Ethnicity and Democratic Change in Kenya, 1963-2011

36
410
Y
Y
N
N
N

0.49
[0.49]

3.03**
(1.26)
-3.61**
(1.36)

1.94*
(0.99)

(2)

410
Y
Y
Y
N
N

0.10
[0.75]

3.19**
(1.33)
-3.45**
(1.32)

2.20*
(1.09)

(3)

410
Y
Y
Y
Y
N

0.34
[0.56]

3.90**
(1.76)
-2.71*
(1.46)

3.24*
(1.72)

(4)

410
Y
N
N
N
Y

0.00
[0.97]

3.34
(2.38)
-3.22**
(1.49)

3.96
(2.38)

(5)

Notes: OLS regressions using maps on 41 districts from 1964 to 2002. Maps are only available for years = [1964, 1967, 1969,
1972, 1974, 1979, 1981, 1984, 1987, 1992, 2002]. Standard errors corrected for clustering at the district level are reported
in parentheses; *** denotes significance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 1%. Coethnic District Indicator [d,t] is an indicator
variable whose value is one if more than 50% of the population of district d is from the ethnic group of the president at time
t. Democracy Indicator [t] is an indicator variable whose value is one if year t is a democracy year. The F-test is used to
test the null hypothesis of joint equality between a coethnic district and a non-coethnic district during democracy. Columns
(2)-(4) include the same controls as in Table 1 interacted with a time trend (1964-2002). See the footnote of Table 1 for a
description of these controls. See Appendix Table 2 and Online Data Appendix for data sources and construction of variables.

410
Y
N
N
N
N

F-test [p-value]
Coethnic + Coethnic x Democracy = 0

Observations
Year and district fixed effects
(Population, area, urbanization rate) x trend
(Earnings, employment, cash crops) x trend
(Main highway, border, dist.Nairobi) x trend
District time trends

0.44
[0.51]

Coethnic District Indicator [d,t]
x Democracy Indicator [t]

1.91**
(0.94)

(1)

Share of paved road construction [d,t]
Population share [d,1962]

3.00**
(1.23)
-3.55**
(1.38)

Panel B:
Coethnic District Indicator [d,t]

Panel A:
Coethnic District Indicator [d,t]

Dependent Variable:

Table 2: Road Building, Ethnicity and Democratic Change in Kenya, 1964-2002

37
2009

Observations

(4)

2009

2009

0.28
[0.60]

2.34** 4.44***
(1.00) (1.13)
-3.78**
(1.45)

0.52
[0.48]

1.84** 3.05***
(0.90) (0.99)
-2.22*
(1.29)

(3)

Share of road
dvt exp.[d,t]
Area sh.[d]

410

3.68*
(1.90)

3.24*
(1.72)

(5)

410

0.40
[0.53]

4.63**
(1.97)
-3.20*
(1.79)

0.34
[0.56]

3.90**
(1.76)
-2.71*
(1.46)

(6)

Share of paved
road con.[d,t]
Pop.sh.[d,1962]
(8)

410

410

0.02
[0.90]

4.24** 5.81***
(1.93)
(1.73)
-5.30
(4.05)

0.11
[0.74]

4.53*** 5.69***
(1.47)
(1.62)
-4.80
(2.93)

(7)

Share of paved
road con.[d,t]
Area sh.[d]

Notes: Columns (1)-(4): OLS regressions using road expenditure data (road dvt. exp.) on 41 districts annually from 1963 to
2011. Columns (5)-(8): OLS regressions using paved road construction data (paved road con.) on 41 districts from 1963 to 2002.
Road maps are only available for years = [1964, 1967, 1969, 1972, 1974, 1979, 1981, 1984, 1987, 1992, 2002]. In columns (1)-(2)
and (5)-(6) the numerator of the dependent variable is normalized by the population share of the district in 1962 (Pop.sh.). In
columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8), the numerator is normalized by the area share of the district (Area sh.). All regressions include
district and year fixed effects. Standard errors corrected for clustering at the district level are reported in parentheses; ***
denotes significance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. Coethnic Dist. Indicator [d,t] is an indicator variable whose value is one if
more than 50% of the population of district d is from the ethnic group of the president at time t. Coethnic Share [d,t] is the
population share of the ethnic group of the president in district d at time t. Democracy Indicator [t] is an indicator variable
whose value is one if year t is a democracy year. The F-test is used to test the null hypothesis of joint equality between a
coethnic district and a non-coethnic district during democracy. Columns (1)-(8) include the same controls as in the column (4)
of Table 1 interacted with a time trend. See the footnote of Table 1 for a description of these controls. See Appendix Table 2
and Online Data Appendix for data sources and construction of variables.

2009

0.97
[0.33]

1.25*** 2.30***
(0.38)
(0.56)
-1.90***
(0.66)

0.90
[0.35]

F-test [p-value]
Coethnic + Coethnic x Dem. = 0

Coethnic Share [d,t]
x Democracy Indicator [t]

Panel B:
Coethnic Share [d,t]

(2)

1.02*** 1.74***
(0.35)
(0.49)
-1.32**
(0.63)

(1)

Share of road
dvt exp.[d,t]
Pop.sh.[d,1962]

F-test [p-value]
Coethnic + Coethnic x Dem. = 0

Coethnic Dist. Indicator [d,t]
x Democracy Indicator [t]

Panel A:
Coethnic Dist. Indicator [d,t]

Dependent Variable:

Table 3: Robustness Checks for the Main Specifications

38
369
Y

6.92**
[0.01]

-0.17
(0.32)

0.96**
(0.39)

Autocracy
1970-1978
(2)

574
Y

3.13*
[0.08]

1.88***
(0.66)

0.66
(0.49)

Autocracy
1979-1992
(3)

410
Y

2.26
[0.14]

0.70
(1.11)

-0.88
(0.57)

Democracy
1993-2002
(4)

MOI

369
Y

0.99
[0.33]

-0.60
(0.57)

0.00
(0.63)

Democracy
2003-2011
(5)

KIBAKI

Notes: OLS regressions using data on 41 districts annually from 1963 to 2011. Standard errors corrected for clustering at the
district level are reported in parentheses; *** denotes significance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 1%. The number of observations
depends on the number of years of the regime. Kikuyu (Kalenjin) District Indicator [d,1962] is an indicator variable whose
value is one if more than 50% of the population of district d is Kikuyu (Kalenjin) according to the 1962 population census.
Non-Kikuyu and non-Kalenjin districts are the omitted group. Unlike previous regressions, we cannot include district fixed
effects because Kikuyu (Kalenjin) District Indicator [d,1962] does not vary over time. We cannot include the same controls (or
district time trends) as in Table 1 because the number of observations significantly decreases when we restrict our analysis to
each interval. The F-test is used to test the null hypothesis of joint equality between a Kikuyu district and a Kalenjin district.
See Appendix Table 2 and Online Data Appendix for data sources and construction of variables.

287
Y

0.15
[0.70]

F-test [p-value]
Kikuyu District - Kalenjin District = 0

Observations
Year fixed effects
District fixed effects

-0.57
(0.41)

Kalenjin District Indicator [d,1962]

Democracy
1963-1969
(1)

KENYATTA

-0.44
(0.39)

Regime:

Leader:

Share of road development expenditure [d,t]
Population share [d,1962]

Kikuyu District Indicator [d,1962]

Dependent Variable:

Table 4: Leadership, Democratic Changes and Road Expenditure in Kenya, 1963-2011

39
2009
Y
Y

Observations
Year and district/ethnic group fixed effects
Controls

2009
Y
Y

2.62***
[0.71]
-1.63**
[0.69]
1.46**
[0.56]
-1.42**
[0.61]
2.64
[0.11]
0.00
[0.95]

(2)

169
Y
N

5.87**
[0.03]

0.64***
[0.13]
0.02
[0.28]

(3)

169
Y
N

1.08***
[0.31]
0.03
[0.29]
0.94**
[0.34]
-0.64
[0.38]
216.4***
[0.00]
4.00**
[0.05]

(4)

Ethnic share of
cabinet [e,t]
Pop. share [e,1962]

Notes: Columns (1)-(2): OLS regressions using expenditure data on 41 districts annually from 1963 to 2011. Columns (3)-(4):
OLS regressions using data on all elections from 1963 to 2011, for 13 ethnic groups. The dependent variable is the ratio of
the cabinet share of ethnic group e to its population share. Standard errors corrected for clustering at the district/group level
are reported in parentheses; *** denotes significance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. Coethnic District Indicator [d,t] is an
indicator variable whose value is one if more than 50% of the population of district d is from the ethnic group of the president
at time t. Coethnic Group Indicator [e,t] is an indicator variable whose value is one if the president at time t belongs to ethnic
group e. Democracy Indicator [t] is an indicator variable whose value is one if year t is a multi-party year. VP-Coethnic
District Indicator [d,t] is an indicator variable whose value is one if more than 50% of the population of district d is from
the ethnic group of the vice-president at time t. VP-Group Indicator [e,t] is an indicator variable whose value is one if the
vice-president at time t belongs to ethnic group e. The F-tests are used to test the null hypothesis of joint equality between
a coethnic district/group and a non-coethnic district/group for the president and the vice-president during a multi-party year.
Columns (1)-(2) include the standard controls interacted with a time trend. Columns (3)-(4) include ethnic group time trends.
See Appendix Table 2 and Online Data Appendix for data sources and construction of variables.

0.90
[0.35]

1.74***
[0.49]
-1.32**
[0.63]

(1)

VP-Coethnic District [d,t] / Group [e,t] Indicator
x Democracy Indicator [t]
F-test, Coethnic [p-value]
Coethnic + Coethnic x Democracy = 0
F-test, VP-Coethnic [p-value]
VP-Coethnic + VP-Coethnic x Democracy = 0

Coethnic District [d,t]/Group [e,t] Indicator
x Democracy Indicator [t]
VP-Coethnic District [d,t] / Group [e,t] Indicator

Coethnic District [d,t]/Group [e,t] Indicator

Dependent Variable:

Share of road dvt
expenditure [d,t]
Pop. share [d,1962]

Table 5: Role of the Vice-President and Effects on Cabinet Composition, 1963-2011

40

Sample:
Decades:

182
Y

0.05
[0.83]

Africa
1960s-2000s
(4)
-0.023*
(0.011)
0.036**
(0.015)
-0.018
(0.012)

Notes: OLS regressions using GDP data on 110 countries c for five decades d = [1960s, 1970s, 1980s, 1990s, 2000s]. The
dependent variable, Growth of Per Capita Real GDP [c,d], is the average growth rate of real per capita GDP for country c
in decade d. We use Easterly and Levine’s (1997, henceforth cited as EL97) - 1960s, 1970s and 1980s data set and extend it
using the Penn World Tables v7.1. Ethnic [c,1960] is the index of ethnolinguistic fractionalization of country c in 1960. This
variable was obtained from EL97. Democracy [c,d] is an indicator variable whose value is one if country c is not an autocracy
in decade d, specifically if the average combined polity score for decade d is strictly less than -5, the threshold defined by
Polity IV. Standard errors corrected for clustering at the country level are reported in parentheses; *** denotes significance at
1%, ** at 5%, and * at 1%. EL97 use Seemingly Unrelated Regressions, while we run OLS regressions and cluster standard
errors at the country level, which produces nearly identical results. Columns (1)-(4) include the same controls as in the column
(1) of Table IV of EL97 – “Indicator for the 1960s”, “Indicator for the 1970s”, “Indicator for the 1980s”, “Indicator Variable
for Sub-Saharan Africa”, “Indicator Variable for Latin America and the Caribbean”, “Log of Initial Income”, “(Log of Initial
Income) Squared” – with the exception of “Log of Schooling”, because of the high number of missing observations, especially
for Africa. In columns (4), we run the same regression as in column (3) for 38 Sub-Saharan African countries only. The F-test
is used to test the null hypothesis of joint equality between a fractionalized and a non-fractionalized country during democracy.
See Online Data Appendix for data sources and construction of variables.

500
Y

World
1960s-2000s
(3)
-0.015*
(0.008)
0.013
(0.009)
-0.002
(0.005)

Observations
Controls

528
Y

World
1960s-2000s
(2)
-0.006
(0.005)

0.10
[0.76]
312
Y

World
1960s-1980s
(1)
-0.017***
(0.006)

Growth of Per Capita Real GDP [c,d]

F-test [p-value]
Ethnic + Ethnic x Democracy = 0

Democracy [c,d]

Ethnic [c,1960] x Democracy [c,d]

Ethnic [c,1960]

Dependent Variable:

Table 6: Economic Growth, Ethnic Diversity and
Democratic Change Across Countries, 1960-2010

