NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SPECULATIVE INVESTORS AND TOBIN’S TAX IN THE HOUSING MARKET
Yuming Fu
Wenlan Qian
Bernard Yeung
Working Paper 19400
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19400
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013

The authors thank Sumit Agarwal, Yakov Amihud, Ekkehart Boehmer, Michael Brennan, Darwin Choi,
William Cheung, Sarah Daway, Kathryn Dominguez, Mark Flannery, Lu Han, Alexander Ljungqvist,
Andy Naranjo, Andrew Rose, Will Strange, Luigi Zingales and participants at the 2013 NBER EASE
meeting, 2013 ABFER meeting, 2012 Chinese International Finance Conference, 2012 AREUEA
meeting, seminar participants at NUS, University of Cincinnati and University of Florida for helpful
discussions. Wenlan Qian gratefully acknowledges financial support from IMAS-CAMRI Applied
Finance Research Grant. Any errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Yuming Fu, Wenlan Qian, and Bernard Yeung. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Speculative Investors and Tobin’s Tax in the Housing Market
Yuming Fu, Wenlan Qian, and Bernard Yeung
NBER Working Paper No. 19400
September 2013
JEL No. E3,G12
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the impact of a policy change in Tobin’s tax on housing market speculators. The
policy intervention effectively raised the transaction cost in the market segment with a high presence of
speculators. Relative to the unaffected control sample, we find that the rise in transaction cost substantially
reduced speculative trading activities in the treatment sample. However, it significantly raised its price
volatility and reduced the price informativeness. We further show that the unintended consequences
are likely due to a relatively greater withdrawal by informed speculators than by destabilizing speculators
after the transaction cost increase.
Yuming Fu
Department of Real Estate
National University of Singapore
yuming.fu@nus.edu.sg
Wenlan Qian
National University of Singapore
Business School
Department of Finance
Singapore 119245
wenlan.qian@nus.edu.sg

Bernard Yeung
National University of Singapore
Mochtar Riady Building
15 Kent Ridge Drive
BIZ 1, Level 6, #6-19
Singapore 119245
bizdean@nus.edu.sg

1.

Introduction
The 2008 Global Financial Crisis, triggered by the collapse of house prices in the U.S.,

brings a renewed interest on the role of speculators in fuelling housing markets’ boom and bust.
Earlier, Case and Shiller (1989) suggest that the housing market does not appear to be efficient.
Some explicitly argue that home buyers are investors with backward-looking expectations; their
behaviour helps explain the surge of price-rent ratios in the housing boom periods (Case, Quigley,
and Shiller, 2003; Mayer and Sinai, 2007; Piazzesi and Schneider, 2009). Based on a survey
sample in four U.S. cities, Case, Shiller, and Thompson (2012) report that home price
expectations, which reached abnormal levels relative to the mortgage rate at the peak of the boom
and have declined sharply since, were highly correlated to the past price movements of the
housing market. Cheng, Raina, and Xiong (2013) find that mid-level managers in securitized
finance business continue to speculate on house prices in their own home purchases in the boom
period. Using transaction-level data, recent studies find supportive evidence of inexperienced
housing speculators chasing short-term trends (Bayer, Geissler and Roberts, 2011) leading to
price overreaction (Fu and Qian, 2013). Haughwout, Lee, Tracy, and Klaauw (2011) use unique
credit report data to show the important role speculative investors play in contributing to the rise
and fall of the U.S housing market in the recent crisis.
Indeed, behavioural finance suggests that “noise traders”, broadly defined as investors
who trade for non-fundamentals-related reasons, drive prices away from fundamentals and cause
excess volatility (Cutler, Poterba, and Summers, 1990, 1991; De Long, Shleifer, Summers; and
Waldmann, 1990a, 1990b; Shleifer and Summers, 1990; Hong and Stein, 1999). This naturally
calls for policy interventions to curb destabilizing speculation. A transaction tax, often referred to
as Tobin’s tax, is viewed as an effective way to dissuade speculators, reduce volatility, and thus
promote price stability (Tobin, 1978; Stiglitz, 1989; Summers and Summers 1989).
Opinions, however, are divided. Friedman (1953) argues that rational speculators help
stabilize prices. The financial economics literature cautions that a transaction tax can deter
informed traders, who are essential players in promoting informational efficiency and price
stability in the market (Schwert and Jones, 1993). Subrahmanyam (1998) shows theoretically
that, in the context of the stock market, a transaction tax can increase stock price volatility by

2

discouraging informed traders from acquiring information. Clearly, transaction tax is a doubleedged sword – it can deter both informed and uninformed speculation.
Nevertheless, transaction tax has been utilized multiple times in recent years in order to
“cool” the housing market, particularly in Asia (e.g., Singapore and Hong Kong). Anecdotally,
the policy might indeed slow down price inflation in these markets. However, the debate over
the effectiveness of such a tax suggests that we cannot be sure of the impact on volatility and
price informativeness, which are important considerations. Investigation of these transaction tax
effects in the housing markets is very sparse. Empirical evidence on these impacts of a Tobin’s
tax is usually based on financial market data, which does not easily generalize to the housing
market. Moreover, there is little empirical information on the differential deterrence impact of
transaction tax on noise vs. informed speculators.
In this paper, we study the impact of a policy induced rise in transaction cost (a Tobin’s
tax) on housing market speculators. Our study takes advantage of a natural experiment due to a
policy intervention in Singapore in December 2006. Singapore has a highly developed economy
and a well-functioning real estate market; data of all housing market transactions are publicly
available with reliable quality. 1 More importantly, the nature of the policy intervention
particularly suits the objective of our study—identifying the effect of Tobin’s tax on housing
market speculators and the associated mechanism. Specifically, aiming to curtail housing
speculation, the policy raises the transaction cost in a sub-market with a high presence of
speculators. With the unaffected submarket as a control group and using difference-in-differences
regressions, we can explore the transaction tax’s impact on trading volume, speculative trade,
price volatility and informativeness while controlling for the general market conditions.
Moreover, within the treatment group we can gauge the cross-sectional variation in the relative
presence of informed vs. noise speculators. Thus, we can differentiate the policy’s impact on
price volatility according to the prevalence of informed vs. less informed speculators.

1

Singapore is often ranked among top cities in global real estate investment ranking. For example, it was ranked 5th
in the world in 2011 in terms of direct real estate activity according to Jones Lang LaSalle, just behind London, New
York, Paris and Tokyo.

3

Our findings are as follows. (i) The heightened transaction cost is associated with a
significant drop in trading activity; in particular, speculators are deterred. The decrease in
speculative trading in the post policy year is equivalent to 75% of the pre-policy level. (ii) The
decline in trading is associated with an 18% rise in price volatility. (iii) These results are
particularly prominent in locations that attract informed speculators. (iv) Consequently, the
affected market exhibits a decline in price informativeness. Our findings are robust against
alternative specifications of the post-policy window and volatility measures as well as against the
potential measurement error in our speculator identification. In addition, our results do not appear
to be driven by an anticipation of the policy change. Amidst the increasing evidence on
speculators’ role in the recent crisis, our evidence nevertheless cautions against the use of a
transaction tax in curbing speculators in housing markets: heightened transaction tax might deter
the “good” speculators disproportionately more, leading to unintended consequences.
While our empirical work is about the effect of transaction tax on housing market
transactions and price volatility, our result could be broadly related to the literature on transaction
tax in other financial markets. After the global financial crisis, implementation of a financial
transaction tax draws much attention to regulators in many countries.2 In the literature, Umlauf
(2003) shows that a transaction tax in the 1980s did not reduce price volatility in the Swedish
stock market. Others (e.g., Roll, 1989; Jones and Seguin, 1997; Hau, 2006) show that raising
transaction cost leads to either no change or a rise in volatility. Furthermore, Bloomfield, O’Hara
and Saar (2009) find in a controlled experiment that such a tax deters informed and uninformed
traders equally. The economic mechanism documented in our paper, albeit in the much less liquid
and higher transaction cost housing market, complements the literature suggesting that
transaction tax could end up discouraging informed speculators disproportionately more than
others resulting in lower price stability and informativeness.

2

On December 11th 2009, Financial Times reported that “European Union leaders urged the International Monetary
Fund on Friday to consider a global tax on financial transactions in spite of opposition from the U.S. and doubts at
the IMF itself”. The U.S. Senator Tom Harkin and Representative DeFazio followed the pursuit and proposed bills in
November 2011 to impose a transaction tax on financial firms. France becomes the first European country to impose
a transaction tax on August 1st 2012.

4

The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the policy experiment and
empirical methodology. The data and sample statistics are described in Section 3 and the
empirical findings are reported in Section 4. Section 5 discusses alternative interpretations and
performs additional robustness checks. Second 6 concludes.
2.

Empirical design and methodology

2.1.

Market background and policy experiment
In Singapore, private condominium properties (known locally as non-landed properties)

in new development projects are launched for sale before project completion (typically before the
commencement of construction).3 Like properties in completed private condominium projects,
the ownership of these uncompleted properties, called presale contracts, can be freely traded and
are sought later by homebuyers as well as by investors 4 (The Appendix provides additional
details of the residential market background in Singapore).
The presale market is more attractive to short-term speculators than the spot market for
completed properties because a presale contract has a lower holding cost than a completed
property. Figure 1 highlights the difference between owning an uncompleted property vs. owning
a completed property; the former does not require full payment until completion, management
fees, maintenance costs, and property taxes. Because of these differences, speculators in the
presale market have a strong incentive to exit the market before project completion.
[Insert Figure 1 about here]
Short-term speculators are called flippers in our sample — those who buy and
subsequently sell before project completion. In our sample, speculators have a short investment
horizon: they hold their investments for about 24 months on average, less than half the average
holding time for a spot market purchaser (i.e., those who buy completed properties). Admittedly,
flipping could be affected by unexpected changes in price trends or unexpected changes in

3

Condominium residential projects in Singapore range in size from a few dozen units to over a thousand units and
their construction period lasts around 3 years.
4
The buying and selling procedures, including the incurrence of tax and various fees, are typically the same for
presale and spot market transactions.

5

personal financial circumstances so that identifying flippers as short-term speculators can be
noisy. We discuss the robustness of our speculator identification in section 5.
The policy intervention we study is the Singapore government’s announcement on 15
December 2006, with immediate effect, to withdraw a stamp duty payment deferral in the presale
market. Home buyers in Singapore typically pay a stamp duty (i.e., a transaction tax) of 3% of the
full transaction price at the time of purchase. Previously, as a part of the various policies to
counter the impact of the economic slowdown triggered by the Asian Financial crisis, the
government in June 1998 gave concession for presale buyers to defer stamp duty payment until
project completion or until the property was sold before completion.5 The concession encourages
short-term speculation because it allowed speculators to finance their stamp duty from the sale
proceeds when they eventually sell their properties before project completion. By the same token,
the withdrawal of the deferral raises the upfront purchase cost for these speculators, effectively
raising their transaction costs.6 The presence of the parallel affected presale and unaffected spot
markets for condominium properties offer an opportunity to apply a difference-in-differences
approach to identifying the policy’s impact.
It is important to note that the policy does not directly affect the monetary cost for house
purchase (except for the time value of money). However, the requirement to pay 3% stamp duty
in cash at the time of purchase is a significant up front capital constraint for investors. This will
reduce investors’ incentive to purchase in the presale market, as previous research shows that the
demand for housing is sensitive to cash-on-hand (Adams, Einav, and Levin, 2009; Ben-David,
2011). In our context, compared to the 10-20% down payment requirement and zero capital gains
tax in Singapore, the 3% buyer stamp duty represents a significant up front capital constraint for
investors in the presale market.7 Moreover, the policy could be interpreted as a signal that the
government intended to discourage short term speculation.

5

The government undertook other measures to stimulate the economy after the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis.
Therefore, we do not use the introduction of the policy to study the impact of transaction tax reduction.
6
Old pre-sale contracts are “grand-fathered” so that the holders did not have to immediately pay stamp-duties until
project completion or re-selling of their contracts.
7
Brokerage commission is typically 1-2% of the transaction price in Singapore and only sellers incur this transaction
cost. Therefore, the 3% buyer stamp duty is the single and an economically significant item of monetary transaction
cost buyers pay at the time of purchase.

6

2.2.

Empirical methodology
Our empirical analysis involves several steps. Using Dec 2006 as the event month, we

first investigate the impact of the withdrawal of the stamp duty deferral on project turnover and
particularly on turnover by to flippers. We then study the policy’s impact on price volatility. We
define ‘project turnover’ as the number of transactions in a condominium project in a given
month scaled by the project size (the total number of units in that project). ‘Speculative turnover’
is the purchases by flippers, who sold the purchased property before project completion, scaled
by the project size.
We estimate price volatility based on observed transaction prices. To remove the price
variability due to heterogeneous property attributes, we first adjust the raw transaction prices for
the market price trend, project fixed effects, and property unit hedonic attributes using the
hedonic pricing regression (Rosen, 1974); the pricing equation and the estimates are reported in
the Appendix. The regression residuals,

, measure prices specific to each transaction of

property unit j in condominium project i in month t after adjusting for market conditions and
hedonic factors. Averaging over j, ̅ , in month t reflects the market- and hedonic characteristicsadjusted price in project i in the month. The monthly change in this average is used to represent
project-specific monthly return. We estimate project i’s price volatility in month t according to
the range of the pricing errors within the project, i.e., the difference between the highest and the
lowest

within project i in month t.8 A missing value is assigned for project-months with fewer

than two transactions.
We seek to identify the policy’s effects on the presale market’s trading activity and price
volatility relative to the spot market through difference-in-differences analyses as in the
following generic form:
(1)

8

Existing studies have shown that the price range estimator is a more efficient estimator of the volatility (e.g.,
Parkinson, 1980).

7

where the dependent variable yit represents monthly project turnover, or speculative turnover, or
measures of price volatility in project i in month t; Presale, is a binary variable equal to 1 for
projects in the presale market and 0 for projects in the spot market, and WD has a binary value 0
before the policy intervention and 1 afterward. Thus, by specification the presale market is the
treatment group and the spot market is the control group. The coefficient

measures any general

changes in property market conditions correlated with the policy intervention.

measures the

effect associated with the treatment group before the policy change. The coefficient

is the

main variable of interest – it measures the differential effect of the policy change on the treatment
group relative to the control group. The macroeconomic conditions as well as the policy shock
may affect all similar condominium projects at the same time, e.g., those with the same type
(presale or spot) and in the same location. Therefore, we cluster the standard errors to allow the
regression residuals to be correlated within the same location (i.e., central vs. non-central region)9
among all presale (or spot) condominium projects in a given month.10
3.

Data and Sample Statistics

3.1

Data sources
The data for this study are obtained from Urban Redevelopment Authority (URA)

REALIS database, which reports all property transactions lodged with the Singapore Land
Authority (SLA). Our sample excludes transactions in private non-landed projects with fewer
than 40 units (to avoid illiquidity concerns) and properties bought out for redevelopment (en bloc
sales). The entire available sample, comprising more than 181,000 transactions observed between
1995:01 and 2010:10 in 854 non-landed projects, is employed to estimate the hedonic pricing
model. Approximately 55% of all transactions are presale transactions (of uncompleted properties
in new condominium development projects). The 854 projects range in size from 40 to 1,232
property units, with an average size of 184 units. A project’s completion is dated by the receipt of
a Temporary Occupancy Permit (TOP) from the government.

9

In Singapore, the central location is the prime region for residential real estate, and condominium projects in the
central location differ from the non-central projects in both project characteristics and investment demand.
10
As a further robustness check (e.g., to account for autocorrelation of dependent variables), we use the bootstrap
method to compute standard errors (Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan, 2004). To save space, we do not report the
results but the inference of our main findings remains to hold.

8

For each transaction, we observe the following: transaction date, transaction price,
transaction type (new sale by developer, resale of presale contracts before completion, or resale
after completion), buyer attributes (whether previously residing in a government Housing
Development Board flat or at a private residential address), property attributes (project identity,
building block, floor level, and living area) and project attributes (project size, location by postal
district, completion date and land title11). We also obtain the monthly CPI and interest rate from
the SingStat Time Series compiled by the Singapore Department of Statistics. We deflate the
transaction price using the published CPI. Interest rates are used to estimate the equilibrium
compensating price differential between spot and presale prices.
3.2

Comparability of the treatment (presale) and control (spot) samples
Before conducting the difference-in-differences analysis of the policy impact, we compare

the spot market (control group) and presale market (treatment group) in several respects. In
general, properties in the two markets are similar although units in the presale markets tend to be
somewhat smaller and more expensive. Table I shows that the average size of the transacted unit
between 1995 and 2010 is 1,377 square feet in the entire market and 1,302 square feet for the
presale market. The average transaction price is US$505 per square foot (in real terms) for the
spot market, and US$565 in the presale market. 12 Projects size (i.e., the number of units in a
condominium project) in presale markets also tends to be larger (149 in the spot sample versus
204 in the presale sample).
[Insert Table I about here]
We further evaluate the comparability of the spot and presale markets in the pre-policy
period. Figure 2 shows the kernel density plots, based on the Epanechnikov kernel function 13, for
several measures at the monthly frequency for both markets during the one-year period before the
policy intervention (i.e., 2005:11-2006:10). The similarity of the distributions in project size,
geographic location of condominium projects, and average monthly transaction price indicate that

11

In Singapore, land title can be permanently, a 999 years lease, or a 99 years lease.
For the convenience of readers, we report the price information in the text in US dollars by using the concurrent
exchange rate. The analyses in the paper, for example volatility measures, are based on the price in local currency.
13
The result is robust to different choices of the kernel density functions and the bandwidth.
12

9

the treatment (presale) and control (spot) groups are balanced in distribution along those
observables in the pre-policy period. We also compare the distribution of the project-level price
volatility, one of our key policy outcome variables, between the two markets in the year before
the policy intervention. Our range estimates of the (monthly) price volatility average 15% and 12%
for the presale and spot samples, respectively. The kernel density plot shows that the
distributional patterns are well matched between the two samples.
[Insert Figure 2 about here]
3.3.

The sample statistics around the policy intervention
Table II provides the summary statistics for trading activity one month before (2006:11)

and one month after (2007:01) the policy intervention. The mean turnover (the number of
monthly transactions scaled by the project size) for the spot market is 0.77% in November 2006
and 0.71% in January 2007. The change in trading activity before and after the policy
intervention is only -0.07% and is statistically insignificant, consistent with that the withdrawal
of the tax concession does not affect the spot market.
[Insert Table II about here]
In contrast, the mean turnover for presale projects experienced a significant postintervention drop of 4.3% (statistically significant at the 1% level), an almost two thirds reduction
relative to the pre-intervention average turnover. Moreover, speculative turnover drops 1.66%, a
70% reduction relative to the pre-intervention level (statistically significant at the 1% level). The
drop in turnover is unlikely associated with seasonal variation in trading activities between
calendar months. Panel C of Table II shows that the difference between November project
turnover and January project turnover from 1995 to 2010 (excluding 2006:11 and 2007:01) is
statistically and economically indistinguishable from zero in both the presale and spot markets.
4.

Empirical Analysis

4.1.

Impact on speculative trading
We study the trading response to the withdrawal of the stamp duty deferral (WD) using

the difference-in-differences method in a regression framework. To control for heterogeneity
10

across condominium projects, we include as explanatory variables project size and Central
location dummy. We also include the average turnover between 2006:08 and 2006:10, pre-policy
turnovers, to control for differences in trading across projects before the policy intervention. In
the regression framework, we analyse the trading and volatility response in the 6-months period
after the policy shock to identify the shorter-term effect, and study the longer term policy impact
using a 12-month post-policy window. Housing transactions often need considerable lead
planning time so that trading may have an apparent mechanical momentum. The policy impact
might thus take some months to fully show up in market data. In addition, the exercise allows us
to examine the persistence of the policy effects, if any.
The first three columns of Table III report the regression analyses of project turnovers one
month before and six months after the policy intervention in December 2006. The first column
shows that monthly project turnover is in general 5.5 percentage points higher in the presale
market than in the spot market before the policy, consistent with the summary statistics shown in
Table I. The critical result is that the presale market sees a sharper decline in turnover after the
policy intervention (indicated by the coefficient of WD×Presale). On average, the turnover for
presale projects drops 3.5 percentage points more than that in spot market projects, and the
difference is statistically significant at the 1% level. The estimated 3.5 percentage point drop in
trading implies a reduction of total trading by 51% (compared to 6.9 percentage points in
November 2006 as shown in Table II) in the presale market during the six months after the policy
shock.
[Insert Table III about here]
In Column 2 of Table III, we investigate the impact of the concession withdrawal on
identified speculative trade in the presale market. The speculative turnover in the treatment
sample, compared to the change in project-level turnover in the control sample, declines by 1.6
percentage points one month after the policy intervention. The effect is statistically significant at
1% and is equivalent to a 67% reduction in speculative trading (compared to 2.4 percentage
points in November 2006 as shown in Table II) in the presale market, an effect that is larger than
the average trading reduction (Column 1).

11

Column 3 of Table III shows that the drop in total turnover in the presale market after the
policy intervention is more pronounced in projects with a high presence of speculators just before
the policy. We note that before the policy change speculative turnover is strongly serially
correlated (the monthly autocorrelation coefficient is 0.33). We therefore use the average
speculative turnover (“pre-policy speculative trading”) for each presale project between 2006:08
and 2006:10 (which are two to four months prior to the policy changes) to proxy for the presence
of short-term speculators and interact it with the WD dummy. The results in Column 3 show first
that locations that used to have high speculative trade indeed have higher total turnover. Very
importantly, they confirm that the decrease in trading activity in the presale market is increasing
in the presence of speculators. The presale condominium project associated with 1 percentage
point greater speculative turnover before the policy experiences an additional 0.34 percentage
point decrease in the total trading activity after the policy intervention. This result further
suggests that the policy has a particularly strong impact on short-term speculators.
We further examine the longer term policy effect by extending the event window to
twelve months after the policy implementation. Columns 4 to 6 show results similar to those
obtained using a six-month post-event window. Interestingly, the magnitudes of reduction in total
turnover or speculative turnover become larger in the 12 month period. We perform further
analysis by separating the trading response in the first 6 months from that in the second 6 months
in one single regression, and formally compare the size of the trading response using F-tests (see
Appendix for details). The results indicate that the average monthly trading response (measured
by total turnover and speculative turnover) is stronger in the second 6 months, and the effect is
statistically significant at the 5% level. These results suggest that the effect of transaction tax on
housing markets comes with a lag but is reasonably persistent.
4.2.

Impact on price volatility
Having shown that the policy effectively reduces turnover in presale projects, we now

investigate its impact on price volatility. We estimate project level price volatility by the pricing
error range within individual projects. Again, we study the response in price volatility six months
and twelve months after the implementation of the policy.

12

Marsh and Rosenfeld (1986) show that the range estimator is biased downward for thin
trading. We therefore include monthly transaction volume as a control variable in our regressions.
To the extent that the policy reduces transaction volume in presale projects, the resultant
downward bias will be against finding policy induced volatility increase in presale projects. We
will discuss in more detail on the robustness of our volatility measure in section 5.
[Insert Table IV about here]
Table IV reports our difference-in-differences regressions comparing the impact of the
policy change in price volatility between the presale (treatment) and spot (control) markets.
Columns 1 and 2 report the comparisons within the six months after the policy intervention and
Columns 3 and 4 report the within twelve months comparisons.
Column 1 in Table IV shows that there is no significant difference in the change in price
volatility between the presale and spot markets over the six months after the policy intervention.
Column 3 shows that the change in price volatility in the presale market is significantly greater
than in the spot market over the twelve months after the policy intervention. Compared to the
average monthly price volatility in the pre-policy period (15%), price volatility increases by 18%
in the presale projects. Note that the policy intervention, as shown in Table III, is associated with
notable decline in turnover in the pre-sale market but not in the spot market.
To capture the role played by speculative traders, we again introduce as an explanatory
variable the proxy for the prevalence of speculative trade: “pre-policy speculative trading”
(which is the average speculative turnover in a presale project during the three months before the
policy (2006:08-2006:10)). Both Columns 2 and 4 show that the proxy attracts a negative and
significant coefficient; that is, a greater presence of speculative traders is associated with a lower
price volatility before the policy intervention. In Column 2, the cross term between the proxy
and the dummy indicating the post event months is positive but insignificant while in Column 4 it
is significantly positive. Thus, markets that used to attract more speculative traders experience a
greater rise in price volatility after the policy intervention.
We examine why volatility increase is stronger and statistically significant only in the
longer term. First, we note that our volatility estimates are downward biased, so the true volatility

13

response could very well be positive and significant for both post-event windows. Moreover, we
study the volatility response in the first 6 months and in the second 6 months in one single
regression (see Appendix for details). F-tests suggest that, during the 12 month period after the
policy shock, volatility increase is much higher in the second 6 months than in the first 6 months,
and the difference is statistically significant at the 1%. This is consistent with the finding on the
dynamics of the trading response. The (speculative) trading activity drops more strongly in the
second 6 months after the policy shock, during which period we also observe the stronger
volatility increase. Taken together, these results suggest first that the policy effect takes time to
show up in the housing market.

Yet, over time the decrease in trading after the policy

intervention, particularly the withdrawals of speculators, causes the price volatility to increase in
the affected presale market.
4.3.

Impact on informed vs. noise speculators
Findings in Table III and Table IV present evidence that while a transaction tax deters

speculative trade, it may raise rather than reduce price volatility. Note that if the policy had
deterred noise speculators, the price volatility would have declined. Perhaps, the policy also
deters informed speculators.
To evaluate the possibility, we exploit the potential variations in the relative presence of
informed speculators vs. noise traders across presale projects in our treatment sample. There is an
asymmetry in informed arbitrage trade in housing markets: informed speculators can benefit from
their information advantage by buying under-priced housing units but cannot easily do so by
shorting over-priced housing units. This asymmetry implies that there is a higher proportion of
informed speculators in previously under-priced than previously overpriced projects. The crosssectional variation enables us to disentangle the policy’s impact on trading volume and price
volatility via discouraging informed versus discouraging noise speculators.
To identify under- and over-priced presale projects (as a proxy of the presence of
informed speculators), we conduct the following. First, we obtain ̅ , the average for each month
a presale project’s unit level hedonic pricing residuals

. Based on the distribution of these

14

averages in month t, a project i is “underpriced” in month t if ̅ is in the bottom 30% of the
distribution and “overprice” if it is in the top 30%.14
Compared to other presale projects (in particular the over-priced presale projects),
underpriced presale projects tend to be larger in size and are farther away from project
completion. Within our entire sample between 1995 and 2010, underpriced projects tend to attract
more speculators in the subsequent month, cerates paribus. Price recovery seems to be slow; on
average 26% of the underpriced projects remain in the bottom 30% price distribution six months
later. However, those underpriced projects with more speculators (i.e., their speculative turnovers
are in the top 30% among all underpriced projects) are 20% less likely to stay in the bottom
tercile of the price distribution six months later. This adds credence to the hypothesis that
underpriced projects are likely to attract a greater proportion of informed investors.
In Table V, we examine the differences in responses to the policy change among presale
projects that were under- or over-priced in October 2006, the month immediately before our
event window (2006:11 and 2007:1 to 2007:6). Our focus is on the changes in speculative
turnovers and price volatility. To facilitate interpretation, we keep for the treatment group (the
presale projects) only the under- and over-priced presale projects and compare them to the
control group (spot market projects).
[Insert Table V about here]
Columns 1 and 2 of Table V show that in November 2006, the month before the policy
intervention, the projects under-priced in Oct 2006 have a relatively higher speculative turnover
than the overpriced presale projects as suggested by the comparison between the coefficients on
Underpricing Dummy and Overpricing Dummy (an F-test of their difference is significant). This
is consistent with the idea that underpriced projects attract informed speculators. Most
interestingly, being in one of the “previously” underpriced presale projects is associated with an
additional 0.8-1.1 percentage points decrease in speculative turnover, after the policy intervention,

14

We have also experimented with the 20% and 80% cut off in identifying the underpriced and overpriced presale
projects, and obtain the same results. Furthermore, to address the look-ahead bias, we also use an alternative
underpricing measure based on the project-specific price, , estimated from the transaction data before November
2006 (out-of-sample). Results in Table V remain qualitatively the same.

15

than being in one of the previously overpriced presale projects. The F-test for the difference is
significant. Compared to the average monthly speculative turnover of 2.4% among all presale
projects in the month before the policy change, this effect is economically large. On the basis that
informed speculators are more prevalent in underpriced projects and that noise speculators are
concentrated in overpriced projects, these results suggest that the transaction tax may have a
stronger deterrence effect on informed traders than on noise traders.
Our result can be consistent with that presale projects underpriced in 2006:10 had
attracted speculators in 2006:11 and thus fewer speculators in 2007:01 and afterwards as the
adjustment process continues. We do not believe this is the driver of our regression result. First,
as we noted earlier, price correction is sluggish; about 26% of underpriced projects remain
underpriced over six months. Second, we perform a placebo regression test. In exactly the same
way as before we identify underpriced and overpriced presale projects in October for all other
years (1995-2010 except 2006). We designate the subsequent November as the pseudo-prepolicy month; for projects underpriced in October, speculative turnover typically increases in
November. We also designate the subsequent January to June as the pseudo-post-policy months.
Using speculative turnover as the treatment sample and spot market turnover as the control
sample, we replicate the regression in Table V Col. 1. We find that speculative turnover in
underpriced projects is neither statistically nor economically significantly changed in the postpolicy months (i.e., the cross term between WD and underpricing is only slightly positive and
insignificant). The cross term between WD and overpriced presale projects behaves similarly.
These observations support our interpretation of the result in Table V: the policy change, rather
than other factors, reduces the participation of speculators, especially informed speculators in the
market.
Next, we study the price volatility response after the policy implementation among the
underpriced and overpriced projects in the presale market. Note that a bigger drop in informed
speculators should be associated with a higher volatility increase. Results in Columns 3 and 4 of
Table V, Panel A show revealing evidence. First, on average, presale projects underpriced in
2006:10 in the treatment sample exhibit lower price volatility in the month before the policy
intervention than the control sample (2006:11), in line with the expectation that informed traders
aid pricing efficiency in these projects. Second, during the six and twelve months after the policy
16

intervention, these underpriced projects experienced a price volatility increase that is 11.5-11.8
percentage points greater than the overpriced projects (the F-test rejects the hypothesis of zero
difference at the 1% level). Taken together, these results are consistent with the view that the
transaction tax disproportionately deters informed speculators and exacerbates price volatility.
We conjecture that the policy has a stronger deterrence effect on rational informed
investors than noise traders because informed investors are more sensitive to the change in
expected return due to the policy change. The policy shock effectively increases the transaction
cost for presale investors by tightening the capital constraint, which equally affected informed
and noise investors. However, the policy shock might also indicate an increased likelihood of
further government intervention to dampen housing market growth. Rational informed investors
are more responsive to such a change in expected speculative returns than noise traders.
4.4.

Impact on price informativeness
If the policy change, which raises speculators’ transaction cost, indeed disproportionately

deters informed speculator, price will become less informative. We now investigate this
possibility.
Given the low transaction frequency in the real estate market, we are not able to use the
conventional price informativeness measures. Kyle (1995) suggests that a higher level of
information asymmetry implies a greater impact of trades on prices. In our context, the
withdrawal of informed speculators after the policy change would result in lower information
acquisition and greater information asymmetry in the market. Consequently, the same turnover,
on average, should have a bigger impact on the price movement compared to the pre-policy
period. We exploit this economic intuition to construct an empirical price informativeness proxy.
To operationalize, we follow Amihud (2002) and use the absolute monthly project-specific return
(i.e., the monthly change in the average of project i’s project-specific price ̅ ) divided by

17

monthly project turnover to measure negative price informativeness (Amihud measure,
hereafter).15
To validate the measure, we examine whether the presence of speculators is associated
with a lower Amihud measure (more informative prices) for presale projects over the entire
sample period in our dataset (1995:012010:10). In an unreported analysis, we run a crosssectional regression of presale projects’ Amihud measures (854 of them) on the monthly share of
speculative purchases (as a proportion of monthly transactions in a project), the monthly turnover
rate of each project, and other control variables. We find a strong negative relation between the
Amihud measure and the average share of speculative purchases.
[Insert Table VI about here]
Table VI reports the change in price informativeness before and after the policy
intervention across the condominium projects, showing the policy effect over a six-month and
twelve-month period, respectively. In both Columns 1 and 2, the coefficients of the presale
market dummy are significantly negative, suggestive of more informative prices in the presale
market in general. The Amihud measure for the presale projects significantly increased relative to
the spot market projects during the six-month and twelve-month period after the policy
intervention that targeted only speculators in the presale market. The results confirm that the
relative price informativeness in the presale market is reduced (resulting in a higher Amihud
measure) after the policy intervention.
Overall, these results are broadly consistent with the notion that informed traders are well
represented among speculators and their withdrawal from the market results in a loss of price
informativeness. A transaction tax, thus, appears to be a double-edged sword, deterring both
noise traders and informed traders. It may well bring about the inadvertent effect of exacerbating
price volatility by disproportionately deterring the latter.
5.

Robustness

15

Following Amihud (2002), we winsorize the measure at the top and bottom 1% tail, and our results remain robust
without the winsorizing.

18

Our analysis is built on two critical proxies: a proxy for speculative trade and a proxy for
price volatility. We therefore first discuss the robustness of our main results with respect to these
proxies. Another concern is whether investors anticipated the timing of the policy intervention
and how it may affect our results. To save space, while we present the key robustness test results
below, we report results of most robustness checks in the Internet Appendix.
5.1.

Potential error in the measurement of speculative activities
We proxy for speculative trading by flipper purchases; that is, purchases in presale

projects that were eventually sold before project completion. While such a transaction can be
speculative, it is possible that genuine homebuyers and long-term investors can exit the market
before project completion due to unexpected changes in family and financial circumstances cause
re-selling of a property before completion (TOP). Such happenstances, however, are random
across time and project location and should not systematically affect our results.
We are, however, concerned with projects in which speculators may be systematically
under- or over-represented by the observed flippers. For example, genuine presale homebuyers
may sell to take a profit when the market experiences a large and unexpected positive rise in
demand before project completion. Likewise, an intentional speculator can be forced to hold an
investment beyond completion to avoid realizing losses due to unexpected market downturn.
To address the problem, we restrict the analysis to a subsample of projects that were
completed during stable market conditions, for example, we should exclude periods in an extreme
economics situation, such as the run up period before the 2008 financial crisis and the dramatic
decline after the crisis. Operationally, we exclude projects whose last three months before
completion fell in the period when the benchmark price index was in the top or bottom 30% in
between 1995 and 2010 (reported in the Internet Appendix) and repeat the regressions in Table
III. We find consistent results: the policy intervention discouraged speculative trading in the
presale market.
5.2.

Robustness of the volatility analysis
Error in our volatility measurement would be large when the transaction frequency is low.

This concern is specifically relevant for presale projects, which experience a significant decline
19

in trading activities after the policy intervention. We partly mitigate the estimation bias in the
coefficient estimate by including the number of transactions as a control variable in the price
volatility regressions (Table IV).
Larger measurement errors in project-months with fewer transactions also imply that the
regression residuals are heteroskedastic. We further address this concern using a weighted least
squares specification in the volatility analysis. In the first stage, we run the OLS regression as
shown in Tables III, IV and V, and obtain the regression residuals. We regress the square of the
residual on the number of transactions, the number of transactions squared, and project size. Then
we re-estimate the second-stage OLS with the predicted residual squared as the regression weight.
This specification corrects for the heteroskedasticity. Consistent with previous findings, there is a
strong and significant increase in project price volatility in the presale market during the sixmonth and twelve-month horizon after the policy intervention (reported in the Internet Appendix).
We also partition the sample by project size to perform the price volatility analysis on
more homogeneous sub-samples of condominium projects; the dividing size is 204 units (mean in
our presale sample). Projects of similar size are more comparable in transaction volume. We
perform the above weighted least squares regression on project price volatility as in Table IV.
The price volatility increase is stronger and more significant among the larger condominium
projects (see Internet Appendix). As there tends to be fewer transactions, on average, in smaller
projects, this finding further suggests that our previous result is not due to errors in measuring
price volatility, especially in the project-months with a low transaction volume.
Next, we note that our volatility measures are derived from the pricing residuals in the
hedonic pricing regression, for each project the price volatility is the range of the residuals.
However, a greater range may reflect a poorer fit of the hedonic pricing model rather than the
true price volatility. For example, completed properties may have more heterogeneous valuerelevant information, such as maintenance and unit condition, that are not captured in the hedonic
regression. The result is more heterogeneous price residuals in the spot market (relative to the
presale market) transactions.
Table A_I in the Appendix shows the results for the hedonic pricing regression for both
the presale market and the spot market. Our hedonic pricing model explains, on average, 94% of
20

the variation in transaction prices. The presale and spot transaction prices are equally well
explained by the pricing model: the R-squared is 94.1% for the presale market transactions and
94.4% for the spot market transactions. The negligible difference suggests that nuances in the
behavior of the estimated price volatility for the presale and spot market are likely not driven by
uneven fit of the underlying hedonic price regression. We perform an additional robustness
check on the price volatility analysis by dropping the spot market projects that are more than 20
years old. Our main results continue to hold when the more recent spot market project are used as
the control group.
We further check the robustness of our volatility results by using an alternative volatility
measure. A natural choice is the return volatility, defined on a rolling basis as the standard
deviation of the monthly project-specific return for the most recent six months. Again we find
that return volatility is smaller in the presale market before the policy intervention; and it
significantly increases as well after the policy intervention (see the Internet Appendix). We also
apply the weighted least squares approach and the results are qualitative the same.
5.3.

Is the timing of the policy intervention anticipated by market participants?
An alternative interpretation of our main results is that investors anticipated the timing of

the policy intervention and rationally advanced their investment before the transaction tax takes
effect, resulting in subsided speculative activities immediately after the policy intervention. We
first note that the reduction in trading and the increase in volatility after the policy intervention
are not transitory; the effects remain strong for a period of six to twelve months. When we
exclude the month immediately after the policy is enacted (Jan 2007) and repeat our turnover and
volatility regressions, our results remain as significant both statistically and economically. It is
therefore unlikely that our findings are driven by a temporary elevation of speculation during the
month before the policy intervention. This is not surprising–after all, the withdrawal of the buyer
stamp duty deferral concession was announced with immediate effect without prior public debate
and it is unlikely for the date of withdrawal to be anticipated.16

16

We also searched for news reports related to the buyer stamp duty in the major newspapers in Singapore, and we
find no coverage of any discussion of the policy intervention prior to the government announcement.

21

6.

Conclusion
Our study provides the first piece of evidence on the impact of a Tobin’s tax on

speculative trading activities and price volatility in housing markets. We explore a policy
intervention in the private residential market in Singapore, where condominium properties are
traded both in the (forward) presale market and in the (spot) resale market; the former is
particularly attractive to speculators. The Tobin’s tax policy change raises a buyer’s transaction
cost in the presale market but does not directly affect the spot market, which serves as a control
group. Difference-in-differences regression analyses show that the transaction cost increase
significantly deters speculative trading and raises price volatility in the presale projects.
Further investigation into sub-markets reveals that the increase in transaction cost deters
informed traders more than other traders. Because of difficulties in short-selling presale contracts,
underpriced presale market segments attract informed speculators but overpriced presale market
segments do not. We find that while the policy intervention generally reduces trading in presale
projects, the drop is more pronounced in presale projects that are relatively underpriced shortly
before the intervention. In addition, the increase in price volatility is concentrated in these
underpriced presale projects. In contrast, previously overpriced presale projects experiences a
smaller reduction in speculative trading and little volatility change afterwards.
These findings indicate that informed traders are more sensitive to the heightened
transaction tax than other traders. Accordingly, we find that after the increase in transaction tax
price informativeness drops in the affected presale housing market. All of our findings are robust
against alternative measures of volatility and speculative activity.
Overall, our findings caution against increasing transaction tax to stabilize housing
markets. While admitting that housing markets are different from high trading frequency asset
markets, we speculate that our results may be broadly relevant for the global debate on the
transaction tax in financial markets. As far as the objective of promoting asset price stability and
informativeness is concerned, these taxes and regulatory measures are not necessarily effective
and could even be counter-productive. In most cases, speculative trades comprise informed and
noise trading. A transaction tax deters both; our results raise the possibility that the former may
be more affected than the latter.
22

References
Adams, W., L. Einav, and J. Levin, 2009, Liquidity constraints and imperfect information in
subprime lending. American Economic Review 99, 49-84.
Amihud, Y., 2002. Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time series effects. Journal of
Financial Markets 5, 31-56.
Amihud, Y., and H. Mendelson, 1992. Transaction tax and stock values. In: Lehn, K., and
Kamphuis, R. W. Jr. (Eds.) Modernizing U.S. Securities Regulations. New York, N.Y.: Irwin
Professional Publishing.
Bayer, P., C. Geissler, and J. W. Roberts, 2011, Speculators and middlemen: The role of flippers
in the housing market. NBER Working Paper No. 16784.
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan, 2004, How much should we trust differences-indifferences estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 249-275.
Bloomfield, R. J., M. O'Hara, and G. Saar, 2009. How noise trading affects markets: an
experimental analysis. Review of Financial Studies 22, 2275-2302.
Case, K.E., and R. J. Shiller, 1989. The efficiency of the market for single-family homes.
American Economic Review 79, 125-113.
Case, K. E., J. M. Quigley, and R. J. Shiller, 2003. Home-buyers, housing and the macroeconomy.
In: Richards, A., and Robinson, T. (Eds.). Asset Prices and Monetary Policy. Canberra: Reserve
Bank of Australia.
Case, K.E., R.J. Shiller, and A. Thompson, 2012. What have they been thinking? home buyer
behavior in hot and cold markets. NBER working paper w18400.
Cheng, I., S. Raina, and W. Xiong, 2013. Wall Street and the housing bubble. Working paper.
Cutler, D. M., J. M. Poterba, and L. H. Summers, 1990. Speculative dynamics and the role of
feedback traders. American Economic Review 80, 63-68.
———, 1991. Speculative dynamics. Review of Economic Studies 58, 529-546.
De Long, J. B., A. Shleifer, L. H., Summers, and R. J. Waldmann, 1990a. Positive feedback
investment strategies and destabilizing rational speculation. Journal of Finance 45, 379-395.
———, 1990b. Noise trader risk in financial markets. Journal of Political Economy 98, 703-738.
Fu, Y., and W. Qian, 2013. Speculators and price overreaction in the housing market. Real Estate
Economics forthcoming.
Friedman, M., 1953. The case for flexible exchange rates. In: Essays in Positive Economics,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
23

Habermeier, K., and A. A. Kirilenko, 2003. Securities transaction taxes and financial markets.
IMF Staff Papers 50 (special issue).
Hau, H., 2006. The role of transaction costs for financial volatility: evidence from the Paris
bourse. Journal of the European Economic Association 4, 862-890.
Haughwout, A., D. Lee, J. Tracy, and W. Klaauw, 2011, Real Estate Investors, the Leverage
Cycle, and the Housing Market Crisis, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 514.
Jones, C. M., and P. J. Seguin, 1997. Transaction costs and price volatility: evidence from
commission deregulation. American Economic Review 87, 728-737.
Kyle, A. S. 1985. Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica 53, 1315-1335.
Mayer, C., and T. Sinai, 2007. Housing and behavioural finance. Mimeo.
Marsh, T., and E. Rosenfeld, 1986. Non-trading, market making, and estimates of stock price
volatility. Journal of Financial Economics 15, 359-372.
Mian, A., and A. Sufi, 2011. House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the U.S.
Household Leverage Crisis. American Economic Review 101, 2132-2156.
Piazzesi, M., and M. Schneider, 2009, Momentum traders in the housing market: survey evidence
and a search model. American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 99, 406-411.
Parkinson, M., 1980. The extreme value method for estimating the variance of the rate of return.
Journal of Business 53, 61-65.
Roll, R., 1989. Price volatility, international market links, and their implication for regulatory
policies. Journal of Financial Services Research 3, 211-246.
Rosen, S., 1974. Hedonic prices and implicit markets: product differentiation and pure
competition. Journal of Political Economy 82, 34-55.
Schwert, G. W., and P. J. Seguin, 1993. Securities transaction taxes: an overview of costs,
benefits and unresolved Questions. Financial Analysts Journal 49, 27-35.
Shleifer, A., and L. H. Summers, 1990. The noise trader approach to finance. Journal of
Economic Perspectives 4, 19-33.
Stiglitz, J. E., 1989. Using tax policy to curb speculative short-term trading. Journal of Financial
Services Research 3, 101-115.
Subrahmanyam, A., 1998. Transaction taxes and financial market equilibrium. Journal of
Business 71, 81-118.
Summers, L. H., and V. P. Summers, 1989. When financial markets work too well: a cautious
case for a securities transaction tax. Journal of Financial Services Research 3, 261-286.

24

Tobin, J., 1978. A proposal for international monetary reform. Eastern Economics Journal 4,
153-159.
Umlauf, S. R., 1993. Transaction taxes and the behavior of the Swedish stock market. Journal of
Financial Economics 33, 227-40.

25

Figure 1: Residential project life cycle and self-selection of speculators
The chart below highlights the differences between the ownership of a presale contract (synthetic ownership) and of a completed property (real ownership). A
project completion date is defined as the date a project receives a Temporary Occupancy Permit (TOP) from the government.

Timeline

Project launch
for sale

Project completion
(TOP date)

Ownership status

Synthetic

Real

Construction status

Uncompleted

Completed

Transaction type

Presale (forward market)

Resale (spot market)

Investment amount

Down payment: (1−γ) × Price, 0<γ<1

Full price (or with mortgage)

Holding expenses

Interest on down payment (if any)

Full interest + maintenance costs
and management fee + property
tax

Ownership benefits:
Speculators
Long term investor / user

High liquidity and financial leverage
(Imputed) income

26

Figure 2: Comparability of presale (treatment) and spot (control) groups: kernel density plots
The figure shows the kernel density plots (based on the Epanechnikov kernel function) for project size, project location distribution (among 28 postal districts),
average transaction price (per square foot, in real U.S. dollars) in a month, and monthly project price volatility (definition in Table III) in the presale (treatment)
and spot (control) group during the one-year period leading to the policy (2005:11-2006:10).

27

Table I: Entire sample statistics of the spot market and the presale market
This table reports the summary statistics of the full sample of housing transactions for both the spot and presale
markets in Singapore from 1995:01 to 2010:10.

Panel A: Transaction-level statistics
Spot sample
Real Price (per sqft) (USD)
Unit Area (sqft)
Project Size (# of units)
Floor Level
Age (Months after TOP)
Observations

Mean
505
1,471
149
8
115
80,768

Std Dev.
253
626
157
7
87

Min
88
280
40
1
0

Max
3,143
13,046
1,232
68
555

Presale sample

Mean

Std Dev.

Min

Max

565
1,302
204
9
24
100,704

282
478
202
8
12

66
344
40
1
1

3,308
11,011
1,232
69
108

Real Price (per sqft) (USD)
Unit Area (sqft)
Project Size (# of units)
Floor Level
Months to TOP
Observations

28

Table II: Trading activity around the policy event: summary statistics
This table compares the real estate transaction turnover in projects of the spot market (unaffected, control sample) and the presale market (affected, treatment
sample) around the buyer stamp duty deferral withdrawal (2006:12). Panel A shows the mean and median statistics of the trading activity of the spot market,
while Panel B shows the mean and median statistics of the total as well as speculative trading activity in the presale market. Panel C compares the time series
averages of the mean monthly project turnover between November and January for the presale and spot market, respectively. We average the mean project
turnover for November (and January) from 1995-2010 (excluding 2006:11 and 2007:01). Monthly Project turnover is defined as the number of transactions in a
month divided by the condominium size. Monthly Speculative turnover is defined as the number of purchases in a month which get sold before the condominium
is completed, divided by the condominium size. We also report the statistical significance of the mean differences based on a t-test, and the statistical significance
of the median differences based on a Wilcoxon signed-rank test, with ***, **,* denoting 1%, 5%, and 10% significance respectively.

Panel A
Spot Market (controlled sample)

Monthly Project Turnover

Nov-06
Mean
Median
0.77%
0.00%

Jan-07
Mean
Median
0.71%
0.00%

Difference
Mean
Median
-0.07%
0.00%

Nov-06
Mean
Median
6.90%
2.38%
2.40%
0.73%

Jan-07
Mean
Median
2.61%
1.61%
0.74%
0.00%

Difference
Mean
Median
-4.30%***
-0.76%***
-1.66%***
0.00%

Nov(except 06)
Mean
Median
0.41%
0.00%
1.96%
0.21%

Jan (except 07)
Mean
Median
0.40%
0.00%
2.07%
0.15%

Difference
Mean
Median
-0.01%
0.00%
0.11%
-0.06%

Panel B
Presale Market (treatment sample)

Monthly Project Turnover
Monthly Speculative Turnover
Panel C
Cyclicality of Trading in Presale and Spot Markets
Monthly Project Turnover—Presale Market
Monthly Project Turnover—Spot Market

29

Table III: Policy impact on (speculative) turnover
This table presents the result of the regression analysis of the policy impact on (speculative) turnover. The first three columns report the turnover responses in the
6-month post-policy window (2006:11-2007:06), and the second three columns present results 12 months after the policy (2006:11-2007:12). The month when
the policy came into effect (i.e., 2006:12) is excluded. Turnover is defined as the number of transactions for a condominium project in a month divided by project
size. Turnover* is equal to Turnover on presale market: it is speculative turnover, i.e., the number of presale purchases sold before project completion divided by
size. WD is a dummy that is equal to one if it is after the buyer stamp duty deferral withdrawal. Presale is a dummy that is equal to one for presale condominium
projects. Pre-policy turnover is the average turnover of a project in the three months before the event window (2006:08-2006:10). Pre-Policy Speculative
Trading is the average speculative turnover in a presale project during the three months before the policy (2006:08-2006:10). Size is the number of units in a
project. Central is equal to one if the project is in the Central (core) region of Singapore. Standard errors are clustered to allow correlated outcomes within
condominium projects in the presale (or control) market in the same location (central vs. non-central) at a given month. Standard errors are included in
parentheses, and ***, **, * indicate 1%, 5%, and 10% significance, respectively.

VARIABLES
WD
Presale
WD × Presale

6 months after the policy (2006:11-2007:06)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Turnover
Turnover*
Turnover
0.004***
0.004***
0.002
(0.00)

(0.00)

0.055***
(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

0.012***

0.057***

0.013***

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

-0.035***

-0.016***

-0.042***

-0.018***

(0.01)

(0.00)

(0.01)

(0.00)

Pre-Policy Speculative Trading

0.171**

WD × Pre-Policy Speculative Trading
Pre-policy Turnover
Project Size
Central
Constant
Observations
R-squared

(0.00)

12 months after the policy (2006:11-2007:12)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Turnover
Turnover*
Turnover
0.002
0.002
0.000
(0.00)

0.241***

(0.07)

(0.04)

-0.342***

-0.377***

(0.03)

(0.03)

0.072*

0.055***

0.081**

0.041**

0.035***

0.052**

(0.04)

(0.02)

(0.03)

(0.02)

(0.01)

(0.02)

0.000

0.000***

0.000***

0.000***

0.000***

0.000***

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

0.004**

0.004***

0.004***

0.002

0.002

0.002

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

0.004***

0.004***

0.005***

0.006***

0.006***

0.007***

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

5,467
0.16

5,467
0.03

5,467
0.03

10,153

10,153

10,153

0.12

0.02

0.01

30

Table IV: Policy impact on price volatility
This table presents the results on the policy impact on the project price volatility. Price Volatility is defined as the
difference between the highest and lowest (log) transaction price (after adjusting for market and hedonics) for each
project in a month. We require the number of transactions in the project to be at least two for the variable to be well
defined. Condominium projects in the presale and spot markets are included. The first two columns report the sixmonth impact (2006:11-2007:06), and the second two columns present results twelve months after the policy
(2006:11-2007:12). The month when the policy came into effect (2006:12) is excluded. WD is a dummy that is equal
to one if it is after the buyer stamp duty deferral withdrawal. Presale is a dummy that is equal to one for presale
condominium projects. Pre-Policy Speculative Trading is the average speculative turnover in a presale project during
the three months before the policy (2006:08-2006:10). Transaction Volume Control is equal to the number of
transactions in the project-month and is used to control for the small sample bias introduced in calculating the price
volatility measure. Other control variables include pre-policy turnover, project size and Central region dummy (see
Table III). Standard errors are clustered to allow correlated outcomes within condominium projects in the presale (or
control) market in the same location (central vs. non-central) at a given month. Standard errors are included in
parentheses, and ***, **, * indicate 1%, 5%, and 10% significance, respectively.

Variable

WD
Presale
WD × Presale

6 months after the policy
(2006:11-2007:06)
(1)
(2)
Price
Price
volatility
volatility

12 months after the policy
(2006:11-2007:12)
(3)
(4)
Price
Price
volatility
volatility

0.038***

0.039***

0.031***

0.036***

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

-0.012

-0.016

(0.02)

(0.01)

0.002

0.027*

(0.02)

(0.02)

Pre-policy speculative trading
WD × Pre-policy speculative trading

-0.614**

-0.545**

(0.26)

(0.25)

0.140

0.395*

(0.23)

Pre-policy Turnover
Project Size
Central
Transaction Volume Control
Constant
Observations
R-squared

(0.22)

0.006

0.151

-0.044

0.006

(0.04)

(0.11)

(0.04)

(0.04)

0.000***

0.000***

0.000***

0.000***

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

0.044***

0.044***

0.041***

0.044***

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

0.005***

0.004***

0.005***

0.005***

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

0.031***

0.028***

0.035***

0.031***

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

2,170
0.22

2,170
0.22

3,530
0.23

3,530
0.23

31

Table V: Policy impact on trading and volatility in the presale (treatment) market: underpriced vs. overpriced projects
This table presents the result of the regression analysis of the policy impact among the overpriced and underpriced projects in the presale market relative to the
change in the spot (control) market. We argue the presence of informed speculators is proportionately higher in underpriced presale projects than in overpriced
presale projects. Panel A shows the results of the average effect in the 6 or 12 months after the policy change. The Underpricing dummy is one if a presale
project has an average project-specific price that is in the bottom 30% distribution among all presale projects in 2006:10, and the Overpricing dummy is one if a
presale project has an average project-specific price in the top 30% distribution among all presale projects in 2006:10. Turnover* is equal to the number of
speculative purchases (divided by size) for presale projects, and is equal to the number of purchases (i.e., Turnover) divided by size for spot projects. WD is a
dummy that is equal to one if a month is after the buyer stamp duty deferral withdrawal (i.e., 2007:01). WD_first 6 months is equal to one if the month falls in
the first 6 months after the buyer stamp duty deferral withdrawal (2007:01-2007:06), and WD_second 6 months is equal to one if the month is in the second 6
months after the policy change (2007:07-2007:12)We include the same set of control variables as in Table III and IV. Columns (1) and (2) present results on the
policy impact on (speculative) trading, and Columns (3) and (4) present results on the policy impact on price volatility. For a cleaner interpretation, the month in
which the policy is enforced (2006:12) is excluded. Standard errors are clustered to allow correlated outcomes within condominium projects in the presale (or
control) market in the same location (central vs. non-central) at a given month. They are included in parentheses, and ***, **, * indicate 1%, 5%, and 10%
significance, respectively.

(1)
VARIABLES

(2)

(3)

Turnover*

(4)
Price volatility

WD

6 months
0.003***
(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.01)

(0.01)

Underpricing Dummy

0.017***

0.018***

-0.061***

-0.049**

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.02)

(0.02)

-0.020***

-0.021***

0.065***

0.089***

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.02)

(0.03)

0.006*

0.009**

0.036***

0.040***

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.01)

(0.01)

-0.009**

-0.013***

-0.050***

-0.029**

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.02)

(0.01)

WD x Underpricing Dummy
Overpricing Dummy
WD x Overpricing Dummy

Other Controls
Observations
R-squared

12 months
0.001

6 months
0.034***

12 months
0.029***

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

5,121
0.05

9,555
0.02

1,971
0.25

3,227
0.25

32

Table VI: Does price informativeness decrease after the policy?
In this table, we investigate whether price informativeness decreases after the policy change in 2006:12. The
dependent variable (Amihud measure) is defined as the absolute value of project return in a given month divided by
the project turnover. We winsorize the Amihud measure at the top and bottom 1% tails to control for outliers.
Condominium projects in the presale and spot markets are included. The first column reports the six-month impact
(2006:11-2007:06), and the second column presents results twelve months after the policy (2006:11-2007:12). For a
cleaner interpretation, the month in which the policy is enforced (2006:12) is excluded. Other control variables
include pre-policy project turnover, pre-policy project-specific return, project size and Central region dummy. Please
refer to Table IV in the paper for definitions of the other independent variables. Standard errors are clustered to allow
correlated outcomes within condominium projects in the presale (or control) market in the same location (central vs.
non-central) at a given month. Standard errors are included in parentheses, and ***, **, * indicate 1%, 5%, and 10%
significance, respectively.

Variable
WD
Presale
WD×Presale
Constant
Controls
Observations
R-squared

6 Months after the policy
(2006:11-2007:06)
(1)
Amihud
-1.251

12 Months after policy
(2006:11-2007:12)
(2)
Amihud
-0.210

(0.80)

(0.95)

-5.493***

-5.672***

(0.86)

(0.92)

2.342**

3.132**

(0.94)

(1.22)

8.746***

7.821***

(0.93)

(1.11)

Yes
3,233
0.05

Yes
5,516
0.03

33

Appendix: The Private Residential Market and Presale in Singapore

Residential properties in Singapore can be broadly divided into three types: (i) HDB flats, sold by
the government’s Housing Development Board (HDB) at subsidized prices to eligible citizens below
stipulated income levels; (ii) non-landed private properties (condominium flats), not subject to ownership
restrictions, and (iii) landed private properties (detached, semi-detached, and terrace houses), which
normally can be owned by residents only. In 2009, HDB homes accounted for about 78% of the 1.13
million residential properties in Singapore, and the non-landed private properties for about 16%. The
presale activity examined in this paper pertains to the market for non-landed private properties, which are
sought after by high-income Singaporean households and expatriates, aspiring home upgraders from HDB
homes, as well as by domestic and international investors. Geographically the residential market can be
divided into the Central and Non-Central regions; the former is considered the prime location catering to
the demand for high-end private homes.
Non-landed residential projects, ranging in size from a few dozen property units to over a
thousand units, are often launched for presale before the commencement of construction (see project life
cycle timeline in Figure 1). A presale resembles a forward contract, whereby the developer undertakes to
deliver the project according to specification within a specified time period (usually around three years
from the commencement of construction) and the buyer is obliged to pay a predetermined price at the time
of purchase. Presale contracts are tradable, and transactions are conducted through private negotiations
(typically through brokers) as in the spot market. Presale contracts are as liquid as the completed property
units. Over the past 15 years, on average the annual dollar trading volume in the presale market is USD 7
billion. The monthly (dollar) transaction volume of uncompleted units is as large as (and often exceeds)
that of completed units most of the time .
The standard presale contract offered by developers involves a progressive payment scheme (PPS).
The buyer pays a fee of 5% to 10% of the property price to book the property for purchase. Within eight
weeks, the buyer signs the sale and purchase agreement (SPA) and makes a down payment of up to 20%
of the property price (less any booking fee already paid). Progressive payments equal to 40% of the price
will subsequently be made during construction. The building project is deemed completed when a
temporary occupancy permit (TOP) is issued by the Commissioner of Building Control, at which time a
further 25% of the payment is due. The final 15% of the price is due upon the transfer of legal title and
issuance of the certificate of statutory completion (CSC). Presale proceeds are typically kept in escrow to
be released to the developer according to construction progress. In contrast to other presale markets (e.g.,
China), developers in Singapore almost never default or abandon a project prematurely (even during the

34

market distress period). In case of buyer default upon project completion, which has been rare, developers
have recourse against the defaulting buyers for the loss incurred.
As shown in Figure 1, the life cycle of a project is represented by a timeline with a reference point
at the project completion date (or TOP date). Let T denote the TOP date. Transactions before TOP are
referred to as presale (forward) transactions, and those after TOP are resale (spot) transactions. In
Singapore, a presale differs from a spot market transaction in three important respects. First, it allows the
buyer and the developer to lock in at time t<T a fixed price for the property to be delivered at time T.
Second, it offers the buyer an interest-free leveraged position in the property by allowing delayed payment
of a substantial portion of the price. Last, the presale mechanism allows developers or homebuyers to
hedge future price risks. Given that developer and buyer defaults are very rare in Singapore, the value of a
presale contract has three key components: the discounted value at t of a future spot price at T, a hedging
premium arising from price risk sharing between the developer and the investor, and the interest saving
derived from the interest-free leverage.
Let pij be the (log) value associated with the hedonics of the property unit j in the condominium
project i and p(t) be the log spot price index. Further, let  and 2, respectively, be the expected rate of
appreciation and the instantaneous diffusion variance of the spot price between t and T. According to Liu,
Edelstein, and Wu (2011), the hedging premium, denoted by h, increases with the uncertainty of spot price
at T, 2(T−t), when the developer is risk neutral and the buyer is risk averse.; h = h(2(T−t)). Without
financial leverage, the value of the presale contract at t<T would be exp(pij+p(t)+(T-t)−(r+)∙(Tt))+h(2(T−t))), where r is the interest rate and  is the real estate risk premium. Suppose the presale
contract requires an upfront down payment equal to 1− fraction of the forward price, with the remaining 
<1 portion due at T. In other words, the presale investor gets interest-free financing with a loan-to-value
ratio of  <1 between time t and T. In the log term (with the use of the first-order Taylor expansion), we
obtain Vij(t,T), the market value at time t of the forward contract for property j in the condominium project
i to be delivered at TOP date T, as:
(

(

))

( )

(

)

(

(

))

(

)

(A.1)

where d  r     denotes rental yield (according to the Gordon valuation formula). The last three
components of Eq. (A.1), which are all proportional to time to TOP, T−t, represent adjustments for presale.
The presale adjustments decrease with T−t at rate d due to foregone rental income but increase with T−t in
proportion to r and 2 due to interest saving and buyer risk aversion respectively.
Since Eq. (A.1) serves as a pricing benchmark in this study, we do not have to identify its
structural parameters. Hence we use a semi-parametric specification to control for the time-varying

35

presale price adjustments. The transaction price per square foot of a presale property unit j in development
project i, Pij, can be expressed as the fundamental value Vij plus a price discovery error ij(t):
(

(

))

(

(

))
( )

( )
(

)

(

)

( )

(A.2)

where pij represents hedonic adjustment (including project i fixed effect, and unit j characteristics such as
floor area, and floor level), p(t) is the log spot price index. (T−t) equals zero when T−t ≤0 and is linear
in (T−t) when Tt >0. t denote calendar month fixed effects to control for time-varying components of
the presale adjustments, and Central is the Central Region fixed effect to account for potential difference in
required rental yield between the two regions. Developer_sale is a dummy equal to 1 if the sale is by the
developer, to control for any sale incentive offered by the developer. ij(t) is the price residual, the average
of which within the project i in each period gives the project-specific price i(t). Note that when T−t ≤0
(i.e., after the project is completed), Eq. (A.2) reduces to the standard hedonic price index model widely
used in real estate market studies (Rosen, 1974).
First, we estimate the spot market benchmark price indexes (adjusted for CPI trend) for the
Central and Non-Central Regions by applying Eq. (A.2) (in this case the standard hedonic pricing model)
to transactions in completed projects (t>T). We obtain both the market benchmark indexes and the
project-specific pricing error (ij(t)) in the spot market (relative to the market trend and adjusting for
hedonic attributes). The estimated benchmark indexes are plotted in Panel A of Figure A_1 (which can be
compared to the average transaction price shown in Panel B of Figure A_1). Second, we estimate the
presale pricing model using the presale transactions adjusted for the spot benchmark price trends
estimated in the first step. The estimates are reported in Table A_I, Panel B and are used to compute
project-specific pricing errors (ij(t)) during presale.
[Insert Figure A_1 about here]
[Insert Table A_I about here]
To assess robustness of the hedonic estimates, we carry out the estimation by dividing the sample
into earlier (<2004) and later (> = 2004) subsamples, and by restricting our estimation to projects larger
than the cross-sectional mean. The estimated price indices and hedonic coefficients are very similar to
those in Panel A of Table A_I. These results are not reported but are available from the author upon
request.

36

Figure A_1: Benchmark price indices and regional average prices
Panel A shows the estimated price index using all resale (spot) transactions from 1995 to 2010, according to Eq.
(A.2); the index values are the region-specific month dummies from the regression reported in Panel A of Table A_I.
The index is set to be 100 for Non-Central region in 1995:01. Panel B shows the CPI-adjusted monthly average
transaction price among all transactions per square foot (denoted in USD).

Panel A: Estimated Price Index
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60

Non-Central Index

Central Index

Panel B: Monthly Average Transaction Price

(Real) Transaction Price per sq ft (USD)

1100
1000

900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200

Non-Central

Central

37

Table A_I: OLS estimates of benchmark price equations
This table reports the estimated coefficients for hedonics of our pricing model (Eq. A.2). Panel A presents results on
the pricing model estimation for the spot transactions, and Panel B report results on the pricing model estimation for
the presale transactions. The log region-specific spot price index used to adjust the dependent variable in Panel B
equals the region-specific calendar month fixed effects estimated in Panel A. Standard errors are clustered at the
project level. P-values are reported in the parenthesis and **,* represent 1% and 5% significance respectively.

Panel A: Spot market sample
(transaction in completed projects, t>T)
Dependent variable
ln(Floor_level)
ln(Floor_level)
×Central
Ground_floor
Ground_floor
×Central
ln(Living_area)
ln(Living_area)
×Central
ln(Building_age)

ln(price psf)
0.040**
(0.00)

0.001
(0.49)

0.024**
(0.00)

-0.012**
(0.01)

-0.274**
(0.00)

0.107**
(0.00)

-0.127**
(0.00)

Panel B: Presale market sample
(transaction in uncompleted projects, t ≤T)
ln(price psf)−ln(region-specific
Dependent variable
spot price index)
0.038**
ln(Floor_level)
(0.00)

ln(Floor_level)
×Central
Ground_floor
Ground_floor
×Central
ln(Living_area)
ln(Living_area)
×Central
Time_to_completion

ln(Building_age)
×Central

-0.018**
(0.01)

Time_to_completion
×Central

FE

Building blocks

Developer_sale

FE
FE
Observations
R-squared

Calendar month
for Central
Calendar month
for Non-Central
80,751
0.944

FE
FE
Observations
R-squared

0.019**
(0.00)

-0.018**
(0.00)

0.026**
(0.00)

-0.217**
(0.00)

0.115**
(0.00)

0.002**
(0.00)

0.001**
(0.00)

-0.031**
(0.00)

Building blocks
Time_to_completion×
(Calendar month fixed effects)
100,704
0.941

38

Internet Appendix
(Not Intended for Publication)

39

Internet Appendix Table I. Dynamics of Speculative Turnover and Volatility Response
This table shows results that decompose the speculative and volatility response in all presale projects (treatement sample) in the 12 month post-policy period into
the response in the first 6 months and the second 6 months. WD_first 6 months is equal to one if the month falls in the first 6 months after the buyer stamp duty
deferral withdrawal (2007:01-2007:06), and WD_second 6 months is equal to one if the month is in the second 6 months after the policy change (2007:072007:12). Column (1) shows the decomposition result of the finding in column (5) in Table III, and column (2) shows the decomposition result of the finding in
column (3) in Table IV. We use the same specification and include the same set of control variables as in Table V. Standard errors are clustered to allow
correlated outcomes within condominium projects in the presale (or control) market in the same location (central vs. non-central) at a given month. They are
included in parentheses, and ***, **, * indicate 1%, 5%, and 10% significance, respectively.

(1)

(2)

VARIABLES

Turnover*
12 months

Price volatility
12 months

WD_first 6 months

0.004***
(0.00)
-0.000
(0.00)
0.013***
(0.00)
-0.016***
(0.02)
-0.020***
(0.00)
Yes
10,153
0.04

0.037***
(0.01)
0.022***
(0.01)
-0.016
(0.01)
0.006
(0.02)
0.061***
(0.02)
Yes
3,530
0.24

WD_second 6 months
Presale
WD_first 6 months x Presale
WD_second 6 months x Presale
Other Controls
Observations
R-squared

40

Internet Appendix Table II. Trading response to BSDDW using an alternative speculator
measure
This table investigates the robustness of the policy impact on speculators with a subsample analysis. We remove the
presale projects that are completed in more extreme market conditions (i.e., either of the three months before
completion occurs at a time where market index is in the top or bottom 30% of the time-series distribution). The
sample period is the one month before and one month after the policy event (2006:11-2007:01), and results also hold
using a longer post-event window. For a cleaner interpretation, the month in which the policy is enforced (2006:12)
is excluded. Refer to Table III for definitions of the variables. Standard errors are clustered to allow correlated
outcomes within condominium projects in the presale (or control) market in the same location (central vs. noncentral) at a given month. Standard errors are included in the parenthesis, and ***, **, * indicate 1%, 5% and 10%
significance respectively.

VARIABLES
WD

(1)
Turnover

(2)
Turnover*

-0.001

-0.001

(0.00)

(0.00)

Presale

0.022***

-0.000

(0.00)

(0.00)

WD × Presale

-0.024***

-0.009***

(0.00)

(0.00)

Pre-policy Turnover

0.205***

0.081***

Project Size

(0.02)

(0.01)

0.000

0.000

(0.00)

(0.00)

Central

0.003***

0.003***

(0.00)

(0.00)

Constant

0.004***

0.005***

(0.00)

(0.00)

1,461
0.20

1,461
0.05

Observations
R-squared

41

Internet Appendix Table III: Robustness checks for price volatility analysis
This table presents more specifications on the analysis of the policy impact on the project price volatility. Panel A shows the 6-month and 12-month price
volatility result using weighted least squares (to correct for heteroskedasticity), where the weights are the predicted residual square from the first-stage OLS on
the monthly transaction volume, volume squared, and project size. Panel B shows the 6-month price volatility result by project size. Column (1) of Panel B
presents results for projects with size between 40 and 204 units, and Column (2) shows the impact for projects with more than 204 units. Standard errors in Panel
B are clustered to allow correlated outcomes within condominium projects in the presale (or control) market in the same location (central vs. non-central) at a
given month. Please refer to Table III in the paper for detailed variable definitions. Other control variables are the same as in Table IV. Standard errors are
included in the parenthesis, and ***, **, * indicate 1%, 5%, and 10% significance, respectively.

Panel A: Weighted least squares
Time horizon after the policy intervention: 6 months (2006:11-2007:06)
(1)
VARIABLES
Price volatility
WD
0.041***

12 months (2006:11-2007:12)
(2)
Price volatility
0.033***

(0.01)

(0.01)

Presale

-0.012

-0.007

(0.02)

(0.02)

WD × Presale

0.019

0.040**

(0.02)

(0.02)

Yes
2,170
0.24

Yes
3,530
0.28

Controls
Observations
R-squared

Panel B: By project size (with 6 months after the policy intervention, 2006:11-2007:06)

VARIABLES
WD

Small projects (40-200 units)
(1)
Price volatility
0.036***

Large projects (>200 units)
(2)
Price volatility
0.038***

(0.01)

(0.01)

Presale

-0.005

-0.055*

(0.01)

(0.03)

WD × Presale

-0.023*

0.057**

(0.01)

(0.02)

Controls
Observations

Yes
957

Yes
1,213

R-squared

0.12

0.27

42

Internet Appendix Table IV: Policy impact on rolling return volatility
This table shows the policy impact on price volatility using an alternative return volatility measure as the dependent
variable. Return volatility is defined as, on a rolling basis, the standard deviation of the monthly project-specific
return over the most recent six months. We require the number of transactions in the project to be at least one for the
variable to be well defined. Condominium projects in the presale and spot markets are included. For a cleaner
interpretation, the month in which the policy is enforced (2006:12) is excluded. Volatility Bias is equal to
∑ (
), where
denotes the number of transactions for project k in month t (the proof is available
upon request). It is used to control for the bias introduced in calculating the return volatility measure when there are
few transactions in a project-month. Other unreported control variables include the lagged return volatility (up to five
months), pre-policy project turnover, pre-policy project-specific return, project size and Central dummy. Please refer
to Table III in the paper for definitions of the other independent variables. We compute Newey-West (with five lags)
standard errors to control for autocorrelation. Standard errors are included in the parenthesis, and ***, **, * indicate
1%, 5%, and 10% significance, respectively.

Time horizon after the policy intervention:

Variables
WD
Presale

6 months
(2006:11-2007:06)
(1)
Rolling volatility
-0.000

12 months
 (2006:11-2007:12)
(2)
Rolling volatility
0.001

(0.00)

(0.00)

-0.006***

-0.007***

(0.00)

(0.00)

WD× Presale

0.005**

0.007***

(0.00)

(0.00)

Volatility Bias

0.007***

0.006***

(0.00)

(0.00)

Constant

0.005**

0.008***

(0.00)

(0.00)

Yes
2,974

Yes
5,203

Controls
Observations

43

