                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DOES THE FEDERAL RESERVE CARE ABOUT THE REST OF THE WORLD?

                                         Barry Eichengreen

                                        Working Paper 19405
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19405


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2013




Prepared for the NBER Symposium on the First 100 Years of the Federal Reserve, July 10, 2013. I
thank Christina, David Romer, and the editors of this journal for comments and Chris Krogslund for
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Barry Eichengreen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Does the Federal Reserve Care About the Rest of the World?
Barry Eichengreen
NBER Working Paper No. 19405
September 2013
JEL No. E4,N1

                                              ABSTRACT

Many economists are accustomed to thinking about Federal Reserve policy in terms of the institution’s
dual mandate, which refers to price stability and high employment, and in which the exchange rate
and other international variables matter only insofar as they influence inflation and the output gap
– which is to say, not very much. This conventional view is heavily shaped by the distinctive circumstances
of the last three decades, when the influence of international considerations on Fed policy has been
limited. I discuss how the Federal Reserve paid significant attention to international considerations
in its first two decades, followed by relative inattention to such factors in the two-plus decades that
followed, then back to renewed attention to international aspects of monetary policy in the 1960s,
before the recent period of benign neglect of the international dimension. This longer perspective
is a reminder that just because the Fed has not attached priority to international aspects of monetary
policy in the recent past is no guarantee that it will not do so in the future.


Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu
                  Does the Federal Reserve Care About the Rest of the World? 1

                                             Barry Eichengreen

        Many economists are accustomed to thinking about Federal Reserve policy in terms of
the institution’s “dual mandate,” which refers to price stability and high employment, and in
which the exchange rate and other international variables matter only insofar as they influence
inflation and the output gap – which is to say, not very much.
         In fact, this conventional view is heavily shaped by the distinctive and peculiar
circumstances of the last three decades, when the influence of international considerations on
Fed policy has been limited. In this paper, I will discuss how the Federal Reserve paid significant
attention to international considerations in its first two decades, followed by relative inattention
to such factors in the two-plus decades that followed, then back to renewed attention to
international aspects of monetary policy in the 1960s, before the recent period of benign neglect
of the international dimension. This longer perspective is a reminder that just because the Fed
has not attached priority to international aspects of monetary policy in the recent past is no
guarantee that it will not do so in the future. Indeed, I will argue in the conclusion that in the next
few decades, international aspects are likely to play a larger role in Federal Reserve policy-
making. 2
International from the Start
        The founding of the Federal Reserve in 1913 is commonly portrayed in terms of domestic
financial-stability considerations. Prior to 1914 financial crises were frequent. Interest rates
spiked in the planting and harvest seasons, giving rise to financial stringency and instability.
There was dissatisfaction with how market participants had managed the most recent crisis in
1907. The Fed was therefore created “to furnish an elastic currency…and for other purposes” in
the words of the Federal Reserve Act of 1913. Importantly, the Act did nothing to change the
international dimension of American monetary policy. The dollar was still convertible
exclusively into gold at $20.67 a troy ounce, as it had been since the Gold Standard Act of 1900.
Federal Reserve Banks were now obliged hold gold in the amount of 40 per cent of their notes
(and gold and other eligible assets equal to 35 per cent of deposits and reserves) and to pay out
gold at this price.
         But this is only part of the story. Political agreement to create a new central banking
institution required building a coalition. In addition to those desiring a more elastic currency,
there were exporters, importers and financiers interested in establishing a market in dollar-

1
  Prepared for the NBER Symposium on the First 100 Years of the Federal Reserve, July 10, 2013. I thank Christina,
David Romer, and the editors of The Journal of Economic Perspectives for comments and Chris Krogslund for
research assistance.
2
  The treatment here is necessarily summary in form. For readers interested in additional rigor and detail on the
intersection of international issues and monetary policy, some starting points would be Gali and Gertler (2010),
which is an especially useful compendium of recent scholarship; Friedman and Schwartz’s (1963) Monetary History
of the United States, which touches more than incidentally on the role of international factors in Fed decision
making; and my personal favorite, William Adams Brown’s (1940) The International Gold Standard Reinterpreted,
which devotes successive chapters to the United States and its central bank.


                                                        1
denominated trade credits and enhancing the currency’s role as a vehicle for international
investment (Broz 1997). Attaining these goals required creating a central bank to provide liquidity
to international markets. Before World War I, the US dollar and American financial firms played
little role in financing international trade, including even the trade of U.S. importers and
exporters. A U.S. coffee roaster seeking to import beans from Brazil would request a letter of
credit from its bank, and that bank in turn would arrange a letter of credit denominated in pounds
sterling with its London correspondent, because that was the only instrument that the Brazilian
exporter would accept. Taking payment in dollars was unattractive, given the volatility of US
markets. In addition, because US banks were prohibited from branching abroad, exporters to US
markets faced practical difficulties in converting US dollar payments back into their local
currencies.
        Thus, the New York financial community found itself unable to compete with London for
an important source of business. US importers and exporters faced a competitive disadvantage
from having to pay two commissions, one to their local bank and one to its London
correspondent, in order to arrange trade credit. Paul Warburg, the German-born financier who
was heavily involved in drawing up the blueprint that became the Federal Reserve Act, was
familiar from his career in the import-export and banking business in Hamburg and London with
the advantages that European economies derived from possessing local markets “trade
acceptances”--the contemporary name for what we now call trade credits. These are essentially
explicit documented promises by the purchaser of a good produced in another country to pay for
a purchase at a future time.
        Agreement to establish the Fed required building an alliance between those with
financial-stability concerns and these other groups seeking the remedy the problems created by
the absence of a trade-acceptance market. The Federal Reserve Act thus authorized U.S. banks to
branch abroad to originate foreign business. And one of the first initiatives of the new central
bank was to take steps to foster a market in acceptances (LaRoche 1993; Eichengreen and Flandreau
2012). A key challenge in creating a new financial market is the problem of developing liquidity.
Without a minimum level of transactions, the market will lack liquidity; conversely, if the market
lacks liquidity no one will transact. This was the chicken-and-egg problem that the Fed, seeking
to foster a market in acceptances, faced in the 1920s. It responded by stepping in as buyer and
liquidity provider of last resort, purchasing US dollar trade acceptances when private demand
was lacking. For much of the 1920s, the Fed it was the dominant purchaser. Its efforts succeeded
in that New York and the dollar matched and in some years surpassed London and sterling as a
source of credit for global trade. This was a startling change from before 1914.
         In addition to underscoring the early Fed’s international orientation, this episode had two
further features relevant to modern central banking. First, a policy of direct Federal Reserve
purchases in credit markets with liquidity problems – while a controversial aspect of recent
policy -- is not at all unprecedented. Second, the success of the 1920s was fleeting. When
international trade declined in the 1930s, the market in trade acceptances declined even more
rapidly. The other investors who the Fed had sought to attract by providing liquidity and
stabilizing pricing never entered the market in large numbers. It is tempting to speculate that the
Fed’s overwhelming buy-side dominance crowded out potential entrants. When the central bank
curtailed its involvement in the trade acceptance market the 1930s, at a time when it had bigger
fish to fry, the market collapsed.

                                                 2
        The Federal Reserve Bank of New York was the single most active participant in the US
dollar acceptance market, which is no surprise given that the bulk of acceptance business was
transacted in New York. The New York Fed similarly took the lead on the new central bank’s
other international policy initiative, namely, reconstruction and maintenance of the international
gold standard. Its leadership reflected the views of Benjamin Strong, the influential governor of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Strong saw exchange rate stability – an important
corollary of the gold standard – as critical for the expansion of international trade, and
international trade as key to U.S. prosperity. Great Britain had traditionally been at the center of
the gold standard system; only if it now restored gold convertibility were other countries apt to
follow.
        Thus, in the spring and summer of 1924, the New York bank cut its discount rate (the
interest rate it charged when advancing money to exporters and their banks by purchasing trade
acceptances) by a cumulative 150 basis points, as shown in Figure 1, with the objective of
making the pound sterling a relatively more attractive investment, inducing capital to flow from
New York to London, and helping the Bank of England push sterling up to the prewar exchange
rate against the dollar, where it could then be stabilized (Clarke 1967). 3 To ensure a wider impact
on financial markets, the New York Fed also purchased US Treasury securities, in the course of
so doing helping to establish the efficacy of open market operations as an instrument of
monetary control. After importing gold for 51 consecutive months from December 1920 to April
1925, the United States now exported it instead. In January 1925 the Federal Reserve agreed to
advance the British Treasury an additional $200 million in gold while encouraging a banking
syndicate led by J.P. Morgan to provide a $100 million line of credit.
        This was not an act of altruism: Strong firmly believed that helping Britain back onto the
gold standard, by paving the way for a broader stabilization of exchange rates, would lend
stimulus to U.S. exports and economic growth. But that view was not universally shared within
the Federal Reserve System. Strong’s initiative was criticized, for example, by Adolph Miller,
founding governor of the Federal Reserve System and previously professor at the University of
California, Berkeley. Miller argued that the resulting monetary policy was inappropriately loose
for domestic circumstances. Along with others like then-Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover,
Miller warned that low interest rates were fueling unsustainable real estate bubbles across
Florida and from Detroit to Chicago. This was the first full-blown controversy within the Federal
Reserve over the relative importance of domestic and international objectives.
        The second controversy arose in 1927, when Strong again proposed cutting interest rates,
this time in order to help Britain stay on the gold standard. Miller would have objected, but he
was on summer holiday in California. When he returned he mounted a strenuous attack on the
policy as inappropriate for an economy already recovering from a brief recession. Monetary
historians have been similarly critical (as described in Meltzer 2002) , suggesting that a policy
looser than appropriate from a domestic standpoint helped to fuel the commercial real estate
boom and Wall Street run-up of the late 1920s, both of which came down with a crash. Better,
they conclude, would have been for the Fed to keep its eye on the domestic ball.



3
 At this time, individual Federal Reserve Banks were free to change their own discount rates, subject to the review
and determination of the Federal Reserve Board.

                                                         3
         The traditional constraint in which a central bank needs to hold interest rates high to
attract capital inflows and defend the exchange rate then reemerged, with a vengeance, late in
1931. In a shock to financial markets, Britain departed from the gold standard on September 21,
1931. The dollar weakened against the continental European currencies, and gold losses mounted
rapidly. In part this reflected worries about U.S. competitiveness as it became clear that some
two dozen other countries were preparing to follow Britain in devaluing their currencies. Even
more important was psychological contagion – the wake-up-call effect – since if one reserve-
currency country could depreciate its currency, it was no longer inconceivable that the other, the
United States, might follow.
         At this point the Fed made its priorities unambiguously clear. On October 8, 1931, the
directors of the New York Fed voted to raise its discount rate by 100 basis points and then a
week later by another 100 basis points. Other Reserve Banks followed. These higher interest
rates were designed to attract financial capital from abroad, or at least discourage it from leaving,
thereby supporting the dollar. The wisdom of the decision can be questioned, coming as it did in
the midst of the Great Depression be questioned, when domestic conditions warranted lower
interest rates. But it clearly privileged exchange rate stability over price stability, financial
stability and economic stability.
       The final attack on the dollar came in February-March 1933 in the interregnum between
the Hoover and Roosevelt administrations. Worries that the new president might devalue –
something that only he, together with the Congress, and not the Federal Reserve could decide –
encouraged capital flight from the US to France, Switzerland and Belgium, countries seen as
having stronger currencies (Wigmore 1987). The decision in February 1933 to let Henry Ford’s
Union Guardian Trust Company go under – the equivalent for its time of the September 2008
bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers – then ignited a nationwide banking panic (Kennedy 1973;
Awalt 1969). At this point there was essentially no choice but to embargo gold exports, close the
banks, and regroup. On his first day in office, President Franklin Roosevelt invoked the Trading
with the Enemy Act for the necessary authority. 4
         At this point, the first era in which international considerations played a prominent role in
U.S. monetary policy drew to a close. President Roosevelt took the next step in April 1933,
making clear that there would be no early return to the gold standard. Currency would no longer
be exchanged for gold, and individuals were required to turn in their gold and to receive currency
in exchange. The Congress then passed a joint resolution canceling all contracts, public and
private, that called for payment in gold. Starting in October, FDR used the authority of the
Reconstruction Finance Corporation, an emergency agency created in 1932, to purchase gold
with dollars. Pushing up the dollar price of gold was equivalent to pushing down the exchange
rate of the dollar against the currencies of other countries still on the gold standard. In effect the
Executive Branch had taken emergency control of monetary policy. Finally in January 1934 the
president agreed to stabilize the price of gold at $35 an ounce. This was not a formal return to the
gold standard, since freedom for individuals to hold gold and the reintroduction of gold clauses
into private and government contracts were not part of the bargain. Nonetheless, changes in the
gold stock again translated into changes in the monetary base (the money supply narrowly


4
 One can’t help but be reminded of UK Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown invoking the UK Anti-
Terrorism Act to prevent the repatriation of Icelandic assets in 2008.

                                                     4
defined) – with some important exceptions detailed below – since the government again bought
gold for currency when it flowed in from abroad to keep the dollars price from falling.
        These steps inaugurated a new era in which international considerations played little role
in U.S. monetary policy. There was no need for high interest rates to stem capital outflows. The
new higher dollar price of gold attracted the yellow metal toward the U.S.; more generally,
devaluation enhanced the country’s international competitiveness. In addition, as the outlines of
World War II became visible, foreign capital fled in growing volumes to American shores.
Foreign economic and financial conditions mattered less for the U.S. economy than in the 1920s,
now that global trade had collapsed due to the imposition of higher tariffs, and long-term
international investment had been discouraged by exchange controls and sovereign debt defaults.

On the Horns of the Triffin Dilemma
        After FDR stabilized the price of gold at $35 an ounce, the Federal Reserve and the U.S.
Treasury jousted over who would control monetary policy. Standard practice was for Treasury to
purchase all gold inflows using funds in its account at the Federal Reserve, print “gold
certificates” in the same dollar amount, and deposit those certificates with the Fed, where they
could back an increase in the supply of money and credit. But on some occasions, notably in
1937, when it grew worried about inflation, Treasury would place its gold certificates in an
“inactive” account where they could not be used to expand the money supply. This practice was
known as “gold sterilization.” The Fed might still seek to influence the money supply by
changing the discount rate or reserve requirements for the banks. But Treasury’s sterilization
policy could frustrate or, as in 1937, undesirably amplify the effects (Irwin 2012).

        Confronted with a US Treasury that was seeking to carry out monetary policy in this way,
the Fed sought to regain the ability to influence money and credit market. Its campaign was
unsuccessful: with the outbreak of World War II and the very large government deficits of that
time, the Fed was drafted into keeping federal borrowing costs low by holding interest rates on
Treasury bills at 0.375 percent and Treasury bonds at 2.5 percent. The practice continued, despite
growing Fed resistance, for two years following World War II. Current controversies over how a
change in Federal Reserve policy would affect federal government borrowing costs in some
ways echo this earlier situation.
         This long period of fiscal dominance over monetary policy eventually came to an end
with the Treasury-Fed Accord of 1951, which officially ended the expectation that the Fed would
purchase US Treasury securities in whatever quantities were necessary to keep interest rates at
these low levels. Recent scholarship portrays monetary policy over the balance of the 1950s in a
relatively favorable light (for example, Romer and Romer 2002a). More pertinent from the
standpoint of this paper, monetary policy at this time focused on keeping inflation low and, to a
lesser extent, on responding to temporary deviations from full employment. The Minutes of the
Federal Open Market Committee in this period (available online at
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/publication/?pid=677) offer little emphasis or even mention of the US dollar
exchange rate, the US balance of payments, or the effect of US monetary policy on the rest of the
world. Of course, the discussions do mention of exports and imports, since these variables were
seen by members of the committee as containing information useful for forecasting the future
paths of inflation and what would later be called the “output gap.”


                                                   5
        But beyond that, international factors do not appear to have impinged on the committee’s
deliberations. There was a commitment after the Bretton Woods agreement of 1944 to continue
stabilizing the price of gold at $35 an ounce and pay out gold on demand to official foreign
creditors, but no matter. This was the period of the “dollar shortage.” The term refers to the
difficulty experienced by other countries in acquiring, whether through exporting or foreign
borrowing, the dollars they needed in order to finance merchandise imports from the United
States (Kindleberger 1950). At this time, gold held by the U.S. monetary authorities far
exceeded the foreign liabilities of the Federal Reserve, U.S. commercial banks and the U.S.
government combined. In this sense, the orientation of monetary policy was not constrained by
international implications.
         This situation began to change around 1960, when U.S. foreign monetary liabilities first
threatened to exceed U.S. gold reserves. Investors worried that John F. Kennedy, if elected
president, might follow in Roosevelt’s footsteps and devalue the dollar to get the economy
“moving again” (to quote Kennedy’s campaign literature). Robert Triffin (1960) published the
first of a series of books in which he warned that if the dollar remained the only source of global
liquidity (other than gold, which still lurked behind the scenes at the agreed-upon price of $35
per ounce), a crisis of confidence in the greenback would ultimately develop. Triffin’s dilemma
was based on the insight that the expansion of the global economy would bring growing
demands for international liquidity. If dollar-denominated claims, and specifically U.S. Treasury
bonds, were the primary source of such liquidity (on the margin), then U.S. foreign liabilities
would eventually come to exceed U.S. gold reserves. When this occurred, it would call into
question the ability of the U.S. authorities to convert these liabilities into gold at the fixed price
of $35 an ounce, creating crisis of confidence. Alternatively, if the authorities took steps to limit
US current account deficits and foreign lending, the rest of the world would be starved of
liquidity in an ongoing “dollar shortage,” and international transactions generally would suffer.
        The expectation that President Kennedy would devalue the US dollar proved erroneous,
but the other worries were not without foundation. Inflation accelerated in the later 1960s and
grew more erratic. The goals of Federal Reserve policy shifted from an overarching emphasis on
inflation to greater attention to unemployment and economic growth. Romer and Romer (2002b)
argue that this period saw a revolution in ideas in which policymakers forgot much of what they
had learned about the natural rate of unemployment. Instead, they overestimated potential output
and succumbed to the temptation to use monetary policy to target real variables. Fed chairman
William McChesney Martin believed that the Fed had an obligation to help keep federal debt
service at manageable levels, which constrained monetary policy as budget deficits grew.
         Even if the Fed was concerned about its gold losses and other international variables, it
might nonetheless be hard to detect that concern amongst these other changes. However, Bordo
and Eichengreen (2008) argue that the Fed paid considerable attention to balance-of-payments
considerations in the first half of the 1960s, tightening when it grew worried by the pace of gold
outflows. In addition to his concern with debt service, Fed Chairman Martin was a firm believer
in maintenance of the gold peg. Already in 1960, the Fed abandoned its traditional “bills-only
policy” (the policy of buying only short-term Treasury debt) in order to let short-term interest
rates rise, attract capital flows and strengthen the balance of payments (Solomon 1977, p. 36).
The Minutes of the FOMC regularly refer to balance-of-payments considerations. Many of these
statements, in an echo of the 1920s, came from President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New

                                                  6
York, now Alfred Hayes (Meltzer 2008). A count of references in the minutes and memoranda of
the FOMC, as available from 1950 through March 1976, normalized by pages, shows mention
(and presumably concern) with the balance of payments mounting in the first half of the 1960s
and peaking around mid-decade, as shown in Figure 2. 5
        Of course, mentioning international issues in the minutes is not the same as taking action
with these issues in mind, so Bordo and Eichengreen (2008) attempt to identify the role of those
mentions (and that concern) in the policy decisions of the Federal Open Market Committee.
They identify seven occasions when policy action was motivated primarily by international
considerations, and 23 when it was motivated by a combination of domestic and international
factors. That is, only rarely were international factors an overriding consideration, but they
generally combined with domestic factors to prompt policy action. The total of 30 such instances
suggests that international considerations were not inconsequential. The majority of these
instances were in the period through 1965 (although international considerations were also invoked
during crisis episodes in 1967-8 and 1971). These international concerns help to explain why
monetary policy in the first half of the 1960s was tighter than would be expected on the basis of
inflation and the output gap alone (Bordo and Eichengreen 2008; Taylor 1999). 6
         What changed between the first and second halves of the 1960s that made international
considerations less salient for Federal Reserve policy-makers? In the first half of the decade,
balance-of-payments management had effectively been a shared a shared responsibility of the
Treasury and the Fed. But as the Treasury pushed for adoption of an “interest equalization
tax”—a tax on purchases of foreign securities by US investors—and took a variety of other
policy measures designed to strengthen the balance of payments, it assumed primary
responsibility for balance-of-payments management. In addition, measures like the interest
equalization tax had effects tantamount to capital-flow taxes and controls. They gave the central
bank some room looser monetary with less concern that it would encourage an outflow of
investment capital. Whether these steps were good policy is debatable (Meltzer 1991 offers a
critical assessment). The acceleration of inflation and mounting political pressure on Chairman
Arthur Burns for loose monetary policy starting in 1970 suggests that there would have been
benefits to the Federal Reserve if it had continued to perceive itself as under the external
constraint under which it operated in the first half of the 1960s

After Bretton Woods


5
  Where dots are missing in Figure 2(as in the first half of the 1950s), there were zero mentions. Normalizing by
pages adjusts for the fact that the minutes and memoranda tended to grow longer over time, although raw counts
show basically the same picture. In principle, it should be possible to extend this analysis beyond 1976 when
transcripts of FOMC meetings become available. However, the transcripts are sharply discontinuous with the
minutes in terms of comprehensiveness; in addition, pagination and font size are quite different, and the pagination
and format of the transcripts themselves are not constant over time. This makes trends in both raw and per-page
counts more difficult to interpret. I have resisted the temptation. The outlier in mid-1963 is from a meeting in a
period of heightened concern about dollar stability (Eichengreen 2000). The Federal Reserve System had recently
drawn its full $150 million swap line with the Bundesbank, and dollar weakness had been a prominent topic at the
most recent monthly meeting of the Bank for International Settlements, where the Fed had been represented by
Charles Coombs of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
6
  Romer and Romer (2002b, p.57) similarly make the point that balance-of-payments considerations prevented the
Fed from being as expansionary as it would have otherwise wanted in the first half of the 1960s.

                                                          7
         The 1970s was a decade of mixed signals and uncertainty about Federal Reserve policy.
Unconstrained by the exchange rate, or for that matter much else, monetary policy drifted. This
changed in 1977 when Congress amended the Federal Reserve Act to include the “dual mandate”
that monetary policy should consider both stable prices and maximum employment, and in 1979
when Paul Volcker succeeded G. William Miller as chairman of the Federal Reserve and made
inflation control a priority. The touchstones of policy became deviations of inflation from low
single digits and fluctuations in the output gap. 7 One finds periodic mention of international
considerations in the minutes and transcripts of the Federal Open Market Committee of this time,
but it is clear that these variables mattered principally insofar as they were relevant to the future
evolution of inflation and the output gap.
         A combination of factors explains why international factors were less influential in the
late 1970s and early 1980s than in the 1920s, 1930s and 1960s. After the final collapse of the
Bretton Woods agreement in 1973, there was no longer an exchange rate peg or statutory gold
price to defend. The 1977 legislation gave the Fed a mandate to pursue price stability and full
employment but said nothing about the exchange rate, balance-of-payments or international
financial stability. The experience of the 1970s had taught that a Federal Reserve that failed to
achieve price stability would lack the credibility to successfully pursue other economic and
financial goals. The U.S. economy was large and closed enough that the Fed could afford to act
to a first approximation like the central bank of a closed economy. The U.S. share of world GDP
peaked in 1985 at 33 percent, at a time when the Soviet economy was in decline and China’s
growth spurt had just begun. 8 The U.S. trade/GDP ratio was rising but more slowly than in the
subsequent quarter century. The explosive growth of international capital flows and deepening of
international financial linkages was yet to come.
        International considerations did in some circumstances play a role in monetary policy
during this time. Volcker’s inflation-control strategy itself had an international dimension; the
fact that higher interest rates meant a stronger dollar made for sharper disinflation through the
channel of lower import prices (as argued by Sachs 1985).9 The Fed’s decision to back away from
a very tight monetary policy in 1982 may have been influenced by the outbreak of the Latin
American debt crisis and the threat this posed to the solvency of major U.S. banks (which is not
to deny that there was also an influence of the recession in 1981-2). Central bank governors as
well as finance ministers were party to the Plaza Agreement of 1985 between the US, the UK,
France, Germany and Japan to attempt to stem the continued rise of the dollar exchange rate.
This led to coordinated foreign exchange market intervention and, in March 1986, coordinated
interest rate reductions. Starting in 1986, central bank governors of the so-called G-7 countries
(the United States, United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy, Canada and Japan) met regularly,
together with their finance-ministry counterparts, on the sidelines of the spring and fall meetings
of the IMF and World Bank. In addition, senior central bank officials met bi-monthly at the

7
  Indeed, the observation of how the federal funds interest rate changed with differences in inflation and
unemployment after 1983 is what led the eponymous Professor Taylor to develop his rule.
8
  One should be cautious about these comparisons, because they depend on the exchange rate used to value
transactions in dollars, and, 1985 was when the dollar exchange rate was at a local peak. At purchasing power parity,
the US share of the global economy was more like 23 percent in 1985, and reaches another local peak in 1999.
Economists will of course debate which valuation method is more relevant when considering the conduct of
monetary policy.
9
  Nelson (2005) argues that the FOMC had something similar in mind when it tightened in 1978.

                                                         8
Bank of International Settlements. These meetings facilitated information exchange. They also
facilitated coordinated foreign-exchange-market intervention, frequently before the mid-1990s
and sporadically thereafter: in June 1998 when the yen depreciated in the wake of the Asian
crisis, in September 2000 when the euro weakened reflecting uncertainty about the policies of
Europe’s new central bank, and in March 2011 in response to the rise of the yen induced by the
Fukushima Earthquake and the liquidation of foreign assets by Japanese insurance companies. 10
        The global economic and financial crisis that unfurled in 2007 is another reminder that
the Fed cannot afford to neglect the impact of its policies on conditions abroad or the
implications of conditions abroad for its policies. On October 8, 2008, in the wake of Lehman
Bros. failure, the Federal Reserve coordinated a reduction in the federal funds rate with the
lending rates of the European Central Bank, Bank of England, Bank of Canada, Swiss National
Bank and Swedish Riksbank. Irwin (2013), with a little exaggeration, calls this the “first globally
coordinated easing in history.” Unusually, the Fed issued a joint statement together with these
other central banks announcing the action, which I interpret as an acknowledgment that
coordinating policy with foreign central banks might produce better outcomes under the
circumstances.
        In addition, the Fed arranged dollar swap lines with 14 foreign central banks starting in
December 2007 when the subprime crisis intensified. In these arrangements, the Federal Reserve
stands ready to swap US dollars with other central banks for the currencies of that bank. The Fed
renewed five of those dollar swap lines, notably that with the European Central Bank, in May
2010. These swap facilities were designed to alleviate financial problems abroad and limit the
blowback to U.S. markets if foreign banks, unable to secure US dollar funding, were forced to
liquidate their holdings of U.S. securities. These swap lines were an acknowledgement that what
happens abroad doesn’t always stay abroad and, while not modifying monetary policy to take
this fact into account, that the Fed must develop ancillary policy instruments to address strains in
foreign markets for US dollars. The Board of Governors (2013), in justifying the practice to a
skeptical Congress, noted that foreign currency swap lines might also be helpful for addressing
financial strains should U.S. institutions experience a shortage of foreign currency-denominated
liquidity, although the most recent swaps were not activated for this purpose.

Back to the Future
        The questions are whether international considerations will have a more powerful impact
on the U.S. economy in the future and how if at all the Federal Reserve should modify the
formulation and conduct of policy to take this into account. I posit three trends that will heighten
the impact of international variables on the U.S. economy. First, I assume that the U.S. will
continue to grow more open to international trade and financial transactions. Admittedly, this
assumption is contestable. While technological progress works inexorably to reduce the costs of
international transactions, and – I would argue – also reduces the cost of international relative to
domestic transactions, international openness depends not just on technology but also on policy,
which has been known to push in the other direction. But bear with me.

10
   To be clear, these intervention operations are decided in consultation by the US Treasury and the Federal Reserve.
Such operations are typically sterilized with the goal, sometimes questioned by academics, of moving the dollar
exchange rate without also moving the monetary base. On the effectiveness of sterilized intervention, a useful
starting point is Rogoff (1984).

                                                          9
        Second, I assume that emerging and frontier markets will continue to grow more rapidly
than mature economies, so that the U.S. economy will come to account for a progressively
declining share of the global economy. Again, catch-up and convergence continue are not
inevitable; their progress will depend on policy choices. But recent experience makes this
assumption a reasonable starting point.
        Third, I assume that the US dollar will lose its monopoly as funding currency for
international banks and as the all but exclusive vehicle and currency of denomination for
international transactions (for discussion, see Shin 2012). This is not to suggest, as does the film
Looper, that we will wake up tomorrow and discover that all transactions are conducted in
renminbi. 11 Movement toward other funding and vehicle currencies will be gradual, so that the
dollar ends up sharing its international role with other national units. But there is no fundamental
reason why the U.S. should be the only country with deep and liquid financial markets open to
the rest of the world. Moreover, the United States alone will not be able to provide safe and
liquid assets on the scale required by an expanding global economy. It follows that U.S. banks
and firms will rely more on foreign currency funding and liquidity in the future than the recent
past (Eichengreen 2011).
        Taken together, these three trends suggest that shocks to the exchange rate and balance of
payments will have a larger impact on the US economy in the future, and that the implications
may extend beyond those for inflation and the output gap. For example, US dollar appreciation
which creates competitiveness problems for the traded-goods sector will be more of a problem as
a larger share of U.S. output and employment is exposed to international competition. If dollar
appreciation causes US firms to exit the market and they face fixed costs of reentering (as in
Baldwin and Krugman 1989), then transitory currency swings may have permanent welfare-
reducing effects. This is one explanation for why other open economies adjust their policies in
response to movements in the exchange rate. It is an explanation for the aversion to freely
floating exchange rates, known as “fear of floating,” in emerging markets (Calvo and Reinhart
2002).
         A country on the receiving end of large capital inflows, in addition to experiencing a
rising exchange rate, is likely to feel unwelcome pressure on housing and financial markets.
Capital inflows into the United States in the period leading up to the subprime crisis are an
illustration of the problems that can arise. The effect on local markets will be larger the smaller
the economy is relative to the rest of the world and the more open it is to global markets. At the
time of writing, New Zealand is a case in point of a country that is dealing with these kinds of
housing and asset market concerns due to exchange-rate and capital-flow pressures (Wheeler
2013). 12 More generally, a variety of small open economies, and a number of middle-sized
countries like Brazil, have complained about the adverse impact of policies abroad on their




11
   Looper, as film buffs know, is set in 2044. In the original script, the protagonist planned to move to Paris “in the
future.” When the director found filming in Paris prohibitively expensive, the future was shifted to Shanghai, the
Chinese distributor having offered to pay for a crew to film there – see http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1276104/trivia.
12
   It is tempting to point to Ireland and Spain before 2009 as additional examples, but their cases are special for
obvious (euro-related) reasons.

                                                          10
economies, operating through these channels, and have adjusted monetary and other policies to
address them. 13
        Finally, as global markets grow relative to the U.S. market, and as international finance is
provided in a wider range of currencies, U.S. banks and firms will rely more on foreign currency
funding. As they accumulate liabilities denominated in foreign currency, the Federal Reserve
may then feel a growing reluctance to let the dollar exchange rate move for fear of the
destabilizing balance sheet effects (that banks and firms with foreign-currency-denominated
debts will be unable to service them using their domestic-currency earnings). Those adverse
balance sheet effects are another explanation for why smaller, more open economies where such
currency mismatches are prevalent find it hard to commit to regimes of flexible inflation
targeting that imply benign neglect of the exchange rate.
        Assume, as a result of the changes posited above, that the effect of the exchange rate and
capital flows grows more important. Does it follow that the Fed will have to modify the
formulation and conduct of monetary policy to take them into account?
        The answer, as with many economic questions, is “yes and no.” For example, if a higher
level of reliance on foreign currency funding causes exchange rate movements to have more
destabilizing balance sheet effects, then the first-best response is not to use monetary policy to
prevent those movements, but instead to strengthen prudential supervision and regulation of
banks and governance of corporations to prevent excessive exposure to this form of balance
sheet risk from arising in the first place. Mishkin and Savastano (2001) is an early statement of
the tradeoff between, on the one hand, the strength of supervision and regulation of balance-sheet
mismatches, and on the other hand, policies of benign neglect of the exchange rate on the other.
       Similarly, if capital inflows place worrisome upward pressure on housing and other asset
markets, then the first-best solution is to strengthen lending standards, raise margin requirements,
and otherwise address problems in housing and asset markets directly. The second-best set of
responses in this case would be to address the capital inflows that are the proximate source of the
problem by applying taxes to such inflows and, among other steps, tightening fiscal policy,
which should put downward pressure on interest rates and on the exchange rate. Trying to
address problems in asset markets caused by inflows of foreign capital by making adjustments in
monetary policy would be no more than a third best policy choice.
        As yet another example, if the issue is the risk of permanent damage to traded-goods
sectors because temporary exchange rate movements have permanent effects, then the first-best
response is to eliminate the financial imperfections forcing incumbents to exit and preventing
them from reentering, or to use tax and other policies (assuming that these can be enacted in a
form compliant with World Trade Organization rules) to address their problems directly.
       Readers will detect echoes here of the “lean versus clean debate” (White 2009; Mishkin
2011). The question in that context was whether central banks should lean against asset bubbles.
Earlier thinking tended to favor letting other agencies of government – bank supervisors,
regulators, those responsible for the conduct of fiscal policy – to address problems of asset

13
  For example, Brazilian Finance Minister Guido Mantega, registered strong complaints in a series of press
interviews and speeches starting in September 2010.

                                                        11
bubbles using other instruments better suited to the task than monetary policy, and for central
banks to limit their intervention to cleaning up the aftereffects. It would be presumptuous to
assert that recent events have permanently decided the question in favor of one view or the other.
But there is no question that those events have shifted the balance, by suggesting that central
banks should think harder about the need to take preemptive action both because other agencies
of government may not be doing their part and because cleaning up afterwards can be very
costly.
        The implication is that precisely the same issues will arise, with growing intensity over
time, in connection with movements in exchange rates and capital flows. There will be no return
to the gold standard of the 1920s or the Bretton Woods System of the 1950s and 1960s. But as
the US economy grows even more open and the rest of the world grows larger, international
considerations, operating through these channels, will impinge more directly on the central
bank’s key objectives of price and economic stability. The Fed will have no choice but to
incorporate those considerations more prominently into its policy decisions.




                                                12
Figure 1. Discount Rate, Federal Reserve Bank of New York




Notes: Data from NBER Macrohistory Data Base (series 13009).




                                                    13
Figure 2. References to Balance of Payments and Related Terms in the Minutes




       Notes: Mentions for each term are taken from minutes and memoranda of discussion for all meetings and
       telephone conferences of the Federal Open Market Committee from 1950 through March 1976. Data is fit
       with a 2nd degree local polynomial LOESS regression with span parameter α=0.75 (indicating that 75 of
       the data are used to estimate each local regression) and a +/- one standard error band.




                                                   14
References

Awalt, Francis Gloyd. 1969. “Recollections of the Banking Crisis in 1933.” Business History
Review 43(3): 347-371.

Baldwin, Richard, and Paul Krugman. 1989. “Persistent Trade Effects of Large Exchange Rate
Shocks.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 104(4): 635-654.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2013. “Central Bank Liquidity Swap Lines.”
Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/reform_swaplines.htm.
Bordo, Michael, and Barry Eichengreen. 2008. “Bretton Woods and the Great Inflation.” NBER
Working Paper14532 (December).
Brown, William Adams. 1940. The International Gold Standard 1914-1934. New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Broz, Lawrence. 1997. International Origins of the Federal Reserve System. Ithaca: Cornell
University Press.
Calvo, Guillermo, and Carmen Reinhart. 2002. “Fear of Floating.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117(2): 379-408.
Clarke, Stephen V.O. 1967. Central Bank Cooperation, 1925-31. New York: Federal Reserve
Bank of New York.
Eichengreen, Barry. 2000. “From Benign Neglect to Malignant Preoccupation: U.S. Balance of
Payments Policy in the 1960s.” In Economic Events, Ideas and Policies: The 1960s and After,
edited by George Perry and James Tobin, 185-242.Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution,
Eichengreen, Barry. 2011. Exorbitant Privilege: The Rise and Fall of the Dollar and the Future
of the International Monetary System. New York: Oxford University Press.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Marc Flandreau. 2012. “The Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, and
the Rise of the Dollar as an International Currency, 1914-1939.” Open Economies Review 23(1):
57-87.
Friedman, Milton, and Anna Schwartz.1963. A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-
1960. Princeton University Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Galí, Jordi, and Mark Gertler, eds. 2010. International Dimensions of Monetary Policy.
University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Irwin, Douglas. 2012. “Gold Sterilization and the Recession of 1937-8.” Financial History
Review 19(3): 249-267.
Irwin, Neil. 2013. The Alchemists: Three Central Banks and a World on Fire. New York:
Penguin.


                                              15
Kennedy, Susan Eastabrook. 1973. The Banking Crisis of 1933. Lexington: University Press of
Kentucky.

Kettl, Donald. 1986. Leadership at the Fed. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Kindleberger, Charles. 1950. The Dollar Shortage. Cambridge: MIT Press.
LaRoche, Robert K. 1993. “Bankers Acceptances.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
Quarterly Review 79(1): 75-85.
Meltzer, Allan. 1991. “U.S. Policy in the Bretton Woods Era.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Review 73(3): 54-83.
Meltzer, Allan. 2002. A History of the Federal Reserve, Vol. 1, 1913-1951. University of
Chicago Press.
Meltzer, Allan. 2008. “Bretton Woods and the Great Inflation: Comment.”
http://www.nber.org/chapters/c9175.pdf .
Mishkin, Frederic, and Miguel Savastano. 2001. “Monetary Policy Strategies for Latin
America.” Journal of Development Economics 66(2): 415-444.
Mishkin, Frederic. 2011. “Monetary Policy Strategy: Lessons from the Crisis.” NBER Working
Paper 16755 (February).
Nelson, Edward. 2005. “The Great Inflation of the Seventies: What Really Happened?” B.E.
Journal of Macroeconomics 5(1): 1-50.
Orphanides, Athanasios. 2003. “The Quest for Prosperity without Inflation.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 50(3): 633-663.
Reinhart, Carmen, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2013. “Shifting Mandates: The Federal Reserve’s First
Centennial.” NBER Working Paper 18888 (March).
Rogoff, Kenneth. 1984. “On the Effects of Sterilized Intervention: An Analysis of Weekly
Data.” Journal of Monetary Economics 14(2): 133-150.
Romer, Christina, and David Romer. 2002a. “A Rehabilitation of Monetary Policy in the 1950s.”
American Economic Association Papers and Proceedings 92(2): 121-127.
Romer, Christina, and David Romer. 2002b. “The Evolution of Economic Understanding and
Postwar Stabilization Policy,” In Rethinking Stabilization Policy, 11-78. Federal Reserve Bank
of Kansas City.

Sachs, Jeffrey. 1985. “The Dollar and the Policy Mix, 1985.” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 16(1): 117-185.
Shin, Hyun. 2012. “Global Banking Glut and Loan Risk Premium.” IMF Economic Review
60(2): 155-192.



                                               16
Solomon, Robert. 1977. The International Monetary System 1945-1976: An Insider’s View. New
York: Harper & Row.
Taylor, John. 1999. “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules.” In Monetary Policy
Rules, edited by John Taylor, 319-348. University of Chicago Press.
Triffin, Robert. 1960. Gold and the Dollar Crisis. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Wheeler, Graeme. 2013. “Manufacturing Decline Not Just a Dollar Story.” Speech delivered to
the New Zealand Manufacturers and Exporters Association, Auckland (20 February),
http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/speeches/5150125.html .
White, William. 2009. “Should Monetary Policy ‘Lean or Clean?’” Globalization and Monetary
Policy Institute Working Paper 34. Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas (August).
Wigmore, Barrie. 1987. “Was the Bank Holiday of 1933 Caused by a Run on the Dollar?”
Journal of Economic History 47(3): 739-755.




                                              17
