                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  INSURER COMPETITION IN HEALTH CARE MARKETS

                                            Kate Ho
                                          Robin S. Lee

                                       Working Paper 19401
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19401


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2013




This paper replaces an earlier working paper titled “Insurer Competition and Negotiated Hospital
Prices.” We have benefited from helpful comments and suggestions from the editor and five
anonymous referees, as well as numerous individuals (including Cory Capps, Allan Collard-
Wexler, Greg Crawford, David Cutler, Leemore Dafny, Jan De Loecker, David Dranove, Martin
Gaynor, Gautam Gowrisankaran, Phil Leslie, Julie Mortimer, Aviv Nevo, Ariel Pakes, Mike
Riordan, Bob Town, Mike Whinston, and Ali Yurukoglu) and conference and seminar
participants; and from exceptional research assistance from Patricia Foo. We acknowledge
support from the NYU Stern Center for Global Economy and Business. All errors are our own.
The authors have no other outside sources of funding and no relevant or material outside financial
interests that relate to the research described in this paper. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2013 by Kate Ho and Robin S. Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Insurer Competition in Health Care Markets
Kate Ho and Robin S. Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 19401
September 2013, Revised November 2016
JEL No. I11,L13,L40

                                         ABSTRACT

The impact of insurer competition on welfare, negotiated provider prices, and premiums in the
U.S. private health care industry is theoretically ambiguous. Reduced competition may increase
the premiums charged by insurers and their payments made to hospitals. However, it may also
strengthen insurers' bargaining leverage when negotiating with hospitals, thereby generating
offsetting cost decreases. To understand and measure this trade-off, we estimate a model of
employer-insurer and hospital-insurer bargaining over premiums and reimbursements, household
demand for insurance, and individual demand for hospitals using detailed California admissions,
claims, and enrollment data. We simulate the removal of both large and small insurers from
consumers' choice sets. Although consumer welfare decreases and premiums typically increase,
we find that premiums can fall upon the removal of a small insurer if an employer imposes
effective premium constraints through negotiations with the remaining insurers. We also
document substantial heterogeneity in hospital price adjustments upon the removal of an insurer,
with renegotiated price increases and decreases of as much as 10% across markets.


Kate Ho
Columbia University
Department of Economics
1133 International Affairs Building
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
kh2214@columbia.edu

Robin S. Lee
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 120
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
robinlee@fas.harvard.edu
1        Introduction
This paper examines the impact of insurer competition on premiums, negotiated hospital prices,
and welfare in the U.S. private and commercial health care industry. Our analysis is timely. In
many markets, the creation of state and federal health insurance exchanges and the emergence
of integrated and joint ventures by health providers and insurers have led to an increase in the
number and variety of insurance plans that are available to consumers. On the other hand, recently
proposed (e.g., between Aetna and Humana, and Anthem and Cigna) and consummated (e.g.,
between Centene and Health Net) national insurer mergers and other forms of consolidation tend
towards a more concentrated, and less competitive, insurance sector. Given the scale of the private
health care industry ($1 trillion in annual expenditures) and the magnitude of the payments made
to hospitals through negotiated prices ($400 billion), understanding how such changes impact the
level and growth of premiums and health care spending is of substantial policy relevance.1
        There is a standard intuition that reduced insurer competition may increase health expenditures
by raising insurer premiums and, with them, the payments made to medical providers. However,
the complex interactions between insurers and other players in concentrated oligopolistic health
care markets generate indirect effects that may offset such increases.2 In particular, employers (or
other significant purchasers) often constrain insurance product offerings in the large-group market,
thereby limiting the extent to which premiums can rise following a reduction in competition. A less
competitive insurance sector can also strengthen insurers’ bargaining leverage when negotiating
with medical providers over reimbursements, thus potentially reducing total payments. The overall
impact of reduced competition on both premiums and payments is theoretically ambiguous, and can
differ both across markets and—in the case of reimbursements—within a market across providers.3
        Our aim is to assess the impact of market structure changes on equilibrium outcomes in health
care markets. We focus on the large-group component of the employer-sponsored private health
insurance market, serving approximately 60% of the non-elderly population in the U.S (Fronstin,
2010). We provide a framework for analyzing insurer-hospital bargaining over negotiated provider
prices (or reimbursement rates), insurer-employer bargaining over premiums, household demand
for insurers, and individual demand for hospitals. We estimate parameters in our model using
detailed 2004 California admissions, claims, and enrollment data, and information on insurers’
provider networks and negotiated hospital prices, obtained from a large health benefits manager.
We leverage our framework and estimates to conduct simulations across several markets that alter
the set of insurers that are available to consumers, and investigate the equilibrium impact of insurer
competition on premiums, negotiated hospital prices, firm profits and consumer welfare. Our
    1
     Figures are from Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) National Health Expenditure Accounts.
    2
     The Hirschman-Herfindahl Index index (HHI) for the average U.S. hospital market (3,261) and the large employer
insurance market (2,984) in 2006 was well above the U.S. Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission merger
guidelines’ cut-off point for classifying a market as “highly concentrated” (Gaynor, Ho and Town, 2015).
   3
     The recent antitrust lawsuits brought by health providers against Blue Cross and Blue Shield, alleging that
these insurers conspire to avoid competing against one another in certain markets, are evidence that some market
participants believe that reduced insurer competition sustains lower, rather than higher, reimbursements. See, for
example, “Antitrust Lawsuits Target Blue Cross and Blue Shield,” Wall Street Journal, May 27, 2015.


                                                        1
insights are relevant not only when employers change insurance plan menus offered to employees,
but also when insurers merge, and when they enter or exit markets.
       One of this paper’s primary contributions is identifying and quantifying the mechanisms by
which insurer competition affects negotiated hospital prices in equilibrium. If reducing insurer
competition raises premiums via an increase in the remaining insurers’ market power, there may be
an upward pressure on negotiated prices as hospitals capture part of the increased industry surplus.4
However, there are offsetting effects that arise if insurers consequently have greater bargaining
leverage. This can occur if an insurer loses fewer enrollees to a rival insurer upon disagreement with
a hospital and if a hospital “recaptures” fewer enrollees through a rival insurer upon disagreement
with an insurer. If substantial, these additional effects—variants of countervailing power (Galbraith,
1952)—imply that greater downstream concentration can reduce total hospital payments.
       Previous papers have examined the relationship between market concentration and medical
provider prices, often within a regression framework (c.f. Gaynor and Town, 2012; Gaynor, Ho and
Town, 2015).5 We build on this literature by imposing structure derived from a theoretical model
of competition in health care markets in order to uncover heterogeneous responses across firms and
markets and conduct counterfactual simulations. Our approach is also related to Gowrisankaran,
Nevo and Town (2015) who use a structural model of hospital-insurer bargaining to estimate the
impact of hospital mergers on negotiated prices.6 Our contributions include estimating a model of
insurer competition for households in our empirical analysis and incorporating employer bargaining
over premiums with insurers.7 Capturing these interactions is critical for understanding how market
structure affects outcomes in the large-group employer-sponsored market.
       Our empirical analysis focuses on plans offered by three major health insurers—Blue Shield of
California, Anthem Blue Cross, and Kaiser Permanente—through the California Public Employ-
ees’ Retirement System (CalPERS) to over a million individuals, comprising California state and
public agency employees, retirees, and their families. We begin by estimating a model of individual
demand for hospitals that conditions on hospital characteristics and each individual’s location and
   4
     This positive relationship between premiums and prices is consistent with statements such as: “...non-Kaiser
[hospital] systems recognized the need to contain costs to compete with Kaiser [Permanente]—that is, the need to
keep their own demands for rate increases reasonable enough that the premiums of non-Kaiser insurers can remain
competitive with Kaiser.” (“Sacramento,” CA Health Care Almanac, July 2009 accessed at http://www.chcf.org/
~/media/MEDIA%20LIBRARY%20Files/PDF/A/PDF%20AlmanacRegMktBriefSacramento09.pdf). See also arguments put
forth by Sutter Health, a large Northern CA hospital system (http://www.sutterhealth.org/about/healthcare_
costs.html accessed on July 29, 2013).
   5
     For example, Moriya, Vogt and Gaynor (2010) regresses hospital prices on hospital and insurer HHI measures
and market and firm fixed effects, and find that increases in insurer concentration are associated with decreases in
hospital prices. Melnick, Shen and Wu (2010) conduct a similar analysis with qualitatively similar results.
   6
     Gowrisankaran, Nevo and Town (2015) conduct their main analysis under the assumption that premiums are fixed,
and insurers do not compete with one another for enrollees; they also examine a calibrated version of their model in
which insurers engage in Nash-Bertrand premium setting. See also Grennan (2013) (who models individual hospitals
bargaining with medical device manufacturers), Lewis and Pflum (2013), and Dranove, Ody and Satterthwaite (2015).
   7
     Ho (2006, 2009) relaxes the assumption that insurers do not compete with one another and estimates a model
of consumer demand for hospitals and insurers given the network of hospitals offered, as an input to a model of
hospital network formation and contracting (assuming a take-it-or-leave-it offers model to determine hospital prices).
Lee and Fong (2013) proposes a dynamic bargaining model of network formation and bargaining in a similar setting.
However, these papers do not investigate the impact of insurer competition on input prices.



                                                          2
diagnosis. The estimates are used to construct a measure of expected utility derived by households
from an insurer’s hospital network, which in turn is used to estimate a model of household demand
for insurance plans. We extend methods developed in Town and Vistnes (2001), Capps, Dranove
and Satterthwaite (2003), and Ho (2006, 2009) by using detailed information on household charac-
teristics and allowing for households to aggregate the preferences of individual household members
when choosing an insurer. We thus admit more realistic substitution patterns across insurers upon
counterfactual network changes than in previous work.8 By allowing for preferences and the proba-
bility of admission for various diagnoses to vary across individuals by age and gender, our analysis
also accounts for the selection of heterogeneous individuals across insurers as hospital networks,
and insurer choice sets, change.
       We assume that insurers engage in simultaneous bilateral Nash bargaining over premiums with
CalPERS, and in simultaneous bilateral Nash bargaining with hospitals over prices in each market.
This bargaining protocol, used in other studies of bilateral oligopoly to model the division of
surplus (e.g., Horn and Wolinsky, 1988; Crawford and Yurukoglu, 2012), implies an equilibrium
relationship between the “gains-from-trade” created when two parties come to an agreement and
negotiated premiums and prices. Nash bargaining parameters allow for potentially asymmetric
splits. Our estimates imply that hospitals capture nearly three-quarters of the gains-from-trade
when bargaining with insurers, and that approximately 80% of negotiated hospital price levels are
determined by functions of the loss in insurers’ premium revenues upon losing a particular hospital,
and the prices of neighboring hospitals. Realized insurer margins are less than half of what would
be predicted under Nash Bertrand premium setting. We interpret this finding as evidence that
CalPERS effectively constrains equilibrium premium levels through negotiation with insurers.
       Our main application uses our estimated model to simulate the equilibrium impact of removing
one of the three insurers—either Kaiser or Blue Cross—from enrollees’ choice sets on premiums,
negotiated prices, insurer enrollment, hospital utilization and total spending across all of California.
We summarize our key predictions in Figure 1, reporting changes in both premiums and hospital
prices as they are jointly determined in equilibrium. We highlight two factors that affect these
changes for Blue Shield when a rival insurer is removed: (i) the size and attractiveness to enrollees
of the insurer that is removed; and (ii) the presence of effective premium setting constraints. Panel
(a) presents Blue Shield’s predicted premium changes when either Blue Cross (left-column) or
Kaiser (right-column) is removed. If premiums are not constrained by the employer—modeled by
assuming that insurers compete à la Nash Bertrand for enrollees—premiums for Blue Shield are
predicted to rise (top-row). However, predicted increases are larger upon the removal of Kaiser,
which has approximately a 40% statewide market share, than Blue Cross, with a 16% share. This
is consistent with the intuition that the removal of a stronger competitor supports higher premium
levels for the firms that remain. When premium setting is constrained—modeled by assuming
that CalPERS actively negotiates with insurers over premiums on behalf of its members—premium
   8
    To our knowledge, only Ho (2006, 2009) and Shepard (2015) are able to recover how the demand for competing
insurers varies as a function of their hospital networks; these papers assume that individuals (as opposed to households)
choose both insurers and hospitals.


                                                           3
                                   Insurer Removed                            Insurer Removed
    Premium Setting            BC (Small)     K (Large)                   BC (Small)     K (Large)

      Unconstrained              +11.0%            +19.3%                    −1.1%             +3.0%
    (Nash-Bertrand)           [10.8%, 11.3%]    [19.1%, 19.6%]           [−1.5%, −0.8%]      [2.1%, 3.9%]



         Constrained              −3.4%            +16.6%                    −8.9%             +0.6%
        (Bargaining)         [−4.0%, −3.3%]     [15.8%, 16.8%]          [−13.3%, −7.7%]     [−3.1%, 1.8%]


                                 (a) Premium Changes                      (b) Hospital Price Changes

Figure 1: Predicted (a) premium and (b) hospital price per admission changes for Blue Shield upon the removal
of either Blue Cross (BC) or Kaiser (K), when insurers set premiums according to Nash-Bertrand competition or
bargain with the employer. 95% confidence intervals are reported below estimates. See Section 4 for details.


increases are predicted to be smaller (bottom-row), and even negative when Blue Cross is removed.
    Related to premium adjustments are changes in insurers’ negotiated hospital prices, shown in
Panel (b) of Figure 1. These changes vary with the insurer that is removed for at least two reasons.
First, as discussed, the removal of a larger insurer generally supports higher premiums; this tends
to raise negotiated prices as hospitals are able to extract some of the increase in premium revenues.
Second, the larger the insurer that is removed, the greater the increase in bargaining leverage of
the remaining insurers; this tends to depress negotiated hospital prices. On net, the first effect
dominates when Kaiser is removed (where we predict an increase in average hospital prices paid by
Blue Shield), but not when Blue Cross is removed (where we predict average prices to fall).
    Overall, our simulations indicate that health care costs—both premiums and hospital reimbursements—
need not increase upon the removal of an insurer. Although our findings regarding the net impact
of insurer competition on reimbursement prices are application specific, there are several general
takeaways. First, we establish the empirical relevance of countervailing power effects, which may
lower negotiated prices and hence limit premium increases. Second, we highlight the importance
of premium setting constraints, such as negotiations with large employers or policies such as med-
ical loss ratio requirements, when evaluating changes in insurance market structure. When such
constraints are absent, we predict that increased insurer concentration leads to higher premiums,
consistent with recent findings (e.g., Dafny, 2010; Dafny, Duggan and Ramanarayanan, 2012; Trish
and Herring, 2015). Third, in every counterfactual, the reported averages conceal substantial het-
erogeneity in price changes across providers and markets. For example, when Kaiser is removed,
Blue Shield’s negotiated hospital prices can increase or decrease by as much as 10% across mar-
kets. This implies a redistribution of rents across hospitals, and a long-term impact on provider
investment, entry, and exit. Finally, we predict that consumers are harmed when an insurer is
removed—in some cases, by as much as $200 per capita per year. This occurs even when premiums
are predicted to fall, suggesting that restricted choice sets and product variety may be a substantial
source of consumer harm when insurance markets become less competitive.


                                                         4
       Our framework can be used to explore the effects of other changes to the structure of health care
markets, including mergers and integration.9 In addition, our setting bears similarities to other
vertical markets in which individuals access goods and services provided by suppliers through an
intermediary (including cable television markets and other hardware-software and platform markets;
see, e.g., Lee, 2013). Thus, our findings regarding how suppliers interact with a concentrated
intermediary market may also prove useful in non-health care contexts. To our knowledge, the
only other papers that estimate and compute counterfactual negotiated input prices in an applied
analysis of bilateral oligopoly with competing upstream and downstream firms are Crawford and
Yurukoglu (2012) and Crawford et al. (2015) on the cable television industry; our analysis builds
on important methodological contributions from these papers.10
       That said, it is worth emphasizing two notable features of health care markets that do not
generally apply to other industries. First, consumers are minimally exposed to insurers’ marginal
cost differences across providers when making utilization decisions, creating incentives for insurers
to exclude certain hospitals from their networks.11 Second, premiums are often restricted to be the
same within groups of individuals, even though the costs borne by the insurer can vary dramatically
across individuals due to heterogeneous health status or preferences over providers. Both of these
features lead to adverse selection concerns (c.f. Akerlof, 1970; Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1976) as
insurers’ costs are a function of their enrollees’ health risk (e.g., Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen, 2010;
Handel, 2013) and propensity to choose more expensive providers (Shepard, 2015). In contrast, in
many other settings consumers are exposed to marginal cost differences across products through
product-specific prices (e.g., as in retail environments), and the costs of serving a given customer
do not differ across individuals (e.g., in cable television markets, distributors pay content providers
a linear fee per subscriber that does not vary across individuals or by viewership).
       The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present our theoretical model of
the U.S. private health care market and derive bargaining equations that relate negotiated prices
and premiums to estimable objects that underly insurer, hospital and employer gains-from-trade
from agreement. Section 3 describes our data and the empirical implementation of our model.
Section 4 presents our counterfactual simulations, and Section 5 concludes.
   9
     For example, Dafny, Ho and Lee (2015) use a version of our model to examine cross-market hospital mergers.
  10
     Our analysis also contributes to the large literature in industrial organization on countervailing power and bargain-
ing in bilateral oligopoly, and the impact of changes in concentration on negotiated prices (e.g., Horn and Wolinsky,
1988; Stole and Zweibel, 1996; Chipty and Snyder, 1999; Inderst and Wey, 2003). In a related industry, recent em-
pirical work by Ellison and Snyder (2010) finds that larger drugstores secure lower prices from competing suppliers
of antibiotics. Chipty and Snyder (1999) consider the effect of buyer mergers on negotiated upstream prices in the
cable television industry, assuming the existence of just one supplier and multiple buyers; in their framework (which
abstracts away from the upstream competition that is a central component of our setting), properties of the supplier’s
gross surplus function determine the effect of a merger on buyers’ bargaining positions.
  11
     Provider-specific cost-sharing mechanisms are typically limited, and even if they do exist (e.g., co-insurance
rates), patients are often unaware or unable to determine their liability prior to choosing their provider.




                                                            5
2     Theoretical Framework
We begin with a stylized theoretical model of the U.S. private, or commercial, health care market.
The majority of non-elderly consumers obtain health insurance coverage through their employer or
benefits manager, typically paying a monthly premium for, among other things, access to a par-
ticular insurer’s network of medical providers. We assume that a benefits manager (referred to as
an employer from now on) bargains over premiums with the insurers that it offers, and that these
insurers also bargain with hospitals over reimbursement prices. We use the model to support our
subsequent empirical analyses by highlighting how particular objects of interest—notably house-
hold demand for insurers and individual demand for hospitals—determine equilibrium premiums
and prices, and how changes in insurer competition affect these objects and hence counterfactual
predictions. We also discuss why increased insurer competition has a theoretically ambiguous im-
pact on prices and premiums. In this section we abstract away from various empirically-relevant
details that are introduced later.

2.1     Setup
Consider the set of insurers (also known as managed care organizations, or MCOs) M that are
offered by an employer, and a single market that contains a set of hospitals H.12 Let the current
“network” of hospitals and MCOs be represented by G ⊆ {0, 1}|H|×|M| , where we denote by ij ∈ G
that hospital i is present in MCO j’s network. We assume that a consumer who is enrolled in MCO
j ∈ M can only visit hospitals in j’s network, denoted by GjM ; similarly, GiH denotes the set of
insurers that have contracted with (and are allowed to send patients to) hospital i. We take the
network G as given, and assume the following timing:

  1a. The employer and the set of MCOs bargain over premiums φ ≡ {φj }j∈M , where φj represents
       the per-household premium charged by MCO j.

 1b. Simultaneously with premium bargaining, all MCOs and hospitals ij ∈ G bargain to determine
       hospital prices p ≡ {pij }, where pij denotes the price paid to hospital i by MCO j for treating
       one of j’s patients.13
   12
      We focus on premium and price bargaining and consumer choices conditional on the set of insurers offered
to employees, and do not explicitly model the selection of insurers that are offered. In our empirical application,
CalPERS primarily offered the three insurers that we focus on for the decade following 2003.
   13
      Although in reality hospital contracts are more complicated (e.g., specifying case-rates, per-diems, or discounts
off charges), they are essentially linear payments based on the services provided and the patient’s diagnosis. If
MCOs instead negotiated with hospitals over a fixed payment for inclusion on their networks (so that payments were
invariant to actual utilization of hospitals’ services), then changes in negotiated payments induced by changes in
insurer competition would not necessarily be passed through to consumers in the form of lower premiums. In our
empirical application, we multiply a Medicare diagnosis-related group (DRG) adjusted price pij by the expected DRG
weight for a given admission to control for variation in patient severity across different age-sex categories and construct
expected payments. This amounts to an assumption that hospitals negotiate a single price index (corresponding to an
admission of DRG weight 1.0) with each MCO, which is then adjusted in accordance with the intensity (as measured
by DRG weight) of treatment provided.




                                                            6
   2. Given hospital networks and premiums, households choose to enroll in an MCO, determining
         household demand for MCO j, denoted by Dj (G, φ).

   3. After enrolling in a plan, each individual becomes sick with some probability; those that are
                                                                     H (G, φ), the number of individuals
         sick visit some hospital in their network. This determines Dij
         who visit each hospital i through each MCO j.14

The distinction between households choosing insurance plans (and paying premiums) and individ-
uals choosing a hospitals is an important instutitional feature of the private health care market,
and integral for linking the theoretical analysis with our data and empirical application.
       MCOs and hospitals seek to maximize profits when bargaining over negotiated prices and pre-
miums. For now, we assume that profits for an MCO j are
                                                                       X
                              πjM (G, p, φ) = Dj (·)(φj − ηj ) −               H
                                                                              Dhj (·)phj ,                        (1)
                                                                      h∈GjM


where the first term on the right-hand-side represents MCO j’s total premium revenues (net of
non-inpatient hospital costs, represented by ηj ), and the second term represents payments made
to hospitals in MCO j’s network for inpatient hospital services. This last term sums, over all
hospitals in an MCO’s network, the price per admission negotiated with each hospital multiplied
by the number of patients admitted to that hospital.
       We assume that profits for a hospital i are
                                                       X
                                     πiH (G, p, φ) =            H
                                                               Din (·)(pin − ci ) ,                               (2)
                                                       n∈GiH


which sums, over all MCOs n with which hospital i contracts, the number of patients it receives
multiplied by an average margin per admission (where ci is hospital i’s average cost per admission
for a patient).15 Any components of MCOs’ or hospitals’ profits that do not vary with the network,
including fixed costs, do not affect the subsequent analysis and are omitted.
       We take household and individual demand for insurers and hospitals as primitives of this sec-
tion’s theoretical analysis, deferring further discussion until our empirical application, and focus on
the equilibrium determination of insurer premiums and hospital prices.

Employer-Insurer Bargaining over Premiums. We assume that premiums for each MCO
are negotiated with the employer via simultaneous bilateral Nash bargaining, where the employer
maximizes its employees’ welfare minus its total premium payments. This assumption nests the
standard Nash-Bertrand model of premium setting. It is consistent with evidence suggesting that
  14
     In our empirical application, we allow for heterogeneous consumers who become sick with different diagnoses with
different probabilities and whose preferences for hospitals depend on their diagnosis, age-sex category, and location.
  15
     Our empirical analysis will utilize expected resource-intensity-adjusted prices and costs per admission that vary
across age-sex categories and across each insurer-hospital pair.



                                                          7
large employers (including the one that we examine) constrain the level of premiums that are
charged in the private health care market. Negotiated premiums φj for each MCO j thus satisfy
                                            τ φ                                              (1−τ φ )
                 M                                                                   
   φj = arg max πj (G, p, {φ, φ−j })              ×
                                                     W (M, {φ, φ−j }) − W (M \ j, φ−j )                   ∀j ∈ M ,
             φj |       {z         }                |               {z              }
                             GF TjM                                    GF TjE

                                                                                                                    (3)

(where φ−j ≡ φ \ φj ) subject to the constraints that the terms GF TjM ≥ 0 and GF TjE ≥ 0. These
terms represent MCO j’s and the employer’s “gains-from-trade” (GFT) from coming to agreement
and having MCO j in the employer’s choice set. The MCO’s gains-from-trade are its profits from
being offered by the employer (as the MCO’s disagreement outcome is assumed to be 0). The
employer’s gains-from-trade are represented by the difference between its objective, represented by
W (·), when MCO j is and is not offered. In our empirical example, W (·) will be the employer’s total
employee welfare net of its premium payments to insurers; an explicit parameterization is provided
in section 3.4. Given our timing assumptions, outside options from disagreement are determined by
removing MCO j from the employer’s choice set, holding fixed premiums and negotiated hospitals
prices for other MCOs, but allowing employees to choose new insurance plans (but not switch
employers).
       The “premium Nash bargaining parameter” is represented by τ φ ∈ [0, 1], where τ φ = 1 implies
that MCOs simultaneously set profit-maximizing premiums (i.e., compete à la Nash-Bertrand),
and τ φ = 0 implies that the employer pays each MCO only enough to cover its costs (i.e., so that
GF TjM = 0 for all j).

Insurer-Hospital Bargaining over Hospital Prices.                         As with premiums, we assume that
hospital prices p are determined via simultaneous bilateral Nash bargaining.16 Each negotiated
price per-admission pij ∈ p between hospital i ∈ H and MCO j ∈ M (for all ij ∈ G) maximizes
the pair’s bilateral Nash product:
                                                                      τj

             pij = arg max πjM (G, p, φ) − πjM (G \ ij, p−ij , φ)
                                                                 
                        pij  |               {z                  }
                                      MCO j’s GFT with hospital i
                                                                                 (1−τj )

                                       × πiH (G, p, φ) − πiH (G \ ij, p−ij , φ)                ∀ij ∈ G .          (4)
                                                                               
                                          |                {z                  }
                                                Hospital i’s GFT with MCO j

  16
    Our empirical application allows for insurers to bargain simultaneously with hospital systems, where we assume
that a system removes all of its hospitals from an insurer’s hospital network upon disagreement (see Appendix A.4).
We also note that our approach implicitly assumes that different prices for each insurer-hospital pair may be negotiated
for different employers.




                                                           8
That is, each price pij maximizes the product of MCO j and hospital i gains-from-trade, holding
fixed all other negotiated prices p−ij ≡ p \ pij , where πjM (p−ij , φ, G \ ij) and πiH (p−ij , φ, G \ ij)
represent MCO j and hospital i’s disagreement payoffs. As each bilateral bargain occurs concur-
rently with premium setting, if hospital i comes to a disagreement with MCO j, we assume that
both parties believe that the new disagreement network will be G \ ij, and all other prices p−ij and
premiums φ remain fixed.
    The “price Nash bargaining parameter” for MCO j is represented by τj ∈ [0, 1] for all j ∈ M.

Remarks.        The assumption that each bilateral negotiation maximizes bilateral Nash products
(taking the outcomes of all other bargains as given) was proposed in Horn and Wolinsky (1988). It
is a type of contract equilibrium as defined in Cremer and Riordan (1987), and has been subsequently
used in applied work to model upstream-downstream negotiations over input prices in oligopolistic
vertical markets (e.g., Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012), Grennan (2013), Gowrisankaran, Nevo and
Town (2015)).17 Our paper is the first in the literature to allow the “consumer” of the downstream
firms’ products (here, the employer) to also negotiate over downstream prices (premiums).
    We assume that both premiums and hospital prices are simultaneously determined, implying
that they will be “optimal” (i.e., maximize their bilateral Nash products) with respect to each
other in equilibrium.18 This assumption implies that prices remain fixed when evaluating payoffs
from premium bargaining in (3) and that premiums remain fixed when considering both agreement
and disagreement payoffs from hospital price bargaining in (4). Although we adopt this timing
assumption primarily to simplify the computation and estimation of our model, we also note that
as prices and premiums are set at staggered intervals and are fixed for different period lengths in
reality, an alternative timing assumption—that prices are negotiated before premiums and that
premiums immediately adjust to changes in negotiated prices—may be unrealistic.19

2.2     Equilibrium Negotiated Premiums and Hospital Prices
We next derive the first-order conditions for our premium and hospital price bargaining equations
in (3) and (4) to examine how insurer competition affects their determination in equilibrium.
   17
      Collard-Wexler, Gowrisankaran and Lee (2016) provide a non-cooperative extensive form that allows for firms to
participate in multiple bargains with multiple parties that, under certain conditions, yields the bargaining solution
over premiums and prices given by (3) and (4)—i.e., where each pair chooses a transfer to maximize their bilateral
Nash product holding the outcomes of other bargains as fixed—as an equilibrium outcome.
   18
      See also Gal-Or (1999), Nocke and White (2007), Draganska, Klapper and Villas-Boas (2010), and Crawford
et al. (2015) who use a similar timing assumption in other settings. As negotiated hospital prices are assumed to be
linear, double marginalization will still be present.
   19
      In our empirical application, we find that premiums would not significantly adjust to an increase in any particular
hospital’s negotiated price, and thus our results are also likely to be robust to assuming that hospital prices are
determined before premiums. I.e., using our estimated parameters, we compute the elasticity of premiums with
respect to hospital prices (i.e., (pij /φj ) × (∂φj /∂pij )) for each hospital i and insurer j pair at observed premiums and
price levels when premiums are determined after hospital prices are negotiated: the maximum elasticity across all
insurer and hospital pairs is no greater than .03, with a mean of 4 × 10−4 . These small magnitudes are attributable to
the presence of state-wide premium setting and the fact that no single hospital serves more than 12% of an insurer’s
total admissions (with a mean of less than 0.5%).



                                                             9
Insurer Premiums.             Setting the first-order conditions of (3) equal to 0 (for a given network and
set of premiums φ−j , and set of negotiated prices p∗ ) implies that
                                                                        
                                              π M (·) × −∂GF T E (·)/∂φ
                          ∂πjM (·)   1−τ  φ    j                 j     j
                                   =    φ
                                            ×                E
                                                                                                    ∀j ,                         (5)
                           ∂φj        τ                 GF T j (·)

where, again, GF T E (·) represents the change in the employer’s objective function when MCO j is
added to the choice set.
       As (5) shows, if τ φ = 1, these conditions correspond to the standard Nash-Bertrand first-order
conditions: ∂πjM (·)/∂φj = 0 for all j. However, holding fixed φ−j , if τ φ < 1, then (5) implies that
∂πjM (·)/∂φj ≥ 0 and the equilibrium premium for j will likely be lower than that predicted under
Nash Bertrand premium setting.20 The negotiated premium level will be particularly low relative
to the Nash Bertrand outcome if the right-hand side of (5) is large in magnitude: for example,
if the MCOs’ Nash bargaining parameter (τ φ ) is low, the profits that MCO j receives from the
employer (π M (·)) are high, the employer’s gains-from-trade with the MCO (GF TjE ) are low, or the
harm to the employer from higher premiums (−∂GF TjE (·)/∂φj ) is large.

Hospital Prices. Turning now to hospital prices, the first-order conditions of (4) (for a given
network, set of premiums φ, and set of negotiated prices p∗−ij ) are
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                            X
            ∗    H                                                                                   ∗        H  
                                                                                                                   
           pij Dij         =(1 − τj )         [∆ij Dj ](φj − ηj )             −                    phj [∆ij Dhj ] 
                                                                                        
                                                                                       
                                               |        {z          }
                                                                                          h∈GjM \ij
           | {z }                                                                                                  
   total hospital payments             (i) “premium and enrollment effects”                                        
                                       (∆ MCO revenues net of non-hosp costs)          |            {z           } 
                                                                                        (ii) “price reinforcement effect”
                                                                                     (∆ MCO j payments to other hospitals)
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                                                                     X                                     
                              + τj            ci DijH
                                                                  −                  H
                                                                              [∆ij Din ](p∗in − ci )            ∀ij ∈ G ,        (6)
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                           
                                                                    n∈G H \ij
                                               | {z   }
                                                                    | i
                                    (iii) “hospital cost effect”                                           
                                    (total hospital costs)                        {z             }         
                                                                           (iv) “recapture effect”
                                                                   (∆ Hospital i profits from other MCOs)



where we have dropped the arguments of all demand functions for expositional convenience, and
                                                  H ] ≡ D H (G, ·) − D H (G \ ij, ·). These “[∆D]” terms
[∆ij Dj ] ≡ Dj (G, ·) − Dj (G \ ij, ·), and [∆ij Dhj     hj           hj
represent the adjustments in particular demand functions when hospital i and MCO j come to a
disagreement, where we assume disagreement between hospital i and insurer j results in i’s removal
from j’s network.
  20
    If τ φ < 1, the right-hand side of (5) is positive: πjM and GF TjE must be weakly positive if the employer and MCO
j are observed to have an agreement, and the negative change in employer welfare from an increase in premiums is
also positive. If πjM (·) is globally concave, then a value of φj for which ∂πjM (·)/∂φj ≥ 0 will be no greater than the
value of φj for which ∂πjM (·)/∂φj = 0.


                                                              10
       Equation (6) decomposes the determinants of negotiated payments when MCO j and hospital
i bargain over the gains-from-trade created when that hospital is included in j’s network. These
gains are primarily obtained by MCOs through higher premiums and additional enrollees. Although
the gains are shared with hospitals via negotiated per-admission prices, we use the total hospital
payment on the left-hand-side of (6) as a measure of revenues that is comparable across hospitals
for a particular MCO and is not dependent on the number of admissions that a hospital actually
receives.21
       The total hospital payment made from MCO j to hospital i depends on each firm’s gains
from trade. The first line, representing the MCO j’s gains from having hospital i on its network,
comprises two terms:

  (i) Premium and enrollment effects: this is the effect of hospital i’s inclusion in MCO j’s network
         on the MCO’s premium revenues. It is a function of both the level of the MCO’s premiums
         and the change in its enrollment if i is removed from its network.

 (ii) Price reinforcement effect: the adjustment in payments per enrollee that j makes to other
         hospitals in its existing network upon dropping i. It is a function of the substitutability and
         equilibrium negotiated prices of all hospitals in MCO j’s network.

The second line of (6), representing hospital i’s gains from being included in MCO j’s network,
also comprises two terms:

 (iii) Hospital cost effect: this implies that every unit increase in hospital i’s costs results in a τj
         unit increase payments.

 (iv) Recapture effect: this represents the adjustment in hospital i’s reimbursements from other
         MCOs n 6= j when i is removed from MCO j’s network.

       These terms have intuitive effects on equilibrium negotiated prices. The premium and enroll-
ment effects indicate that the greater is the loss in an MCO’s premium revenues (net of non-hospital
costs) from losing access to a hospital, the more that hospital is paid, since it has more “leverage”
over the MCO’s profits. The price reinforcement effect indicates that the higher the price of the
hospitals in j’s network that j’s enrollees visit in the case when i is dropped, the higher will be
p∗ij . That is, if hospital i’s patients on MCO j substitute to cheaper hospitals when i is dropped,
hospital i is paid less than if its patients visited more expensive hospitals. The hospital cost effect
implies that the Nash bargaining parameter determines how completely the hospital is able to pass
through cost increases to the MCO. And finally, the recapture effect represents hospital i’s “op-
portunity cost” from being in MCO j’s network: i.e., the more hospital i would be paid by other
MCOs if i dropped MCO j, the more MCO j pays i in equilibrium.
  21
    For example, consider two hospitals A and B that deliver the same gains-from-trade to MCO j, but A serves
                                                                                          H     H
fewer patients than B (e.g., it is only valuable for a rare disease or diagnosis so that DAj < DBj ). The model indicates
that each hospital obtains the same absolute amount of surplus from MCO j but focusing on a price-per-admission
as opposed to total hospital payments will obscure this.


                                                           11
2.3      The Impact of a Change in Insurer Competition on Premiums and Prices
We now use the bargaining first-order conditions from our model, given by (5) and (6), to examine
the effects of insurer competition on premiums and hospital prices.

Insurer Premiums. Consider the impact of a reduction in insurer competition. The left-hand
side of the first-order condition in (5) implies that the standard logic from Nash-Bertrand premium
setting is still present: the removal of an insurer from an employer’s choice set tends to reduce
“competitive pressures” (i.e., the elasticity of demand with respect to premiums for each MCO),
and thus increase premiums.
       However, if τ φ < 1, then the right-hand side of (5) will be non-zero, leading both initial and
“counterfactual” (i.e., post-removal of an insurer) premiums to differ from Nash Bertrand levels.
For example, the term GF TjE (·) will tend to increase for an MCO j when a rival insurer is removed
from the choice set. This will reduce the extent to which premium setting departs from Nash-
Bertrand behavior and lead to additional upward pressure in MCO j’s premiums when another
MCO is removed. Such an increase may be partially offset by an increase in πjM (·) when a rival
insurer is removed, because now MCO j stands to lose more upon being dropped.
       Unlike with standard Nash-Bertrand premium setting, in our premium bargaining model it is
possible that removing an MCO from the employer’s choice set can actually lead to a reduction in
premiums for the remaining insurers (holding fixed hospital prices) when τ φ < 1 if an employer’s
bargaining leverage is strengthened. To understand how this is possible, observe that if GF TjE (·)
decreases when a rival MCO is removed from the choice set, then the right-hand side of (5) will tend
to increase; if this effect is large enough to offset other adjustments, premiums may actually fall.
One example of how GF TjE (·) can decrease if a rival MCO k is removed from the choice set is if k is
a high-cost insurer with higher premiums than its rivals.22 Allowing for negotiated hospital prices
to change (and potentially fall) can reinforce this effect, and further admit the possibility that a
“countervailing power” result—i.e., a more concentrated downstream (insurer) market leading to
both lower negotiated upstream (hospital) and downstream (employer) prices—can occur.

Hospital Prices.       To understand how insurer competition affects hospital prices, we focus on how
the removal of a rival MCO adjusts each of the right-hand side terms in (6) for a particular MCO
j and hospital i pair. Term (i), referred to as the premium and enrollment effects, is a function of
both the change in MCO j’s demand upon losing access to hospital i (the enrollment effect), and
the level of its premiums in the market (the premium effect). We decompose the adjustment in
these effects when a rival MCO is removed into an enrollment effect change, and a premium effect
  22
    I.e., if MCO k is in the choice set, a disagreement between the employer and MCO j may lead to most enrollees
in j choosing to join k and substantially increase the employer’s premium payments. However, if MCO k is not in
the choice set, then a disagreement between the employer and MCO j may lead to the employer’s enrollees choosing
a more cost-effective plan, harming the employer by less.




                                                       12
change:
                                                                            
                        [∆ij DjCF ] − [∆ij Dj ] × φCF
                                                   j  − ηj + [∆ij Dj ] × φCF
                                                                           j − φj ,                          (7)
                      |                   {z              } |           {z       }
                                enrollment effect change            premium effect change


where “CF” superscripts denote counterfactual values of demand and premiums terms when an
MCO is removed. An adjustment to insurer competition will often cause these two terms to move
in opposite directions. On one hand, when a rival insurer is no longer competing for the same
enrollees, the loss of hospital i typically results in a smaller adjustment in MCO j’s enrollment
([∆ij DjCF ] < [∆ij Dj ]). This negative enrollment effect change is a primary source of MCOs’
additional bargaining leverage when negotiating with hospitals in less competitive markets, and
can lead to lower negotiated prices. On the other hand, as previously discussed, a less competitive
insurance market may generate higher premiums; this positive premium effect change will tend
to increase negotiated prices. Thus, the effect of insurer competition on the first term in (6) is
theoretically ambiguous.
         Note that the impacts of insurer competition on terms (ii) and (iv)—i.e., a price reinforcement
effect change and recapture effect change—are more difficult to sign because they are not only
                                            H,CF     H ) for all MCOs n, but they are also
affected by changes in changes in demand (∆Din   − ∆Din
a function of the equilibrium prices paid to all other hospitals. Finally, the impact of insurer
competition on negotiated per-admission prices induced by a hospital cost effect change (a change
in term (iii) of (6)) will be limited in our model, as hospital costs per admission are not assumed
to be a function of realized hospital demand.23

Summary.           Even in this fairly stylized setting, we have shown that the equilibrium effects of
insurer competition on negotiated prices and premiums (and consequently on consumer welfare
and industry profits) are complicated, and that it may not be possible to sign these effects without
more detailed analysis. The ultimate impact will depend on underlying demand primitives, firm
heterogeneity, and institutional details. We thus turn to our empirical application for further
guidance, using the insights developed here to guide our approach and inform the interpretation of
our findings.


3         Empirical Application and Estimation
In this section we discuss our empirical setting and estimation strategy. We first describe the data
from which negotiated prices, average hospital costs, insurer-hospital networks, household insurance
enrollment, and individual hospital demand can be inferred. We then present and estimate a model
of individual demand for hospitals and household demand for insurance plans. Estimates from this
demand model are used as inputs for the estimation of a model of employer-insurer bargaining over
    23
    In Appendix A.7, we provide a formal derivation and further discussion of how the objects in (6) (extended to
allow for hospital system bargaining) adjust upon a change in insurer competition.


                                                           13
premiums and hospital-insurer bargaining over reimbursement prices.

3.1      Data and Setting
Our main dataset comprises 2004 enrollment, claims, and admissions information for over 1.2M
enrollees covered by the California Public Employees’ Retirement System (CalPERS), an agency
that manages pension and health benefits for California public and state employees, retirees, and
their families. In 2004, CalPERS offered access to an HMO plan from California Blue Shield
(BS), a PPO plan administered by Anthem Blue Cross (BC), and an HMO plan offered by Kaiser
Permanente, a vertically integrated insurer with its own set of physicians and hospitals. We base
our market definition on the California Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development
(OSHPD) health service area (HSA) definitions. There are 14 HSAs in California.
       For enrollees in BS and BC, we observe hospital choice, diagnosis, and total prices paid by each
insurer to a given medical provider for the admission. We have 38,604 inpatient admissions in 2004
for enrollees in BS and BC under the age of 65 that can be matched to an acute care hospital in
our data; we do not observe prices or claims information for Kaiser enrollees. The claims data are
aggregated into hospital admissions and assigned a Medicare diagnosis-related group (DRG) code;
we use the admissions data to estimate a model of consumer demand for hospitals (described in
the next section), conditional on the set of hospitals in the BS and BC networks.24 We discuss our
measure of a price per-admission negotiated between an insurer and hospital in Section 3.4.
       We categorize individuals into 5 age groups (0-19, 20-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64) and omit individu-
als over 65 (as they likely qualify for Medicare); this defines 10 distinct age-sex categories. For each
age-sex category, we compute the average DRG weight for an admission from our admissions data,
and compute the probability of admission to a hospital by dividing the total number of admissions
from commercial insurers, by age-sex category, in California (from 2003 OSHPD discharge data) by
Census data on the total commercially insured population. We also compute the probability of an
individual in each age-sex category of being admitted for particular diagnoses in a similar fashion.
       For enrollment data we use information on the 2004 plan choices of state employee households,
for which we observe the age, sex, and zip code for each household member and salary information
in $10K bins for the primary household member. We limit our attention to enrollees into either BS,
BC, or Kaiser, which represents over 90% of state enrollees.25 For estimating insurance demand,
we focus on households where the primary enrollee is under the age of 65 and salary information
is not missing, leaving us with 162,719 unique households representing 425,647 individuals. We
supplement detailed information on plan premiums and hospital networks with information on
plan availability, collected from plan evidence of coverage and disclosure forms; it provides the zip
  24
     We obtain BC hospital network information directly from the insurer; for BS, we infer the hospital network by
including all hospitals that admitted at least 10 BS enrollees, and had claims data indicating that the hospital was
a “network provider.”
  25
     Some employees (primarily members of law enforcement associations) had access to additional plans that we
exclude from our analysis. For our sample of active state employees, total household enrollment in these other plans
was below 8%, and no omitted plan had enrollment greater than 2.8%.



                                                        14
                                          Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                                            BS         BC     Kaiser
              Premiums                                         Single   3782.64    4192.92   3665.04
              (per year)                                     2-Party    7565.28    8385.84   7330.08
                                                              Family    9834.84   10901.64   9529.08
                                           Revenues (per individual)    2860.34    3179.39   2788.05
              Insurer                        # Hospitals in Network         189        223        27
              Characteristics        # Hospital Systems in Network          119        149         -
                                     Hospital Prices (per admission)    7191.11    6023.86         -
                                  Hospital Payments (per individual)     623.20     554.00         -
                                     Hospital Costs (per admission)     1709.56    1639.92         -
              Household                                        Single     19313       8254     20319
              Enrollment                                     2-Party      16376       7199     15903
                                                              Family      35058      11170     29127
                                         Avg. # Individuals/Family         3.97       3.99      3.94

Notes: Summary statistics by insurer. The number of hospitals and hospital systems in network for BS and BC
are determined by the number of in-network hospitals or systems with at least 10 admissions observed in the data.
Hospital prices and costs per admission are average unit-DRG amounts, weighted across hospitals by admissions.
Hospital payments per individual represent average realized hospital payments made per enrollee (not weighted by
DRG).


codes and markets in which Kaiser is not available to enrollees as an option.
    In addition to our main dataset, we use hospital characteristics, including location, from the
American Hospital Association (AHA) survey. Hospital costs are taken from the OSHPD Hospital
Annual Financial Data for 2004.26 We use demographic information from the 2000 Census. Finally,
we use 2004 financial reports for each of our three insurers from the California Department of
Managed Health Care (DMHC) to compute medical loss ratios (MLRs) by dividing total medical
and hospital costs by total revenues.27

Summary Statistics.             Summary statistics are provided in Table 1. In 2004, annual premiums for
single households across BS, BC, and Kaiser were $3,782, $4,193, and $3,665; premiums for 2-party
and families across all plans were a strict 2x or 2.6x multiple of single household premiums. State
employees received approximately an 80% contribution by their employer. We use total annual
premiums received by insurers when computing firm profits, and household annual contributions
(20% of premiums) when analyzing household demand for insurers.
    Table 2 reports individual enrollment for our sample of state employees and dependents, and
illustrates the considerable variation in insurer market shares across HSAs. In particular, although
  26
      Our measure of costs is the average cost associated with the reported “daily hospital services per admission”
divided by the the computed average DRG weight of admissions at that hospital (computed using our data).
  27
     The obtained ratios for BS, BC and Kaiser are (0.82, 0.79, 0.91). MLR information for large-group plans offered
by insurers is available from CMS for 2011 onwards; using our approach to compute 2011 MLRs for the three insurers
that we examine yields similar figures to those reported to CMS in 2011. To address the possibility that the CalPERS
margins for BC (the only self-insured product in our sample) are smaller than those reported in the DMHC data, we
also re-estimate our model and compute counterfactuals under the assumption that BC’s margins are half the level
observed in the DMHC data: we find broadly similar parameter estimates and counterfactual predictions, with the
exception that we estimate higher BC non-inpatient hospital costs per enrollee (implied by the lower margins used
in estimation).



                                                         15
                   Table 2: Individual Enrollment and Hospital System Concentration

                                              Individual Plan Enrollment                        Hospital Concentration
                                           Enrollment                Market Share           # Systems         HHI (Adm)
     HSA Market                      BS        BC       Kaiser     BS     BC     Kaiser     BS          BC     BS     BC
     1. North                       5366     15143           -    0.26   0.74         -       5          17   3686   1489
     2. Sacramento                 55732      6212       59772    0.46   0.05     0.49        6           8   4112   2628
     3. Sonoma / Napa               6826       955       13762    0.32   0.04     0.64        5           5   3489   3460
     4. San Francisco Bay West      6021       926        4839    0.51   0.08     0.41        4           4   4362   3054
     5. East Bay Area               7856      1200       10763    0.40   0.06     0.54        9          10   2560   2096
     6. North San Joaquin           9663      3979        4210    0.54   0.22     0.24        7           8   2482   1888
     7. San Jose / South Bay        2515       762        4725    0.31   0.10     0.59        5           6   3265   2628
     8. Central Coast               8028     13365           -    0.38   0.62         -       4           9   3431   2254
     9. Central Valley             27663      7613       10211    0.61   0.17     0.22       12          13   1863   1539
     10. Santa Barbara              3973      1416         658    0.66   0.23     0.11        7           7   2459   2863
     11. Los Angeles               18205      6731       23919    0.37   0.14     0.49       22          28    741    716
     12. Inland Empire             17499      2801       20690    0.43   0.07     0.50       15          15   1015   1034
     13. Orange                     7836      2906        5430    0.48   0.18     0.34        8           9   2425   2250
     14. San Diego                 14585      2298        8593    0.57   0.09     0.34       10           8   1708   2549
     Totala                       191768     66307      167572    0.45   0.16     0.39      119         147   1004    551

Notes: Individual enrollment and market shares (Kaiser was not an option for enrollees in HSAs 1 and 8) and hospital
system membership and admission Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI)—computed using the number of admissions
for all hospital-insurer pairs in our sample—by insurer.
a
    Total (statewide) HHI accounts for hospital system membership across HSAs.

                            Table 3: Admission Probabilities and DRG Weights

                                               Admission Probabilities            DRG Weights
                                             OSHPD           CalPERS                   CalPERS
                       Age-Sex Category           All        BS         BC       BS       BC      All
                       0-19 Male               2.05%      1.78%      2.08%      1.78     1.49    1.70
                       20-34 Male              2.07%      1.66%      2.07%      1.99     1.77    1.92
                       35-44 Male              3.11%      2.79%      3.21%      1.95     1.89    1.93
                       45-54 Male              5.58%      5.29%      5.32%      2.07     2.05    2.07
                       55-64 Male             10.49%     10.13%      9.70%      2.25     2.25    2.25
                       0-19 Female             2.28%      1.95%      2.04%      1.31     1.39    1.32
                       20-34 Female           11.19%     11.75%     10.22%      0.84     0.87    0.85
                       35-44 Female            7.91%      7.31%      7.73%      1.32     1.33    1.32
                       45-54 Female            6.87%      6.16%      6.82%      1.90     1.83    1.87
                       55-64 Female            9.74%      9.01%      9.26%      2.03     2.02    2.03

Notes: Average admission probabilities and DRG weights per admission by age-sex category. OSHPD refers to
estimates from 2003 OSHPD discharge data; CalPERS refers to estimates from CalPERS admissions data.


BC is a small player in most markets, it has the largest market share in two of the more rural
markets—HSA 1 and 8—where Kaiser is not available and BS has a limited presence. Our empirical
work will control for cross-market variation in insurer attractiveness by including insurer-market
specific fixed effects, controlling for each insurer’s hospital network, and varying the set of insurers
available to each enrollee by zip code.
      Table 3 provides average admission probabilities and DRG weights per admission by age-sex
categories. Note that admission rates and DRG weights for each age-sex category are quite similar


                                                           16
across samples. Older patients are admitted more often and with higher weights; the exceptions
are 20-34 year old females, who are admitted more often than any other age-sex category at lower
average DRG weights (consistent with admission primarily for labor and delivery services).

3.2    Individual Demand for Hospitals
Our model of individual demand for hospitals and insurers builds on Ho (2006), which estimates a
discrete choice model of hospital demand that allows preferences to vary with observed differences
across consumers. The estimates are used to generate an expected utility from each insurer’s
network which is then included as a plan characteristic in a model of demand for insurers.
    We group individuals into one of 10 age-sex categories (described previously), and assume that
an individual in category (or of “type”) κ requires admission to a hospital with probability γκa .
Conditional on admission, the individual receives one of six diagnoses l ∈ L ≡{cardiac, cancer,
neurological, digestive, labor, other} with probability γκ,l . Individuals can only visit a hospital in
their market m and insurer’s network, and individual k of type κ(k) with diagnosis l derives the
following utility from hospital i:

                                  uH                       z        d    H
                                   k,i,l,m = δi + zi υk,l β + di,k βm + εk,i,l,m                                 (8)

where δi are hospital fixed effects, zi are observed hospital characteristics (teaching status, a for-
profit (FP) indicator, the number of beds and nurses per bed, and variables summarizing the
cardiac, cancer, imaging and birth services provided by the hospital), υk,l are characteristics of
the consumer (diagnosis, income, PPO enrollment), di,k represents the distance between hospital
i and individual k’s zip code of residence (and has a market-specific coefficient), and εH
                                                                                         k,i,l,m is an
idiosyncratic error term assumed to be i.i.d. Type 1 extreme value. There is no outside option since
our data includes only patients who are sick enough to go to a hospital for a particular diagnosis.
We observe the network of each insurer and can therefore accurately specify the choice set of each
patient; we assume that the enrollee can choose any hospital in his HSA that is included in his
insurer’s network and within 100 miles of the enrollee’s zip code. We also assume that negotiated
hospital prices do not influence individuals’ choices of which hospital to visit.28
    The model predicts the probability that an individual k—who lives in market m, is enrolled
in MCO j, and has diagnosis l—visits hospital i; we estimate the parameters of this model via
maximum likelihood using our admissions data. Additional details and results are provided in
Appendix A.1.

Identification.      Identification of individual preferences for hospitals relies on variation in hospi-
tal choice sets across markets and differences in choice probabilities for hospitals with particular
  28
     This is consistent with the non-observability of negotiated prices by consumers who may face coinsurance pay-
ments, and the inability of insurers to otherwise steer patients to cheaper hospitals. See further discussion of this
assumption in Ho and Pakes (2014) and Gowrisankaran, Nevo and Town (2015).




                                                         17
characteristics both within and across diagnosis categories.29 The distance coefficient, which is
assumed to be market-specific, is identified from within-market, across-zip code variation in choice
probabilities for consumers who live at varying distances from hospitals. We rely on the common
assumption that unobservable hospital preference shocks are uncorrelated with observable hospital
characteristics, including location. Furthermore, as in Ho (2006), we implicitly assume that there
is no selection across insurance plans on unobservable consumer preferences for hospitals.

Willingness-to-Pay (WTP).              We use the estimated demand model, not only to predict changes
in hospital demand following hypothetical network changes, but also to construct a measure of
consumers’ ex-ante expected utility for an insurer’s hospital network. We follow an established
literature by referring to this measure as “willingness-to-pay” (W T P ) (Town and Vistnes, 2001;
Capps, Dranove and Satterthwaite, 2003; Ho, 2006; Farrell et al., 2011). This object will be used
as a plan characteristic in our subsequent insurer demand model. Given the assumption on the
distribution of H
                 k,i,l,m , individual k’s W T P for the hospital network offered by plan j is

                                                                                                          
                                          X                       X
                                   a
             W T Pk,j,m (Gj,m ) = γκ(k)         γκ(k),l log              exp(δ̂h + zh υk,l β̂ z + dh,k β̂m
                                                                                                          d 
                                                                                                            ) ,
                                          l∈L                    h∈Gj,m
                                                      |                             {z                        }
                                                                             EUk,j,l,m (Gj,m )


where the expression is a weighted sum across diagnoses of the expected utility of a hospital network
conditional on a given diagnosis (EUk,j,l,m (Gj,m )), scaled by the probability of admission to any
hospital.30 Note that this object varies explicitly by age and gender. The model will therefore
be able to account for differential responses by particular types of patients (i.e., selection) across
insurers and hospitals when an insurer’s hospital network changes.

3.3      Household Demand for Insurance Plans
We next estimate a model of household demand for insurance plans using enrollment information
for state employee households. We assume that each household chooses among three insurance
plans (BS, BC, and Kaiser), taking all household members’ hospital preferences into account.
       The utility a household or family f receives from choosing insurance plan j ∈ {BS, BC} in
market m is given by

                                 φ
                                                            X                X
                uM
                 f,j,m = δj,m + αf (.2 × φj Φλ(f ) ) +              ακW                W T Pk,j,m +εM
                                                                                                    f,j,m ,       (9)
                                                             ∀κ           k∈f,κ(k)=κ
                          |                                 {z                                   }
                                                          ũM
                                                            f,j,m

  29
     Here, and throughout the paper, we use the word “identification” in an informal sense. A formal identification
argument would require further conditions.
  30
     EUk,j,l,m (Gj,m ) is the expected value of the maximum of {uH k,i,l,m } across all hospitals in Gj,m before the
realization of the (demeaned) error terms {εHk,i,d }.




                                                            18
where δj,m is an insurer-market fixed effect that controls for physician networks, brand effects,
and other insurer characteristics; φj is the single household premium, which is scaled by the con-
sumer contribution of 20%; λ(f ) ∈ {single, 2-party, family} is the household “type” for family
f ; and Φ ≡ [1, 2, 2.6]0 is a vector of premium multipliers for each household type. The term
       W
P        P
   ∀κ ακ  k∈f,κ(k)=κ W T Pk,j,m (·) controls for a household’s WTP for the insurer’s hospital net-
work by summing over the value of W T Pk,j,m for each member of the household multiplied by an
age-sex category specific coefficient, ακ . Finally εM
                                                     f jm is a Type 1 extreme value error term.
       This specification is consistent with households choosing an insurance product prior to the
realization of their health shocks and aggregating the preferences of members when making the
plan decision.31,32 We assume that in markets where Kaiser is available, Kaiser is the “outside-
                                                                                              φ
option” and delivers utility uM              M                                  M
                              f,Kaiser,m = ũf,Kaiser,m + εf,Kaiser,m , where ũf,Kaiser,m ≡ αf (.2 ×
                    K dK and dK is the (drive-time) distance between household f ’s zip code and the
φKaiser Φλ(f ) ) + αm  f      f
closest Kaiser hospital. In the two HSAs where Kaiser is not available we assume that δBC,m = 0.
       Thus, the predicted probability that a given family f chooses an insurer j is

                                                   exp(ũM
                                                         f,j,m )
                          σ̂f,j,m (φ, G) = P                                j ∈ Mz(f ) ,                        (10)
                                               n∈Mz(f )   exp(ũM
                                                                f,n,m )


where Mz(f ) denotes the set of insurers available in f ’s zip code of residence.

Identification.       Our dataset contains little variation in premiums but substantial variation on
other dimensions. In particular, the expected utility derived from an MCO’s network differs at the
zip code and family level. Thus, the coefficients {ακW }∀κ are identified from variation in households’
W T P for an insurer’s network, induced both through geographic variation within-market across
zip-codes (e.g., some households are closer to hospitals included in an insurer’s network than others),
and through variation in the probabilities of experiencing different diagnoses (e.g., households vary
in age and gender composition).
       We parameterize the coefficient on premiums as αfφ ≡ α0φ + α1φ log(yf ), where yf is the income of
the household’s primary enrollee. The premium coefficient is identified from within-plan variation
in the premiums charged across household types (which are observed) for a given market. This
identification strategy requires an assumption that, controlling for income, while premiums vary
across family types, premium sensitivity does not. As premiums do not vary across markets and are
common across the state, cross-market variation cannot be used to identify the premium coefficient.
The insurer-market fixed effects will absorb variation in plan benefits that do not vary within
markets; we assume that they also absorb any variation in unobserved plan quality that could be
correlated with premiums or hospital networks and lead to biased estimates.33 Concerns about
  31
     For implementation, we group together male and female individuals between the ages of 0-19, yielding 9 different
age-sex category coefficients for W T P .
  32
     See also Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012) and Lee (2013) as examples of controlling for complementary good
utility when estimating demand for an intermediary product.
  33
     We do not explicitly model household responsiveness to deductibles, copays, or—in the case of BC—coinsurance



                                                          19
                    Table 4: Estimates: Insurance Plan Household Price Elasticities

                                                  Single    2-Party   Family
                                         BS       -1.23     -2.15     -2.53
                                         BC       -1.62     -2.50     -2.95
                                         Kaiser   -1.23     -2.12     -2.53

Notes: Estimated own-price elasticities for each insurer using insurer demand estimates from Table 13.


endogeneity are further mitigated by the use of exogenous fixed multiples to scale premiums across
household types.

Estimates.       We estimate the model via maximum likelihood. Estimates from the insurer demand
system are presented in Table 13 in the Appendix. All coefficients are significant (at p = .05) and
of the expected sign, except for one (which is insignificant). We find that higher-income households
are less price sensitive and that, all else equal, households prefer insurance plans that deliver higher
network expected utility. The desirability of Kaiser as an insurer is decreasing in the distance to
the closest Kaiser hospital.
    Table 4 provides the implied own-premium elasticities for each plan and household type.34
The magnitudes range from -1.23 for single-person households for Kaiser to -2.95 for families with
children for BC. These numbers are well within the range estimated in the previous literature. For
example Ho (2006) uses a similar model (although a different dataset) to generate an estimated
elasticity of -1.24. Cutler and Reber (1998) and Royalty and Solomon (1998) use panel data on
enrollee responses to observed plan premium changes in employer-sponsored large group settings
to estimate elasticities of -2, and between -1.02 and -3.5, respectively.
    We note that, while the estimated household premium elasticities are an important input into
the premium setting model, they may not be the only constraint faced by insurers when setting
premiums. If in reality CalPERS bargains with insurers over premiums, then failing to account for
this (e.g., by assuming that insurers unilaterally set their own premiums) would lead us to predict
higher markups than would be observed in the data. We return to this issue below.

3.4    Insurer Premiums and Hospital-Insurer Bargaining
We next turn to the estimation of insurer (non-hospital) marginal costs η ≡ {ηBS , ηBC , ηK } and
Nash bargaining parameters τ ≡ {τBS , τBC , τ φ }. We first detail the construction of the objects
that are required to estimate our remaining parameters (hospital-insurer prices and insurer and
hospital demand) and then discuss how we adapt our theoretical model to fit our empirical setting.
rates. As long as the financial generosity of plans (outside of premiums) does not vary when an insurer is added or
removed from a market, the impact of deductibles and copays will be absorbed into plan-market fixed effects and not
affect our analysis.
   34
      We report elasticities based on the full premium rather than the out-of-pocket prices faced by enrollees; they are
referred to in the previous health insurance literature as “insurer-perspective” elasticities.




                                                           20
Construction of Hospital-Insurer Prices.                  To construct a measure of the price negotiated
between each insurer-hospital pair, we take the total amount paid to the hospital by an insurer
across all admissions, and divide it by the sum of the 2004 Medicare DRG weights associated
with these admissions. This “DRG-adjusted price” accounts for differences in relative values across
diagnoses. We focus only on hospital-insurer price observations for which we observe 10 or more
admissions from a given insurer. We assume that each hospital-insurer pair negotiates a single
price index that is approximated by this DRG-adjusted average (representing the negotiated price
for an admission with DRG weight of 1.0), and that this value is multiplied by the DRG severity
of the relevant admission to determine the actual payment to the hospital.
       Formally, let Aij be the set of admissions that we observe between hospital i and MCO j.
We assume that for any admission a ∈ Aij , the total observed payment made for that admission
poa = p∗ij × DRGa + εa , where p∗ij is the price per-admission (for an admission of DRG weight
1.0) negotiated by i and j given by (6), DRGa is the observed DRG-weight for admission a,
and εa represents a mean-zero admission specific payment shock reflecting unanticipated proce-
dures or costs (which is mean independent of all observable hospital and insurer characteristics).
Our estimate of a hospital-insurer’s negotiated DRG-weighted price per admission p∗ij is p̂ij ≡
( ∀a∈Aij poa )/( ∀a∈Aij DRGa ) = p∗ij + εA           A            ∗
 P              P                                                       P             P
                                         ij , where εij ≡ p̂ij − pij = ( ∀a∈Aij εa )/( ∀a∈Aij DRGa )
and, by assumption, is not known in advance to either hospitals or insurers.35

Predicted and Counterfactual Hospital and Insurer Demand.                             Our insurer and hospital
demand systems allow us to condition on any set of premiums and hospital-insurer networks, and
construct estimates for: (i) the number of households of each type λ ∈ {single, 2-party, family}
that enroll in MCO j in market m, denoted D̂j,λ,m (·); (ii) the number of individual enrollees for
                                    E (·); and (iii) hospital demand for all hospitals i, MCOs
all MCOs j and markets m, denoted D̂j,m
                                                H
j, age-sex category κ, and markets m, denoted D̂i,j,κ,m (·). We account for potential differences in
disease severity across admissions by scaling this last value by the expected admission DRG weight
for patients of type κ. We assume that our estimates of these demand terms condition on exactly
the set of observables in firms’ information sets so that they are optimal predictors and equal to
firms’ expectations for these objects. Additional details are provided in Appendix A.3.
  35
     Hospital contracts with commercial insurers are typically negotiated as some combination of per-diem and case
rates, and payments are not necessarily made at the DRG level. However, since Medicare DRG weights are designed
to measure variation in resource utilization across diagnoses, we view them as appropriate inputs to control for
differences in case-mix and resource use across hospitals. Hospitals are not paid on a capitation basis in our data.




                                                        21
Extending the Theoretical Model. We adjust (1) to accommodate the institutional details of
our application, and assume that the profits for MCO j are given by
                                                                                                         
                                                                                               
                         X                                                  X                  
         M                        0                    E                          H
                                                                                               
        πj (G, p, φj ) =    φ j Φ Dj,m (·) −       Dj,m (·)ηj           −       Dh,j,m (·)ph,j 
                                                                                                 .                 (11)
                           
                         m 
                             |      {z    }         | {z }                    M
                           premium revenues non-inpatient hospital costs h∈Gj,m
                                                                                                
                                                                                                
                                                                           |      {z          }
                                                                                     hospital payments


The first term on the right-hand side of (11) represents total premium revenues obtained by MCO
j. It accounts for the different premiums charged to different household types: φj is MCO j’s
premium charged to single households, Φ is the vector of premium multipliers for each household
type, and Dj,m (·) is a vector containing the number of households of each type λ enrolled in MCO j.
The second term makes the distinction that an MCO’s non-inpatient hospital costs ηj are incurred
                                                                        E (·).36 The third term
on an individual and not a household basis, and thus are multiplied by Dj,m
represents expected payments made to hospitals in MCO j’s network for inpatient services, where
           H
each term Dh,j,m (·) sums across all age-sex categories of individuals. As noted above, we scale by
the expected admission DRG weight for patients of the relevant age-sex category to account for
variation in severity across admissions. Our model will therefore capture the impact of selection of
enrollees by age-sex categories and location across plans (e.g., as insurer hospital networks change)
on expected reimbursements and costs.
       For the remainder of this section, any demand term that is missing a market subscript m denotes
the value of that term summed over all markets; e.g., (11) is equivalent to πjM (·) = φj Φ0 Dj (·) −
DjE (·)ηj − h∈G M Dh,j
                     H (·)p .
           P
                           h,j
                    j



Estimation of Insurer Marginal Costs and Nash Bargaining Parameters.                                          We jointly
estimate θ ≡ {η, τ } using 2-step GMM under the assumption that                  E[ω n (θ)Z n ]   = 0 for n ∈ {1, 2, 3},
where we define our error terms         {ω n }n∈{1,2,3}   and sets of instruments      {Z n }n∈{1,2,3}   below.37

   1. Premium Bargaining. Our model accounts for the fact that, in our application, premiums for
         different household types are required to be the fixed multiples of single household premiums
         observed in the data and are the same across all markets. Thus, each MCO j negotiates only
         the single household premium φj with the employer. Rewriting the first-order condition of
  36
     For BS and BC, as we are explicitly controlling for prices paid to hospitals, the estimated cost parameters
{ηj }j∈{BS,BC} represent non-inpatient hospital marginal costs per enrollee, which may include physician, pharma-
ceutical, and other fees. Since we do not observe hospital prices for Kaiser, ηKaiser will also include Kaiser’s inpatient
hospital costs.
  37
     All error terms are generated by MCO-hospital system specific differences between predicted and observed total
hospital payments, resulting from our use of estimated prices per-admission as opposed to firms’ actual expected
prices, and are explicitly defined in Appendix A.5.




                                                           22
       (3), and using our general version of MCO profits given by (11), yields
                                                                                       
                                               πjM × Φ0 D̂j (·) + .8 k∈M φk Φ0 ∂ D̂k (·)
                                                                    P
                         ∂π M
                           j                                                     ∂φj
         ωj1 (θ) = τ φ ×      − (1 − τ φ ) ×                       E
                                                                                                              ∀j , (12)
                         ∂φj                                   GF T j (·)

       where
                                                                                         H (·)
                     ∂πjM (·)                       0 ∂ D̂j (·)
                                                                   ∂ D̂jE (·)      X ∂ D̂h,j
                              = Φ × D̂j (·) + φj (Φ             )−            ηj −             p̂h,j ,                (13)
                      ∂φj                               ∂φj          ∂φj            H
                                                                                        ∂φj
                                                                                         h∈Gj


       and GF T E
                j (·), defined in (3) and representing the employer’s gains from trade with MCO j,
       can be derived using our specification of household MCO utility from (9) and distributional
       assumptions on demand shocks:

                GF TjE (·) ≡ W (M) − W (M \ j)                                                                        (14)
                                                                 
                                                           ˆM )
                                                P
                              X X 1               k∈M exp(ũf,k,m 
                                                                         X
                           =               log                     − .8   φk Φ0 [∆M
                                                                                   j D̂k ] .
                                      |αφ |                 ˆM )
                                                P
                                   m f ∈Fm       f
                                                       exp(ũ k∈M\j          f,k,m              k∈M


                         ˆM
       In this equation, ũ                                                       M
                           f,k,m is our estimate of the term defined in (9) and [∆j D̂k ] is the change
       in MCO k’s enrollment across all household types and markets when MCO j is removed
       from the employer’s choice set. The first term on the right-hand-side of (14) is the change
       in employee welfare when MCO j is removed from the choice set. The second accounts for
       the change in the employer’s payments to insurers when j is removed; these terms are scaled
       by the employer contribution of 80% of premiums (the other 20% is accounted for in the
                          ˆM ) terms).38
       household utility (ũ    f,k,m

       With the exception of η and τ φ (which are both contained in θ), all objects on the right-
       hand-side of (12) are computable from the hospital and insurer demand systems estimated in
       the previous subsections. By construction, the term ωj1 is mean zero; we use a constant and
       the number of hospital systems in the network of each insurer as instruments in Z 1 to form
       two moment conditions.
       Finally, recall that if τ φ = 1, moments based on (12) are equivalent to assuming that MCOs
       engage in Nash Bertrand premium competition.

 2. Insurer Margins. We define:

                                                          D̂jE (·)ηj +            H (·)p̂
                                                                         P
                                                                         h∈Gj   D̂h,j     h,j
                               ωj2 (θ)   =   M LRjo   −                                               ∀j              (15)
                                                                    φj Φ0 D̂j (·)
                                                          |             {z                  }
                                                              Predicted MLR from (11)
                                                                            
38
     One can show that ∂GF TjE (·)/∂φj = − Φ0 D̂j (·) + .8 k φk Φ0 ∂ D̂k (·)
                                                          P
                                                                     ∂φj
                                                                               ; this is used in the derivation of (12).



                                                               23
  where M LRjo represents the value of each insurer’s MLR obtained from the 2004 financial
  reports provided by the California Department of Managed Health Care. We use the same
  instruments as for the premium setting moments in addition to the number of hospitals on
  each insurer, providing three additional moments.

3. Hospital-Insurer Bargaining. In Appendix A.4, we derive the generalization of the hospital-
  insurer bargaining first-order condition given by (6) to allow all hospitals in a hospital sys-
  tem to bargain jointly with insurers. We rewrite this generalized condition (derived in Ap-
  pendix A.4 and given by (19)) as
                                                                                            
               X                                                      X                                       h          i
   3
  ωS,j (θ) =                H
                     p̂ij D̂ij − (1 − τj ) φj Φ0 [∆S,j D̂j ] −                            H 
                                                                             p̂h,j [∆S,j D̂h,j ] +(1 − τj )ηj ∆S,j D̂jE
                                           
               i∈S                                                  h∈GjM \S                                  | {z }
                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                Z2;S,j
                                         |                           {z                         }
                                                                      3
                                                                    Z̃1;S,j
                                                                                  
                     X            X           X
                            H                                     H
               − τj   ci D̂i,j −                         [∆S,j D̂i,n ](p̂i,n − ci )    ∀S ∈ S ,                  (16)
                          i∈S          i∈S n∈G H ,n6=j
                                              S
                      |                           {z                               }
                                                  3
                                                Z̃3;S,j


  where S is a particular hospital system and S is the set of all systems.
  As discussed above, we assume that our estimates of all demand terms in (16) are equal to
  firms’ expectations for these objects. We use the following instruments in Z 3 to address the
                                                                                   3 :
  endogeneity of negotiated prices on the right hand side of (16) with respect to ωSj
                                      3
     • Two instruments for the term Z̃1;Sj in (16). Each is constructed by replacing p̂hj for
       each hospital h in the expression by either the hospital’s per-admission cost ch , or by a
       weighted average of ∆W T Ph,j,k,m ≡ W T Pk,j,m (G, ·) − W T Pk,j,m (G \ Sh , j, ·) across all
       individuals enrolled in MCO j (where ∆W T Ph,j,k,m represents the change in expected
       utility for an individual k when hospital h’s system is dropped from MCO j’s network,
       and m is the market in which h is located);
                 3
     • The term Z2;S,j in (16), which is the predicted change in individual enrollment in MCO
       j upon losing system S;
                                      3
     • Two instruments for the term Z̃3;Sj in (16), where similar to above, we construct each
       instrument by replacing the term (p̂in − ci ) with either ci or with ∆W T Pi,n,k,m .

  We construct these 5 instruments separately for BS and for BC (we do not estimate for
  Kaiser, as we do not observe its hospital prices), yielding 10 total instruments in Z 3 . These
  instruments rely on the positive correlation between hospital prices and both hospital costs
  and the constructed ∆W T Pi,j,k,m measure. These are valid instruments as we have assumed
  that unanticipated admission price shocks {εA                 3
                                              ij } (present in ωSj ) are mean-zero and mean-




                                                            24
         independent of firm and hospital observable characteristics.39
         Due to the simultaneous determination of premiums and negotiated prices in our model, the
         value of τ φ does not enter into the computation of these sets of moments.

We obtain bootstrapped estimates of standard errors by resampling the set of admissions within
each hospital-insurer pair to construct new estimates for each pair’s DRG-weighted price per ad-
mission, p̂ij , and re-estimating marginal costs and Nash bargaining parameters.40

Identification.       The non-hospital marginal costs (η) and the premium Nash bargaining parameter
(τ φ )   are primarily identified from the premium setting and margin moments. Intuitively, since
premiums and inpatient hospital payments are observed, the margin moments constructed from
(15) closely pin down non-hospital marginal costs for BS and BC and the total medical marginal
costs for Kaiser.41 The assumed form of premium bargaining governed by (12) relates estimated
premium elasticities and observed premiums to marginal costs and therefore helps to identify τ φ .
     To illustrate how τ φ is identified, we re-compute equilibrium single premiums for all MCOs at
different values of τ φ using (12) and our main parameter estimates (to be discussed later), and plot
these values in Figure 2. As τ φ increases from 0 to 1, single premiums for all insurers are predicted
to increase smoothly, from a level where their costs are just covered to a level (approximately $2000
higher) that exceeds the premiums that we observe in the data. That is, at our estimated household
premium elasticities for insurance plans, Nash-Bertrand premium setting behavior would generate
implied profit margins higher than those we observe. Thus a value of τ φ > 0 is consistent with
positive MCO margins, and a value of τ φ < 1 rationalizes lower MCO margins than predicted under
Nash Bertrand premium setting (given estimated premium elasticities).
     Identification of the bargaining parameter τj for BS and BC leverages the bargaining moments
constructed from (16). Several sources of variation in negotiated hospital prices are relevant. One
source is the extent to which cross-hospital variation in hospital costs, ci , is reflected in prices;
another is the correlation between a hospital’s price and the predicted effect of dropping that
hospital (or its system) on the number of households enrolled in the insurer. For example, if MCO
  39
     The hospital and insurer-market fixed effects included in the demand equations (8) and (9) control for a substantial
amount of variation in preferences that might otherwise generate endogeneity issues in the bargaining equation. We
have explicitly ruled out one additional source of bias: the correlation between unobservable hospital preference shocks
with observable hospital characteristics. For example, we do not allow unobserved preferences for hospitals to be
correlated with individuals’ zip codes and conditioned upon when either households choose among insurers or insurers
contract with hospitals (thus generating a correlation across zip codes between household unobservable preferences
for insurers and computed households’ WTP for an insurer’s network). Given these assumptions, the use of objects
related to household and insurer demand in our instruments is valid. One additional possibility ruled out by our
assumptions is the presence of heterogeneous Nash bargaining parameters that differ within an insurer across hospital
systems in a way that is correlated with systems’ attractiveness to consumers. Rather than allowing for bargaining
parameters to be pair-specific, our model primarily rationalizes observed price variation through predicted differences
in insurer and hospital system gains-from-trade.
  40
     Accounting for the effect of variance in the hospital and insurer demand estimates on standard errors in our last
stage of estimation is outside the scope of this analysis.
  41
     There is also additional information on MCO non-hospital marginal costs contained within the bargaining first-
order condition in (16) because ηBS and ηBC affect the correlation between hospital price and changes in the number
of individual enrollees for each MCO upon disagreement with a given hospital.


                                                           25
Figure 2:     Predicted equilibrium single household premiums at estimated parameters from specification (ii) in
Table 5 as the premium Nash bargaining parameter (τ φ ) varies.

            Table 5: Estimates: Insurer Marginal Costs and Nash Bargaining Parameters

                                                                           (i)        (ii)
                              Insurer Non-Inpatient            ηBS     925.78    1,691.50
                              Marginal Costs                            11.12       10.41
                              (per individual)             ηBC       1,417.73    1,948.61
                                                                         6.93        8.14
                                                               ηK    1,496.44    2,535.14
                                                                             -       0.62
                              Nash Bargaining                  τBS       0.33        0.31
                              Parameters                                 0.01        0.05
                                                               τBC       0.40        0.38
                                                                         0.02        0.03
                                                                τφ       1.00        0.47
                                                                             -       0.00
                              Use Margin Moments                            N           Y
                              Number of Bilateral Pairs                   268         268

Notes: 2-step GMM estimates of marginal costs for each insurer (which do not include hospital payments for BS and
BC), Nash bargaining parameters, and elasticity scaling parameter. When “margin moments” are not used, we set
τ φ = 1.00, and Kaiser marginal costs are directly obtained from (12) by setting ωKaiser
                                                                                  1
                                                                                         = 0. Standard errors are
computed using 80 bootstrap samples of admissions within each hospital-insurer pair to re-estimate hospital-insurer
DRG weighted admission prices and re-estimating these parameters.


j’s negotiated hospital prices are correlated with the predicted loss in its premium revenues when
hospitals are dropped from its network (φj Φ0 [∆Sj D̂j ]), then our model will predict that hospitals
capture a proportion of their created gains from trade (i.e., τj < 1).

Estimates.      Table 5 contains estimates for MCOs’ non-hospital marginal costs and the Nash
bargaining parameters for both price and premium setting across two specifications. Specification
(i) assumes that MCOs engage in Nash-Bertrand competition over premiums (setting τ φ = 1); it



                                                          26
does not rely on insurer margin data.42 Under this specification, we estimate that non-hospital
per enrollee per year marginal costs range from approximately $926 for BS to $1,418 for BC; total
(including hospital) marginal costs are estimated to be $1,496 per enrollee per year for Kaiser.
These non-hospital marginal costs are likely to be under-estimated: predicted average insurer
margins under Nash-Bertrand premium setting are over 40%, much larger than those observed in
the data.
       Motivated by this discrepancy, specification (ii) incorporates employer-insurer bargaining over
premiums (and allows for τ φ ≤ 1), matches observed insurer margins, and hence recovers higher
marginal costs which range from approximately $1,690 for BS to $1,950 for BC. Total (including
hospital) marginal costs are estimated to be $2,535 for Kaiser. These estimates are close to those
reported by outside sources. For example, the Kaiser Family Foundation reports a cross-insurer
average of $1,836 spending per person per year on physician and clinical services, for California in
2014; data from the Massachusetts Center for Health Information and Analysis indicates average
spending of $1,644 per person per year on professional services for the three largest commercial
insurers in the years 2010-12.43
       To match observed margins (and rationalize our marginal cost estimates), we obtain an estimate
of τ φ = 0.47. That is, insurers and CalPERS have approximately equal bargaining weights during
premium negotiations. This predicted existence of employer bargaining leverage over premiums
will be important for our counterfactual analyses.
       Estimated Nash bargaining parameters for insurer-hospital bargaining in specification (ii) are .31
and .38 for BS and BC, lower than the estimates in specification (i). To understand this difference,
note that (ii) implies that insurers, with lower margins and higher marginal costs, have less surplus
to share with hospitals when bargaining. Thus, to rationalize the observed level of hospital prices
in the data, our model predicts that hospitals capture more of these “gains from trade” under
specification (ii) than (i), resulting in lower estimated insurer Nash bargaining parameters.
       For all subsequent analyses (unless otherwise specified), we use estimates from specification (ii).

Implied Price Decomposition. Table 6 presents the average of negotiated hospital prices for
BS and BC, weighted by the predicted number of hospital admissions within each insurer.44 It also
reports the decomposition of hospital prices into our different bargaining effects: i.e., we compute
the fraction of hospital price levels that are determined by each term in our general hospital-system
bargaining equation (given by (19)), and reports the weighted (by predicted number of hospital
  42                                                                      1
     Hospital payments are included in ηK for Kaiser, and thus we fix ωKaiser   = 0. Without using hospital margin
                                        φ
data and under the assumption that τ = 1, marginal costs are still identified from the premium setting moments
for BS and BC; η̂Kaiser in this case can be recovered directly from (12) alone.
  43
     Kaiser data accessed from http://kff.org/other/state-indicator/health-spending-per-capita-by-service/
on February 25, 2015. Massachusetts data were taken from the report “Massachusetts Commercial Medical Care
Spending: Findings from the All-Payer Claims Database 2010-12,” published by the Center for Health Information
and Analysis in partnership with the Health Policy Commission. Both of these figures include member out-of-pocket
spending, which is excluded from our estimates; the California data also include the higher-cost Medicare population
in addition to the commercially insured enrollees in our sample.
  44
     These figures are higher than the unweighted average hospital prices reported in Table 1, indicating that indi-
viduals tend to be admitted to relatively expensive hospitals.


                                                       27
                      Table 6: Estimates: Negotiated Hospital Price Decomposition

                                  (i) Premium &            (ii) Price    (iii) Hospital   (iv) Recapture
                          Price       Enrollment     Reinforcement               Costs              Effect
                 BS    7,191.11            24.2%               66.3%              8.9%               0.6%
                                  [23.6%, 25.5%]     [64.9%, 69.3%]     [5.1%, 10.6%]        [0.4%, 0.8%]
                BC     6,023.86            32.3%               52.6%             12.1%               3.0%
                                  [31.8%, 33.7%]     [51.8%, 55.1%]     [9.2%, 13.1%]        [2.3%, 3.3%]

Notes: Weighted average (by hospital admissions) decomposition of negotiated hospital prices into the components
provided in (19) for each insurer and hospital system (omitting residuals, and scaling by τj or 1−τj where appropriate).
95% confidence intervals, reported below estimates, are constructed using 80 bootstrap samples of admissions within
each hospital-insurer pair to re-estimate hospital-insurer DRG weighted admission prices, re-estimate insurer marginal
costs and Nash Bargaining parameters, and re-compute price decompositions.


admissions) average across all hospitals.45 We predict that the largest determinants of hospital price
levels are the price reinforcement effect and the premium and enrollment effects, which represent
over 80% of hospital price levels across both insurers. The other effects are predicted to have a
smaller, but still significant, impact on hospital prices.46


4     The Equilibrium Effects of Insurer Competition
In this section, we use our estimated model to simulate the impact of removing an insurer from
enrollees’ choice sets, and examine conditions under which premium increases can be mitigated
(or completely offset) by employer bargaining or adjustments in negotiated hospital prices. We
also decompose predicted changes in hospital payments into adjustments in each of our theoretical
bargaining effects in order to better understand the circumstances under which they are likely to
increase or decrease.

Setup and Assumptions. For our counterfactual exercises, we hold fixed hospital characteristics
and insurers’ hospital networks (for all remaining insurers), and compute a new equilibrium in
insurer premiums, negotiated hospital prices, insurer enrollment, and hospital utilization upon the
removal of either BC or Kaiser from CalPERS’ menu of plans.47 Our analysis implicitly assumes
  45                              2
     We exclude the residual ωSj     in (16) from this calculation; when included, the residuals constitute less than
0.5%, on average, of BS and BC hospital prices. We use the negative of terms (ii) and (iv) when computing this
decomposition.
  46
     The recapture effect, in particular, is small relative to the premium and enrollment effects. Based on the as-
sumptions of our model, an enrollee who previously visited hospital i through MCO j will be recaptured by hospital
i upon disagreement with MCO j only if the enrollee chooses to switch to a different insurer from which she can
access i (which cannot include Kaiser), becomes sick enough to be admitted, and then chooses to visit the same
exact hospital. The presence of Kaiser—a vertically integrated insurer from which non-Kaiser hospitals cannot be
accessed—together with the low average probability of admission to hospital (under 5 percent in our population) and
the fact that enrollees choose insurance plans based on ex ante expectations over admission risk and their hospital
preferences, help to explain the recapture effect’s relatively small magnitude. Further, in reality the realization of
any recapture effect is likely to be delayed because enrollees may not be able to switch plans until the following year.
  47
     We compute an equilibrium using an iterative algorithm that alternates between adjusting premiums, prices and
enrollment until the process converges. The process is similar to that used in Crawford et al. (2015); additional
details are provided in the Appendix.



                                                          28
that: (i) the menu of insurance plans is held fixed, (ii) hospital prices are negotiated specifically
for CalPERS by each insurer-hospital pair; and (iii) counterfactual changes do not induce hospitals
to enter or exit or hit capacity constraints.48 As the insurers that we observe are three of the five
largest in the state (covering over two-thirds of California’s commercially insured population in
2004), and CalPERS has substantial scale (representing approximately 8% of commercially insured
individuals), we argue that our analysis can be seen as representative of scenarios facing other
employers in large group insurance markets.
       We assume that premiums are determined through insurer-employer bargaining before examing
how results are affected if insurers instead engage in Nash Bertrand premium setting.

4.1      Counterfactual 1: Removing Kaiser Permanente
Table 7 reports premiums, enrollment, hospital payments and prices, and surplus in our baseline
setting where all three insurers are available (recomputed from model estimates), and across our
two counterfactual exercises. We focus first on results from the removal of Kaiser Permanente,
presented in panel (i).

Insurer Premiums. Even though we have estimated that CalPERS has substantial bargain-
ing power when negotiating with insurers over premiums, removing Kaiser—an attractive insurer
with 39% market share overall in California, and over 50% in several markets—leads premiums
for the remaining insurers to increase by approximately 14-17%. The intuition for this finding is
straightforward. First there is a standard market power effect: removing a large competitor reduces
competitive pressures for the remaining insurers. Second, CalPERS’ outside option from disagree-
ment with the remaining insurers is harmed by the loss of Kaiser (represented by an increase in
GF TjE (·) in equation (5)); as discussed in Section 2.3, this generates additional upward pressure
on the remaining insurers’ premiums.

Hospital Prices.        In spite of BS’s large premium increase, we find that average hospital payments
per enrollee and (unit-DRG) prices per admission do not change significantly for BS when Kaiser
is removed. This suggests that any increases in negotiated prices induced by higher premiums
are being offset by changes in bargaining leverage for BS. However, BC’s hospital prices increase
significantly, suggesting that such bargaining effects may not be as substantial for BC.
       To explore this impact on hospital prices in more detail, panels (ia) and (ib) of Table 8 report
hospital price changes for BS and BC across a sample of markets when Kaiser is removed. Columns
3-6 provide levels and changes in negotiated prices both when premiums are held fixed at levels
  48
    We motivate the first assumption by noting that CalPERS held fixed the set of insurers that were offered for
several years both prior to and after our sample period. Due to CalPERS’ scale, we believe that it is feasible that
insurers would be willing to negotiate CalPERS-specific prices. At the same time, CalPERS’ enrollees still comprise
only a relatively small portion of hospitals’ total admissions (which come from both public and price sources); hence
counterfactual adjustments in utilization for any particular hospital are likely to be small relative to its capacity.




                                                         29
                             Table 7: Removing an Insurer: Summary Results

                                      Baseline             (i) Remove Kaiser                     (ii) Remove BC
                                       Amount             Amount           % Change           Amount           % Change
 Premiums                  BS              3.78                4.41            16.6%               3.65             -3.4%
 (per year)                        [3.76, 3.79]        [4.36, 4.43]   [15.8%, 16.8%]       [3.62, 3.66]    [-4.0%, -3.3%]
                          BC               4.19                4.80            14.4%                  -                  -
                                   [4.18, 4.20]        [4.75, 4.81]   [13.7%, 14.6%]
                       Kaiser              3.67                   -                 -             3.62              -1.4%
                                   [3.66, 3.67]                                           [3.60, 3.62]     [-1.6%, -1.3%]
 Household                 BS             73.91              124.16            68.0%             87.73             18.7%
 Enrollment                      [73.65, 74.34]    [124.13, 124.25]   [67.1%, 68.6%]    [87.44, 88.51]    [18.4%, 19.3%]
                          BC              27.49               38.56            40.2%                 -                   -
                                 [27.49, 27.50]      [38.47, 38.59]   [39.9%, 40.4%]
                       Kaiser             61.31                   -                 -            64.99               6.0%
                                 [60.88, 61.58]                                         [64.21, 65.27]       [5.2%, 6.3%]
 Hospital                  BS              0.66               0.66               0.5%             0.60              -8.5%
 Payments                             [.65, .68]         [.64, .68]     [-3.1%, 1.7%]        [.57, .62]   [-12.7%, -7.5%]
 (per individual)           BC             0.56               0.68             21.2%                  -                  -
                                      [.55, .58]         [.67, .72]   [20.0%, 24.8%]
  Hospital Prices           BS             7.19               7.23               0.6%             6.55              -8.9%
  (per admission)                  [7.06, 7.35]       [6.92, 7.43]      [-3.1%, 1.8%]     [6.19, 6.74]    [-13.3%, -7.7%]
                            BC             6.02               7.29             21.0%                  -                  -
                                   [6.04, 6.40]       [7.14, 7.64]    [19.8%, 24.6%]
  Surplus               Insurer            0.44               0.99            125.9%              0.38            -13.3%
  (per individual)                    [.44, .44]         [.99, .99] [124.6%, 126.6%]         [.38, .39] [-13.8%, -11.7%]
                     Hospitals             0.30               0.51             69.7%              0.27              -9.0%
                      (Non-K)         [.29, .31]         [.49, .52]   [63.0%, 72.3%]         [.26, .28]   [-13.8%, -7.6%]
                      ∆ Cons.                  -             -0.19                   -           -0.01                   -
                                                       [-.19, -.18]                        [-.01, -.01]
Notes: Results from simulating removal of Blue Cross or Kaiser from all markets using estimates from specification (iv)
in Table 5. All figures are in thousands. Baseline numbers (including premiums, hospital prices, and enrollment) are
recomputed from model estimates. Average insurer payments to hospitals and average DRG-adjusted hospital prices
are weighted by the number of admissions each hospital receives from each insurer under each scenario. Surplus figures
represent total insurer, hospital, and changes to consumer surplus per insured individual. 95% confidence intervals,
reported below estimates, are constructed by using 80 bootstrap samples of admissions within each hospital-insurer
pair to re-estimate hospital-insurer DRG weighted admission prices, re-estimate insurer marginal costs and Nash
bargaining parameters, and re-compute counterfactual simulations.


observed in the data and when they are allowed to adjust.49 In addition, the final columns of
Table 8 report the changes in the main insurer-hospital bargaining effects from (6) upon removal
of an insurer when premiums are allowed to adjust.50 As discussed in Section 2.3, these changes in
bargaining effects will determine the effect of insurer competition on negotiated equilibrium prices.
In general, a positive premium effect change will tend to increase prices, but if offset by a larger
negative enrollment effect change, prices can fall.
       When premiums are held fixed (columns 3-4 of Table 8) so that the premium effect change is
restricted to be zero, hospital prices fall across all markets for BS and on average for BC when
Kaiser is removed. This is broadly consistent with the intuition that, when premiums do not
  49
     To clarify comparisons and decompositions, we hold fixed the weights used when averaging across hospital prices
to be equal to baseline admission probabilities. For this reason, counterfactual hospital prices in column 6 of Table 8
do not correspond exactly to those in Table 7 which uses scenario-specific weights.
  50
     We provide the formal derivation of the terms in equation (20) in the Appendix.



                                                           30
                 Table 8: Removing an Insurer: Counterfactual Blue Shield and Blue Cross Hospital Price Changes Across Markets

                                            Avg. Hospital Price ($ / admission)                     Decomposition of Change ($ / admission)
                                                 Fix Premiums         Adjust Premiums       (ia) Prem    (ib) Enroll   (ii) Price   (iii) Cost   (iv) Re-
                                Baseline    CF % Change                  CF    % Change         Effect       Effect    Reinforce       Effect    Capture
                 (ia) REMOVE KAISER: BS PRICES
                 All Mkts       7191.13 6451.01 -10.29%              7175.65       -0.22%      624.97      -1149.39      473.70          0.65      34.59
                 2. Sacramento  8204.98 7318.75 -10.80%              7751.96       -5.52%      605.39      -1572.02      491.33          1.83      20.45
                 4. SF Bay W.   8825.62 7994.95  -9.41%              8589.65       -2.67%      616.37      -1439.98      533.81         -0.86      54.69
                 5. E. Bay      7368.50 5967.77 -19.01%              6537.55      -11.28%      717.37      -1820.40      229.04          0.15      42.89
                 9. C. Valley   6591.73 6369.72  -3.37%              7329.03       11.19%      556.42       -550.32      681.83          0.00      49.36
                 10. S. Barbara 7934.89 7779.92  -1.95%              8709.83        9.77%      402.15       -187.53      533.88          2.55      23.90
                 11. LA         5878.37 4829.25 -17.85%              5661.03       -3.70%      662.05      -1163.77      258.83          0.43      25.12
                 14. SD         6673.04 6038.49  -9.51%              6634.70       -0.57%      472.14       -908.62      380.01         -0.04      18.16
                 (ib) REMOVE KAISER: BC PRICES
                 All Mkts       6023.83 5988.53  -0.59%              7219.85      19.85%       671.85       -130.41      580.01          0.24      74.33
                 2. Sacramento  6651.31 6703.09   0.78%              8186.10      23.08%       839.58       -137.89      728.48          2.05     102.58
                 4. SF Bay W.   7602.06 7734.73   1.75%              9189.30      20.88%       836.40       -157.26      747.50         -0.70     161.29




31
                 5. E. Bay      7158.45 7150.76  -0.11%              8570.60      19.73%       835.46       -220.00      684.32          0.18     112.19
                 9. C. Valley   5210.75 5215.51   0.09%              6763.68      29.80%       875.55       -134.94      700.05          0.00     112.27
                 10. S. Barbara 5130.74 5094.60  -0.70%              6395.60      24.65%       699.55        -84.34      599.56          2.52      47.55
                 11. LA         6084.19 5803.18  -4.62%              6960.25      14.40%       687.32       -386.22      540.62          0.21      34.12
                 14. SD         5381.70 5482.36   1.87%              6841.04      27.12%       807.95       -143.63      719.75         -0.02      75.29
                 (ii) REMOVE BLUE CROSS: BS PRICES
                 All Mkts       7191.13 6898.64  -4.07%              6620.28       -7.94%      -129.81      -247.77      -167.38         0.01     -25.89
                 2. Sacramento  8204.98 8098.96  -1.29%              7799.41       -4.94%      -125.74      -131.81      -134.28        -0.02     -13.72
                 4. SF Bay W.   8825.62 8643.19  -2.07%              8370.37       -5.16%      -128.03      -195.86       -95.34         0.10     -36.12
                 5. E. Bay      7368.50 7252.44  -1.58%              6913.99       -6.17%      -149.00      -113.83      -170.56         0.00     -21.11
                 9. C. Valley   6591.73 5945.62  -9.80%              5781.16      -12.30%      -115.57      -485.97      -152.72        -0.02     -56.29
                 10. S. Barbara 7934.89 7248.92  -8.65%              7170.32       -9.64%       -83.53      -610.90       -17.78        -0.28     -52.08
                 11. LA         5878.37 5623.27  -4.34%              5304.90       -9.76%      -137.51      -216.72      -200.27        -0.02     -18.94
                 14. SD         6673.04 6373.32  -4.49%              6161.37       -7.67%       -98.07      -239.34      -160.35         0.00     -13.91

     Notes: Average (DRG-adjusted) hospital prices for Blue Shield from simulating the removal of Blue Cross or Kaiser across all HSAs, or within a selected sample
     of HSAs, using estimates from specification (iv) in Table 5. Baseline numbers are recomputed from model estimates. Average hospital prices are weighted by the
     number of admissions each hospital receives from each insurer under each scenario. Decomposition effects correspond to terms in equation 20, and are weighted
     by the number of admissions under the baseline scenario; their sum equals the predicted overall change in hospital prices.
adjust following the removal of an insurer, the remaining insurers generally have greater negotiating
leverage over hospitals because they tend to lose fewer enrollees upon a bargaining disagreement.51
We find that price reductions can be large when premiums are fixed: hospital prices for BS fall by
over 17% in two markets, and by 10% on average.
       However, when both premiums and prices are permitted to adjust, hospital price changes for
both insurers are more positive due to the predicted positive premium effect change. For Blue Shield
the average price change is insignificant, but in some markets prices increase by approximately 10%,
and in others they fall by the same amount. Blue Cross prices are predicted to increase across all
markets.
       What drives this cross-market variation? As shown in Table 8, the premium effect change for BS
is positive (which follows from its predicted 17% premium increase) but does not vary substantially
across markets; this is unsurprising given premiums are restricted to be the same across the entire
state. However, the enrollment effect change exhibits much more variability across markets, and
large negative values are the sole reason for hospital price reductions for BS when Kaiser is removed.
       The enrollment effect change represents the extent to which an insurer (either BS or BC) loses
fewer patients upon coming to a disagreement with a hospital when Kaiser is absent than when
Kaiser is present. Kaiser’s market-specific attractiveness relative to the insurer in question will be
a primary determinant of the magnitude of this effect. Consider BS’s negotiations with hospitals.
If BS drops a hospital system from its network, more of BS’s enrollees will likely switch to Kaiser
(causing a larger negative enrollment effect change) in markets where Kaiser is a strong competitor
than in markets where it is not. Thus, a hospital price reduction is more likely in markets where
the insurer being removed is more attractive (where attractiveness could be caused by particularly
dense or high-quality hospital or physician networks, for example, and should be reflected in a
particularly high market share in the relevant area). Consistent with this intuition, Table 8 shows
that the enrollment effect is most negative in markets where Kaiser has the largest market share
(e.g. Sacramento and East Bay, each with a Kaiser share of over 50%). These in turn are also the
markets in which BS is predicted to have the largest hospital price reductions.
       However, since BC is not as direct a substitute for Kaiser (largely because most of its enrollees
live in areas further away from Kaiser hospitals), BC benefits less from Kaiser’s removal when
bargaining with hospitals, and the negative enrollment effect change for BC is smaller than that
for BS. Thus, the positive premium and price reinforcement effect changes dominate in all markets
for BC, leading to price increases.
       This discussion highlights why the competitiveness of the insurer being removed in a given
market is an important predictor of hospital price changes. We find that characteristics of the
hospital market, in contrast, do not yield clear predictions. Though the quality of the relevant
  51
     In all but one market in which BC has less than 10% market share in the baseline scenario (Sacramento, Sonoma
(unreported), San Francisco, and San Diego), we find that the removal of Kaiser with fixed premiums leads to average
BC hospital price increases. This arises from a large positive recapture effect change: more enrollees are willing to
switch from BC to BS in order to access a dropped hospital when Kaiser is removed. This offsets other negative
effects and illustrates that, even with fixed premiums, insurers need not always have increased bargaining leverage
when insurer competition is reduced.


                                                         32
hospital and presence of reasonable substitutes directly affects the level of the enrollment effect
for a given insurer-hospital pair, using measures related to the competitiveness or concentration
of the hospital market to predict average bargaining effect changes (including, for example, the
enrollment effect change) when a insurer is removed is less clear. Consistent with this, we find that
cross-market correlations between the average changes in our bargaining effects and measures of
hospital concentration differ in magnitude and sign across counterfactuals.

Welfare.      The bottom of Table 7 reports the surplus that accrues to insurers and hospitals, and
the change in consumer welfare on a per-capita basis, across baseline and counterfactual scenarios.
When Kaiser is removed, total insurer surplus (across all insurers that are present) increases due
to premium increases for BS and BC. Non-Kaiser hospitals’ surplus increases, by 70%, due both
to increased prices and to their new admissions of former Kaiser enrollees. Higher premiums and a
reduced choice set generate consumer surplus reductions of approximately $200 per capita.52

4.2    Counterfactual 2: Removing Blue Cross
Panel (ii) of Table 7 reports results from the removal of BC from the choice set.53 We focus our
discussion on findings that differ from the previous counterfactual.

Insurer Premiums.            The removal of BC, a smaller insurer than Kaiser, leads to a premium
decrease for both remaining MCOs (a reduction of 3.4% for BS and 1.4% for Kaiser). To understand
how the removal of an insurer can lead to lower negotiated premiums, recall the discussion in
Section 2.3: if an insurer with higher premiums (i.e., higher costs to the employer) than its rivals
is removed from the choice set, this can lead to a reduction in GF TjE (·) in equation (5) for the
remaining insurers, and can thus strengthen the employer’s bargaining position. If this change
outweighs other effects it can generate a premium reduction. The BC counterfactual fits this
description quite closely: BC has over 10% higher premiums than BS and Kaiser, and its low
market share indicates a relatively low attractiveness to consumers, further depressing the change
in GF TjE (·) when it is removed.

Hospital Prices.        This negative premium effect change coupled with a negative enrollment effect
change across markets leads to an average reduction in BS hospital payments of approximately
9% when BC is removed. Thus countervailing effects dominate and hospital prices fall; this leads
to lower premiums than would result if prices were held fixed. Table 8 again shows that the
magnitude of price changes varies substantially across markets. Consistent with earlier discussion,
we find that negative enrollment effect changes and price reductions are largest in markets where
  52                                                        P P               P
                                                                                         ˆM          φ
     We compute (expected) total consumer welfare as           m   f ∈Fm log(  j∈Mm exp(ũf,j,m ))/α̂f , where expected
                                                             φ
                           ˆf,j,m and premium coefficients α̂ are estimates from our insurer demand model. The total
                              M
utilities for each insurer ũ                                f
insured population does not change across baseline and counterfactual scenarios.
  53
      We retain BC in HSAs 1 and 8, as in these markets Kaiser is not offered and removing BC would leave BS as a
monopolist in the choice set.



                                                          33
BC has a relatively large share (e.g., in rural areas like Central Valley where BC’s larger hospital
network than its competitors makes it attractive to consumers).

Welfare.       Total insurer surplus falls when BC is removed, not surprisingly given the reduction in
premiums. Non-Kaiser hospital profits fall due to their lower prices. Consumer welfare is predicted
to fall slightly (by approximately $10 per capita per year) despite the premium reduction. This is
(at least in part) a result of removing enrollee access to BC and its network of hospitals.

4.3      Counterfactuals Under Nash Bertrand Premium Setting
Our main analysis assumes that insurers and CalPERS engage in Nash bargaining over premiums.
We believe that it is reasonable to assume that CalPERS is involved in determining premium
levels since it constrains premiums to vary only across family size and not across demographics or
geographic markets. However, the scale of CalPERS’ leverage in negotiations may be unusual and
likely affects how premiums and negotiated prices respond to the removal of an insurer. Here, we
investigate how our predictions would change if insurers instead engaged in Nash Bertrand premium
setting and did not face bargaining constraints.
       Table 9 presents counterfactual estimates for the scenario where BC is removed, using insurer
marginal cost and bargaining parameter estimates from specification (i) in Table 5. Rather than
predicting a premium reduction as in our main specification, we now find that premiums increase
by 9-11% for the remaining insurers; consumer welfare is predicted to fall by approximately $90
per capita per year. There is no significant change in average hospital payments, as positive
premium effect changes offset negative enrollment effect changes. Again the overall changes are
heterogeneous: prices rise in some markets and fall in others.
       We have also examined a scenario where insurers charge premiums based on a fixed markup
above their (hospital and non-hospital) marginal costs. This exercise is motivated by the minimum
medical loss ratio standards established under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of
2010.54 Here we predict that premiums would fall for the remaining insurers when either BC or
Kaiser was removed from the market, and that hospital prices would fall across all markets (though
there would still remain significant heterogeneity in the magnitude of the price effects). The now-
familiar explanation is that this alternative premium setting model places heavy restrictions on the
amount by which insurers’ premiums can increase following the removal of a competitor. Hence,
the small premium effect change is easily offset by the negative enrollment and price reinforcement
effect changes.
       These exercises reinforce the notion that understanding the degree to which employers or other
constraints mitigate premium increases is crucial for determining whether or not overall premium
  54
      It is also motivated by noting that one of the three insurance plans in our analysis (BC) is a self-insured product
(i.e., CalPERS covers all costs and sets premiums for the BC plan but pays BC an administrative fee for processing
claims, negotiating with network providers, and other services), and that both Kaiser and BS are non-profit entities
that may employ objectives other than straightforward profit maximization.




                                                           34
        Table 9: Removing an Insurer: Summary Results (Nash-Bertrand Premium Setting)

                                                      Baseline     (iii) Remove BC (Nash-Bertrand)
                                                       Amount           Amount            % Change
                  Premiums                 BS              3.78              4.20             11.0%
                  (per year)                       [3.76, 3.79]      [4.17, 4.22]    [10.8%, 11.3%]
                                           BC              4.19                 -                  -
                                                   [4.18, 4.21]
                                       Kaiser              3.67              3.98              8.7%
                                                   [3.66, 3.67]      [3.97, 4.00]      [8.4%, 8.9%]
                  Household                BS             73.91             82.99             12.3%
                  Enrollment                     [73.53, 74.56]    [82.71, 83.39]    [11.8%, 12.5%]
                                           BC             27.49                 -                  -
                                                 [27.06, 27.77]
                                       Kaiser             61.31             71.13             16.0%
                                                 [61.10, 61.44]    [70.78, 71.38]    [15.8%, 16.2%]
                  Hospital                 BS              0.66              0.66             -0.4%
                  Payments                            [.65, .68]        [.65, .67]      [-.7%, -.1%]
                  (per individual)         BC              0.56                  -                 -
                                                      [.55, .58]
                  Hospital Prices          BS              7.19              7.11             -1.1%
                  (per admission)                  [7.06, 7.36]      [6.96, 7.29]      [-1.5%, -.8%]
                                           BC              6.02                 -                  -
                                                   [6.03, 6.40]
                  Surplus              Insurer             1.27              1.57             24.1%
                  (per individual)                 [1.27, 1.27]      [1.57, 1.58]    [23.4%, 24.7%]
                                     Hospitals             0.30              0.29              -2.8%
                                     (Non-K)          [.29, .31]        [.28, .30]    [-3.9%, -1.9%]
                                      ∆ Cons.                  -            -0.09                   -
                                                                      [-.09, -.08]

Notes: Results from simulating removal of Blue Cross or Kaiser, using estimates from specification (i) in Table 5
(without insurer margin moments) and assuming Nash-Bertrand premium setting. All figures are in thousands.
Baseline numbers are recomputed from model estimates. Average insurer payments to hospitals and average (DRG-
adjusted) hospital prices are weighted by the number of admissions each hospital receives from each insurer under each
scenario. Surplus figures represent total insurer, hospital, and changes to consumer surplus per insured individual.
95% confidence intervals, reported below estimates, are constructed by using 80 bootstrap samples of admissions
within each hospital-insurer pair to re-estimate hospital-insurer DRG weighted admission prices, re-estimate insurer
marginal costs and Nash bargaining parameters, and re-compute counterfactual simulations.


reductions and cost savings can result when an insurer is removed. Absent such constraints, our
results suggest that premiums will tend to increase, and may increase substantially.

4.4    Additional Assumptions and Robustness
Switching Costs and Inertia.               Previous work (e.g., Handel (2013); Ho, Hogan and Morton
(2015); Polyakova (2015)) has documented switching costs and other forms of inertia in health
plan choice with respect to changes in the financial characteristics (e.g., premiums) of plans. In
our current analysis, we identify household premium elasticities from cross-household-type varia-
tion in premiums. One concern may be that if frictions are substantial, true premium elasticities
may differ from our estimates; in turn, this may affect our estimated insurer marginal costs, bar-
gaining parameters, and predicted counterfactual premiums and hospital prices. We respond in


                                                          35
two ways. First, as noted earlier, the estimated household premium elasticities correspond well to
the range estimated in previous papers which utilize panel data and time variation in premiums.
Second, household premium elasticities are not the only determinants of equilibrium premiums:
e.g., employers—who may not be subject to such frictions—have substantial input into premium
determination through the bargaining process.
    One may also be concerned that our estimated insurer “network” elasticities (i.e., sensitivity
to an insurer’s hospital network), identified from cross-household and cross-zip code variation in
the expected utility derived from each insurer’s hospital network, may also be affected and per-
haps overstated due to the presence of consumer choice frictions. Appendix A.8 presents evidence
suggesting that enrollees in our setting are responsive to hospital network changes and do not face
insurmountable frictions when switching plans. There, we also describe robustness tests that exam-
ine the sensitivity of our results to changing the estimated responsiveness of consumers to hospital
network changes.

Consumer Selection Across Hospitals and Insurers.                          Our analysis implicitly assumes that,
conditional on premium levels, the quantity and composition of consumers who choose particular
hospitals or plans are not directly affected by negotiated hospital prices. This implies that insurers
are unable to directly steer patients to certain (e.g., lower cost) hospitals, and consumers do not
respond to hospital prices when selecting where to go.55 Because the two HMO plans in our data
have zero co-insurance rates, and we believe that price transparency is limited for enrollees during
this period, we argue that this assumption is reasonable for our setting.
    We also rule out the selection of consumers across insurance plans based on unobservable char-
acteristics other than age, sex, income, household type, or zip code when estimating our hospital
and insurer demand systems. In particular, we assume that firms form expectations over the prob-
                       a ), and the probability of a particular diagnosis (γ
ability of admission (γκ(k)                                                  κ(k) ) and its DRG weight
(E[DRGa |κ(k)]) for an individual k conditional on admission based on that individual’s age-sex
category, κ(k). As is common in the hospital demand literature, we also rule out the correlation
of unobservable consumer preferences with observable hospital characteristics, including location.
However, conditioning on age-sex category controls for a significant amount of heterogeneity in
admission and diagnosis probabilities. Since insurers are unable to set premiums or otherwise
screen based on age, sex, or location, our model allows insurers to engage in behavior similar to
cream-skimming by anticipating the likely selection of heterogeneous consumers onto their plans
when setting premiums and negotiating hospital prices. Finally, as Table 3 indicates, both average
admission probabilities and DRG weights within age-sex categories are very similar for BS and BC
enrollees, suggesting only limited selection across these plans based on underlying health risks.56
  55
     Ho and Pakes (2014) find that in California, when referring physicians are given incentives to use low-cost hospitals
through capitation payments, the hospital referral is influenced by its price. However the estimated effect is small or
insignificant for both BC (which rarely uses capitation payments for its physicians) and BS (a not-for-profit plan).
We therefore abstract away from these patient steering issues.
  56
     Though we control for selection across insurance plans based on income and premium sensitivities, we do not
consider selection on moral hazard or risk aversion as in Einav et al. (2013). While important, these issues are


                                                           36
    The assumption that consumers choose insurance plans based on their expected probability of
admission and diagnosis has commonly been used in option-demand-model settings where con-
sumers’ value for an insurance product is based on ex ante expected utilities (Town and Vistnes,
2001; Capps, Dranove and Satterthwaite, 2003; Ho, 2006). Allowing consumers to condition on a
richer set of information, which may include prior health conditions or idiosyncratic preferences,
when choosing health plans may enable these and similar models to better match counterfactual
patient flows upon network changes.57


5     Concluding Remarks
This paper presents a framework for examining the impact of insurer competition on premiums,
hospital prices, and welfare. We limit our attention to adjusting the insurer choice set for a
particular population of consumers, and for this reason our results are most applicable to the large
group employer-sponsored insurance market. However, our analysis is also relevant for examining
state health insurance exchanges set up by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010):
for example, insurers must choose whether or not to participate in each exchange, and variation in
the number of participants will likely have similar effects to those predicted by our model. Though
our analysis does not explicitly model the entry, exit, or consolidation of insurers (as this would
raise additional issues that are outside the scope of our analysis, including the determination of
fixed, entry, and exit costs, and potential merger efficiencies), the mechanisms that we identify are
still present whenever market structure changes.
    Our analysis emphasizes the importance of the characteristics of the insurer that is removed
and how employers or institutions constrain insurer premium setting. Although we predict that
premiums typically increase, we also show that a reduction in premiums—and thereby a substantial
mitigation of consumer harm—is empirically plausible with external premium setting constraints.
Even with significant premium increases, hospital prices need not increase on average; indeed,
hospital prices often fall in multiple markets as the remaining insurers exercise increased bargaining
leverage. Markets with price reductions are those in which removing a particular insurer most
harms hospitals’ bargaining positions, which in turn are those markets where the removed insurer
was dominant. We find that consumer welfare falls by as much as $200 per capita per year upon
the removal of an insurer.
    We conclude with potential directions for future research. Our current analysis conditions on
the set of insurers that are offered to enrollees, and holds all non-price characteristics of hospitals
and insurers fixed. However, additional responses by medical providers (including physician groups,
pharmaceutical firms, and device manufacturers) and by insurers (which may adjust provider net-
orthogonal to our model since we do not consider choices regarding the amount of care received and assume that
consumers do not respond to price variation across providers.
  57
     For example, the “recapture” effect may be larger than estimated if consumers know before choosing an insurance
plan that they will visit a particular hospital, and will switch plans in order to access that hospital if it is dropped
by their current insurer. Consumer selection into plans based on unobservables can be accounted for by estimating
the hospital and insurer demand systems jointly at the cost of increased computational complexity (c.f. Lee, 2013).


                                                          37
works, financial terms, or other aspects of benefit design) are likely to be important.58 Finally,
we have documented considerable heterogeneity in price changes across providers. Predicting long-
run welfare effects and distributional consequences of market structure changes will require an
understanding of providers’ dynamic investment, entry, and exit responses.


References
Akerlof, G.A. 1970. “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism.”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3): 488–500.

Capps, Cory, David Dranove, and Mark Satterthwaite. 2003. “Competiton and Market
 Power in Option Demand Markets.” RAND Journal of Economics, 34(4): 737–763.

Chipty, Tasneem, and Christopher M. Snyder. 1999. “The Role of Firm Size in Bilateral
 Bargaining: A Study of the Cable Television Industry.” Review of Economics and Statistics,
 81(2): 326–340.

Collard-Wexler, Allan, Gautam Gowrisankaran, and Robin S. Lee. 2016. ““Nash-in-Nash”
 Bargaining: A Microfoundation for Applied Work.” NBER Working Paper 20641.

Crawford, Gregory S., and Ali Yurukoglu. 2012. “The Welfare Effects of Bundling in Multi-
 channel Television Markets.” American Economic Review, 102(2): 643–685.

Crawford, Gregory S., Robin S. Lee, Michael D. Whinston, and Ali Yurukoglu. 2015.
 “The Welfare Effects of Vertical Integration in Multichannel Television Markets.” Unpublished.

Cremer, Jacques, and Michael H. Riordan. 1987. “On Governing Multilateral Transactions
 with Bilateral Contracts.” RAND Journal of Economics, 18(3): 436–451.

Cutler, David M., and Sarah J. Reber. 1998. “Paying for Health Insurance: The Tradeoff
 between Competition and Adverse Selection.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2): 433–466.

Dafny, Leemore S. 2010. “Are Health Insurance Markets Competitive?” American Economic
 Review, 100(4): 1399–1431.

Dafny, Leemore S., Katherine Ho, and Robin S. Lee. 2015. “The Price Effects of Cross-
 Market Hospital Mergers.” Unpublished.

Dafny, Leemore S., Mark Duggan, and Subramaniam Ramanarayanan. 2012. “Paying a
 Premium on Your Premium? Consolidation in the U.S. Health Insurance Industry.” American
 Economic Review, 102(2): 1161–1185.

Draganska, Michaela, Daniel Klapper, and Sofia B. Villas-Boas. 2010. “A Larger Slice
 or a Larger Pie? An Empirical Investigation of Bargaining Power in the Distribution Channel.”
 Marketing Science, 29(1): 57–74.

Dranove, David, Christopher Ody, and Mark Satterthwaite. 2015. “Bargaining Foresight
 in Option Demand Markets.” mimeo.
  58
     E.g., see Lee and Fong (2013) and Ho and Lee (2016) which builds on results from this paper to analyze
counterfactual adjustments to networks and contracting partners.



                                                    38
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark R. Cullen. 2010. “Estimating Welfare in Insurance
  Markets Using Variation in Prices.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 75(3): 877–921.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Stephen P. Ryan, Paul Schrimpf, and Mark R. Cullen.
  2013. “Selection on Moral Hazard in Health Insurance.” American Economic Review, 103(1): 178–
  219.

Ellison, Sara F., and Christopher M. Snyder. 2010. “Countervailing Power in Wholesale
  Pharmaceuticals.” Journal of Industrial Economics, 58(1): 32–53.

Farrell, Joseph, David J. Balan, Keith Brand, and Brett W. Wendling. 2011. “Economics
  at the FTC: Hospital Mergers, Authorized Generic Drugs, and Consumer Credit Markets.” Re-
  view of Industrial Organization, 39: 271–296.

Fronstin, P. 2010. “How Many of the U.S. Nonelderly Population Have Health Insurance?” Em-
  ployee Benefit Research Institute Issue Brief No. 183.

Galbraith, John K. 1952. American Capitalism:          The Concept of Countervailing Power.
 Boston:Houghton Mifflin.

Gal-Or, Esther. 1999. “The Profitability of Vertical Mergers Between Hospital and Physician
 Practices.” Journal of Health Economics, 18: 623–654.

Gaynor, Martin, and Robert J. Town. 2012. “Competition in Health Care Markets.” In
 Handbook of Health Economics. Vol. 2, , ed. Mark V. Pauly, Thomas G. Mcguire and Pedro P.
 Barros, Chapter 9, 499–637. Elsevier.

Gaynor, Martin, Kate Ho, and Robert J. Town. 2015. “The Industrial Organization of
 Health Care Markets.” Journal of Economic Literature, 53(2): 235–284.

Gowrisankaran, Gautam, Aviv Nevo, and Robert Town. 2015. “Mergers When Prices Are
 Negotiated: Evidence from the Hospital Industry.” American Economic Review, 105(1): 172–203.

Grennan, Matthew. 2013. “Price Discrimination and Bargaining: Empirical Evidence from Med-
 ical Devices.” American Economic Review, 103(1): 147–177.

Handel, Benjamin. 2013. “Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets: When
 Nudging Hurts.” American Economic Review, 103(7): 2643–2682.

Ho, Kate, and Ariel Pakes. 2014. “Hospital Choices, Hospital Prices and Financial Incentives
 to Physicians.” American Economic Review, 104(12): 3841–3884.

Ho, Kate, and Robin S. Lee. 2016. “Equilibrium Insurer-Provider Networks: Exclusion and
 Steering in Health Care Markets.” Unpublished.

Ho, Kate, Joseph Hogan, and Fiona Scott Morton. 2015. “The Impact of Consumer Inat-
 tention on Insurer Pricing in the Medicare Part D Program.” NBER Working Paper 21028.

Ho, Katherine. 2006. “The Welfare Effects of Restricted Hospital Choice in the US Medical Care
 Market.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 21(7): 1039–1079.

Ho, Katherine. 2009. “Insurer-Provider Networks in the Medical Care Market.” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 99(1): 393–430.


                                              39
Horn, Henrick, and Asher Wolinsky. 1988. “Bilateral Monopolies and Incentives for Merger.”
 RAND Journal of Economics, 19(3): 408–419.

Inderst, Roman, and Christian Wey. 2003. “Bargaining, Mergers, and Technology Choice in
  Bilaterally Oligopolistic Industries.” RAND Journal of Economics, 34(1): 1–19.

Lee, Robin S. 2013. “Vertical Integration and Exclusivity in Platform and Two-Sided Markets.”
  American Economic Review, 103(7): 2960–3000.

Lee, Robin S., and Kyna Fong. 2013. “Markov Perfect Network Formation: An Applied Frame-
  work for Bilateral Oligopoly and Bargaining in Buyer-Seller Networks.” Unpublished.

Lewis, Matthew S., and Kevin E. Pflum. 2013. “Diagnosing Hospital System Bargaining
  Power in Managed Care Networks.” Unpublished.

Melnick, Glenn A., Yu-Chu Shen, and Vivian Yaling Wu. 2010. “The Increased Concen-
 tration of Health Plan Markets Can Benefit Consumers Through Lower Hospital Prices.” Health
 Affairs, 30(9): 1728–1733.

Moriya, Asako S., William B. Vogt, and Martin Gaynor. 2010. “Hospital Prices and Market
 Structure in the Hospital and Insurance Industries.” Health Economics, Policy and Law, 5(459–
 479).

Nocke, Volker, and Lucy White. 2007. “Do Vertical Mergers Facilitate Upstream Collusion.”
 American Economic Review, 97(4): 1321–1339.

Polyakova, Maria. 2015. “Regulation of Insurance with Adverse Selection and Switching Costs:
 Evidence from Medicare Part D.” Unpublished.

Rothschild, M., and J. Stiglitz. 1976. “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An
 Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90(4): 630–
 649.

Royalty, A., and N. Solomon. 1998. “Health Plan Choice: Price Elasticities in a Managed
 Competition Setting.” Journal of Human Resources, 34(1): 1–41.

Shepard, Mark. 2015. “Hospital Network Competition and Adverse Selection: Evidence from the
  Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange.” Unpublished.

Stole, Lars A., and Jeffrey Zweibel. 1996. “Intra-Firm Bargaining under Non-Binding Con-
  tracts.” Review of Economic Studies, 63(3): 375–410.

Town, Robert J., and Gregory Vistnes. 2001. “Hospital Competition in HMO Networks.”
  Journal of Health Economics, 20: 733–753.

Trish, Erin E., and Bradaley J. Herring. 2015. “How Do Health Insurer Market Concentration
  and Bargaining Power with Hospitals Affect Health Insurance Premiums?” Journal of Health
  Economics, 42: 104–114.




                                             40
                               Table 10: Definition of Diagnosis Categories
                           Category       MDC or ICD-9-CM codes

                           Cardiac        MDC: 05 (and not cancer)
                                          ICD-9-CM: 393-398; 401-405; 410-417; 420-249
                           Cancer         ICD-9-CM: 140-239
                           Neurological   MDC: 19-20
                                          ICD-9-CM: 320-326; 330-337; 340-359
                           Digestive      MDC: 6 (and not cancer or cardiac)
                                          ICD-9-CM: 520-579
                           Labor          MDC 14-15 (and aged over 5)
                                          ICD-9-CM: 644; 647; 648; 650-677; V22-V24; V27



Notes: Patient diagnoses were defined using MDC codes in the admissions data where possible. In other cases,
supplemental ICD-9-CM codes were used.


A     Estimation and Computation: Further Details and Results
A.1     Hospital Demand: Details
Our consumer demand model outlined in Section 3.2 predicts that a individual k, who lives in market m, is
enrolled in MCO j, and has diagnosis l, visits hospital i with probability

                             H                   exp(δi + zi υk,l β z + di,k βmd
                                                                                 )
                            σi,j,k,m|l (G) = P                             z         d )
                                                                                         ,
                                               h∈G H exp(δh  + z h υ k,l β   + dh,k βm
                                                   jm


        M
where Gj,m  is the network of hospitals available on insurer j in market m. The ex ante probability that a
individual k visits hospital i given his insurer network is then given by
                                                         X
                                   H                a               H
                                  σi,j,k,m (Gm ) = γκ(k)   γκ(k),l σi,j,k,m|l (Gm ) .                 (17)
                                                        l∈L

We estimate this model via maximum likelihood using our admission data. In each market we normalize one
hospital fixed effect to zero. We choose the largest hospital in each market to ensure comparability across
markets.
     We define 5 diagnosis categories using ICD-9-CM codes and major diagnosis category (MDC) codes, as
shown in Table 10. The categories are cardiac, cancer, labor, digestive diseases, and neurological diseases.
The sixth category, “other diagnoses,” includes all other categories in the data other than newborn babies
(defined as events with MDC 15 where the patient is less than 5 years old). The hospital “service” variables
are defined using American Hospital Association data for 2003-2004 (if observations are missing for a partic-
ular hospital in one year we fill them in from the other). These variables summarize the services offered by
each hospital; they cover cardiac, imaging, cancer, and birth services. Each hospital is rated on a scale from
0 to 1, where 1 implies that the hospital offers the least common of a list of relevant services and 0 implies
that it offers none of the services. Details are given in Table 11. Finally, since we do not observe household
income for non-state agency enrollees (and we estimate our demand system using observed admissions from
all enrollees), we use the mean household income in each zip code from Census data (winsorized at 5%).

A.2     Hospital and Insurer Demand: Results
Table 12 shows estimates from our hospital demand system (omitting hospital fixed effects due to space
constraints). The results are in line with Ho (2006) and the previous hospital choice literature. The coefficient
on distance is negative and varies across markets (likely reflecting differences in transportation options and
costs), with similar magnitudes to those in Ho (2006). The non-interacted effects of teaching hospitals
and other hospital characteristics are absorbed in the fixed effects; however, the interactions show that
patients with very complex conditions (cancer and neurological diseases) attach the highest positive weight


                                                        41
                                   Table 11: Definition of Hospital Services
                               Cardiac               Imaging           Cancer              Births
                     CC laboratory                  Ultrasound    Oncology services    Obstetric care
                     Cardiac IC                     CT scans      Radiation therapy    Birthing room
                     Angioplasty                    MRI
                     Open heart surgery             SPECT
                                                    PET

Notes: The exact methodology for rating hospitals is as follows. If the hospital provides none of the services, its rating
= 0. If it provides the least common service, its rating = 1. If it offers some service X but not the least common
service its rating = (1 - x) / (1 - y), where x = the percent of hospitals offering service X and y = the percent of
hospitals offering the least common service.


to teaching hospitals. Many of the interactions are difficult to interpret, but it is clear that patients with
cardiac diagnoses place a strong positive weight on hospitals with cardiac services, cancer patients on those
with cancer services (although, as in Ho (2006), this coefficient is not significant at p=0.1), and women in
labor on hospitals with birthing services.
     Table 13 shows estimates from our insurer demand system outlined in Section 3.3 (omitting insurer-
market fixed effects). The coefficient on premium is negative and significant, with premium sensitivity
decreasing with income; elasticities are provided in the main text. The coefficient on W T P is positive for
every age-gender group, and significant at p=0.01 for all groups except enrollees aged 0-19. Coefficient
magnitudes are larger for males aged 20-34 and 35-44 than for women in the same age groups. This partially
reflects the fact that the higher probability of admission for women of child-bearing age translates to a higher
standard deviation in the W T P variable for women than for men (so that a smaller coefficient is needed
to generate the same valuation for a 1 standard deviation increase in W T P ). Further discussion of the
estimates is contained in the main text.

A.3     Predicted and Counterfactual Hospital and Insurer Demand: Details
Given parameter estimates from our hospital and insurer demand systems, we construct estimates for insurer
and hospital demand given any set of premiums and hospital-insurer networks as follows:
    • Insurer Demand: For each insurer j and household type   P λ ∈ {single, two-party, family}, we predict
      expected insurer household demand as D̂j,λ,m (G, φ) ≡ f ∈Fλ,m σ̂f,j,m (G, φ), where Fλ,m is the set of
      households of type λ in market m, and σ̂f,j,m is the our predicted probability that household f chooses
      MCO j given by (10). Similarly, for each insurer j, we P form a prediction of the expected number of
                                                E
      individual enrollees on each insurer by D̂j,m (G, φ) ≡ f ∈Fm Nf σ̂f,j,m (G, φ), where Nf is the number
      individuals in household f .
    • Hospital Demand: For each hospital i andPMCO j, we predictPthe number of expected admissions
                                  H                                                 H                 H
      from type-κ individuals: D̂i,j,κ,m (G, φ) ≡ f ∈Fm σ̂f,j,m (G, φ) k∈f,κ(k)=κ σ̂ijkm (G), where σ̂ijkm (·)
      is the predicted probability that individual k of type κ in family f visits hospital i on MCO j’s
      network given by (17) and our hospital demand estimates. We aggregate this value to the total
      predicted number of expected admissions across all individuals for hospital i from MCO j, and scale
      by the expected Padmission DRG weight      for patients of type κ (given by E[DRGa |κ]), as follows:
        H                                   H
      D̂i,j,m (G, φ) ≡ ∀κ E[DRGa |κ] × D̂i,j,κ,m (·).
                     H
       Weighting D̂i,j,κ,m (·) by the average admission DRG weight for a type-κ individual accounts for
       potential differences in disease severity across admissions. Since this multiplies both hospital unit-
       DRG adjusted prices and costs, we capture the impact of selection of enrollees by age-sex categories
       and location across plans (e.g., as insurer hospital networks change) on expected reimbursements and
       costs.




                                                           42
                              Table 12: Estimates: Hospital Demand System
                   Interaction Terms                Variable                 Parameter   Std. Err.
                   Interactions: Teaching           Income ($000)             0.008∗∗∗     0.002
                                                    PPO enrollee              0.123∗       0.065
                                                    Cancer                    0.098        0.108
                                                    Cardiac                  −0.521∗∗∗     0.082
                                                    Digestive                −0.237∗∗      0.096
                                                    Labor                    −0.069        0.098
                                                    Neurological              1.281∗∗∗     0.172
                   Interactions: Nurses Per Bed     Income ($000)             0.000        0.001
                                                    PPO enrollee              0.054∗       0.032
                                                    Cancer                    0.121∗∗      0.055
                                                    Cardiac                   0.073∗       0.039
                                                    Digestive                −0.087∗∗      0.044
                                                    Labor                    −0.179∗∗∗     0.046
                                                    Neurological             −1.009∗∗∗     0.097
                   Interactions: For-Profit         Income ($000)            −0.000        0.002
                                                    PPO enrollee              0.033        0.047
                                                    Cancer                    0.012        0.084
                                                    Cardiac                   0.107∗       0.056
                                                    Digestive                −0.122∗       0.066
                                                    Labor                     0.324∗∗∗     0.063
                                                    Neurological              0.609∗∗∗     0.113
                   Interactions: Cardiac Services   Income ($000)             0.008∗∗∗     0.002
                                                    PPO enrollee              0.254∗∗∗     0.046
                                                    Cardiac                   0.251∗∗∗     0.050
                   Interactions: Imaging Services   Income ($000)            −0.003∗∗      0.002
                                                    PPO enrollee              0.142∗∗∗     0.051
                                                    Cancer                    0.139∗       0.083
                                                    Cardiac                   0.049        0.063
                                                    Digestive                 0.037        0.061
                                                    Labor                    −0.475∗∗∗     0.065
                                                    Neurological             −0.775∗∗∗     0.123
                   Interactions: Cancer Services    Income ($000)            −0.013∗∗∗     0.005
                                                    PPO enrollee             −0.133        0.127
                                                    Cancer                    0.444∗∗      0.225
                   Interactions: Labor Services     Income ($000)             0.006∗∗∗     0.002
                                                    PPO enrollee             −0.168∗∗∗     0.048
                                                    Labor                     1.164∗∗∗     0.069
                   Distance interactions:           HSA 1                    −0.107∗∗∗     0.003
                                                    HSA 2                    −0.155∗∗∗     0.004
                                                    HSA 3                    −0.235∗∗∗     0.008
                                                    HSA 4                    −0.274∗∗∗     0.009
                                                    HSA 5                    −0.240∗∗∗     0.005
                                                    HSA 6                    −0.186∗∗∗     0.005
                                                    HSA 7                    −0.246∗∗∗     0.013
                                                    HSA 8                    −0.149∗∗∗     0.004
                                                    HSA 9                    −0.106∗∗∗     0.003
                                                    HSA 10                   −0.165∗∗∗     0.008
                                                    HSA 11                   −0.276∗∗∗     0.004
                                                    HSA 12                   −0.132∗∗∗     0.003
                                                    HSA 13                   −0.312∗∗∗     0.008
                                                    HSA 14                   −0.114∗∗∗     0.005
                                                    Number of Admissions       38064
                                                    Hospital Fixed Effects      Yes
                                                    Pseudo-R2                 0.540
                   Standard errors in parentheses
                   ∗
                     p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Notes: Results from estimated hospital demand model. Specification includes hospital fixed effects (not reported).




                                                           43
                               Table 13: Estimates: Insurer Demand System

                                    Premium (αφ
                                              0)                         -0.0648∗∗∗
                                                                          (0.00137)
                                    Log(Income) × Premium (αφ
                                                            1)           0.00563∗∗∗
                                                                         (0.000123)
                                    WTP (αW Age 0-19)                       -0.0281
                                                                            (0.265)
                                    WTP (αW Male, Age 20-34)              8.909∗∗∗
                                                                            (0.619)
                                    WTP (αW Female, Age 20-34)            0.936∗∗∗
                                                                           (0.0910)
                                    WTP (αW Male, Age 35-44)              4.388∗∗∗
                                                                            (0.363)
                                    WTP (αW Female, Age 35-44)            1.885∗∗∗
                                                                            (0.127)
                                    WTP (αW Male, Age 45-54)              1.643∗∗∗
                                                                            (0.166)
                                    WTP (αW Female, Age 45-54)            2.314∗∗∗
                                                                            (0.132)
                                    WTP (αW Male, Age 55-64)              0.917∗∗∗
                                                                            (0.114)
                                    WTP (αW Female, Age 55-64)            1.838∗∗∗
                                                                            (0.138)
                                    Drive Time to Kaiser (αK HSA 2)      -0.0420∗∗∗
                                                                          (0.00119)
                                    Drive Time to Kaiser (αK HSA 3)      -0.0351∗∗∗
                                                                          (0.00220)
                                    Drive Time to Kaiser (αK HSA 4)      -0.0175∗∗∗
                                                                          (0.00483)
                                    Drive Time to Kaiser (αK HSA 5)      -0.0226∗∗∗
                                                                          (0.00352)
                                    Drive Time to Kaiser (αK HSA 6)      -0.0182∗∗∗
                                                                          (0.00316)
                                    Drive Time to Kaiser (αK HSA 7)      -0.0286∗∗∗
                                                                          (0.00732)
                                    Drive Time to Kaiser (αK HSA 10)     -0.0548∗∗∗
                                                                           (0.0135)
                                    Drive Time to Kaiser (αK HSA 11)     -0.0218∗∗∗
                                                                          (0.00125)
                                    Drive Time to Kaiser (αK HSA 12)     -0.0253∗∗∗
                                                                         (0.000979)
                                    Drive Time to Kaiser (αK HSA 13)     -0.0190∗∗∗
                                                                          (0.00375)
                                    Drive Time to Kaiser (αK HSA 14)     -0.0366∗∗∗
                                                                          (0.00240)
                                    Number of Households                   162,719
                                    HSA-Insurer Fixed Effects                 Yes
                                    Pseudo-R2                                .1811
                                    Standard errors in parentheses
                                    ∗
                                      p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Notes: Results from estimated insurer demand model. Drive Time to Kaiser represents the calculated drive time to
the nearest Kaiser hospital from a household’s zipcode. In HSA 1 and 8, Kaiser is not available to enrollees and a
distance coefficient was not estimated; and in HSA 9, no Kaiser hospital existed (only medical offices), and the Kaiser
drive time was normalized to 0 for all zipcodes in this market. Specification includes market-insurer fixed effects (not
reported).


A.4     Hospital System Bargaining
In our empirical application, we allow hospitals to jointly negotiate as part of a system within a market.59
Let S be a partition of the set of hospitals H into hospital systems (under the realistic assumption that
  59
    Allowing systems to jointly negotiate across markets does not affect the analysis as we have assumed that insurer
and hospital demand is separable across markets (c.f. Dafny, Ho and Lee (2015)).


                                                          44
hospitals can be part of only one system), and let S ∈ S represent the set of hospitals in a given system S.
A hospital system S can also represent a single hospital if |S| = 1.
P Define   the profits for a hospital system S to be the sum of the profits of all hospitals h ∈ S: πS (G, p, φ) =
        H
      π
   h∈S h  (G, p, φ). We assume that each insurer must carry all or none of the hospitals in a system in a
given market, but can negotiate a separate price for each hospital within the system. Every hospital system
S ∈ S and insurer j ∈ M engages in simultaneous bilateral Nash bargaining over all prices for the given
system so that each price {pi,j }i∈S maximizes the Nash product of the hospital system and insurer profits:
                                                        τj

   pi,j = arg max  πjM (G, p, φ) − πjM (G \ S, p−ij , φ) 
                                                         
              pi,j   |               {z                 }
                        MCO j’s “gains from trade” with system S
                                                                                                     (1−τj )

                                    ×             πiH (G, p, φ) − πiH (G \ S, p−ij , φ)                               ∀i ∈ S, ∀S ∈ S ,     (18)
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                      
                                                   |                {z                 }
                                          Hospital system S’s “gains from trade” with MCO j

where we use our general version of MCO profits given by (11). This is the system bargaining analogue
to (4), where the disagreement outcome between hospital i ∈ S and MCO j involves MCO j dropping all
hospitals in S. Every hospital in the same system has the same first-order-condition for (18):
                                "                                                                       #
       X                                                                    X                        
            ∗    H                        0                     E                      ∗         H
                                                                       
           pi,j Di,j =(1 − τj )       φj Φ [∆S,j Dj ] − [∆S,j Dj ]ηj ) −              phj [∆S,j Dhj ]
       i∈S                                                                   h∈GjM \S
                                    |                {z                }
       |    {z     }              (i) ∆ MCO revenues net of non-hosp costs |           {z             }
      system payments
                                                                                                (ii) ∆ MCO j payments to other hospitals
                                    "                                                                             #
                                          X                      X         X
                           + τj                       H
                                                  ci Di,j    −                             H
                                                                                   ([∆S,j Di,n ](p∗i,n   − ci )        ∀S ∈ S ,             (19)
                                            i∈S                  i∈S n∈GS
                                                                        H ,n6=j
                                          |       {z   }         |                    {z                      }
                                        (iii) system costs           (iv) ∆ system profits from other MCOs


where [∆S,j Dj ], [∆S,j DjE ], and [∆S,j Dhj
                                          H
                                             ] represent changes in these objects when MCO j and system S
come to a disagreement. As before, we drop all arguments of demand terms for expositional convenience,
and assume that demand terms without market subscripts represent sums of those terms across all markets.
Note that (19) is equivalent to (6) (using the simpler version of MCO profits) if there are no hospital systems,
or if hospitals in the same system bargain independently. As before, we refer to terms (i)-(iv) as the premium
and enrollment, price reinforcement, hospital cost, and recapture effects.

A.5       Derivation of Error Terms
The error terms used in the construction of our estimating moments are:
                                                                        !     
                         H                 φ          E
               X ∂ D̂h,j    (·)    (1  − τ   )(∂GF  T j /∂φ j )
    ωj1 = −                     +            φ GF T E
                                                                  H
                                                                D̂h,j (·) εA
                                                                           h,j
                                                                                ∀j ,
                        ∂φj                 τ       j
              h∈Gj
              X
                                     0
    ωj2 = −(       H
                 D̂h,j (·)εA
                           h,j )/φj Φ D̂j (·) − νj      ∀j ,
               h∈Gj
                               !
              X                                        X                                   X      X
     3
    ωSj   =         εA    H
                     ij D̂ij       + (1 − τj )                 εA          H
                                                                hj [∆S,j D̂h,j ] + τj                       εA          H
                                                                                                             i,n [∆S,j Di,n ]     ∀j, S ∈ S ,
              i∈S                                   h∈GjM \S                               i∈S n∈GS
                                                                                                  H ,n6=j




where νj , referenced in the definition of ωj2 , represents mean zero independent measurement error in M LRjo .




                                                                              45
A.6        Counterfactual Simulations: Details
In all of our exercises, a counterfactual equilibrium is defined as a set of hospital networks, premiums, and
prices {G CF , φCF , pCF }, and implied “demand” objects:
                               E,CF       H,CF
       • D̂ CF ≡ {{D̂j,m
                     CF
                         }, {D̂j,m  }, {D̂h,j,m }}∀j,m
                                          E,CF              H,CF
       • ∂ D̂ CF ≡ {{∂ D̂j,m
                         CF
                             /∂φj }, {∂ D̂j,m  /∂φj }, {∂ D̂h,j,m /∂φj }}∀j,m
                                          E,CF            H,CF
       • ∆D̂ CF ≡ {{∆S,j D̂j,m
                           CF
                               }, {∆S,j D̂j,m  }, {∆S,j D̂h,j,m }∀h }∀S,j,m
                CF
such that (i) Gj,m is the same as in our observed data for all MCOs j active in market m; (ii) single household
premiums φj for all insurers satisfy (13) given D̂ CF , ∂ D̂ CF and pCF ; (iii) all negotiated hospital prices pCF
satisfy (16) given D̂ CF , ∆D̂ CF , and pCF ; and (iv) all demand terms D̂ CF , ∂ D̂ CF , and ∆D̂ CF are consistent
with networks G CF , premiums φCF , and behavior given by our estimated models of hospital and insurer
demand.
    To compute a new equilibrium, we iterate on the following steps, where for each iteration ι:
   1. Update Premiums and Demand Terms. Given negotiated hospital prices pι−1 , we repeat the following
      for each iteration ι0 :
                                  0          0                      0
           (a) Update terms D̂ ι and ∂ D̂ ι given premiums φι −1 and counterfactual networks G CF using esti-
               mated hospital and insurer demand systems;
                          0                      0         0
           (b) Update φιj using (12) and D̂ ι and ∂ D̂ ι terms;
         until premiums converge within a tolerance of $0.1 (using a sup-norm across all insurers). When
         updating premiums, we hold fixed the recovered value of ω̂j1 (scaled by the predicted number of
         hospital admissions) for all MCOs. This provides updated values of φι , D̂ ι and ∂ D̂ ι . Update ∆D̂ ι
         using φι .
   2. Update Negotiated Hospital Prices. Using updated values of φι , D̂ ι and ∆D̂ ι , (16) is used to update
      pι . Since (16) only defines total payments for hospital systems, there is only an equation for each
      hospital system and insurer pair, and not for each hospital and insurer pair; however, negotiated prices
      at the hospital level are required to determine an equilibrium. To proceed, we assume that the ratios
      of negotiated (DRG-adjusted) per-admission prices within a hospital system are the same as those
      observed in the data: i.e., for any two hospitals h and h0 in the same hospital system and MCO j,
      pCF    CF     o    o             o
       hj /ph0 j = phj /ph0 j , where p· are observed per-admission hospital prices.
         We implement this using the following matrix inversion: pι = (Aι )−1 B ι , where each row of vectors
         pι and B ι and square matrix Aι corresponds to a particular hospital i and MCO j.60 Each entry of
         pι , pιij , is the negotiated price per-admission for that given hospital-MCO pair. Each entry of Bij
                                                                                                            ι
                                                                                                               is:
                                                                                      
                       h                                  i       X X                        X
          ι
         Bij =(1 − τj ) φj Φ0 [∆Sj D̂jι ] − ηj [∆Sj D̂jE,ι ] + τj                H,ι 
                                                                        ch [∆Sj D̂hn        3
                                                                                     ]) + ω̃Sj     H
                                                                                                 D̂ij           i∈S
                                                                           H
                                                                    h∈S n∈GS                       i∈S

                                                                                                          ι
         if ij is the first observation in the vector for a given system S, i ∈ S, and MCO j; and Bij        = 0
                                        3      3           H
                                                   P
         otherwise. The parameter ω̃Sj ≡ ω̂Sj /( i∈S D̂ij ) is recovered during estimation, and held fixed in
         our counterfactual simulations. Finally, Aι is a matrix where each entry Aιr;c , corresponding to a row
         r and c which in turn each represent a given hospital-MCO pair, is given by:
                           H,ι
             • Aιij;hj = D̂hj  for all hospitals h in the same system and HSA as i (including i);
                                         H,ι
             • Aιij;hj = (1 − τj )[∆Sj D̂hj  ] if hospital h is on a different system as i, but located in the same
               HSA as hospital i;
                                   H,ι
             • Aιij;hn = τj [∆Sj D̂hn  ] for all hospitals h in the same system and HSA as i (including i) for n 6= j;
  60
       This is similar to the procedure used in Crawford et al. (2015).


                                                               46
      if ij is the first observation in the vector for a given system S and MCO j. If row ij corresponds to a
      repeat observation for a given system S and MCO j, then
          • Aιij;ij = 1;
          • Aιij;hj = −poij /pohj where h is on the same hospital system as i, and hj is the first entry for the
            hospital system and MCO j in the matrix.
      All other elements of Aι are 0.
      Note that A × po = B is equivalent to (16) for the observed prices and demand terms, with the
      additonal restriction that hospital prices within a hospital system for a particular MCO are assumed
      to be a constant ratio with respect to one another.
We repeat until between iterations, premiums do not differ by more than $0.1, and predicted household
demand across insurers and household types do not differ by more than one household.

A.7     Decomposition of Bargaining Effect Changes
We decompose the change in negotiated prices into changes in the components introduced earlier in Section
2.2. Beginning with equation (19), we divide through by the number of admissions from insurer j to hospital
system S to obtain an equation for the average negotiated price per admission within each system. The
difference between counterfactual and observed prices can be written as
                                 "                       #
           CF     o
                                   [∆S,j D̂jo ] CF    o
         p̄Sj − p̄Sj = (1 − τj )       H,o
                                               (φj − φj )                                             (20)
                                     D̂Sj
                       |                {z                }
                                (ia) ∆ Premium Effect

                                                                                       [∆S,j D̂jE,CF ]        [∆S,j D̂jE,o ]
                                 "                                                                                                      #
                                     [∆S,j D̂jCF ]       [∆S,j D̂jo ]
                    + (1 − τj ) (        H,CF
                                                     −       H,o
                                                                        )(φCF
                                                                           j )    −(        H,CF
                                                                                                          −        H,o
                                                                                                                               )(ηj )
                                       D̂S,j               D̂S,j                          D̂S,j                  D̂S,j
                       |                                                     {z                                                         }
                                                               (ib) ∆ Enrollment Effect
                                  P                                                                                    
                                                               H,CF                                             H,o
                                                   pCF                                            poh,j [∆S,j D̂h,j
                                                                                   P
                                        h∈GjM \S    h,j [∆Sj D̂h,j  ]                  h∈GjM \S                     ]
                    − (1 − τj ) (                   H,CF
                                                                             )−(                    H,o
                                                                                                                        )
                                                   D̂S,j                                          D̂S,j
                       |                                                {z                                               }
                                                     (ii) ∆ Price Reinforcement Effect
                                         H,CF                     H,o
                           "P                        P                   #
                                i∈S ci D̂i,j             i∈S ci D̂i,j
                    + τj            H,CF
                                                 −           H,o
                                  D̂S,j                    D̂S,j
                       |                    {z                           }
                                (iii) ∆ Hospital Cost Effect
                                                                                                                        
                                        P        CF                   H,CF            P        o                 H,o
                                X          i∈S (pi,n     − ci )∆S,j D̂i,n                i∈S (pin   − ci )∆S,j D̂i,n
                    − τj                                H,CF
                                                                                  −                   H,o
                                                                                                                         ,
                              H ,n6=j
                           n∈GS
                                                       D̂Sj                                         D̂Sj
                       |                                                {z                                               }
                                                          (iv) ∆ Recapture Effect


where terms with a “o” and “CF” superscript denote observed “baseline” (before the removal or addition of
an insurer) and counterfactual values respectively; other terms are the recomputed equilibrium values   P (at new
                                                                                                  H             H
premiums and prices) after the insurer has been removed; and for each hospital system S, D̂S,j       ≡ i∈S D̂i,j  ,
                        H             H
            P                 P
and p̄S,j ≡ i∈S (pi,j D̂i,j )/ i∈S (D̂i,j ). We discuss each effect briefly in turn, using the example of removing
BC from the market for clarity.
    Changes in term (i) in (19) (premium and enrollment effects) can be decomposed into:
 (ia) Premium effect: This is the increase in insurer j’s premium when BC is removed from the market,
      multiplied by the baseline change in number of enrollees when the hospital system is dropped (scaled
      by the number of admissions system S received from j). The larger the premium increase when the
      insurer is removed from the market, the higher the price increase for system S.

                                                                 47
 (ib) Enrollment effect: The change in insurer j’s profit reduction (net of non-hospital costs) from losing
      system S when BC is removed from the market. The first term of (ib) represents this change-in-change
      in premium revenues (holding fixed premiums), and the second term represents the change-in-change
      in insurer non-hospital marginal costs. Since the loss in insurer j’s enrollment when system S is
      removed from the network is smaller when BC is not present, and since premium revenues exceed
      non-hospital marginal costs, we expect this overall term to be negative—i.e., that insurer j’s outside
      option should improve when BC is removed.
       Changes in terms (ii) - (iv) in (19) upon removal of an insurer are:
  (ii) Price reinforcement effect: When BC is removed from the market, we expect a reduction in j’s loss in
       demand upon losing system S, but an indeterminate overall effect on other-hospital prices. Thus, the
       direction of this overall effect is indeterminate.
 (iii) Hospital cost effect: If system S contains a single hospital this term will equal zero. For multiple-
       hospital systems there may be a small change in average cost per admission when BC exits the market
       due to a re-allocation of differentially sick enrollees across plans and hospitals.
 (iv) Recapture effect: The change in the contribution to profits that system S can recapture from other
      insurers if removed from j’s network, when BC is removed from the market. We expect the first term
      (recapture after BC is removed) to be smaller in magnitude than the second, because consumers have
      fewer other plans to which they can switch. In fact when we remove BC the first term goes to zero
      because the only remaining insurer choice is Kaiser, which as a vertically integrated plan, will not
      allow consumers to retain access to system S. Thus the system’s outside option is weakened when BC
      exits the market, implying a negative effect on the price increase through this term.
As discussed previously, we hold fixed the hospital-insurer specific per-admission residual in the price bar-
gaining equation throughout our counterfactual exercises, and thus (20) will hold exactly.

A.8        Robustness: Switching Costs and Inertia
There is evidence to suggest that enrollees in our setting are responsive to hospital network changes, and do
not face insurmountable frictions when switching plans. In 2005 (the year after our sample), BS removed 24
hospitals on its CA network for CalPERS enrollees, 13 of which were owned by Sutter Health. Approximately
20% of enrollees on BS in three counties surrounding Sacramento switched to BC that year, with another
9% moving to Kaiser.61 Our model’s estimates predict that BS’s enrollment would fall by just under 10%
in the Sacramento HSA if Sutter hospitals were dropped. We note that this difference can partially be
accounted for by the fact that the CalPERS BS plan also dropped 17 physician groups (including some
owned by Sutter) in that year.62 This analysis suggests that, if switching costs do exist, they do not lead us
to substantially over-estimate switching probabilities in response to network changes. Indeed, even without
accounting for switching costs or other frictions, we may be understating the extent to which insurers lose
enrollees upon dropping a hospital system if there are also changes to physician or other services, and these
are not adequately controlled for by our measures of hospital network utility (W T P ).63
    To examine the sensitivity of our results to the estimated responsiveness of consumers to hospital network
changes, we repeat our analysis by increasing and decreasing our estimated ακW W T P coefficients by 25%,
re-estimating the bargaining parameters and insurer marginal costs as in Section 3.4, and recomputing
counterfactual outcomes. Although the parameter estimates change slightly, the counterfactual results and
substantive findings are qualitatively similar.


  61
      “CalPERS Announces Enrollment Results; No Consumer Stampede to Retain Sutter,” Press Release, CalPERS,
December 14, 2004.
   62
      See Dafny, Ho and Lee (2015) for a discussion of why physician and hospital mergers can yield positive price
effects for the merging parties.
   63
      As we rely on within-market across-zip-code variation in hospital network utility to identify the coefficients on
W T P terms ({ακW }), this can occur if physician offices are not located in the same zip codes as affiliated hospitals
and if the utility from physician networks is absorbed by insurer-market fixed effects.


                                                          48
