NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EQUITY VESTING AND MANAGERIAL MYOPIA
Alex Edmans
Vivian W. Fang
Katharina A. Lewellen
Working Paper 19407
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19407
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013

We are grateful to Timur Tufail and Ann Yih of Equilar for answering numerous questions about the
data, and Francesca Cornelli, Francisco Gomes, Ralph Koijen, Luke Taylor and seminar participants
at LBS, Minnesota, Sydney, UNSW, UTS, and Wharton for helpful comments. Edmans gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the Jacobs Levy Equity Management Center for Quantitative
Financial Research and the Wharton Dean’s Research Fund. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Alex Edmans, Vivian W. Fang, and Katharina A. Lewellen. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Equity Vesting and Managerial Myopia
Alex Edmans, Vivian W. Fang, and Katharina A. Lewellen
NBER Working Paper No. 19407
September 2013
JEL No. G31,G34
ABSTRACT
This paper links the impending vesting of CEO equity to reductions in real investment. Existing studies
measure the manager’s short-term concerns using the sensitivity of his equity to the stock price. However,
in myopia theories, the driver of short-termism is not the magnitude of incentives but their horizon.
We use recent changes in compensation disclosure to introduce a new empirical measure that is tightly
linked to theory - the sensitivity of equity vesting over the upcoming year. This sensitivity is determined
by equity grants made several years prior, and thus unlikely to be driven by current investment opportunities.
An interquartile increase is associated with a decline of 0.11% in the growth of R&D (scaled by total
assets), 37% of the average R&D growth rate. Similar results hold when including advertising and
capital expenditure. Newly-vesting equity increases the likelihood of meeting or beating analyst earnings
forecasts by a narrow margin. However, the market’s reaction to doing so is lower, suggesting that
it recognizes CEOs’ myopic incentives.
Alex Edmans
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2460 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
aedmans@wharton.upenn.edu
Vivian W. Fang
Carlson School of Management 3-109
321 19th Avenue S
Minneapolis, MN 55455
fangw@umn.edu

Katharina A. Lewellen
Tuck School at Dartmouth
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
katharina.lewellen@tuck.dartmouth.edu

This paper studies the link between real investment decisions and the vesting horizon of a CEO’s
equity incentives. We find that research and development (“R&D”) is negatively associated with
the stock price sensitivity of stock and options that vest over the course of the same year. This
association continues to hold when including advertising and capital expenditure in the
investment measure. Moreover, CEOs with significant newly-vesting equity are more likely to
meet or beat analyst consensus forecasts by a narrow margin. These results provide empirical
support for managerial myopia theories.
Many academics and practitioners believe that managerial myopia is a first-order problem
faced by the modern firm. While the 20th century firm emphasized cost efficiency, Porter (1992)
argues that “the nature of competition has changed, placing a premium on investment in
increasingly complex and intangible forms”, such as innovation, employee training, and
organizational development. However, the myopia theories of Stein (1988, 1989) show that
managers may fail to invest due to concerns with the firm’s short-term stock price. Since the
benefits of intangible investment are only visible in the long run, the immediate effect of such
investment is to depress earnings and thus the current stock price. Therefore, a manager aligned
with the short-term stock price may turn down valuable investment opportunities.
Despite its perceived importance, myopia is very difficult to test empirically. Standard
measures of CEO incentives (e.g., Hall and Liebman (1998)) quantify the sensitivity of
managerial wealth to the stock price stemming from his stock and option compensation.
However, in myopia models, the driver of short-termism is not the overall level of equity
compensation, but the weighting of this compensation towards the short-term as opposed to longterm stock price (Stein (1988, 1989)). Equity that does not vest until the long term will deter
rather than induce myopia (Edmans, Gabaix, Sadzik, and Sannikov (2012)).

2

However, operationalizing this theoretical concept empirically is tricky.

The ideal

experiment would be for the CEO to be forced to sell some equity for exogenous reasons, and to
be aware of this forced sale ahead of time so that this expectation affects his actions. (This is
indeed how short-term concerns arise in the Stein (1989) model). However, identifying sales
that are both exogenous and predictable by the CEO is difficult. Unexpected forced sales (e.g.,
due to sudden liquidity needs) are likely exogenous, but typically unobservable by researchers
and unpredictable by the CEO. Actual discretionary sales are observable to researchers, but
likely endogenous for two reasons. First, omitted variables may drive both actual sales and
investment. For example, the manager’s negative private information on firm prospects may
cause him both to sell equity and to reduce investment. Second, some actual sales (e.g., due to
sudden liquidity needs) may have been unpredictable by the CEO. Thus, actual sales are a poor
proxy for the ideal explanatory variable, predicted sales, leading to measurement error.
We measure a manager’s myopic tendencies using the sensitivity of his stock and options
that are scheduled to vest over the upcoming year. We show that this sensitivity is highly
correlated with actual sales: in the absence of private information, a risk-averse manager should
sell his equity upon vesting. However, while a CEO’s actual sales are an endogenous decision,
the amount of newly-vesting equity is largely driven by the magnitude and vesting horizon of
equity grants made several years prior.1 For the same reason, it is known to the CEO in advance.
We identify the equity that is scheduled to vest in a given year using a recently-available dataset
from Equilar.

This dataset contains grant-by-grant information on an executive’s options,

including whether they are vested or unvested. We can thus identify at an individual grant level
the number of options that switch from unvested to vested in a given year. This grant-level
1

Gopalan, Milbourn, Song, and Thakor (2013) show that most vesting periods are between three and five years.

3

information allows us to calculate the delta of the vesting options, which captures the manager’s
incentive to inflate the stock price. Equilar also provides the number of vesting shares; since the
delta of a share is 1, this number does not need to be decomposed into individual grants.
We use the sensitivity of newly-vesting equity in two ways. First, we employ it as the
explanatory variable of interest, relating it to changes in several measures of long-term
investment. Our primary measure is R&D scaled by total assets, but we also include advertising
and two measures of capital expenditure.

We control for determinants of investment

opportunities and the firm’s ability to finance investment, firm and year fixed effects, and other
components of CEO compensation – for example, the CEO’s unvested equity, his already-vested
equity, and the standard components of salary and bonus.
We find a negative and significant relationship between nearly all measures of investment
and the sensitivity of newly-vesting equity.

For example, an interquartile increase in this

sensitivity is associated with a 0.11 percentage point decline in the growth of R&D scaled by
total assets, which corresponds to 37% of the average growth in R&D scaled by total assets, 2%
of the average R&D-to-assets ratio, and an average decline in R&D of approximately $1 million
per year. Our results suggest that firms reduce investment in years in which significant CEO
stock and option holdings vest.
Newly-vesting equity is of interest as an explanatory variable, since boards may wish to take
into account its link with investment when designing the optimal contract. Similarly, since
boards know the amount of newly-vesting equity at the start of a year, they can predict the
CEO’s incentives to cut investment, and if needed, counteract them. A broader question is how
investment responds to expected equity sales in general. As in the Stein (1989) model, such
sales can stem from channels other than vesting equity – a CEO may voluntarily hold already-

4

vested equity as a long-term investment (e.g., in a family firm), subsequently sell equity to
rebalance his portfolio, and anticipate such sales beforehand. Since actual equity sales are
endogenous, our second use of newly-vesting equity is as an instrument for actual sales. The two
properties of newly-vesting equity discussed earlier – its high correlation with equity sales and
its determination by equity grants several years prior – are analogous to the relevance criterion
and exclusion restriction. We find a negative relationship between instrumented equity sales and
investment. An interquartile increase in equity sales is associated with a 0.25 percentage point
decline in the growth of R&D scaled by total assets, 4.6% of the average R&D-to-assets ratio.
The negative association between investment and vesting equity (or instrumented equity
sales) can arise from two channels. First, vesting equity could cause a decline in investment.
Managers intending to sell equity reduce investment, to inflate earnings and thus the stock price.
Second, there is no causal relationship but instead the link arises from an omitted variable –
current investment opportunities – that our controls fail to capture. It may be that boards believe
that vesting equity reduces the manager’s investment incentives, and thus schedule equity to vest
precisely when they forecast that investment opportunities will decline.

This explanation

requires boards to be able to forecast investment opportunities several years in advance. Note
that it is still consistent with myopia theories: boards ensure that options do not vest while
investment opportunities are strong because they believe that vesting equity induces myopia.
To provide further evidence of the first channel, we show that newly-vesting equity is
associated with a higher likelihood that a firm meets the analyst consensus earnings forecast or
beats it by a narrow margin. In contrast, vesting is unrelated to the likelihood of beating the
forecasts by a wide margin, consistent with earnings manipulation being more likely when
earnings are close to the forecast. These results support the idea that vesting equity increases the

5

CEO’s stock price concerns, but not the alternative hypothesis that equity vesting is correlated
with changes in investment opportunities.
Finally, we study the market’s reaction to earnings announcements. Controlling for the
earnings realization, the announcement return is significantly lower for firms with higher levels
of vesting equity, perhaps because the market suspects that such firms have incentives to inflate
earnings by cutting investment. This effect is especially strong for firms that meet or beat the
forecast, suggesting that this outcome more likely stems from earnings inflation. These findings
are consistent with the Stein (1989) “signal-jamming” equilibrium, where the market is efficient
and recognizes managers’ myopic behavior.
This paper is related to a long literature on managerial myopia. In addition to the theories
already cited, other models include Miller and Rock (1985), Narayanan (1985), Bebchuk and
Stole (1993), Bizjak, Brickley, and Coles (1993), Goldman and Slezak (2006), Edmans (2009),
and Benmelech, Kandel, and Veronesi (2010). However, as previously noted, precisely testing
these theories is difficult. McConnell and Muscarella (1985) document positive stock price
reactions to the announcements of capital investments. This result is sometimes interpreted as
evidence against myopia, but can also arise from selection: managers only pursue projects whose
value can be clearly communicated to the market in the short-term and they know will enjoy a
positive reaction. Graham, Harvey, and Rajgopal (2005) provide survey evidence that 78% of
executives would sacrifice long-term value to meet earnings targets. Using standard measures of
incentives that capture the CEO’s sensitivity to the stock price but not his horizon, Cheng and
Warfield (2005), Bergstresser and Philippon (2006), and Peng and Roell (2008) find a positive
link with earnings management, but Erickson, Hanlon, and Maydew (2006) find no link with
accounting fraud. These conflicting results may arise because, theoretically, it is the horizon

6

rather than level of incentives that induces myopia. Bushee (1998) relates R&D to the horizon of
a firm’s shareholders rather than managers.
A small number of papers do consider the vesting horizon of incentives. Kole (1997) is the
first to describe vesting horizons, but does not relate them to outcome variables. Johnson, Ryan,
and Tian (2009) show that already-vested stock is related to corporate fraud, but do not study
real investment or upcoming vesting. Gopalan, Milbourn, Song, and Thakor (2013) are the first
to systematically analyze the CEO’s horizon, also using Equilar. They develop a new “duration”
measure of incentives, which weights each equity grant by its vesting period. They show how it
varies across industries and with firm characteristics, and link it to earnings management (but do
not investigate real outcomes). In contrast, our goal is to study the link between myopia and
investment, and so our measure of myopic incentives is designed to minimize its correlation with
current investment opportunities. While duration is affected by equity grants in the current year,
which are likely correlated with growth options, newly-vesting equity depends on grants made
several years ago. Although we cannot claim that past grants are completely exogenous to
current investment opportunities and thus make strong causal statements, they are less likely
driven by current investment opportunities than current grants. 2 Finally, a contemporaneous
paper by Ladika and Sautner (2013) shows that FAS 123R induced firms to accelerate the
vesting period of options, and such accelerated vesting led to a reduction in capital expenditure.
Our papers are complementary in that they employ different empirical strategies to investigate
the link between vesting and investment, and find consistent results. While they focus on a onetime shock, we study vesting (or instrumented equity sales) within a panel of firms. This broader

2

While we use vesting equity as an instrument for equity sales, Shue and Townsend (2013) use institutional features
of multi-year grant cycles as an instrument for option grants. They study the different question of whether options
induce risk-taking.

7

setting allows us to quantify the responsiveness of investment to expected equity sales, rather
than the more specific question of how investment responds to changes in the probability of
accelerating options. We also show how vesting equity is related to both the likelihood of
beating earnings forecasts and the market’s response to earnings announcements.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 1 describes the data, in particular our measure of
myopic incentives. Section 2 presents the investment results, and Section 3 analyzes earnings
announcements. Section 4 concludes.

1

Data and Empirical Specification
This section describes the calculation of the variables used in our empirical analysis; a

detailed description is in Appendix A.
1.1

Data and Sample
Since the implementation of FAS 123R in 2006, companies are required to disclose grant-

level (rather than merely aggregate-level) information on each stock and option award held by a
top executive. For an option grant, firms disclose not only the exercise price and expiration date,
which allows us to give each grant a unique identifier, but also details on whether the options are
vested or unvested. In particular, it will split a grant into two if part of the grant is vested and
part remains unvested. We can thus track the vesting of a CEO’s options by studying changes in
the numbers of vested and unvested options with the same exercise price and expiration date.
Separately, Equilar directly reports the number of shares that vest in a given year.
Given the short time series over which grant-level vesting status is available, we require a
wide cross-section to maximize power. While the data is available in Execucomp for the S&P
1500, we use Equilar as it covers all firms in the Russell 3000. The initial sample consists of

8

9,385 firm-CEO-years from 2006-2010. 3 After merging with financial statement data from
Compustat and stock return data from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP), and
removing financial and utilities firms, we obtain the final sample of 2,047 firms and 6,730 firmCEO-years (see Table 1, Panel A). The analysis of earnings forecasts uses the Institutional
Brokers’ Estimate System (I/B/E/S) database and covers 1,498 firms and 17,173 firm-quarters.
1.2

Measurement of vesting equity
We obtain the number of shares that vest in a given year directly using the variable “Shares

Acquired on Vesting of Stock” for each year-CEO. Such vesting may come from previously
restricted stock or Long-Term Incentive Plans (“LTIPs”). To calculate the number of newlyvesting options, we first collect information, grant-by-grant, on the exercise price (EXERPRC),
expiration date (EXPDATE), and number of securities (NUM) for a given CEO’s newly-awarded
options in year t+1 and his unvested options at the end of year t and year t+1. We group these
options by EXERPRC and EXPDATE and infer the number of newly-vesting options from the
following relationship:

NEWLYVESTINGOPTIONNUM (EXERPRCp, EXPDATEd)t+1 = UNVESTEDOPTIONNUM
(EXERPRCp, EXPDATEd)t + NEWLYAWARDEDOPTIONNUM (EXERPRCp, EXPDATEd)t+1 UNVESTEDOPTIONNUM (EXERPRCp, EXPDATEd)t+1,

where p and d index the exercise price and expiration date for a given option grant,
NEWLYVESTINGOPTIONNUM is the number of newly-vesting options for this exercise price3

We have 53 firm-years in which we have 2 CEOs, due either to dual CEOs or a change of CEO during the year. In
these cases, the firm-year observation appears twice, once for each CEO. The results are robust to deleting these
observations or keeping the CEO with the higher incentives from newly-vesting equity.

9

expiration date pair, UNVESTEDOPTIONNUM is the number of unvested options for this pair,
and NEWLYAWARDEDOPTIONNUM is the number of newly-awarded options for this pair.
Having identified the number of vesting securities, we then calculate their delta. The delta
measures the dollar change in the value of a security for a $1 change in the stock price, and thus
the manager’s incentive to inflate the stock price. It equals the number of shares it is equivalent
to, from an incentive standpoint. The delta of a share is 1; we calculate the delta of an option
using the Black-Scholes formula. For options that vest in year t+1, we use the risk-free rate,
volatility, expiration date, and dividend yield from Equilar, as of the end of year t. The rationale
is that, when making his investment decisions at the start of year t+1, the CEO will take into
account the delta of his options at the start of this year. If these are unavailable, we use the
inputs associated with a firm’s newly-awarded options in year t+1 from Equilar, followed by
year t’s inputs from ExecuComp (or year t+1’s if year t’s are missing), and by year t’s inputs
from Compustat (or year t+1’s if year t’s are missing), in that order.4 5
After summing across the deltas of all of the CEO’s vesting stock and options, we multiply
the aggregate delta by the stock price at the end of year t. We call the resulting measure
“sensitivity”, and it represents the dollar change in the value of a CEO’s equity for a 1% change
in the stock price (it is equivalent to the Hall and Liebman (1998) measure of incentives). While
the delta represents the effective number of vesting shares, the sensitivity represents their

4

As a robustness check, we use Equilar inputs in year t, followed by Execucomp inputs in year t, followed by
Compustat inputs in year t, followed by Equilar inputs in year t+1, followed by Execucomp inputs in year t+1,
followed by Compustat inputs in year t+1, in that order. The results are barely affected.
5
If the Black-Scholes inputs cannot be located directly in any of the three databases, we fill in the missing volatility
by calculating past three-year stock price volatility using the CRSP daily files, the missing risk-free rate with the
Treasury Constant Maturity Rate with the closest term to a given option, and the missing dividend yield by
calculating the past five-year average dividend yield using the Compustat annual files, whenever data permits. If the
expiration date is missing from Equilar, we delete the option.

10

effective value. Thus, in contrast to delta, sensitivity is comparable across firms with different
stock price levels, and immune to stock splits.6
We sum the sensitivities of newly-vesting stock (NEWLYVESTINGSTOCKt+1) and options
(NEWLYVESTINGOPTIONt+1) to create NEWLYVESTINGt+1, the total sensitivity of all newlyvesting securities in year t+1. We similarly calculate ALREADYVESTEDSTOCKt, the sensitivity
of stock that had already vested by the end of year t, and add this to ALREADYVESTEDOPTIONt
(analogously defined) to create ALREADYVESTEDt, the sensitivity of all vested securities. We
do the same for unvested securities, to calculate the analogous variables UNVESTEDSTOCKt,
UNVESTEDOPTIONt, and UNVESTEDt.

We then create UNVESTEDADJt, which equals

UNVESTEDt - NEWLYVESTINGt+1 and thus excludes securities that vest in year t+1; we set this
variable to zero if it is negative.7 Appendix B gives a sample calculation for one CEO-year.
NEWLYVESTING differs from the Gopalan et al. (2013) duration measure as it is determined
by equity grants several years prior, as described in the introduction. Another difference is that
the calculation of duration requires several additional assumptions. Equilar provides information
on the vesting period of a particular equity grant, and whether the grant exhibits cliff- or gradedvesting. However, the designation of “graded vesting” could refer to straight-line vesting (e.g., a
grant of 100 shares with a 5-year horizon vests at a rate of 20 shares per year), backloaded
vesting (e.g., 20 shares vest in year 4 and 80 shares in year 5), or frontloaded vesting. Our
NEWLYVESTING measure captures the actual (rather than expected) vesting of equity over the
current year, and thus does not require an assumption on graded vesting schedules. Calculating
6

Several empirical studies of CEO incentives call this sensitivity measure “delta”. In option pricing, delta refers to
the dollar change in the value of an option for a $1 change in the value of the underlying share, so we use
“sensitivity” to refer to the dollar change in the value of an option for a 1% change in the underlying share.
7
In rare cases, NEWLYVESTINGt+1 can be higher than UNVESTEDt because some unvested options have been
canceled during the year, rather than having vested. Equilar does not record such cancelations, but they are very
rare.

11

duration also requires the vesting schedule for equity granted prior to 2006, since some of this
equity will still be outstanding during our time period of 2006-10. Since vesting schedules are
unavailable pre-2006, they also need to be estimated using assumptions.8
As our second measure of myopic incentives, we construct the ratio MMRATIO, which
equals NEWLYVESTING divided by the sum of NEWLYVESTING and UNVESTEDADJ. This
ratio measures the CEO’s concerns for the stock price over the upcoming year relative to future
years. One drawback of a ratio-based measure is that it does not take into account the amount of
vesting equity and thus the magnitude of myopic incentives. For example, if the CEO has little
unvested equity, then even a small dollar value of newly-vesting equity will lead to a large
MMRATIO even though the CEO will gain little from myopia in dollar terms. Nevertheless, we
include tests based on MMRATIO as a robustness check. Similarly, we calculate the ratio
MMRATIOALL, which equals NEWLYVESTING divided by the sum of NEWLYVESTING,
UNVESTEDADJ, and ALREADYVESTED, i.e., incentives derived from total equity holdings.
1.3

Measurement of investment
Having chosen our measure of managerial incentives, we next decide how to measure

myopia. Theoretically, myopia is any action that increases current earnings at the expense of
long-term value, but this cost cannot be observed immediately by the market. Our first measure
is the fall in R&D ΔRD), scaled by total assets. R&D is generally expensed and thus

8

The NEWLYVESTING measure also has its disadvantages compared to duration. In particular, it focuses on only
the equity that vests over the upcoming year, thus effectively treating a share that vests in 2 years as the same as a
share that vests in 5 years. In contrast, the duration measure takes into account all of a CEO’s equity grants and
their respective (estimated) vesting periods. Thus, the duration measure is appropriate for estimating the CEO’s
overall horizon, the goal of Gopalan et al. (2013). Focusing on newly-vesting equity is appropriate for our setting as
it is a sharper measure of incentives to act myopically in the current year. For example, consider CEO A who has 5
shares vesting in year 1 and 5 vesting in year 6; CEO B has 10 shares vesting in year 3. CEO B has a shorter overall
duration, but A likely has higher incentives to cut investment in the current year.

12

immediately reduces earnings.9 On the other hand, any value created by R&D only manifests in
the long-term, and so it is difficult for the market to observe it immediately and incorporate it in
the stock price. While many firms expense R&D separately on the income statement, and so the
market can identify if an earnings increase was caused by a cut in R&D, the income statement
can only report the level of R&D expenditure and not its quality (i.e., its impact on future cash
flows). For example, it is not clear whether a cut in R&D is due to an increase in efficiency or
myopia.10 For these reasons, prior literature finds that managers view R&D cuts as a way to
increase short-run earnings. Graham, Harvey, and Rajgopal (2005) report that 80% of managers
would cut discretionary expenditure on R&D, advertising, and maintenance to meet an earnings
target. Bushee (1998) finds that investors who trade on earnings induce managers to cut R&D to
meet earnings targets. Bhojraj, Hribar, Picconi, and McInnis (2009) find that firms that beat
analyst forecasts by reducing discretionary spending (such as R&D and advertising) enjoy a
short-term increase in stock prices that is reversed in the long-run.11
In our final sample, 2,531 firm-CEO-years (37.6% of our sample) have missing R&D,
because R&D is either included within Selling, General, and Administrative expenses (“SG&A”)
or indeed zero. Following Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Palia (1999), we set missing R&D values
to zero. As a robustness check, we remove an observation if R&D is missing and the results
(available upon request) are slightly stronger.

9

The general rule for R&D costs under the Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (“SFAS”) Rule 2 is that
they are expensed because their future economic benefits are uncertain. However, exceptions exist. Tangible assets
acquired for R&D activities that have alternative future uses can be capitalized, as can the costs of computer
software that is to be sold, leased, or otherwise marketed, after the technological feasibility for the product is
established.
10
Cohen, Diether, and Malloy (2013) find that “the stock market appears unable to distinguish between “good” and
“bad” R&D investment”.
11
These results are inconsistent with the hypothesis that a cut in R&D signals poor investment opportunities
(Bebchuk and Stole (1993)). Any such effect would bias our tests against finding a positive association between
R&D cuts and vesting equity.

13

Based on similar motivation, we also include the increase in advertising expenditure in the
dependent variable, if available. Chan, Lakonishok, and Sougiannis (2001) provide evidence
that both advertising and R&D might be underpriced by the market, suggesting that a cut in
either expenditure could boost the short-term stock price. Since advertising expenditures are
sometimes included within SG&A, they are often missing. Therefore, we do not study them
alone but combine them with R&D to form ΔRDAD, the change in the sum of R&D and
advertising expenditures, scaled by total assets. We set missing advertising expenditures to zero,
but verify that the results are robust to removing an observation if both R&D and advertising
expenditures are missing.
We also include the change in capital expenditure (ΔCAPEX) and total investment
(ΔCAPEXALL), scaled by total assets. While CAPEX is taken directly from the cash flow
statement, CAPEXALL is the increase in gross fixed assets from the balance sheet. The latter
represents a more comprehensive measure as it captures investment not fully reflected on the
cash flow statement, such as capitalized leases. For example, consider a firm that sells capital
and then leases it back to raise cash. CAPEXALL calculated from the balance sheet will correctly
reflect the fact that no disinvestment has occurred, since the capitalized lease will be reflected in
gross fixed assets.

However, CAPEX taken from the cash flow statement will reflect a large

reduction in investment.
While capital expenditure is not directly expensed, it lowers earnings through raising
depreciation. In addition, it is typically financed by reducing cash or taking on additional debt.
This increases a firm’s net interest expense, reducing earnings, and also worsens the firm’s
solvency ratios (such as net debt-to-EBITDA), which may enter into market valuations. As two
additional measures, we consider the change in the sum of R&D, advertising, and capital

14

expenditure (ΔRDADCAPEX and ΔRDADCAPEXALL), which aggregates all of these
“discretionary” expenditures.
We use “investment” as an umbrella term to encapsulate the six different measures of longterm behavior: RD, RDAD, CAPEX, CAPEXALL, RDADCAPEX, or RDADCAPEXALL. Since
R&D and advertising have a more negative effect on current earnings, due to being fully
expensed, the first two are our primary measures of investment.
1.4

Control variables
In addition to our measures of CEO incentives, we also include additional control variables

that may drive investment in year t+1.

We use the controls in Asker, Farre-Mensa, and

Ljungqvist (2013), plus some further controls for the firm’s investment opportunities and CEO
compensation. The first five controls proxy for investment opportunities. Qt is Tobin’s Q at the
end of year t, calculated as the market value of assets (market value of equity, plus liquidating
value of preferred stock, plus book value of debt, minus balance sheet deferred taxes and
investment tax credit) divided by the book value of assets, MVt is the log of market equity12 and
MOMENTUMt is the firm’s compounded market-adjusted monthly stock returns over the twelve
months in year t calculated from CRSP. Following Asker et al. (2013), we include Qt+1 in
addition to Qt.13 Our fifth proxy for investment opportunities is AGEt, firm age.
The next three controls measure a firm’s capacity to finance investment. CASHt is cash and
short-term investments, BOOKLEVt is book value of short- and long-term debt, and RETEARNt
is balance-sheet retained earnings. All variables are measured at the end of year t and deflated
12

Asker et al. (2013) match private firms with public firms on industry and size to study the difference in matched
firms’ investment behaviour, and so do not further control for size. Since matching is not relevant for our setting,
we include size as an additional control.
13
Asker et al. (2013) show that their results are robust to using sales growth rates between year t and t+1, and t-1
and t, as an alternative proxy for growth opportunities to Qt and Qt+1. Our results are similarly robust.

15

by total assets. We also include ROAt, the return-on-assets ratio, calculated as net income
divided by average total assets in year t. This variable proxies for both investment opportunities
and the ability to finance investment. We also add SALARYt and BONUSt, two other components
of CEO compensation.
1.5

Descriptive statistics
Summary statistics for our sample firms are in Table 1, Panel B. Our key dependent

variables are changes in investment scaled by lagged total assets. An average firm exhibits a
0.3% year-on-year change in R&D. This figure becomes 0.4% when adding advertising, and 1%
when further adding capital expenditure inferred from the balance sheet.
The sensitivity of newly-vesting securities, NEWLYVESTING has a mean (median) of $3.6
million ($1.3 million), with a mean of $2.5 million ($1 million) coming from newly-vesting
options (shares). The sample means for MMRATIO and MMRATIOALL are 0.43 and 0.12,
respectively, and the medians are 0.39 and 0.09. The standard deviation of NEWLYVESTING is
$6.4 million and the coefficient of variation (standard deviation divided by the mean) is 1.8. For
comparison, this statistic is 0.7 when computed separately for each CEO and then averaged,
suggesting significant within-firm variation in the NEWLYVESTING measure.14

2
2.1

Investment
Equity vesting
To test our hypothesis that newly-vesting equity is correlated with managerial myopia, we

run the following panel regression (omitting the firm subscript for brevity):

14

To obtain another estimate of the within-firm variation of NEWLYVESTING, we run a regression of
NEWLYVESTING on firm fixed effects. The standard deviation of the residuals from this regression – our measure
of within-firm variation – is $3.3 million compared to the sample standard deviation of $6.4 million.

16

ΔINVESTMENTt+1 = α + 1NEWLYVESTINGt+1 + 2UNVESTEDADJt +

3ALREADYVESTEDt + OTHER_CONTROLSt + t,

(1)

where ΔINVESTMENTt+1 is the change in one of the six investment variables from year t to t+1,
scaled by total assets. We measure NEWLYVESTING over year t+1, the same time period over
which ΔINVESTMENT is measured. The rationale is that, at the start of year t+1, the CEO
knows (from his contract) the amount of equity that will vest over the course of that year, and so
may cut investment accordingly. Our hypothesis is that 1 < 0, i.e., the impending vesting of
equity is associated with a fall in investment. As control variables we include UNVESTEDADJt,
ALREADYVESTEDt, and OTHER_CONTROLSt, a vector of the additional controls described in
Section 1.4. We do not have a clear prediction for the signs of 2 and 3. While unvested equity
that will not vest for several more years will likely dissuade myopia, that which will vest soon
after the upcoming year may have the opposite effect. We are unable to estimate the vesting
period of unvested equity without additional assumptions. Laux (2012) shows theoretically that
unvested equity may exacerbate myopia: the CEO takes short-term actions to avoid being fired,
since termination will lead to the forfeiture of unvested equity. While already-vested equity
could lead to short-termism since the CEO can often sell it at any time, the CEO may be
voluntarily holding already-vested equity as a long-term investment (e.g., in his family firm).
Finally, we use firm fixed effects to control both for firm-level heterogeneity in investment
opportunities and CEO preferences towards investment (e.g., certain CEOs may be more
cautious or more overconfident than average), year fixed effects to control for common shocks to
investment opportunities, and cluster standard errors at the firm level. The inclusion of firm fixed

17

effects means that our identification is based on the time-series variation in NEWLYVESTING
within a firm, which is sizable as discussed in Section 1.5.
Table 2, Panel A presents the core result of the paper. It shows that impending vesting of
equity is significantly negatively associated with growth in five of the six investment measures –
all except CAPEX.

These results are also economically significant.

For example, an

interquartile increase in NEWLYVESTING is associated with a 0.11 percentage point decline in
ΔRD (the growth in R&D scaled by total assets), which corresponds to 37% of the average
growth in R&D scaled by total assets, 2% of the average R&D-to-assets ratio, and an average
decline in R&D of approximately $1 million per year based on the median total assets of $882m
in our sample. To our knowledge, these results are the first to link newly-vesting equity to real
investment decisions.
The coefficient on UNVESTEDADJ is insignificant in all specifications, consistent with the
ambiguous effect of unvested equity on investment.

ALREADYVESTED is positive and

significant in two specifications, weakly consistent with the idea that managers may be holding
onto already-vested equity as a long-term investment. The control variables load with the
expected signs. Investment growth is positively related to investment opportunities, as measured
by Tobin’s Q, momentum, and negatively related to market equity and age. It is positively
related to the firm’s ability to fund investment, as measured by cash holdings, retained earnings,
and (the negative of) book leverage. The return-on-assets ratio, which may proxy for both
investment opportunities and investment, is also a positive determinant.
One potential concern with Table 2, Panel A is that NEWLYVESTINGt+1 is correlated with
the stock price at the start of year t+1, and thus investment opportunities in year t+1. Such
correlation stems from two sources. First, NEWLYVESTING is the delta of the CEO’s vesting

18

equity multiplied by the stock price at the end of year t. The multiplication by the stock price is
necessary to give an incentive measure that reflects the CEO’s wealth gain from increasing the
stock price by a given percentage (rather than dollar) amount and is thus comparable across firms
with different stock prices. Without the multiplication, our results become stronger.15 Second,
the delta of the CEO’s vesting options is itself increasing in the current stock price. As a result,
increases in the stock price both reflect improvements in investment opportunities and augment
NEWLYVESTING. Such a channel will lead to a positive correlation between NEWLYVESTING
and investment, which is the opposite of what we find. In addition, Table 2, Panel A already
includes the price-based controls Qt, Qt+1, MOMENTUMt, and MVt. In the Online Appendix, we
conduct additional robustness checks to address any residual correlation. In Table OA1, Panel A,
rather than using an option’s actual delta (which depends on the stock price), we assume a delta
of 0.7, which is the mean delta in our sample. In Panel B, we assume that all options are at-themoney, which removes the dependence of the estimated delta on the current stock price, but still
allows for deltas to vary across firms according to volatility and other inputs. Both panels show
that the results are barely affected.
In Table 2, Panel A, we have the level of NEWLYVESTINGt+1 on the right-hand side in
addition to firm fixed effects. The regression thus studies whether investment falls from the
previous year’s level, when the level of newly-vesting equity is high relative to the firm mean.
Alternatively, one could ask whether investment falls when the level of newly-vesting equity is
high, relative to the previous year’s level.

15

In Panel B, we replace the levels of

An alternative measure of incentives that is independent of the stock price would be to divide NEWLYVESTING
by the firm’s market capitalization, to give the CEO’s effective equity stake in the firm as a percentage of shares
outstanding (rather than as a dollar value), as in the Jensen and Murphy (1990) incentives measure. This measure
captures the dollar change in the CEO’s wealth for a $1 increase in firm value, and is thus not comparable across
firms of different size: a $1 increase in firm value is much less significant in a large firm than in a small firm.

19

NEWLYVESTINGt+1, UNVESTEDADJt, and ALREADYVESTEDt with ΔNEWLYVESTINGt+1,
ΔUNVESTEDADJt, and ΔALREADYVESTEDt, the changes in these variables from the previous
year. The results are very similar, with ΔNEWLYVESTINGt+1 being significantly negatively
related to the same five investment measures. We do not adopt this as the primary specification
to preserve sample size, given the already short time series of our sample.
In Table 2, we control for UNVESTEDADJ and ALREADYVESTED by including them as
additional regressors. An alternative specification is to use them to scale the NEWLYVESTING
measure and have MMRATIO or MMRATIOALL as the key explanatory variable. As discussed
in Section 1.2, scaling provides a useful robustness check but has two potential drawbacks. First,
the scaled measures do not account for the amount of vesting equity and thus may not capture the
magnitude of CEO incentives to boost the stock price. Second, the direction of the link between
investment and UNVESTEDADJ and ALREADYVESTED is unclear. Unvested securities could
indeed reduce myopia if they vest in 5 years, but increase it if they vest in 2 years. Thus, scaling
by UNVESTEDADJ may weaken the explanatory power of NEWLYVESTING for investment.
Nevertheless, we report regressions with the scaled measures as a robustness check.
In Table 3, Panel A, we run the following regression:

ΔINVESTMENTt+1 = α + MMRATIOt + OTHER_CONTROLSt + t,

(2)

We find that MMRATIO is significantly negatively related to changes in R&D, scaled by
total assets. An interquartile increase in MMRATIO is associated with a 0.16% fall in ΔRD, 53%
of the sample mean ΔRD and 3% of the sample mean RD. This result remains significant when
adding changes in advertising but not capital expenditure to the dependent variable.

20

The

findings of Table 3, when compared with Table 2, are consistent with our conjecture that a ratio
is a less precise measure of a CEO’s myopic incentives, and also with the idea that cutting R&D
and advertising are more effective ways to inflate earnings. Panel B shows similar results using
MMRATIOALL as the incentive measure. In Table OA2, Panels A-D, we show that the results
are unchanged using a delta of 0.7 or assuming that options are at-the-money. Table OA2,
Panels E-F repeat the analysis with a changes-on-changes specification and shows that they are
again little affected.
The results of Tables 2 and 3 show a consistent negative relationship between newly-vesting
equity and various measures of investment, supporting managerial myopia theories. However,
we cannot make strong causal claims. Even though newly-vesting equity is determined by
equity granted several years prior, we cannot rule out the hypothesis that boards of directors are
able to forecast declines in investment opportunities several years in advance and schedule
vesting periods to coincide with these declines, so that the CEO cannot sell equity while
investment opportunities are strong.

Under this alternative explanation, there is no direct

causality from NEWLYVESTING to a decline in investment growth, but an omitted variable (the
expectation of future investment opportunities) causes both. This explanation requires boards to
be able to forecast investment opportunities several years in advance. We try to address this
hypothesis with a long list of controls for observable time-variation in both investment
opportunities and the ability to finance investment, firm fixed effects to control for firm-specific
time-invariant unobservable drivers of these factors, and year fixed effects to control for
aggregate time-varying unobservable drivers. However, we cannot control perfectly for factors
that are both firm-specific and time-varying. Note that this alternative explanation is also
consistent with myopia theories. If the board is deliberately timing the vesting period of equity

21

to coincide with a decline in investment opportunities, such behavior is consistent with the board
recognizing that newly-vesting equity deters investment.
2.2

Equity sales
The analysis in Section 2.1 studies the responsiveness of investment to newly-vesting equity.

A broader question is the responsiveness of investment to anticipated equity sales, which can
stem from channels other than vesting. Indeed, in the Stein (1989) model, the manager’s myopic
incentives arise because he expects to sell equity soon, but the model is ambivalent about the
cause of such sales. Anticipated equity sales could instead arise if a CEO voluntarily holds
already-vested equity as part of a long-term investment, but later decides to sell it to rebalance
his portfolio or meet an anticipated liquidity need (e.g., finance his children going to college).
However, we cannot regress investment on actual equity sales because they are endogenous.
The choice of NEWLYVESTING as an independent variable in Section 2.1 was motivated by
two reasons. First, the amount of newly-vesting equity is determined by equity grants made
several years prior, and thus unlikely to be correlated with current investment opportunities.
Second, newly-vesting equity is likely correlated with actual sales of equity, since a risk-averse
CEO should sell a significant proportion of his equity when it vests. These two reasons are
analogous to the exogeneity and relevance criteria for a valid instrument. Therefore, we now use
NEWLYVESTING as a valid instrument for equity sales in a two-stage least squares (“2SLS”)
procedure. Since in our setting, the coefficient on the instrument is of interest in its own right,
we report the reduced form regressions in Tables 2 and 3, in addition to the structural form
regressions in Table 4 (discussed below).
We calculate STOCKSOLD, the dollar value of the actual equity sold by the CEO, from the
Thomson Financial Insider Trading database, which is compiled from Form 4 filed with the SEC.
22

We aggregate the number of shares sold by the CEO during year t+1 and multiply the number by
his firm’s stock price at the end of year t. We classify an insider trade as “sale” if the transaction
is flagged as “Disposition” in Table 1 of Form 4.
Table 4, Panel A shows that the sensitivity of newly-vesting equity is indeed highly
correlated with the value of equity sales. STOCKSOLD has a Pearson (Spearman) correlation of
0.377 (0.393) with NEWLYVESTING, both significant at the 1% level. Panel B presents the
results of the 2SLS regression, using NEWLYVESTING as the instrument. The left-hand side of
the panel gives the first-stage results and, consistent with Panel A, shows that our instrument
satisfies the relevance criterion: NEWLYVESTING is significantly related to STOCKSOLD at the
1% level. The right-hand side of the table presents the second-stage results. Consistent with the
results of Tables 2 and 3, the fitted value for equity sales (FIT_STOCKSOLD) is significantly
and positively associated with reductions in the same five measures of investment as Table 2,
Panel A – all except ΔCAPEX. In terms of economic significance, an interquartile increase in
STOCKSOLD is associated with a 0.25 percentage point decline in the growth of R&D scaled by
assets, 84% of the average growth of R&D scaled by assets and 4.6% of the average R&D-toassets ratio. Table OA3 presents the 2SLS results using a delta of 0.7 or assuming that options
are at-the-money when calculating NEWLYVESTING, which are similar.
As with any instrumental variables approach, it is impossible to test the exclusion restriction
for the validity of an instrument and so we cannot make strong causal claims. Similar to the
results of Section 2.1, a causal interpretation requires us to believe that NEWLYVESTING is not
correlated with an omitted variable that is also linked to investment.

3

Earnings Announcements

23

3.1

Meeting or beating analyst forecasts
If vesting equity increases the CEO’s stock price concerns, he will try particularly hard to

avoid announcing earnings per share (EPS) below analyst expectations, since doing so typically
leads to a large price drop (Skinner and Sloan (2002)). Thus, the CEO should be particularly
likely to beat the consensus forecast, either by cutting investment or by engaging in other myopic
actions, such as managing discretionary accruals. (For brevity, we use the verb “beat” to refer to
weakly beating analyst consensus, i.e., delivering earnings at or above the forecast.)
This section therefore investigates the link between newly-vesting equity and the likelihood
that a firm beats the analyst consensus. Finding a positive link would provide further evidence –
separate to that in Section 2 – that vesting equity is correlated with managerial myopia.
Moreover, it would help distinguish between the two potential explanations for the results of
Section 2. A positive link would be consistent with managers with significant vesting equity
inflating earnings, potentially through reductions in investment, but cannot be explained by
boards designing contracts so that equity vests when investment opportunities decline.
Figure 1 plots the frequency of the earnings surprise - the difference between reported
earnings and analyst forecasts - separately for firms with NEWLYVESTING in the top and the
bottom tercile of the sample. The number of quarters in which the reported EPS beats (misses)
the mean analyst consensus forecast is markedly higher (lower) for firms in the top
NEWLYVESTING tercile than those in the bottom tercile. The difference is greatest for earnings
announcements that beat the forecast by a small margin, consistent with the manager’s incentives
to inflate earnings being strongest when the firm is close to missing the forecast; in contrast,
earnings significantly above the forecast are more likely to reflect unexpectedly good
performance.

For example, for the bottom tercile of NEWLYVESTING, 9.5% of earnings

24

announcements beat the forecast by less than one cent. This figure is 12.0% for the top tercile,
an increase of 25.8%.
We now investigate the link between vesting equity and the likelihood of beating consensus
forecasts in a multivariate setting, running the following firm-quarter regression using quarterly
earnings announcements:


BEATt+1 = α + 1NEWLYVESTINGt+1 + 2UNVESTEDADJt + 3ALREADYVESTEDt +

OTHER_CONTROLS2t + t,

(3)

The regression is estimated on a panel of quarterly earnings announcements. The dependent
variable (BEATt+1) is set to one for quarters in which the firm’s reported EPS beats the mean
analyst consensus. Analyst forecasts and reported EPS are taken from I/B/E/S. To calculate
analyst consensus, we delete stale forecasts made at least 90 days prior to the fiscal quarter end,
as is standard in the literature, and require a firm to have at least three analysts after this deletion.
For each analyst, we take the most recent forecasts before the announcement.
We also rerun equation (3) using the dependent variables BEATBELOW1t+1, which equals 1
if the firm beats the consensus forecast by 1 cent or less, and BEATABOVE1t+1, which equals 1 if
the firm beats the consensus forecast by more than 1 cent. We predict that the link between
vesting and manipulation is especially strong for BEATBELOW1t+1.
The key independent variable remains NEWLYVESTINGt+1. We control for the two
additional

incentive

measures

UNVESTEDADJt

and

ALREADYVESTEDt,

plus

OTHER_CONTROLS2t, a vector of additional controls previously shown to affect the likelihood
of beating earnings forecasts (e.g., Matsumoto (2002), Davis, Soo, and Trompeter (2009)). We

25

use Tobin’s Q (Q), the log of the market value of equity (MV), return on assets (ROA), and firm
age (AGE), as in the investment regressions. We also include INSTIPCT, institutional ownership
as a percentage of total shares outstanding, from Thomson’s CDA/Spectrum database (form
13F); ALY_N, the log of one plus the number of analysts covering the firm; HORIZON, the log of
one plus the mean average forecasting horizon (the number of days between an analyst forecast
date and the earnings announcement date), to measure forecast staleness; ALY_DISP, analyst
forecast dispersion, the standard deviation of analyst forecasts scaled by the absolute value of the
mean consensus forecast; and POSUE (positive seasonal unexpected earnings), a dummy
variable that equals one if the reported EPS exceeds that of the same quarter in the prior fiscal
year, and zero otherwise. We also include Fama-French 12-industry fixed effects.
Table 5 presents the results. The first column shows that NEWLYVESTING is positively
related to the likelihood of beating analyst forecasts, and significant at the 10% level. Column
(2) shows that NEWLYVESTING is more strongly related to BEATBELOW1, the likelihood of
beating the analyst forecast by up to one cent, with the coefficient now significant at 5%. In
contrast, column (3) shows that BEATABOVE1, the likelihood of beating the forecast by above 1
cent is unrelated to NEWLYVESTING. Table OA4 in the Online Appendix repeats the analyses
of columns (2) and (3) using 2 cents and 3 cents as the cutoff, and finds similar results. Thus,
our conclusion that vesting equity is correlated with the likelihood of beating earnings forecasts
by a narrow margin but not by a wide margin, is not sensitive to our margin definition.
A potential alternative explanation for our results is reverse causality.

Some of the

manager’s equity may exhibit performance-based vesting, and good earnings announcements

26

may cause the stock price to rise and trigger performance-based vesting conditions.16 Gopalan et
al. (2013) report that 35.3% of stock in the Equilar dataset exhibits performance-based vesting,
compared with only 1.9% of options. Thus, the concern is significant for stock but not options.
The summary statistics of Table 1, Panel B show that the mean (median) value of newly-vesting
options is over 2.5 (5) times larger than the median value of newly-vesting stock.

Thus,

NEWLYVESTING is predominantly comprised of options, for which performance-based vesting
is rare. Columns (4) and (5) of Table 5 provides a more systematic evaluation of this alternative
explanation. It replaces NEWLYVESTING with the separate variables NEWLYVESTINGSTOCK
and NEWLYVESTINGOPTION. Column (4) shows that newly-vesting equity is insignificantly
related to the likelihood of beating analyst consensus by 1 cent, but newly-vesting options are
significantly positive (albeit at the 10% level, as they only capture part of the CEO’s myopic
incentives).

Thus, the positive relationship between vesting equity and narrowly beating

earnings targets is not driven by performance-vesting stock. Finally, consistent with the earlier
results, column (5) shows that BEATABOVE1 is unrelated to both components of vesting equity.
Overall, the results of Table 5 show that vesting equity is positively associated with narrowly
beating earnings forecasts, supporting the hypothesis that vesting causes managers to act
myopically. While the tests do not prove that this causal effect drives the results in Section 2,
they do narrow the range of admissible alternative explanations.

Any one non-causal

explanation would also have to explain why vesting equity is correlated not only with falls in
investment but also with narrowly beating earnings forecasts.

16

Note that performance-based vesting is not a plausible explanation for the investment results in Tables 2-4
because it suggests a positive relation between vesting and investment, contrary to our findings. Performance-based
vesting is triggered after high stock returns, when investment opportunities are also likely to be high. (Moreover, all
regressions in Tables 2-4 control for stock returns directly.) See Bettis, Bizjak, Coles, and Kalpathy (2010) for a
systematic study of equity with performance-based vesting.

27

3.2

Market reaction to earnings announcements
The results of the paper thus far show that managers with significant vesting equity are more

likely to reduce investment and narrowly beat earnings forecasts. We finally study the separate
question of whether the market rationally takes into account such managers’ myopic tendencies.
In the Stein (1989) “signal-jamming” equilibrium, myopic managers cut investment to increase
earnings in an attempt to inflate the stock price, but the market rationally discounts reported
earnings and all firms are efficiently priced. Even though managers do not succeed in inflating
the stock price, they remain trapped into engaging in myopia as the market discounts whatever
earnings they report – thus, if they did not inflate earnings, the earnings would still be discounted
and the firm would be underpriced. Hence, the market is efficient and managers inefficiently
underinvest. An alternative scenario is where the market does not take into account managers’
myopic tendencies – either because it lacks information on the manager’s incentives, or because
it has information but is inefficient – and so does not discount reported earnings.
We distinguish between these two scenarios by studying how the market’s reaction to
earnings announcements depends on the level of vesting equity. It is well-established that the
market reaction to an earnings announcement is increasing in the surprise, with a discontinuity at
zero: beating the forecast leads to a markedly higher reaction than missing it (Bartov, Givoly,
and Hayn (2002)).

We study whether, controlling for the earnings surprise, the market’s

response is less positive for CEOs with significant vesting equity, because it places a probability
that such CEOs have inflated their earnings. We run the following regression:

28

CARt+1 = α + 1NEWLYVESTINGt+1 + 2UNVESTEDADJt + 3ALREADYVESTEDt +

BEATt+1+ NEWLYVESTINGt+1×BEATt+1+DIFt+1 + OTHER_CONTROLS3t + t, (4)

CARt+1 is the (-1, +1) three-day market-adjusted return to a quarterly earnings announcement
in year t+1, which is also the year for which we measure vesting equity (NEWLYVESTINGt+1).
In our previous regressions, the dependent variable was a t+1 decision affected by the manager,
such as investment or earnings, and the manager knows NEWLYVESTINGt+1 at the time of his
decision since he observes his own contract. Here, it is investors who determine announcement
returns, and they will typically be unable to calculate NEWLYVESTINGt+1 using our
methodology until the year t+1 proxy statement is disclosed. FAS 123R only requires firms to
disclose the proportions of an individual equity grant that are vested and unvested, but not the
vesting schedule of unvested equity. However, in some cases, firms voluntarily disclose the
precise vesting schedule of each equity grant in their proxy filings – i.e., the filings contain
additional information not in Equilar – so that the market can calculate NEWLYVESTINGt+1
accurately before the beginning of year t+1. For firms that only disclose the required minimum,
the market can estimate NEWLYVESTINGt+1 from previous proxy statements using certain
assumptions (see Gopalan et al. (2013) for a possible methodology). To account for this, we
divide the equity variables NEWLYVESTINGt+1, UNVESTEDADJt, and ALREADYVESTEDt into
terciles and use the ranks instead of the raw variables in the regressions. This specification
assumes that the market can estimate which tercile of vesting equity a firm will fall into, even
though it may be unable to predict exactly where within a tercile it will fall. Our results remain
robust to using quintiles or deciles.

29

The regressions also include the same BEATt+1 dummy variable used earlier, which in some
specifications we interact with NEWLYVESTINGt+1, and DIFt+1, the earnings surprise (difference
between the actual and forecast earnings). OTHER_CONTROLS3 is a vector of control variables
previously shown to be correlated with announcement returns, taken predominantly from Savor
and Wilson (2011). LEVERAGE is the ratio of total debt to the sum of total debt and book
equity. PASTRET(1Y) is the cumulative monthly industry-adjusted return over the year prior to
the announcement and PASTRET(1M) is the industry-adjusted return in the month prior to the
announcement. We include FYE, a dummy variable for the last quarter of a fiscal year, because
the Q4 earnings announcement sometimes coincides with the release of a proxy statement. We
include ANNRET(LAG1), ANNRET(LAG2), ANNRET(LAG3), and ANNRET(LAG4), earnings
announcement returns for quarters -1 to -4 relative to the current quarter, to control for serial
correlation in announcement returns (Abarbanell and Bernard (1992)). We include industry
fixed effects and cluster standard errors by announcement day.
Table 6 presents the results. Column (1) omits the explanatory variables involving BEAT and
DIF, i.e., does not control for the magnitude of the earnings announcement. NEWLYVESTING is
negative and insignificant, suggesting that the market does not respond more positively to
earnings announcements from CEOs with more vesting equity. In combination with Table 5,
column (1) suggests that, while such CEOs are more likely to report earnings at or above analyst
expectations, the market does not respond any more favorably to such reports, potentially
because it expects that they have been inflated. Column (2) adds BEAT and DIF as additional
regressors, to control for the actual announcement. Consistent with the literature, BEAT is
positive and highly significant.

However, NEWLYVESTING is now significantly negative:

holding constant the earnings surprise, the market responds less positively to the earnings

30

announcement if the CEO has significant newly-vesting equity, suggesting a higher perceived
probability that the earnings have been inflated. Increasing the NEWLYVESTING tercile rank by
one lowers the earnings announcement return by 0.28 percentage points.
Column (3) adds an interaction term between BEAT and NEWLYVESTING. This interaction
term is significantly negative. Thus, the negative association between NEWLYVESTING and
announcement returns documented in column (2) is driven by quarters in which earnings exceed
the analyst forecast, consistent with the market expecting more earnings inflation when earnings
surprises are positive. Increasing the NEWLYVESTING tercile rank by one lowers the market
response to beating a forecast by 1.22 percentage points, versus the average response of 2.46%.
It is interesting to note that the coefficient on NEWLYVESTING is now positive. It implies
that increasing the NEWLYVESTING tercile by one mitigates the negative reaction to missing an
earnings forecast by 0.5 percentage points compared to the baseline of -3.6%. One potential
interpretation is that the market infers that the manager has not inflated earnings, despite his
myopic incentives, and that this inference mitigates the negative response to missing the
analysts’ forecast.
In sum, we find that, although managers with more vesting equity are more likely to beat
earnings forecasts, doing so does not lead to a more positive market response on average.
Controlling for the earnings surprise, the announcement returns are lower for higher newlyvesting equity, especially in quarters in which earnings exceed the forecast. These findings
suggest that the stock market recognizes managers’ incentives to inflate earnings when a
significant amount of their equity vests.

31

4

Conclusion
This paper studies the link between equity vesting and real investment decisions.

We

construct a new empirical measure of a CEO’s myopic incentives that corresponds closely to
managerial myopia theories: the sensitivity of equity vesting over the next year. This measure
contrasts standard measures of CEO incentives which gauge the manager’s sensitivity to the
stock price, but do not consider the horizon. We demonstrate that newly-vesting equity is
significantly negatively related to R&D, and the results remain significant when including other
discretionary spending such as advertising and capital expenditure. We also use newly-vesting
equity as an instrument to estimate the responsiveness of investment to anticipated stock sales in
general.
Vesting equity is positively related to the likelihood of beating analysts’ quarterly earnings
forecasts. However, the market responds less positively to beating analyst consensus if the
manager has significant vesting equity, implying that it takes his myopic incentives into account.
Thus, such managers do not enjoy higher announcement returns overall. In sum, our results
show that the horizon of managerial incentives is associated with myopia: managers with newlyvesting equity are more likely to cut investment, potentially to meet short-term earnings targets.
While we have shown that investment is negatively related to newly-vesting equity, we have
not shown that the reduction in investment is inefficient. It may be that managers always
overinvest due to empire-building tendencies, and so the fall in investment brings it closer to the
optimal level. Laux (2012) shows that short-term projects may be optimal as they provide early
feedback on CEO quality and guide interim replacement decisions. Even if the reduction in
investment induced by the CEO’s contract is inefficient, this does not mean that his contract is
inefficient overall.

Boards of directors may recognize that short-vesting equity leads to

32

underinvestment, but trade this off against the costs of long-vesting equity. For example, longvesting equity exposes the manager to risks outside his control, and causes him to demand a risk
premium.
More generally, our measure of myopic incentives, the sensitivity of stock and options
vesting over the upcoming year, is relatively easy to construct, and potentially usable in wider
contexts than investment decisions. For future research, it would be interesting to study whether
it is linked to other examples of myopic behavior.

33

Appendix A: Definition of variables
This appendix describes the calculation of variables used in the core analysis. Underlined variables refer
to variable names within Compustat.
Variable
CEO incentives from equity vesting
NEWLYVESTINGt+1

UNVESTEDt

UNVESTEDADJt
ALREADYVESTEDt

MMRATIOt
MMRATIOALLt

Definition

The dollar change in the value of newly-vesting securities in year t+1 for a 1%
change in the stock price, calculated as NEWLYVESTINGSTOCK (the number of
newly-vesting shares in year t+1 × stock price at the end of year t) plus
NEWLYVESTINGOPTION (aggregated delta of newly-vesting options in year t+1
× stock price at the end of year t). Delta of an option is calculated using the BlackScholes formula. The inputs (i.e., dividend yield, risk-free interest rate, and
volatility) to the Black-Scholes formula are those associated with a firm’s newlyawarded options in year t from Equilar, and if unavailable, replaced with those
associated with a firm’s newly-awarded options in year t+1 from Equilar, followed
by year t’s inputs from ExecuComp (or year t+1’s if year t’s are missing), and by
year t’s inputs from Compustat (or year t+1’s if year t’s are missing), in that order;
The dollar change in the value of unvested securities in year t for a 1% change in
the stock price, calculated as UNVESTEDSTOCK (the total number of unvested
share including unvested LTIP shares × stock price, both at the end of year t) plus
UNVESTEDOPTION (aggregated delta of unvested options × stock price, both at
the end of year t). Delta is calculated similarly as above;
The sum of max (UNVESTEDSTOCKt - NEWLYVESTINGSTOCKt+1, 0) and max
(UNVESTEDOPTIONt - NEWLYVESTINGOPTIONt+1, 0);
The dollar change in the value of already-vested securities in year t for a 1%
change in the stock price, calculated as ALREADYVESTEDSTOCK (the number of
already-vested shares × stock price, both at the end of year t) plus
ALREADYVESTEDOPTION (aggregated delta of already-vested options × stock
price, both at the end of year t). Delta is calculated similarly as above;
The ratio of NEWLYVESTINGt+1 to the sum of NEWLYVESTINGt+1 and
UNVESTEDADJt;
The ratio of NEWLYVESTINGt+1 to the sum of NEWLYVESTINGt+1,
UNVESTEDADJt, and ALREADYVESTEDt;

Stock sold
STOCKSOLDt+1

The number of shares sold in year t+1 × stock price at the end of year t;

Change in investment
ΔRDt+1
ΔRDADt+1

ΔCAPEXt+1
ΔRDADCAPEXt+1

Change in R&D expenditures (XRD) from year t to t+1, scaled by total assets (AT)
at the end of year t. Missing R&D expenditures are set to zero;
Change in the sum of R&D expenditures (XRD) and advertising expenses (XAD)
from year t to t+1, scaled by total assets at the end of year t. Missing R&D
expenditures and advertising expenses are set to zero;
Change in capital expenditures (CAPEX) from year t to t+1, scaled by total assets
at the end of year t. Missing capital expenditures are set to zero;
Change in the sum of R&D expenditures (XRD), advertising expenses (XAD), and
capital expenditures (CAPEX) from year t to t+1, scaled by total assets at the end
of year t. Missing R&D expenditures, advertising expenses, and capital
expenditures are set to zero;

34

ΔCAPEXALLt+1

ΔRDADCAPEXALLt+1

Change in annual increase in gross fixed assets (PPEGT) from year t to t+1
(i.e.,(PPEGTt+1- PPEGTt) - (PPEGTt- PPEGTt-1)), scaled by total assets at the end
of year t. Missing PPEGT are replaced with net fixed assets (PPENT) if available;
Change in the sum of R&D expenditures (XRD), advertising expenses (XAD), and
change in annual increase in gross fixed assets (PPEGT) from year t to t+1, scaled
by total assets at the end of year t. Missing R&D expenditures and advertising
expenses are set to zero and missing PPEGT replaced with PPENT if available;

Control variables
Qt+1

Qt
MVt
MOMENTUMt

AGEt
CASHt
BOOKLEVt
RETEARNt
ROAt
SALARYt
BONUSt

Tobin’s Q at the end of year t+1, calculated as [market value of equity
(PRCC_F×CSHPRI) plus liquidating value of preferred stock (PSTKL) plus book
value of debt (DLTT+DLC) minus balance sheet deferred taxes and investment tax
credit (TXDITC)] divided by total assets (AT) at the end of year t.
Tobin’s Q at the end of year t;
Natural logarithm of market value of equity at the end of year t (PRCC_F×
CSHPRI);
A firm’s compounded market-adjusted monthly stock returns over the twelve
months in year t, with market-adjusted monthly stock return calculated as the
firm’s monthly raw stock return minus the corresponding monthly return on the
CRSP value-weighted index;
Natural logarithm of one plus a firm’s age, approximated by the number of years
listed on Compustat, as the end of year t;
Cash and short-term investments (CHE) at the end of year t divided by total assets
at the end of year t;
Book value of debt (DLTT+DLC) at the end of year t divided by total assets at the
end of year t;
Balance sheet retained earnings (RE) at the end of year t divided by total assets at
the end of year t;
Return-on-assets ratio, calculated as net income (NI) during year t divided by the
average total assets of year t;
CEO’s salary in year t;
CEO’s cash bonus in year t;

Additional variables used in the analyst analysis
BEATt+1
A dummy variable that equals one if the reported EPS is more than or equal to
BEATBELOW1t+1
BEATABOVE1t+1
MVt
INSTIPCTt
ALY_Nt+1
HORIZONt+1

mean analyst consensus forecast in a given quarter and zero otherwise;
A dummy variable that equals one if the reported EPS falls between mean analyst
consensus forecast and that plus 1 cent in a given quarter;
A dummy variable that equals one if the reported EPS exceeds mean analyst
consensus forecast plus 1 cent in a given quarter;
Natural logarithm of market value of equity (PRCC_F×CSHPRI) in $ millions at
the end of year t;
The total percentage of shares owned by institutional investors at the end of the 4th
quarter of year t;
Natural logarithm of one plus the number of analysts;
Natural logarithm of one plus the mean average forecasting horizon, with
forecasting horizon calculated as the number of days between an analyst forecast
date and earnings announcement date;

35

ALY_DISPt+1
POSUEt+1

Analyst forecast dispersion, calculated as the standard deviation of analyst
forecasts scaled by the absolute value of the mean analyst consensus forecast;
A dummy variable that equals one if the reported EPS in a given quarter exceeds
that of the same quarter last fiscal year and zero otherwise;

Additional variables used in the earnings announcement analysis
CARt+1
Cumulative market adjusted return from day -1 to +1 around the quarterly earnings

DIFt+1
LEVERAGEt
PASTRET(1Y)
PASTRET(1M)
FYE
ANNRET(LAG1-4)

announcement in year t+1. Market adjusted daily returns are computed by
subtracting from the stock’ raw return the return on the CRSP value-weighted
NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ index;
Difference between the reported EPS and the mean analyst consensus forecast;
Sum of long-term and short-term debt divided by the sum of the short-term and
long term debt, and the book value of equity;
Cumulative monthly industry adjusted return over the twelve month prior to the
earnings announcement in percent;
Monthly industry adjusted return for the month prior to the earnings announcement
in percent;
A dummy variable to indicate the 4th quarter of a fiscal year;
Cumulative market adjusted returns from day -1 to +1 around the quarterly
earnings announcements in the quarters -1 to -4 relative to the current quarter. The
computation is the same as for the current quarter.

36

Appendix B: A numerical example
This appendix illustrates the calculation steps to derive equity incentives for one CEO in our
sample, along with the company’s disclosure tables retrieved from Equilar for the two fiscal
years on which the calculations are based. As an example, we use James McCann, CEO of 1800 Flowers.com, Inc. and calculate the stock price sensitivity of his newly-vesting securities for
the fiscal year ended on June 30th, 2009 (NEWLYVESTING), that of his unvested securities for
the fiscal year ended on June 30th, 2008 (UNVESTED), and that of his already-vested securities
for the fiscal year ended on June 30th, 2008 (ALREADYVESTED).
First, we obtain option data from Equilar for James McCann:
B.1 Outstanding options as reported in Equilar
Equity Type
Number of Securities
As of June 30th, 2009
(1)
Unexercisable Options
10,000
(2)
Unexercisable Options
20,000
(3)
Unexercisable Options
224,109
(4)
Exercisable Options
39,810
(5)
Exercisable Options
82,730
(6)
Exercisable Options
200,000
(7)
Exercisable Options
200,000
(8)
Exercisable Options
170,148
(9)
Exercisable Options
29,852
(10)
Exercisable Options
40,000
(11)
Exercisable Options
30,000
As of June 30th, 2008
(12)
Unexercisable Options
20,000
(13)
Unexercisable Options
30,000
(14)
Exercisable Options
39,810
(15)
Exercisable Options
82,730
(16)
Exercisable Options
200,000
(17)
Exercisable Options
200,000
(18)
Exercisable Options
170,148
(19)
Exercisable Options
29,852
(20)
Exercisable Options
30,000
(21)
Exercisable Options
20,000
B.2 Newly granted options as reported in Equilar
Grant
Equity Type
Date
(22)
Newly Granted Options
5/5/09

Number of
Securities
224,109

Exercise Price

Expiration Date

$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$

8.45
6.52
3.11
12.44
11.58
12.87
6.42
6.70
6.70
8.45
6.52

12/2/14
10/13/15
5/5/16
12/17/09
8/2/11
1/11/12
9/23/12
3/24/13
3/24/13
12/2/14
10/13/15

$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$

8.45
6.52
12.44
11.58
12.87
6.42
6.70
6.70
8.45
6.52

12/2/14
10/13/15
12/17/09
8/2/11
1/11/12
9/23/12
3/24/13
3/24/13
12/2/14
10/13/15

Exercise Price
$ 3.11

Expiration
Date
5/5/16

To calculate the number of newly-vesting options for fiscal year 2009 and unvested/alreadyvested options at the end of fiscal year 2008, we match and group the outstanding options by
exercise price (EXERPRC) and expiration date (EXPDATE). We then infer the number of newlyvesting options from the following relationship:

37

NEWLYVESTINGOPTIONNUM (EXERPRCp, EXPDATEd)t+1 = UNVESTEDOPTIONNUM (EXERPRCp, EXPDATEd)t +
NEWLYAWARDEDOPTIONNUM (EXERPRCp, EXPDATEd)t+1 - UNVESTEDOPTIONNUM (EXERPRCp, EXPDATEd)t+1
After identifying the number of newly-vesting, unvested, and already-vested securities, we then input into the Black-Scholes formula
the risk-free rate, volatility, and dividend yield from Equilar and calculate each option’s delta, grant-by-grant. The risk-free rate is not
available for fiscal year 2008, so we replace it with the risk-free rate of 0.027 from fiscal year 2009. Similarly, we replace the missing
volatility and dividend yield for fiscal year 2008 with the volatility of 0.7237 and the dividend yield of 0 from fiscal year 2009.
B.3 Calculated number and delta of newly-vesting, unvested, and already-vested options
Calculated
Number of
Exercise
Expiration
number of options
Equity Type
Securities
Price
Date
As of June 30th, 2009
(12) - (1)
Newly-vesting Options
10,000
$ 8.45
12/2/14
(13) - (2)
Newly-vesting Options
10,000
$ 6.52
10/13/15
(22) - (3)
Newly-vesting Options
0
$ 3.11
5/5/16

Term
as of 6/30/08

Z

Delta

6.4275
7.2904

0.865
1.072

8,064
8,582
∑Delta=16,646

As of June 30th, 2008
(12)
(13)

Unvested Options
Unvested Options

20,000
30,000

(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)+(19)
(20)
(21)

Already-vested Options
Already-vested Options
Already-vested Options
Already-vested Options
Already-vested Options
Already-vested Options
Already-vested Options

39,810
82,730
200,000
200,000
200,000
30,000
20,000

$ 8.45
$ 6.52

12/2/14
10/13/15

6.4275
7.2904

0.865
1.072

16,128
25,746
∑Delta=41,874

$
$
$
$
$
$
$

12/17/09
8/2/11
1/11/12
9/23/12
3/24/13
12/2/14
10/13/15

1.4659
3.0904
3.5344
4.2356
4.7342
6.4275
7.2904

-0.266
0.242
0.243
0.825
0.844
0.865
1.072

15,724
49,266
119,174
159,041
160,152
24,192
17,164
∑Delta=544,714

12.44
11.58
12.87
6.42
6.70
8.45
6.52

To calculate the price-sensitivity measures of options, we multiply the deltas calculated above by the closing stock price of $6.45 at
the end of fiscal year 2008. James McCann’s NEWLYVESTINGOPTION during fiscal year 2009 is therefore calculated as 16,646 ×
6.45 = 107,366.7, and his UNVESTEDOPTION and ALREADYVESTEDOPTION at the end of fiscal year 2008 as 41,874 × 6.45 =
270,087.3 and 544,714 × 6.45 = 3,513,405.3, respectively.

38

Second, we obtain share data from Equilar for James McCann:
B.4 Shares held as reported in Equilar

Shares Acquired on
Vesting of Stock
for the year ended
on June 30th 2009
(a)
67,434

Total Unvested
Shares
for the year ended
on June 30th 2008
(b)
33,000

Total Unvested IP
Shares
for the year ended
on June 30th 2008
(c)
277,677

Unvested Shares
for the year ended
on June 30th 2008
= (b) + (c)
310,677

Shares Held
for the year ended
on June 30th 2008
(d)
36,775,359

Options
Exercisable Within
60 Days of Proxy
Date
for the year ended
on June 30th 2008
(e)
792,540

Already-vested
Shares
for the year ended
on June 30th 2008
= (d) – (e)
35,982,819

To calculate the price-sensitivity measures of shares, we multiply the number of shares above by the closing stock price of $6.45 at the
fiscal year end of 2008. James McCann’s NEWLYVESTINGSTOCK during fiscal year 2009 is therefore calculated as 67,434 × 6.45 =
434,949.3, and his UNVESTEDSTOCK and ALREADYVESTEDSTOCK at the end of fiscal year 2008 as 310,677 × 6.45 = 2,003,866.65
and 35,982,819 × 6.45 = 232,089,182.55, respectively.
Finally, we sum the sensitivity measures of options and shares to construct the variables used in the main specification,
NEWLYVESTING, UNVESTEDADJ, ALREADYVESTED, MMRATIO, and MMRATIOALL.
B.5 Variables used in the main specification
NEWLYVESTING
UNVESTEDADJ
542,316
1,731,637.95

ALREADYVESTED
235,602,587

MMRATIO
0.238

39

MMRATIOALL
0.002

Table 1: Sample selection and summary statistics
Panel A: Sample selection
Firm-CEO-years from Equilar for which we can calculate newly-vesting securities in
year t+1, and unvested and already-vested securities in year t for the sample period of
fiscal year 2007 to 2010

9,385

(-) Observations missing COMPUSTAT data to calculate investment measures
and control variables, and observations missing CRSP monthly returns to
calculate momentum

(320)

(-) Observations associated with financial firms (SICs between 6000 and 6999)

(2,010)

(-) Observations associated with utility firms (SICs between 4900 and 4949)

(325)

Number of Firm-CEO-years in the final sample

6,730

Number of unique firms in the final sample

2,047

40

Table 1 (Cont’d)
Panel B: Summary statistics
Variable

N

Mean

SD

5%

25%

Median

75%

95%

CEO incentives from equity vesting
NEWLYVESTINGSTOCKt+1

6,730

1,007,672

2,203,651

0

0

127,564

926,250

5,142,500

NEWLYVESTINGOPTIONt+1

6,730

2,539,718

5,062,821

0

173

660,451

2,496,377

11,700,000

NEWLYVESTINGt+1

6,730

3,626,232

6,372,761

0

310,737

1,257,137

3,917,051

15,900,000

UNVESTEDSTOCKt

6,730

3,746,586

7,785,361

0

0

792,389

3,645,577

17,700,000

UNVESTEDOPTIONt

6,730

5,339,176

10,300,000

0

0

1,370,083

5,440,901

24,500,000

UNVESTEDt

6,730

9,337,752

15,700,000

0

841,833

3,341,484

10,400,000

39,500,000

UNVESTEDADJt

6,730

5,656,486

10,200,000

0

346,113

1,835,151

6,132,905

25,000,000

ALREADYVESTEDSTOCKt

6,730

55,900,000

191,000,000

72,775

1,629,998

6,123,997

22,800,000

244,000,000

ALREADYVESTEDOPTIONt

6,730

12,600,000

25,900,000

0

288,680

2,828,472

11,900,000

60,400,000

ALREADYVESTEDt

6,730

70,400,000

205,000,000

415,985

4,156,739

13,300,000

43,500,000

298,000,000

MMRATIOt

6,167

0.431

0.246

0.060

0.273

0.392

0.536

1.000

MMRATIOALLt

6,710

0.116

0.116

0.000

0.024

0.090

0.167

0.336

6,730

4,098,075

11,200,000

0

0

288,069

2,659,125

19,800,000

Stock sold
STOCKSOLDt+1

41

Table 1(Cont’d)
Panel B
Variable

N

Mean

SD

5%

25%

Median

75%

95%

Change in investment
ΔRDt+1

6,730

0.003

0.029

-0.017

0.000

0.000

0.002

0.037

ΔRDADt+1

6,730

0.004

0.032

-0.023

0.000

0.000

0.004

0.044

ΔCAPEXt+1

6,730

0.002

0.043

-0.056

-0.009

0.000

0.010

0.061

ΔRDADCAPEXt+1

6,730

0.006

0.065

-0.080

-0.013

0.002

0.019

0.105

ΔCAPEXALLt+1

6,730

0.006

0.106

-0.123

-0.023

0.000

0.024

0.153

ΔRDADCAPEXALLt+1

6,730

0.010

0.123

-0.146

-0.027

0.002

0.034

0.188

Qt+1

6,730

1.848

1.720

0.470

0.835

1.287

2.141

5.358

Qt

6,730

2.017

2.024

0.470

0.868

1.372

2.333

5.868

MVt

6,730

6.896

1.599

4.510

5.779

6.712

7.901

9.897

MOMENTUM t

6,730

0.098

0.540

-0.552

-0.220

0.000

0.275

1.072

AGEt

6,730

2.841

0.731

1.609

2.398

2.773

3.401

4.060

CASHt

6,730

0.204

0.219

0.006

0.040

0.120

0.295

0.688

BOOKLEVt

6,730

0.215

0.218

0.000

0.013

0.173

0.330

0.645

RETEARNt

6,730

-0.191

1.362

-2.403

-0.144

0.163

0.389

0.724

ROAt

6,730

0.005

0.179

-0.374

-0.012

0.046

0.090

0.190

SALARYt

6,730

670,194

336,489

265,000

429,577

600,000

860,833

1,300,000

BONUSt

6,730

167,704

483,780

0

0

0

58,000

979,620

Control variables

This panel reports the summary statistics of the main variables used in our multivariate analysis. All variables are winsorized at 1% and 99% level.
Variable definitions are listed in Appendix A.

42

Table 2: The relationship between the change in investment and equity incentives, including
newly-vesting securities, unvested securities, and already-vested securities separately
Panel A: Baseline specifications
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

ΔCAPEXt+1

ΔRDADCAPEXt+1

ΔCAPEXALLt+1

ΔRDADCAPEXALLt+1

Dependent Variables
ΔRDt+1

NEWLYVESTINGt+1
UNVESTEDADJt
ALREADYVESTEDt
Qt+1
Qt
MVt
MOMENTUMt
AGEt
CASHt
BOOKLEVt
RETEARNt
ROAt
SALARYt
BONUSt
Intercept
Observations
Adjusted R2

-0.309**
(0.148)
-0.034
(0.055)
-0.004
(0.005)
0.004***
(0.001)
0.003***
(0.001)
-0.005*
(0.003)
0.004***
(0.001)
-0.017*
(0.010)
0.024**
(0.010)
-0.004
(0.010)
0.008**
(0.004)
0.027**
(0.013)
0.007
(0.052)
-0.001
(0.007)
0.073**
(0.030)
6,730
0.403

ΔRDADt+1

-0.391**
(0.165)
-0.053
(0.068)
-0.002
(0.006)
0.004***
(0.001)
0.004***
(0.001)
-0.005*
(0.003)
0.004***
(0.002)
-0.017
(0.010)
0.027**
(0.011)
-0.006
(0.011)
0.008**
(0.004)
0.036***
(0.014)
-0.014
(0.069)
-0.000
(0.008)
0.071**
(0.032)
6,730
0.425

-0.205
(0.183)
0.000
(0.123)
0.039**
(0.017)
0.006***
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)
0.004
(0.003)
0.010***
(0.002)
-0.008
(0.012)
0.089***
(0.014)
-0.045***
(0.014)
-0.000
(0.002)
0.010
(0.011)
-0.084
(0.119)
0.001
(0.020)
-0.017
(0.036)
6,730
0.320

-0.707**
(0.285)
-0.093
(0.168)
0.035*
(0.018)
0.011***
(0.002)
0.005***
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.005)
0.016***
(0.003)
-0.030
(0.019)
0.123***
(0.022)
-0.060***
(0.021)
0.009*
(0.006)
0.051**
(0.022)
-0.134
(0.150)
0.005
(0.023)
0.078
(0.055)
6,730
0.406

-1.395***
(0.513)
0.514
(0.447)
0.020
(0.037)
0.021***
(0.003)
-0.007***
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.008)
0.020***
(0.005)
0.011
(0.036)
0.274***
(0.033)
-0.123***
(0.043)
-0.007
(0.007)
0.007
(0.027)
0.011
(0.250)
0.034
(0.052)
-0.038
(0.109)
6,730
0.233

-2.154***
(0.616)
0.478
(0.496)
0.016
(0.042)
0.026***
(0.004)
-0.002
(0.003)
-0.014
(0.010)
0.027***
(0.006)
-0.004
(0.041)
0.315***
(0.041)
-0.137***
(0.049)
0.007
(0.009)
0.059*
(0.035)
-0.049
(0.280)
0.047
(0.057)
0.051
(0.126)
6,730
0.273

This panel reports the ordinary least squares (“OLS”) regression results on the relationship between the
CEO’s vesting equity and investment. Variable definitions are listed in Appendix A. NEWLYVESTING,
UNVESTEDADJ, and ALREADYVESTED are in billions, and SALARY and BONUS are in ten millions.
Standard errors are in parentheses, adjusted for heteroskedasticity and clustered by firm. Year and firm fixed
effects are included in all columns. *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) two-tailed level,
respectively.

43

Table 2 (Cont’d)
Panel B: Changes-in-changes specifications
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

ΔRDADt+1

ΔCAPEXt+1

ΔRDADCAPEXt+1

ΔCAPEXALLt+1

ΔRDADCAPEXALLt+1

-0.378***
(0.142)
-0.099*
(0.056)
-0.002
(0.006)
0.000
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.006**
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.003
(0.010)
-0.003
(0.012)
0.007
(0.005)
0.015*
(0.009)
0.016
(0.136)
-0.003
(0.009)
0.006***
(0.001)
4,378
0.513

-0.159
(0.192)
-0.185
(0.113)
0.039**
(0.016)
0.003***
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.015***
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.038***
(0.011)
-0.046***
(0.013)
-0.003
(0.004)
0.000
(0.010)
-0.030
(0.216)
0.014
(0.028)
0.011***
(0.002)
4,378
0.397

-0.632**
(0.262)
-0.305**
(0.145)
0.034*
(0.020)
0.005***
(0.002)
0.002
(0.002)
0.022***
(0.005)
-0.000
(0.003)
0.040**
(0.018)
-0.063***
(0.022)
0.004
(0.007)
0.020
(0.015)
-0.041
(0.281)
0.013
(0.033)
0.019***
(0.003)
4,378
0.468

-1.488***
(0.536)
-0.601*
(0.361)
0.052
(0.043)
0.013***
(0.003)
0.001
(0.002)
0.001
(0.008)
0.014***
(0.005)
0.156***
(0.028)
-0.128***
(0.033)
-0.002
(0.008)
-0.011
(0.022)
-0.416
(0.469)
0.133**
(0.061)
0.011**
(0.005)
4,378
0.326

Dependent Variables
ΔRDt+1

ΔNEWLYVESTINGt+1
ΔUNVESTEDADJt
ΔALREADYVESTEDt
ΔQt+1
ΔQt
ΔMVt
ΔMOMENTUMt
ΔCASHt
ΔBOOKLEVt
ΔRETEARNt
ΔROAt
ΔSALARYt
ΔBONUSt
Intercept
Observations
Adjusted R2

-0.339**
(0.141)
-0.054
(0.049)
-0.006
(0.006)
0.000
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.005*
(0.003)
0.000
(0.001)
0.003
(0.009)
-0.005
(0.011)
0.005
(0.004)
0.011
(0.008)
-0.041
(0.104)
-0.011
(0.007)
0.006***
(0.001)
4,378
0.493

-2.091***
(0.609)
-0.744*
(0.394)
0.047
(0.046)
0.014***
(0.003)
0.002
(0.002)
0.009
(0.009)
0.015***
(0.005)
0.172***
(0.034)
-0.122***
(0.040)
0.013
(0.013)
0.022
(0.025)
-0.398
(0.545)
0.142**
(0.065)
0.016***
(0.006)
4,378
0.368

This panel reports the OLS regression results on the relationship between the CEO’s vesting equity and
investment. Variable definitions are listed in Appendix A. NEWLYVESTING, UNVESTEDADJ, and
ALREADYVESTED are in billions, and SALARY and BONUS are in ten millions. The prefix Δ denotes the
change from year t-1 to t for variables with subscript t and from year t to t+1 for variables with subscript t+1.
Standard errors are in parentheses, adjusted for heteroskedasticity and clustered by firm. Year and firm fixed
effects are included in all columns. *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) two-tailed level,
respectively.

44

Table 3: The relationship between change in investment and equity incentive ratios
Panel A: Measuring CEO incentives as the ratio of newly-vesting securities to the sum of
newly-vesting securities and unvested securities
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

ΔRDADt+1

ΔCAPEXt+1

ΔRDADCAPEXt+1

ΔCAPEXALLt+1

ΔRDADCAPEXALLt+1

-0.007***
(0.003)
0.004***
(0.001)
0.003***
(0.001)
-0.007**
(0.003)
0.004***
(0.002)
-0.019
(0.012)
0.023*
(0.012)
-0.013
(0.011)
0.009**
(0.004)
0.041***
(0.014)
0.018
(0.062)
-0.004
(0.008)
0.094***
(0.035)
6,167
0.437

0.002
(0.004)
0.006***
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)
0.005*
(0.003)
0.010***
(0.002)
-0.010
(0.012)
0.089***
(0.015)
-0.037***
(0.014)
0.000
(0.002)
0.009
(0.011)
-0.065
(0.128)
0.003
(0.021)
-0.022
(0.037)
6,167
0.332

-0.007
(0.006)
0.011***
(0.002)
0.004**
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.005)
0.017***
(0.003)
-0.034*
(0.020)
0.119***
(0.023)
-0.058***
(0.021)
0.011*
(0.006)
0.057***
(0.021)
-0.077
(0.150)
0.002
(0.024)
0.101*
(0.059)
6,167
0.419

-0.004
(0.012)
0.021***
(0.003)
-0.008***
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.009)
0.019***
(0.005)
0.013
(0.039)
0.268***
(0.035)
-0.100**
(0.045)
-0.001
(0.007)
0.012
(0.028)
-0.150
(0.263)
0.051
(0.055)
-0.037
(0.118)
6,167
0.245

Dependent Variables
ΔRDt+1

MMRATIOt
Qt+1
Qt
MVt
MOMENTUMt
AGEt
CASHt
BOOKLEVt
RETEARNt
ROAt
SALARYt
BONUSt
Intercept
Observations
Adjusted R2

-0.006**
(0.003)
0.003***
(0.001)
0.003***
(0.001)
-0.007**
(0.003)
0.004**
(0.002)
-0.020*
(0.011)
0.019*
(0.011)
-0.011
(0.010)
0.009**
(0.004)
0.033**
(0.013)
0.011
(0.051)
-0.006
(0.007)
0.097***
(0.033)
6,167
0.411

-0.017
(0.013)
0.026***
(0.004)
-0.003
(0.003)
-0.018
(0.011)
0.027***
(0.006)
-0.003
(0.045)
0.304***
(0.043)
-0.120**
(0.050)
0.017*
(0.009)
0.077**
(0.035)
-0.184
(0.285)
0.060
(0.060)
0.088
(0.135)
6,167
0.289

This panel reports the OLS regression results on the relationship between the CEO’s vesting equity
(measured using MMRATIO) and investment. Variable definitions are listed in Appendix A. SALARY and
BONUS are in ten millions. Standard errors are in parentheses, adjusted for heteroskedasticity and clustered
by firm. Year and firm fixed effects are included in all columns. *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1%
(5%) (10%) two-tailed level, respectively.

45

Table 3 (Cont’d)
Panel B: Measuring CEO incentives as the ratio of newly-vesting securities to the sum of
newly-vesting securities, unvested securities, and already-vested securities
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

ΔCAPEXt+1

ΔRDADCAPEXt+1

ΔCAPEXALLt+1

ΔRDADCAPEXALLt+1

Dependent Variables
ΔRDt+1

MMRATIOALLt
Qt+1
Qt
MVt
MOMENTUMt
AGEt
CASHt
BOOKLEVt
RETEARNt
ROAt
SALARYt
BONUSt
Intercept
Observations
Adjusted R2

-0.019**
(0.008)
0.003***
(0.001)
0.003***
(0.001)
-0.006**
(0.003)
0.004***
(0.001)
-0.017*
(0.010)
0.024**
(0.010)
-0.004
(0.010)
0.008**
(0.004)
0.027**
(0.013)
-0.018
(0.051)
-0.001
(0.007)
0.081***
(0.030)
6,710
0.404

ΔRDADt+1

-0.021**
(0.008)
0.004***
(0.001)
0.003***
(0.001)
-0.006**
(0.003)
0.004***
(0.002)
-0.017*
(0.010)
0.027**
(0.011)
-0.007
(0.011)
0.008**
(0.004)
0.036***
(0.014)
-0.045
(0.070)
0.001
(0.008)
0.081**
(0.032)
6,710
0.426

-0.003
(0.009)
0.006***
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)
0.005*
(0.003)
0.010***
(0.002)
-0.011
(0.012)
0.088***
(0.014)
-0.045***
(0.014)
-0.000
(0.002)
0.010
(0.011)
-0.073
(0.118)
0.001
(0.020)
-0.015
(0.036)
6,710
0.317

-0.029**
(0.015)
0.011***
(0.002)
0.005***
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.005)
0.016***
(0.003)
-0.033*
(0.019)
0.122***
(0.022)
-0.061***
(0.021)
0.009
(0.006)
0.051**
(0.022)
-0.163
(0.150)
0.006
(0.023)
0.093*
(0.055)
6,710
0.405

-0.014
(0.030)
0.021***
(0.003)
-0.008***
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.008)
0.019***
(0.005)
0.006
(0.036)
0.272***
(0.033)
-0.121***
(0.043)
-0.007
(0.007)
0.008
(0.027)
-0.033
(0.250)
0.037
(0.052)
-0.025
(0.109)
6,710
0.232

-0.054
(0.035)
0.026***
(0.004)
-0.002
(0.003)
-0.015
(0.010)
0.027***
(0.006)
-0.010
(0.042)
0.313***
(0.042)
-0.134***
(0.049)
0.007
(0.009)
0.060*
(0.035)
-0.152
(0.281)
0.052
(0.057)
0.083
(0.125)
6,710
0.272

This panel reports the OLS regression results on the relationship between the CEO’s vesting equity
(measured using MMRATIOALL) and investment. Variable definitions are listed in Appendix A. SALARY
and BONUS are in ten millions. Standard errors are in parentheses, adjusted for heteroskedasticity and
clustered by firm. Year and firm fixed effects are included in all columns. *** (**) (*) indicates significance at
the 1% (5%) (10%) two-tailed level, respectively.

46

Table 4
Panel A: Correlations between the actual sale of securities and the newly-vesting securities
Pearson
Spearman

(i)

(i) STOCKSOLDt+1

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

0.258***

0.330***

0.377***

0.179***

0.600***

(ii) NEWLYVESTINGSTOCKt+1

0.363***

(iii) NEWLYVESTINGOPTIONt+1

0.240***

0.279***

(iv) NEWLYVESTINGt+1

0.393***

0.559***

0.923***
0.822***

This panel reports Pearson and Spearman correlations between the equity sales (STOCKSOLDt+1) and equity
vesting (NEWLYVESTINGSTOCKt+1, NEWLYVESTINGOPTIONt+1, and NEWLYVESTINGt+1). Variable
definitions are listed in Appendix A. Pearson (Spearman) correlations are reported above (below) the main
diagonal. *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) level.

47

Table 4 (Cont’d)
Panel B: The relationship between change in investment and the sale of securities, with the
newly-vesting securities NEWLYVESTING as an IV for the sale of securities
(1)
Dependent Variables

NEWLYVESTINGt+1

STOCKSOLDt+1

ALREADYVESTEDt
Qt+1
Qt
MVt
MOMENTUMt
AGEt
CASHt
BOOKLEVt
RETEARNt
ROAt
SALARYt
BONUSt
Intercept
Observations
Adjusted R2 (R2)

(2.2)

(2.3)

(2.4)

(2.5)

(2.6)

ΔCAPEXALLt+1

ΔRDADCAPEXALLt+1

-4.252**
(1.918)
0.422
(0.492)
0.098*
(0.059)
0.024***
(0.004)
-0.007***
(0.002)
-0.007
(0.008)
0.022***
(0.005)
0.002
(0.037)
0.274***
(0.034)
-0.118***
(0.044)
-0.004
(0.007)
0.002
(0.027)
0.321
(0.326)
0.041
(0.058)
-0.009
(0.049)
6,730
0.159

-6.564**
(2.631)
0.337
(0.593)
0.136*
(0.078)
0.031***
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.017*
(0.010)
0.031***
(0.006)
-0.017
(0.044)
0.315***
(0.043)
-0.129**
(0.050)
0.012
(0.010)
0.052
(0.036)
0.430
(0.417)
0.058
(0.068)
0.044
(0.058)
6,730
0.138

ΔRDt+1

ΔRDADt+1

ΔCAPEXt+1

ΔRDADCAPEXt+1

-0.942*
(0.553)
-0.054
(0.073)
0.013
(0.014)
0.004***
(0.001)
0.003***
(0.001)
-0.006**
(0.003)
0.005***
(0.002)
-0.019*
(0.010)
0.024**
(0.011)
-0.003
(0.010)
0.009**
(0.004)
0.026**
(0.013)
0.076
(0.078)
0.000
(0.009)
0.037**
(0.014)
6,730
0.354

-1.192*
(0.635)
-0.078
(0.089)
0.020
(0.016)
0.005***
(0.001)
0.004***
(0.001)
-0.005*
(0.003)
0.005***
(0.002)
-0.019*
(0.011)
0.027**
(0.011)
-0.005
(0.011)
0.009**
(0.004)
0.034**
(0.014)
0.073
(0.097)
0.002
(0.010)
0.035**
(0.015)
6,730
0.359

-0.625
(0.585)
-0.013
(0.123)
0.050**
(0.023)
0.006***
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)
0.004
(0.003)
0.010***
(0.002)
-0.010
(0.012)
0.089***
(0.014)
-0.044***
(0.014)
0.000
(0.002)
0.009
(0.011)
-0.038
(0.133)
0.002
(0.020)
-0.020
(0.016)
6,730
0.304

-2.154**
(1.083)
-0.139
(0.193)
0.074**
(0.033)
0.012***
(0.002)
0.005***
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.005)
0.018***
(0.003)
-0.034*
(0.019)
0.123***
(0.022)
-0.058***
(0.022)
0.011**
(0.006)
0.048**
(0.022)
0.024
(0.199)
0.009
(0.026)
0.027
(0.026)
6,730
0.343

0.328***
(0.034)

FIT_ STOCKSOLDt+1
UNVESTEDADJt

(2.1)

-0.022
(0.025)
0.018***
(0.002)
0.001***
(0.000)
0.000*
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
0.001**
(0.000)
-0.002
(0.002)
0.000
(0.002)
0.001
(0.002)
0.001**
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.073***
(0.016)
0.002
(0.004)
0.003
(0.009)
6,730
0.421

This panel reports the 2SLS regression results on the relationship between CEO equity sales and investment,
using NEWLYVESTING as an instrumental variable for STOCKSOLD. Column (1) presents the first-stage
regression results, and columns (2.1)-(2.6) present the second-stage regression results for the six different
investment measures. Variable definitions are listed in Appendix A. FIT_STOCKSOLD is the fitted value of
STOCKSOLD from the first-stage regressions. STOCKSOLD, NEWLYVESTING, UNVESTEDADJ, and
ALREADYVESTED are in billions, and SALARY and BONUS are in ten millions. Standard errors are in
parentheses, adjusted for heteroskedasticity and clustered by firm. Year and firm fixed effects are included in
all columns. *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) two-tailed level, respectively.

48

Table 5: The relationship between the likelihood of meeting/beating analyst consensus
forecast and equity incentives
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

BEATt+1

BEATBELOW1t+1

BEATABOVE1t+1

BEATBELOW1t+1

BEATABOVE1t+1

8.834
(9.455)
[1.664]
6.936*
(3.743)
[1.307*]
3.220
(2.091)
-0.167
(0.106)
-0.050**
(0.021)
0.032***
(0.009)
0.384***
(0.117)
-0.001
(0.028)
-0.147**
(0.072)
0.049
(0.044)
-0.122***
(0.047)
-0.121***
(0.029)
0.039
(0.029)
-0.272
(0.258)
17,173
0.027

3.194
(7.247)
[1.246]
-1.093
(3.456)
[-0.426]
-0.450
(1.955)
0.005
(0.085)
0.045***
(0.016)
-0.052***
(0.008)
0.249***
(0.090)
-0.022
(0.023)
0.234***
(0.062)
0.106***
(0.036)
0.091***
(0.035)
-0.042***
(0.015)
0.805***
(0.024)
-1.243***
(0.196)
17,173
0.091

Dependent Variables

NEWLYVESTINGt+1

5.566*
(3.021)
[1.878*]

6.705**
(3.262)
[1.263**]

-0.173
(2.953)
[-0.068]

NEWLYVESTINGSTOCKt+1
NEWLYVESTINGOPTIONt+1
UNVESTEDADJt
ALREADYVESTEDt
MVt
Qt
ROAt
AGEt
INSTIPCTt
ALY_Nt+1
HORIZONt+1
ALY_DISPt+1
POSUEt+1
Intercept
Observations
Pseudo R2

2.596
(2.002)
-0.107
(0.075)
0.018
(0.017)
-0.035***
(0.008)
0.480***
(0.088)
-0.027
(0.024)
0.176***
(0.063)
0.152***
(0.036)
0.018
(0.033)
-0.092***
(0.015)
0.924***
(0.025)
-0.461**
(0.190)
17,173
0.126

3.228
(2.093)
-0.174
(0.107)
-0.049**
(0.020)
0.031***
(0.009)
0.384***
(0.117)
-0.001
(0.028)
-0.147**
(0.072)
0.049
(0.044)
-0.123***
(0.047)
-0.121***
(0.029)
0.040
(0.029)
-0.277
(0.257)
17,173
0.027

0.045***
(0.016)
-0.052***
(0.008)
0.248***
(0.090)
-0.022
(0.023)
0.234***
(0.062)
0.106***
(0.036)
0.090***
(0.035)
-0.042***
(0.015)
0.806***
(0.024)
-1.242***
(0.195)
-0.457
(1.948)
0.002
(0.086)
17,173
0.091

This panel reports the probit regression results on the relationship between the CEO’s vesting equity and
the likelihood of beating the quarterly analyst consensus forecast. Variable definitions are listed in
Appendix A. NEWLYVESTING, NEWLYVESTINGSTOCK, NEWLYVESTINGOPTION, UNVESTEDADJ,
and ALREADYVESTED are in billions. Standard errors are in parentheses, adjusted for heteroskedasticity
and clustered by firm. For NEWLYVESTING, NEWLYVESTINGSTOCK, and NEWLYVESTINGOPTION,
the marginal effects (dF/dx) are displayed below the standard errors. Year and industry fixed effects are
included in all columns but the coefficient estimates are not reported. *** (**) (*) indicates significance at
the 1% (5%) (10%) two-tailed level, respectively.

49

Table 6: The relationship between earnings announcement returns and equity incentives
Dependent Variables

TERC. NEWLYVESTING t+1

(1)
-0.167
(0.139)

(2)
CAR (-1, +1)
-0.278**
(0.137)

TERC. NEWLYVESTING t+1× BEAT t+1
TERC. UNVESTEDADJ t
TERC. ALREADYVESTED t

0.198
(0.140)
0.170
(0.113)

DIFt+1
BEAT t+1
MVt
Qt
LEVERAGEt
PASTRET(1Y)
PASTRET(1M)
FYE
ANNRET(LAG1)
ANNRET(LAG2)
ANNRET(LAG3)
ANNRET(LAG4)
Intercept
Observations
Adjusted R2

-0.193**
(0.081)
-0.049
(0.057)
1.549***
(0.440)
-0.004
(0.003)
0.017
(0.011)
0.148
(0.208)
-0.016
(0.010)
-0.017*
(0.010)
-0.007
(0.009)
0.010
(0.009)
-0.352
(1.610)
18,686
0.007

0.080
(0.134)
0.102
(0.106)
0.332
(0.292)
6.358***
(0.203)
-0.386***
(0.081)
0.012
(0.054)
1.964***
(0.421)
-0.009***
(0.003)
0.002
(0.010)
0.375*
(0.205)
-0.030***
(0.010)
-0.024***
(0.009)
-0.008
(0.009)
0.009
(0.008)
-2.651*
(1.568)
18,686
0.087

(3)
0.545**
(0.212)
-1.215***
(0.230)
0.093
(0.133)
0.106
(0.106)
0.314
(0.284)
7.603***
(0.351)
-0.377***
(0.081)
0.010
(0.054)
1.937***
(0.420)
-0.009***
(0.003)
0.001
(0.010)
0.383*
(0.205)
-0.031***
(0.010)
-0.025***
(0.009)
-0.009
(0.009)
0.009
(0.008)
-3.436**
(1.559)
18,686
0.089

The table shows regressions of cumulative market adjusted returns over days -1 to +1 around the
quarterly earnings announcements in year t+1 in percent (CARt+1). Variable definitions are in Appendix
A. TERC. NEWLYVESTING, UNVESTEDADJ, and ALREADYVESTED are tercile ranks 0-2 for the
vesting variables. Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered by announcement day. Industry fixed
effects are included in all columns but the coefficient estimates are not reported. *** (**) (*) indicates
significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) two-tailed level, respectively.

50

Frequency

Fig. 1: The frequency of earnings surprises around the analyst forecast for high and low
NEWLYVESTING firms
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
[‐5,‐6) [‐4,‐5) [‐3,‐4) [‐2,‐1) [‐1,0) [0,1) [1,2) [2,3) [3,4) [4,5) [5,6)
Number of cents above forecast
T1

T3

This figure illustrates the frequency of earnings surprises of different magnitudes separately for firms with
NEWLYVESTING in the top tercile of the sample (T3) and firms with NEWLYVESTING in the bottom
tercile of the sample (T1). The y-axis reports the number of firm-quarters (within T1 and T3) in which the
reported EPS exceeds (or falls below) the analyst mean consensus forecast as indicated by the x-axis.

51

References
Abarbanell, Jeffery S. and Victor Bernard (1992): “Tests of analysts’ overreaction/underreaction
to earnings information as an explanation for anomalous stock price behavior.” Journal
of Finance 47, 1181-1207.
Asker, John, Joan Farre-Mensa, and Alexander Ljungqvist (2013): “Comparing the investment
behavior in public and private firms.” Working paper, New York University.
Bartov, Eli, Dan Givoly, and Carla Hayn (2002), “The rewards to meeting or beating earnings
expectations.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 33, 173-204.
Bebchuk, Lucian A. and Lars Stole (1993): “Do short-term objectives lead to under- or
overinvestment in long-term projects?” Journal of Finance 48, 719–729.
Benmelech, Efraim, Eugene Kandel, and Pietro Veronesi (2010): “Stock-based compensation
and CEO (dis)incentives.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, 1769–1820.
Bergstresser, Daniel and Thomas Philippon (2006): “CEO incentives and earnings management.”
Journal of Financial Economics 80, 511–529.
Bettis, Carr, John Bizjak, Jeffrey Coles, and Swaminathan Kalpathy (2010): “Stock and option
grants with performance-based vesting provisions.” Review of Financial Studies 23,
3849–3888.
Bhojraj, Sanjeev, Paul Hribar, Marc Picconi, and John McInnis (2009): “Making sense of cents:
an examination of firms that marginally miss or beat analyst forecasts.” Journal of
Finance 64, 2361-2388.
Bizjak, John, James Brickley and Jeffrey Coles (1993): “Stock-based incentive compensation
and investment behavior.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 16, 349–372.
Bushee, Brian J. (1998): “The influence of institutional investors on myopic R&D investment
behavior.” Accounting Review 73, 305–333.
Chan, Louis, Josef Lakonishok, and Theodore Sougiannis (2001): “The stock market valuation
of research and development expenditures.” Journal of Finance 56, 2431–2456.
Cheng, Qiang, and Terry D. Warfield (2005): “Equity incentives and earnings management.”
Accounting Review 80, 441–476.
Cohen, Lauren, Karl Diether, and Christopher Malloy (2013): “Misvaluing innovation.” Review
of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Davis, Larry R., Billy S. Soo, and Gregory M. Trompeter (2009): “Auditor tenure and the ability
to meet or beat earnings forecasts.” Contemporary Accounting Research 26, 517–548.
52

Edmans, Alex (2009): “Blockholder trading, market efficiency, and managerial myopia.”
Journal of Finance 64, 2481–2513.
Edmans, Alex, Xavier Gabaix, Tomasz Sadzik, and Yuliy Sannikov (2012): “Dynamic CEO
compensation.” Journal of Finance 67, 1603–1647.
Erickson, Merle, Michelle Hanlon, and Edward L. Maydew (2006): “Is there a link between
executive equity incentives and accounting fraud?” Journal of Accounting Research 44,
113–143.
Gopalan, Radhakrishnan, Todd T. Milbourn, Fenghua Song, and Anjan V. Thakor (2013):
“Duration of executive compensation.” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Goldman, Eitan and Steve Slezak (2006): “An equilibrium model of incentive contracts in the
presence of information manipulation.” Journal of Financial Economics 80, 603–626.
Graham, John R., Campbell R. Harvey, and Shivaram Rajgopal (2005): “The economic
implications of corporate financial reporting.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 40,
3–73.
Hall, Brian and Jeffrey Liebman (1998): “Are CEOs really paid like bureaucrats?” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 113, 653-691.
Himmelberg, Charles P., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Darius Palia (1999): “Understanding the
determinants of managerial ownership and the link between ownership and
performance.” Journal of Financial Economics 53, 353-384.
Jensen, Michael C. and Kevin J. Murphy (1990): “Performance and top-management
incentives.” Journal of Political Economy 98, 225–264.
Johnson, Shane, Harley E. Ryan, and Yisong Tian (2009): “Managerial incentives and corporate
fraud: The source of incentives matter.” Review of Finance 13, 115–145.
Kole, Stacey (1997): “The complexity of compensation contracts.” Journal of Financial
Economics 43, 79–104.
Ladika, Tomislav and Zacharias Sautner (2013): “The effect of managerial short-termism on
corporate investment.” Working paper, University of Amsterdam.
Laux, Volker (2012): “Stock option vesting conditions, CEO turnover, and myopic investment.”
Journal of Financial Economics 106, 513–526.
Matsumoto, Dawn (2002): “Management’s incentives to avoid negative earnings surprises.”
Accounting Review 77, 483–514.

53

McConnell, John J. and Christopher J. Muscarella (1985): “Corporate capital expenditure
decisions and the market value of the firm.” Journal of Financial Economics 14, 399–
422.
Miller, Merton and Kevin Rock (1985): “Dividend policy under asymmetric information.”
Journal of Finance 40, 1031-1051.
Narayanan, M. P. (1985): “Managerial incentives for short-term results.” Journal of Finance 40,
1469-1484.
Peng, Lin, and Ailsa Roell (2008): “Executive pay, earnings manipulation and shareholder
litigation.” Review of Finance 12, 141–184.
Porter, Michael (1992): “Capital disadvantage: America’s failing capital investment system.”
Harvard Business Review 70, 65–82.
Savor, Pavel G. and Mungo I. Wilson (2011): “Earnings announcements and systematic risk.”
Working Paper, Temple University.
Shue, Kelly and Richard Townsend (2013): “Swinging for the fences: Executive reactions to
quasi-random option grants.” Working paper, University of Chicago.
Skinner, Douglas J. and Richard G. Sloan (2002): “Earnings surprises, growth expectations, and
stock returns or don't let an earnings torpedo sink your portfolio.” Review of Accounting
Studies 7, 289–312.
Stein, Jeremy C. (1988): “Takeover threats and managerial myopia.” Journal of Political
Economy 46, 61-80.
Stein, Jeremy C. (1989): “Efficient capital markets, inefficient firms: A model of myopic
corporate behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 655-669.

54

