                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                HOW CONSUMER PRICE SUBSIDIES AFFECT NUTRITION

                                          Neeraj Kaushal
                                         Felix Muchomba

                                       Working Paper 19404
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19404


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2013




The authors thank Michael Grossman and Robert Kaestner for their insightful comments on the paper.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Neeraj Kaushal and Felix Muchomba. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
How Consumer Price Subsidies affect Nutrition
Neeraj Kaushal and Felix Muchomba
NBER Working Paper No. 19404
September 2013, Revised November 2013
JEL No. I10,I32,I38

                                            ABSTRACT

We study the effect on nutrition of an exogenous increase in food grain subsidy in rural India resulting
from a program targeting the poor. Our analysis suggests that increase in income resulting from the
food price subsidy changed consumption patterns in favor of the subsidized grains and certain more
expensive sources of calorie, and lowered consumption of coarse grains that are cheaper, yet taste-wise,
inferior sources of nutrition, but had no effect on calorie, protein and fat intake in poor households.
Further, our analysis shows that households allocated some of the increase in income from food price
subsidy to expenditures on non-food items. Estimates of the price effect of food price subsidy on the
three measures of nutrition are also negligible. We find evidence that the decline in the price of wheat
and rice, changed consumption patterns toward increased consumption of wheat and rice and lower
consumption of coarse grains, the unsubsidized staple food. Our analysis thus suggests that food price
subsidies are likely to affect agriculture markets without impacting nutrition.


Neeraj Kaushal
Columbia University
School of Social Work
1255 Amsterdam Avenue
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
nk464@columbia.edu

Felix Muchomba
Columbia University
1255 Amsterdam Ave
New York, NY 10027
fmm2116@columbia.edu
Introduction
         There is a longstanding debate on the extent to which nutrition among the poor in

developing countries improves with income. Conventional wisdom is that higher income would

solve the problem of undernourishment. Empirical studies, however, provide mixed evidence

with calorie-income elasticities ranging from 0.01 to 0.56.1 The evidence is also mixed from

research on the effect of food price subsidy programs on nutrition.2 A key concern with many of

these studies is that income and price variation are not exogenous. In a randomized experiment

conducted in two Chinese provinces, Jensen and Miller (2011) find no evidence that subsidies

improved nutrition, and some evidence of a substitution away from the subsidized staple food

towards foods that are expensive sources of nutrition.3 The subsidy recipients, in that study, were

aware that the subsidy would last only six months. The impact of a longer-term food price

subsidy program may differ from that of a short-term experiment where the recipients know that

the benefit is temporary.

         In this paper, we study the effect of an exogenous increase in food price subsidy to poor

families resulting from the introduction in 1997 and expansion in 2002 of a targeted food price

subsidy program in India called the Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS). The Indian

government issued ration cards, called BPL cards, to households with incomes below the official

poverty threshold, which could be used to purchase at approximately a third of the market price




1
  Studies that have estimated high elasticities of calorie consumption to income include: Ravallion (1990); Strauss
and Thomas (1989); Subramanian and Deaton (1996) ; and studies that have estimated close to zero elasticities
include: Behrman and Deolalikar (1987); Bouis and Haddad (1992); Bouis (1994); also see Ogundari and Abdulai
(2013) for more recent studies.
2
  There is a large literature on the nutritional impact of food prices in developing countries with mixed results (Ecker
and Qaim, 2011, Behrman et al., 1988, Guo et al., 1999, Shimokawa, 2010).
3
  Shimokawa (2010), on the other hand, finds that response to food price subsidies in China is asymmetric:
introduction of subsidies improves nutrition, but their disruption has an insignificant effect.

                                                           3
10 kg of rice or wheat per household per month - an amount that was raised to 35 kg in 2002.4

We use the probability of BPL card ownership as an instrumental variable to predict the food

price subsidy of households and study how the increase in predicted food price subsidy and the

overall subsidy amount resulting from the expansion of TPDS affected the nutritional intake and

consumption patterns of poor families in rural India. The latter allows us to study changes in

consumption patterns underlying the changes in nutritional outcomes.

         We take advantage of divergent consumption patterns across districts to stratify the

sample covered by our study into two groups: districts where wheat and rice are the staple food

and districts where coarse grains are the staple food. In districts where wheat and rice are the

staple food, the average monthly household consumption of wheat and rice in the pre-TPDS

period is 35 kg, the PDS purchase limit, or higher. In these districts, TPDS will have a purely

income effect on households receiving the subsidy. In 15 districts, however, the average

consumption of wheat and rice in the pre-TPDS period is 20 kg or less. These are districts where

coarse grains are the staple food, but the price subsidy is provided for wheat and rice. As we

illustrate below, the marginal price of wheat and rice for most households receiving the subsidy

in these districts would be the subsidized price. In the empirical analysis, we first estimate the

effect of total subsidy amount in 66 districts where the average household consumption is 35 kg

or higher in the pre-TPDS period, followed by an analysis of the effect of price subsidy on poor

households in the 15 districts where average combined consumption of wheat and rice is 20 kg or

less in the pre-TPDS period. In the latter analysis, we specifically estimate the effect of the price




4
 The government provides rice and wheat at about 50% of the government’s cost of procurement, which is
somewhat higher than the market price. In our data, the price subsidy is on average 36% of the market price.

                                                         4
subsidy on nutrition and consumption patterns, while the former provides an estimate of the

effect of an increase in income resulting from TPDS on nutrition and consumption patterns.

        Our analysis follows Kochar (2005), who applies the initial changes in the Targeted

Public Distribution System and finds that food price subsidy had a modestly positive effect on

calorie intake. A criticism of her research is low take up rate as her empirical analysis is

restricted to 9 states in India where the PDS off-take is modest and leakages high (Jensen and

Miller 2011; Planning Commission 2005; Khera 2011).5 More importantly, Kochar’s study

covers the initial period of the TPDS (July 1999- June 2000) during which most states/union

territories had not completed identification of the poor who would be eligible for TPDS (Umali-

Deininger, Sur, and Deininger 2005).6

        We focus on states often described as PDS “functioning or reviving” states, with

relatively high take up and cover a post-expansion period when BPL cards had been issued and

the TPDS was fully implemented. Further, our study excludes states that had a targeted PDS

prior to 1999. We use data from three rounds of the National Sample Survey for 1993-1994 (50th

round), 1999-2000 (55th round) and 2004-2005 (61st round) that allow us to control for long-term

trends in nutrition and estimate the effect of food price subsidy and total subsidy amount on

consumption patterns and nutrition.

        Our study has policy relevance for developing countries that spend large sums on food

price subsidies to address undernourishment, which continues to be critical in many countries of

South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. In 2012, according to the UN Food and Agriculture

Organization, there were 780 million chronically undernourished persons in the world. Food



5
 Studies find large scale grain divergence with ration shop owners selling PDS grains in the open market.
6
 Further, Kochar focuses on wheat subsidy. Detailed evaluations show that the PDS has been less effective in wheat
consuming states than in rice consuming states (Khera, 2011).

                                                        5
price subsidy programs have high political and public support compared to unconditional cash

transfer programs even though subsidy programs are often afflicted with corruption and poor

targeting. To eradicate undernourishment, the Indian National Food Security Act promises to

provide highly subsidized food to 75% of rural households and 50% of urban households

(National Advisory Council 2011). Also known as the Right to Food program, India’s National

Food Security Program is expected to cost 3% of the nation’s GDP in the first year of its

implementation, which is three times the current expenditure on food price subsidies in India

(Bhalla 2013). If food price subsidies do not influence nutrition, such a policy would increase

allocation of resources to a program that is widely documented to be inflicted with poor

targeting, inefficiency, and corruption (Comptroller and Auditor General of India 2000;

Chaudhuri and Somanathan 2011).

A Simple Theoretical Model

       Figure 1 presents a simple model to illustrate how a food price subsidy affects

consumers. Let the utility function depend on two goods: x and y. Assume that both goods have

positive income elasticities. The price of y is fixed at $1 and income at I. In period t, the price of

x is p and the budget constraint is depicted by AB, specified as: I=y+px, along which the

consumer allocates income between the two goods. In period t+1, the government allows a food

price subsidy: the consumer can buy up to a maximum amount x0 at price cp (where c<1). ACD

is the new budget constraint, specified as

I=y+cpx0 + p(x – x0), or

I + p (1–c)x0 = y + p x.

At point C on AC, x=x0 and y=I-cpx0 and at point F on AB, y=I-cpx0 and x= cx0.




                                                  6
        Figure 1 presents the indifference curves of three individuals in period t. Consumer 1 is

located to the right of x0, consuming more than x0 in the initial period. With the subsidy program,

consumer 1 will be on the CD portion of the budget constraint and the subsidy program will have

a pure income effect on consumer 1. Consumer 2, who is on segment FE of the budget constraint

in the initial period, could have a new equilibrium at either the AC or CD segment of the new

constraint. If the new equilibrium falls on segment AC, the marginal price for consumer 2 will be

the subsidized price. If, on the other hand, the new equilibrium is on the CD segment of the

budget constraint, consumer 2’s marginal price will be the market price. Consumer 3, who is on

segment AF of the budget constraint before the price subsidy is introduced, must end up at a

point on AC. Thus, the marginal price for individuals who consumed less than cx0 in the initial

period will be the subsidized price.7

        Two inferences can be drawn from this simple illustration. One, assuming that rice and

wheat are normal goods, price subsidy on wheat and rice will increase the combined

consumption of wheat and rice for all 3 consumers. Two, in districts where wheat/rice are the

staple food and their combined average household consumption is 35 kg or more in the pre-

TPDS period (i.e. consumer 1 in the above example), price subsidy on wheat and rice will have a

purely income effect. In districts where coarse grains are the staple food and the average

household consumption is less than 20 kg in the pre-TPDS period (consumer 3 in the above

example), most households will face the subsidized price of wheat and rice in the TPDS period.

        What would be the effect of TPDS on nutrition? Consider the case of high wheat and rice

consuming districts where food price subsidy will have a purely income effect. By lowering the




7
 For a detailed illustration, see Moffitt (1989). The authors thank Michael Grossman for his insightful comments
and for sharing his teaching notes.

                                                         7
price of subsidized food items, wheat and rice subsidies will release funds that families can use,

depending on their tastes and preferences, for buying: (i) higher quantities of subsidized food

items, (ii) higher quantities of non-subsidized costlier sources of nutrition (e.g. eggs, meat, milk),

and (iii) non-food items. Increase in income may also lower consumption of coarse grains that

are cheaper, but generally considered inferior (taste-wise) substitutes for wheat and rice.

Overall, it is unclear whether TPDS in these districts would raise or lower nutrition; indeed,

income increase resulting from wheat and rice subsidies may have a negligible or even negative

effect on nutrition if substitution from cheap coarse grains to expensive sources of nutrition or

non-food items is large.

        Now consider districts where the staple food is coarse grains and the average monthly

household consumption of wheat and rice is relatively low (20 kg or less). Coarse grains are

cheaper sources of nutrition, but are not subsidized. In these districts, wheat and rice price

subsidy will have a largely substitution effect. The subsidy will lower the relative price of wheat

and rice (compared to coarse grains) raising their consumption and lowering the consumption of

coarse grains. Households may also increase consumption of other food items that are expensive

sources of calories, but have non-nutritional attributes (e.g. taste). Here too, it is not certain

whether the price subsidy will increase or lower nutrition.



Targeted Public Distribution System

        Jointly operated by the federal and state governments, India’s Public Distribution System

provides subsidized wheat and rice via a network of around 477,000 fair price shops across the

country. To address criticism relating to high operational costs, poor-targeting, and corruption,

in 1997, the government replaced the PDS, a universal program, with the Targeted PDS that



                                                   8
restricted sale of subsidized food grains to families with incomes below the 1993-1994 poverty

threshold fixed by the Federal government (henceforth referred to as BPL households). But the

implementation of TPDS could not begin in most states till 2000 due to delays in identification

of BPL households and distribution of BPL ration cards (Umali-Deininger, Sur, and Deininger

2005).

         The initial monthly allocation under TPDS was a modest 10 kg per household, at roughly

half the price at which the government could procure the grains, and was raised to 20 kg in April

2000 and to 35 kg in April 2002. In December 2000, a third tier was introduced, under the

Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) program that involved a higher subsidy to the poorest of the

poor. Three types of cards were issued under the new system: AAY cards to the poorest of the

poor, BPL cards to the other poor with incomes below the poverty line, and APL cards to the

non-poor. In the initial period of the TPDS, APL families could buy food grains from ration

shops at market prices; since April 2002, a modest subsidy is given to certain purchases by APL

card holders as well, but allocation to APL families is contingent on availability after meeting the

needs of BPL households (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 2011).

         State and private evaluations of the TPDS have been mixed. A detailed evaluation report

by the government documents that the TPDS remains afflicted with large-scale diversion of

grains in many states (Planning Commission 2005).8 Umali-Deininger et al. (2005) and Khera

(2011), however, document increased grain allocation and off-take in most states after the TPDS




8
 A detailed evaluation of the program showed that nationally only about 57% of the poor households were covered
by it and only about 42% of the subsidized grains issued by the central pool reached the poor: about a third of the
budgetary subsidy was siphoned off the supply chain and 21% reached the non-poor households (APL) ( Planning
Commission, 2005).

                                                         9
expansion.9 Khera (2011) documents that there are seven large states where the PDS has been

functioning well, and in another five states it has ‘revived’ since TPDS implementation. The

focus of our study is six “well-functioning or reviving” states that have implemented the TPDS

system, namely: Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,

Uttaranchal, and Chhattisgarh. States that had dual pricing prior to TPDS, namely Orissa, and

four major southern states- Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Karnataka (all well-

functioning states) are excluded from the analysis.10 Further, we do not include Uttar Pradesh,

classified a “reviving’ state by Khera, because in 2004-2005, the post policy period covered by

our study, the per capita off-take of PDS was less than 500 grams per month in this state.

Data

        The study is primarily based on data from three rounds of the National Sample Surveys

(NSS): the 50th round conducted in 1993-1994 (Schedule 1.0), the 55th round conducted in 1999-

2000 (Schedule 1.0), and the 61st round conducted during 2004-2005 (Schedule 1.0). These are

nationally representative surveys covering between 120,000 to 125,000 households in each

round. The last two rounds were conducted about two years before and two years after the

expansion of the TPDS, therefore, are appropriate to study its effect on nutrition. In recent

decades, there has been a steady decline in calorie intake across income quintiles in India

(Deaton and Drèze 2009, 42-65). These trends are likely to confound the effect of the TPDS on




9
  Swaminathan and Misra (2001) found that shifting from universal to targeted coverage increased errors of
exclusion (excluding poor people) but lowered the errors of inclusion in Maharashtra. But they used 1995-2000 data,
thus their study did not cover the post TPDS expansion period.
10
   These states either opted to not follow the dual pricing scheme of the federal government (e.g. Tamil Nadu
adopted a universal PDS with the AAY covering the entire population) or had a targeted program prior to 1997 (e.g
Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Karnataka), or are states where TPDS reduced subsidized food grain allocation (e.g.
Kerala).

                                                        10
nutrition. We combine the 1993-1994 NSS data with the two later rounds and include district

specific trends to control for the long-term trends in nutrition.

         The NSS collects detailed data on expenditures over the past 30 days. Specifically, for

the purpose of this analysis, the surveys provide information on the quantities of wheat and rice

purchased and the value of their purchases from ration shops as well as in the open market.

Following Kochar (2005) and Deaton (1997), district level open market prices of wheat and rice

are computed from the NSS household data by dividing the value with the quantity of each item

(wheat or rice) purchased from the open market. To minimize measurement error, districts with

fewer than 80 observations (households) in any year are dropped from the analysis. Further, we

stratify districts in our sample states into three groups based on their average household wheat

and rice consumption in the pre-TPDS period: high-wheat/rice consuming districts (with the

combined wheat and rice consumption of 35 kg per month or higher), moderate wheat/rice

consuming districts (average combined rice and wheat consumption of 20 kg per month or less);

and the rest (average monthly wheat and rice consumption per household between 20kg and 35

kg). The focus of our study is the first two groups. Overall, our study covers 66 districts where

average monthly household consumption is 35 kg or higher and 15 districts where the average

monthly household consumption is 20 kg or less.11 The 1993-1994 NSS does not provide district

identifiers for urban areas.12 Therefore, all analysis is restricted to rural areas.




11
   There are only 11 districts (2,285 households) in our sample with an average monthly consumption of 20-35kg.
Theoretically, the effect of TPDS on these districts could be either purely an income effect or both an income and a
substitution effect. This sample is not included in the analysis we present. In a supplementary analysis, we studied
the effect of subsidy discount on districts with an average monthly household wheat and rice consumption of 20 kg
or higher and the results were similar to those reported for high-wheat/rice consuming districts.
12
   We are grateful to Anjini Kochar for providing us with documentation on district identifiers for rural households
in the 1993-1994 NSS data.

                                                         11
       In the NSS surveys, expenditures on education, durables, and institutional medical care

are for the past 365 days and on other items for the past 30 days. For the analysis we convert all

items to expenditures in the past 30 days. Detailed data on food consumption are converted into

three nutrient intakes: calories, protein, and fat, using conversion factors from the NSS (National

Sample Survey Organization 1996; National Sample Survey Organization 2001; National

Sample Survey Organization 2007). The amount of each food item consumed is multiplied by its

per unit nutrient content and converted to average daily nutrient intake.

       We study the effects of TPDS on per capita calorie intake from the following food items:

wheat and rice; pulses and pulse products; edible oil; milk, milk products, eggs, fish and meat;

sugar and sugar substitutes; and all other foods. To examine if TPDS influenced purchases of

relatively cheaper or expensive sources of calories, we study two other outcomes. The first

outcome is per capita calorie intake from coarse cereals namely, maize, jowar, ragi, and bajara. It

captures cheaper sources of calorie and protein. In our data, in the pre-TPDS expansion period,

the cost per calorie from the consumption of these coarse cereals is roughly 40% lower than the

cost per calorie of non-PDS wheat and rice and 17% less than the cost per calorie of PDS wheat

and rice. The second outcome is per capita expenditure on expensive sources of calories and

these items are: pulses and pulse products, milk and milk products, edible oil, sugar, eggs, fish

and meat. In our data, these items are 155% more expensive sources of calorie than non-PDS

wheat and rice.

       All expenditures are adjusted for inflation using the Agricultural Laborers Consumer

Price Index. To ensure that the analysis is not driven by extreme values, households reporting

per capita monthly consumption of more than 30 kilograms of any specific cereal (e.g. wheat,

rice, bajara, maize etc.) or more than 30 kilograms of edible oil are dropped from the analysis.



                                                12
Further, households reporting a per capita daily calorie13 consumption of more than 10,000 and a

per capita daily protein consumption of more than 300 grams are dropped from the analysis.

Overall, as a result of these exclusions, 160 households are dropped from our sample. We also

exclude, from the combined sample, 819 households (2.6% of the sample) that report purchasing

PDS wheat and rice at prices greater than their districts’ average open market price. Additionally,

two districts (with a combined sample of 287 observations) are excluded because a third of their

samples reported purchasing PDS wheat and rice at prices that exceeded the districts’ mean open

market price.

            Additional adjustments are made in models using outcomes specified in logarithm: we

assign a monthly per capita food price subsidy of Rs 0.01 to households that had a subsidy of 0;

in models with logarithm of calories consumed (per food item) as outcome, households that

consumed 0 calories from coarse cereals; sugar and sugar substitutes; and milk, egg, fish and

meat are assigned 0.001 per capita daily calories for each of these food items; and in models with

logarithm of per capita quantity of coarse grains as the outcome, households that did not

consume coarse cereals are assigned 1 gram in monthly per capita consumption.

            All three rounds of the NSS provide detailed data on individual household members,

including their age, educational attainment, sex, marital status, current employment status, and

relationship with the household head. The NSS also provides information on household

characteristics namely: household size, caste, religion, occupation of household head, land

ownership, amount of land irrigated, detailed data on ownership of durables, urban-rural

residence, district of residence, and state or union territory (UT) of residence. We compute




13
     A calorie in this paper refers to one kilocalorie (kcal), as called a large calorie (Cal).

                                                               13
district-level monthly per capita expenditure, open market price of rice, and open market price of

wheat by averaging the respective household values in each district.

        The 2004-2005 NSS provides data on type of ration card that a household owns: AAY

(extremely poor), BPL (poor), APL (non-poor) and no card. Because the new ration cards were

not issued in 1993-94 or 1999-2000, we do not have this information for households in these

years. We use the 2004-2005 data on card ownership to predict the probability of BPL/AAY card

ownership using a rich set of household characteristics that are exogenous to the Targeted Public

Distribution System. In our data only 2.4% of the households had an AAY card in 2004-2005.

To minimize prediction error, we combine the AAY category with the BPL category.

Specifically, we regress whether the household has a BPL/AAY card (binary variable – for

convenience, henceforth we call this variable BPL card) on the household head’s age (a set of

dummy variables indicating age categories: 0-19, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-49, 50-

54, 55-59, 60-64, 65-69, and 70 or older), education (categorical variables indicating illiterate;

literate with less than primary education; primary education; more than primary but less than

secondary; and secondary or higher education), gender, marital status, and occupation, education

of other household members (all illiterate; at least one, but not all, literate; all literate), household

caste (categorical variables indicating scheduled caste, scheduled tribe, and other castes) and

religion (categorical variables indicating Hinduism, Islam, Christianity, Sikhism, Jainism,

Buddhism, Zoroastrianism, and other religions), land ownership, household size (categorical

variables indicating 1, 2, 3-5, 6-8, and 9 or more household members), whether land is irrigated,

ownership of durables, namely radio, TV, bicycles, electric fan, sewing machine, fridge, motor

cycle, or car; and district of residence fixed effects. The coefficients from this regression are

used to predict the probability of BPL ration card ownership of households in all years.



                                                   14
Estimation Strategy: Food Price Subsidy and TPDS

         We begin the analysis by studying the effect of the TPDS on the subsidy received by BPL

cardholders, the target of the program. The per capita food price subsidy amount ( S ijt ) that

household i in district j receives in year t, is computed as the difference in the open market price

( P fjtm ) of the food grains (wheat, rice) minus the PDS price reported by the household ( Pfijt
                                                                                             s
                                                                                                  )

multiplied by the quantity purchased from the PDS ( q fijt ). The total household subsidy amount

if divided by N (household size) to arrive at the per capita subsidy amount:

                    1
(1)
          Sijt =
                   N ijt
                           ∑q
                           f
                                fijt   ( Pfjtm − Pfijt
                                                   s
                                                       )

          f = wheat, rice

Equation (2) describes the model used to study the effect of TPDS on the food grains subsidy

amount received by BPL households:

(2) S ijt = X it β + β c (Pr Card i * Post t ) + δ 0 * Pr Card i + δ 1 * D jt + π j + π t + u ijt ,

         The per capita food price subsidy amount ( S ijt ) is defined as a function of household

characteristics, X it , namely age (a set of dummy variables indicating age categories: 0-19, 20-

24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-49, 50-54, 55-59, 60-64, 65-69, and 70 or older) and marital

status of household head, their educational attainment (categorical variables indicating illiterate;

literate with less than primary education; primary education; more than primary but less than

secondary; and secondary or higher education), gender, occupation, education level of other

household members (all illiterate; at least one, but not all, literate; all literate), household size

(categorical variables indicating 1, 2, 3-5, 6-8, and 9 or more household members), caste

(categorical variables indicating scheduled caste, scheduled tribe, and other castes) and religion

(categorical variables indicating Hinduism, Islam, Christianity, Sikhism, Jainism, Buddhism,

                                                            15
Zoroastrianism, and other religions), land ownership, whether land is irrigated, and ownership of

durables, namely radio, TV, bicycles, electric fan, sewing machine, fridge, motor cycle, or car.

π j and π t are district and year fixed effects. D jt denotes district-level time-varying factors

namely mean district level monthly per capita expenditure, and district-specific trends. We

begin the analysis without any district level time-varying controls and sequentially add these

controls. In our final specification, we replace district-level trends with interactions of the district

dummy variables with Postt .

         Pr Cardi is the predicted probability that the household has a BPL card. The

variable Postt is equal to 1 if the observation is taken from the post-2002 period, after the TPDS

expansion. The coefficient, β c , estimates the effect of the TPDS on the average food price

subsidy as the probability of BPL card ownership increases from 0 to 1.

        The identifying assumption in equation (2) is that in the absence of TPDS, the change in

food price subsidy in the pre- to post-policy period of households with a low probability of

having a BPL card would be the same as that of households with a high probability of having a

BPL card. This is a restrictive assumption. In general families with a low probability of owning

a BPL card are likely to be richer than families with a high probability of owning a BPL card and

the effect of economic factors on these two groups of families is likely to be very different. To

allow more a reasonable comparison, we estimate equation (2) restricting samples to households

with a monthly real per capita expenditure below the median.14




14
  The median monthly per capita expenditure for our sample of states is Rs 485.55 at 2004-2005 prices, which is
equal to $1.04 per day at the ppp exchange rate of $1=Rs 15.54.

                                                       16
        Equations similar to (2) are applied to study two other outcomes: price discount, defined

as the subsidy amount divided by the quantity of wheat and rice consumed by the household and

% discount defined as price discount divided by the market price of the subsidized food items.

Results: Effect of TPDS on Food Price Subsidy

        Table 1 presents estimated coefficients from equation (2). Robust standard errors

clustered around district of residence are in parenthesis. Model 1 includes controls for a rich set

of individual characteristics, and district and year fixed effects. Model 2 includes an additional

control of household monthly per capita expenditure,15 model 3 further adds two more controls:

mean district per capita expenditure and district-specific trends, and model 4 replaces district

specific trends with interactions of district dummy variables and Postt variable (an indicator that

the observation is from the TPDS expansion period). All samples are restricted to low-income

rural households with per capita monthly expenditure below the median.

        Estimates in panel 1, based on the sample of households in high wheat and rice

consuming districts, suggest that an increase in the predicted probability of BLP card ownership

(from 0 to 1) resulting from TPDS expansion raised per capita food price subsidy by Rs 1.4 per

kg of the subsidized grain. Estimates remain robust in models that control for district specific

linear trends (model 3) and models that include district-post interactions. The increase in price

discount is of the order of 16 to 19 percentage points and the overall subsidy amount increased

by Rs 15 to Rs 18 per capita. This is 8 to 10 times the average subsidy amount that households

received in the period prior to the TPDS expansion. The effect size is about five percent of the

per capita average household expenditure in the pre-TPDS expansion period. The F-ratio is much




15
  We also estimated models 2-4 without the control for monthly per capita expenditure. The results were similar to
those reported in table 1 from models inclusive of this control.

                                                        17
larger than the critical F-ratio of 10 used to assess whether instruments are weak (see for

example, Staiger and Stock 1997; Cameron and Trivedi 2005).

       Estimates in panel 2 are for districts where coarse grains are the staple food. In these

districts, the average wheat + rice consumed by households is 16 kg, which is less than half the

maximum quantity that can be purchased at subsidized price under the TPDS. Further, in each

district the average combined consumption of wheat and rice is less than 20 kg per household.

Therefore, the marginal price that most households in these districts would face is the subsidized

price. Estimates suggest that an increase in the predicted probability of BLP card ownership

(from 0 to 1) raised per capita food price subsidy by Rs 1.8 to Rs 2.4 per kg of the subsidized

grain after the TPDS expansion. The % price discount increased by 19-21 percentage points and

the overall discount increased Rs 11 to Rs 14, a rise of about three percent over the pre-TPDS

per capita expenditure. Here too the F-statistic for the interaction term- predicted probability of

BPL card ownership and Post-TDPS period - is above 10.

       Our analysis thus suggests that TPDS raised the food price subsidy of households with a

BPL card and the effect sizes are non-trivial. In high-wheat and rice consuming districts, the

price subsidy increased by 16 to 19 percentage points and the subsidy amount is about 5% of the

per capita total food expenditure in the pre-TPDS expansion period. In moderate wheat and rice

consuming districts, the price discount increased by 19 to 21 percentage points and subsidy

discount amount was about 3% of the per capita expenditure in the pre-expansion period.

Estimation Strategy: Effect of Food Price Subsidy on Nutrition

       Our next objective is to study the effect of food price subsidy on nutrition in the poor

households. We first study the effect of the subsidy amount on nutrition in high wheat and rice

consuming districts. Equation (3) describes the empirical model:



                                                 18
(3) N ijt = X it φ + ϕ * Subsidy ijt + ϕ 0 Pr Card i + φ 0 * D jt + η j + η t + eijt ,

Nijt , the per capita nutrition in-take of household i in district j in year t, is defined as a function

of household characteristics ( X it ), per capita food grains subsidy amount ( Subsidyijt ), the

predicted probability that the household has a BPL or AAY card ( Pr Cardi ), time-varying

district level variables that may influence nutrition ( D jt ), and district ( η j ) and year ( η t ) fixed

effects. We study three measures of nutrition: per capita daily calorie intake, per capita daily

protein intake and per capita daily fat consumption.

        Unobserved factors that determine food subsidy amount may also affect nutrition levels.

For instance, a demand shock that increases nutrition will also increase food prices, and in turn

the amount of the subsidy. Thus, Subsidyijt is likely to be endogenous to household nutrition

(Nijt). We use an instrumental variables methodology to address this issue. Specifically, we use

the predicted probability of BPL card ownership interacted with Postt to instrument for Subsidyijt .

The first stage regression for this methodology is described in equation (2). In the second stage,

the predicted Ŝubsidyijt from equation (2) replaces Subsidy ijt in equation (3). Note that the first

stage estimate includes all the covariates that are in the second stage, so the identification of the

coefficient ϕ in the second stage depends entirely on the exclusion of interaction term

( Pr Cardi * Postt ) from the second stage regression. In the empirical analysis, we use the

IVREGRESS command of STATA to compute the first and second stage estimates in a single

step. Standard errors correct for errors in the first stage prediction and cluster on district of

residence (Murphy and Topel 1985; Hardin 2002; Hardin, Schmiediche, and Carroll 2003).

        An equation similar to (3), with one modification, is applied to estimate the effect of

price subsidy on nutrition: the subsidy amount is replaced by % price subsidy. The sample for

                                                       19
this analysis is districts with combined monthly household wheat and rice consumption of less

than 20 kg.

        Similar IV and reduced form models are used to estimate the effect of food price subsidy

and TPDS on calorie intake from specific food items, quantity/expenditure on food items, and

total food and non-food expenditures.

Results: Descriptive

       Table 2 presents the cost per 1,000 calories, per capita daily calories, and share in total

calorie consumption of various food items in the pre- to post-PDS expansion periods in rural

households with less than the median per capita monthly consumption – the sample of our

analysis. There are several points to note: one, in high wheat and rice consuming districts, these

two staple grains accounted for 65% of the calorie in-take in the pre-TPDS period and a

somewhat higher 67.5% in the post-TPDS period. Only nine percent of the calorie-intake in these

households came from coarse grains in the pre-expansion period, and the proportion further fell

to 5% in the post-expansion period. In the moderate wheat and rice consuming districts,

households derived almost 50% of their calorie intake from coarse grains and another 19% from

wheat and rice. In the post-TPDS period, the share of wheat and rice increased to 26% and of

coarse grains fell to 41%.

       Two, coarse grains were the cheapest source of calorie in the pre-TPDS period and

remained so in the moderate wheat and rice consuming districts after TPDS implementation. In

high wheat and rice consuming districts, however, PDS wheat and rice became the cheapest

sources of nutrition after TPDS implementation. Three, prices of food items rose during the

period of the study, but the increase was relatively low for the staple food items - wheat and rice

– both PDS and open market -and coarse grains.



                                                 20
       Four, as found in previous research there is a decline in per capita daily calorie intake

during the period of this study (Deaton and Drèze 2009). Further, in the pre-TPDS period,

households in high-wheat/rice consuming districts had a calorie consumption that was 7 percent

higher than the per capita calorie in-take in moderate wheat/rice consuming districts. In the post-

expansion period the gap is reduced to two percent. Five, in the pre-TPDS expansion period, the

share of PDS wheat and rice as a source of calorie is about five percent in both sets of districts.

In the post-expansion period this share increased to 15% in high-wheat/rice consuming districts

and to 10% in moderate wheat/rice consuming districts. Six, households increased their total

share of calories from the more expensive sources, namely pulses, milk and milk products, edible

oils, sugar and its substitutes, egg, fish, and meat by about 1 percentage point.

       Were these changes in sources of nutrition and consumption patterns caused by the

increase in food price subsidy from the targeted Public Distribution System? We investigate this

next. We first present the effect of the exogenous increase in income resulting from the food

price subsidy on nutrition and consumption pattern of poor households in high wheat/rice

consuming districts. This analysis is followed by the effect of the price subsidy on poor

households in moderate wheat and rice consuming districts.

Results: Effect of Food Price Subsidy on Nutrition

       Table 3 has the estimates of the effect of food price subsidy amount on calorie intake.

Results are presented from four models: an OLS model and three different specifications of

instrumental variable models: a levels model where both the nutrition variable and predicted

subsidy amount are specified as levels, a log-linear specification where the nutrition variable is

specified in log and the subsidy variable is in levels, and a log-log models where both nutrition

and subsidy are specified in log to compute elasticity. Regressions in the left panel control for



                                                 21
district-specific linear trends; regressions in the right panel include district-post-TPDS

interactions. Previous research suggests that calorie and protein consumption across income

quintiles has been declining in India. Regressions in the right panel are our preferred

specification as they control for these trends in a parsimonious manner. In Appendix Table A1

we also present models that do not include controls for district-trends or district-post interactions.

         The OLS results show that increase in income from food price subsidy is associated with

an increase in per capita calorie intake. As previously argued, subsidy amount is endogenous to

nutrition and the instrumental variable estimates that address the endogeneity are modestly

negative and statistically insignificant. The reduced form estimates are also modest and

insignificant.

         To understand what lies behind these estimates, we investigate the effect of food subsidy

amount on sources of calorie and consumption patterns. We study calorie intakes from seven

different food categories: wheat and rice; coarse cereals; pulses; edible oil; milk, eggs, fish and

meat; sugar and sugar substitutes; and all other foods.16 The OLS results show that an increase in

income resulting from the subsidy increased calorie intake from wheat and rice, pulses, and sugar

and sugar substitutes, but lowered calorie intake from coarse cereals and other food items and the

estimates are roughly the same across models (with district-level linear trends and with

district*post interactions). The IV models (the log–log model) suggest that a 10% increase in

subsidy amount increased calorie intake from wheat and rice by a modest 0.3-0.6%, and the

coefficient is statistically insignificant in models that control for district specific trends, but is

statistically significant in models that do not control for district level trends (Appendix Table 1)



16
  We did additional analyses with quantity of wheat and rice, coarse grains, pulses, and edible oil, and expenditures
on milk, eggs, fish, and meat; expenditure on sugar and sugar substitutes, and other foods as dependent variables.
Results were similar to those reported, and can be provided upon request. For brevity, we do not present them here.

                                                         22
and in models that include district- post-TPDS interactions. Further a 10% increase in subsidy

amount increased calorie intake from sugar and sugar products by 2%-3%, and lowered calorie

intake from coarse grains by 4%-8%, and from other foods by 0.2%-0.5%, leaving the overall

calorie intake unchanged. The reduced form estimates lead to the same conclusion. There is also

some evidence that increase in income from food price subsidy increased consumption of edible

oil, but the estimates are statistically significant only in models that include district-post-TPDS

interactions.

        Table 4 presents the effect of subsidy amount on total food expenditure, expenditure on

high-cost (per calorie) food, and non-food expenditure. The OLS estimates show that in response

to a Re. 1 increase in income due to the food price subsidy, households lowered total expenditure

on food by Rs. 0.61, suggesting that households absorb 39% of the increase in income from food

subsidy in expenditures on food. OLS estimates also suggest that increase in income is positively

associated with an increase in expenditure on high-cost food and non-food expenditures. The IV

estimates (model 4) suggest that a 10% increase in subsidy lowered total food expenditure by

0.2% to 0.4% and raised expenditure on non-food items by 0.2-0.3% and the latter estimates are

statistically insignificant in models that control for district specific linear trends, but remain

significant in models that allow district-post interactions. These estimates thus suggest that

households divide the increase in income from food price subsidy to expenditures on food and

non-food items, but there is little evidence that increased expenditure on food results in higher

calorie intake.

        We also study the effect of subsidy amount on protein and fat intake in high-rice and

wheat consuming districts (Panel 1 table 5). Estimated effects are modest and mostly statistically

insignificant.



                                                  23
       Next, we investigate the effect of the wheat and rice price subsidy on nutrition and

consumption patterns. The sample of analysis is districts where coarse grains are the staple food.

Specifically, these are districts where monthly wheat and rice consumption was less than 20 kg

per household in the pre-TPDS period, much less than 35 kg, the maximum allowed under

TPDS. The OLS estimates in table 6 show that wheat and rice price subsidy raised calorie intake

from rice and wheat. The coefficient on coarse grains is negative, but insignificant. Overall, the

price subsidy appears to have a modest and statistically insignificant effect on calorie intake.

Estimated effects from the IV models are similar: most estimates suggest that wheat and rice

price subsidy raised calorie intake from wheat and rice and there is some evidence of substitution

away from coarse grains, resulting in an overall negligible effect on total calorie intake.

       Table 7 presents the effect of wheat/rice price subsidy on per capita total food

expenditure, expenditure on high-cost (per calorie) food, and non-food expenditure. The OLS

estimates show that an increase in wheat/rice price subsidy lowered expenditure on food and

raised expenditure on non-food items. Estimated effects are modest and statistically insignificant

in IV models. In models that do not include district specific trends or district*post interactions,

our estimates suggest that food price subsidy lowered expenditure on food items and increased

expenditure on non-food items (Appendix Table A2), however, these effects disappear in models

that control for district-time effects (Table 7). We also study the effect of wheat and rice price

subsidy on protein and fat intake in moderate-rice and wheat consuming districts (Panel 2 table

5). Estimated effects are modest and mostly statistically insignificant.

Conclusion and Discussion

       In this paper, we study the effect of an exogenous increase in food price subsidy to poor

families resulting from a targeted food price subsidy program in India called the Targeted Public



                                                 24
Distribution System (TPDS). The Indian government issued ration cards (BPL cards) to

households with incomes below the official poverty threshold. The BPL cards enabled

households to buy a maximum of 35 kg of wheat and rice per month at approximately a third of

the market price. We use the probability of BPL card ownership as an instrumental variable to

predict the food price subsidy of households and study how the increase in predicted food price

subsidy amount and price subsidy (% price discount) resulting from the expansion of TPDS

affected the nutritional intake and consumption patterns of poor families in rural India in states

that have a well-functioning Public Distribution System.

       We take advantage of diverse consumption practices across districts to stratify the sample

covered by our study into two groups: districts where wheat and rice are the staple food and

districts where coarse grains are the staple food. In the former set of districts, the average

monthly wheat and rice expenditure is 35 kg or more and the food price subsidy is likely to have

a purely income effect and we estimate the effect of the increase in income resulting for TPDS

on the nutrition and consumption patterns of poor households in these districts. In the latter set of

districts, the average monthly household consumption of wheat and rice is 16 kg and for most

households the subsidized price is the marginal price in the post-TPDS period. For this latter set

of districts, we study the effect of food price subsidy on nutrition and consumption patterns.

       Our analysis suggests that increase in income resulting from the food price subsidy

changed consumption patterns but had no effect on nutrition measured by per capita calorie

intake, per capita protein intake, and per capita fat intake. The instrumental variables results

show that a 100% increase in subsidy amount (over the pre-TPDS subsidy), which represents a

0.54% increase in income, increased calorie intake from wheat and rice by 3-6%; increased

calorie intake from sugar and sugar products by 22%-30%, and lowered calorie intake from



                                                  25
coarse grains by 43%-82%, and from other foods by 2%-5%, leaving the overall calorie intake

unchanged. Further, our analysis shows that households allocate some of the increase in income

from the food price subsidy to expenditures on non-food items.

         Estimates of the effect of food price on the three measures of nutrition – calorie, protein

and fat intakes – are all negligible and statistically insignificant. We find evidence that the

decline in the price of wheat and rice, due to the subsidy, changed consumption patterns toward

increased consumption of wheat and rice and lowered consumption of coarse grains, the

unsubsidized staple food. There is also some evidence of an increase in consumption of sugar

and sugar substitutes – that are more expensive sources of calorie than wheat, rice or coarse

grains. Finally, there is no evidence that food price subsidy raised consumption of non-food

items.

         Our findings are similar to the findings of previous research that documents low or zero

income and price elasticities of nutrition. In addition, we find that income transfer (resulting

from the increase in food price subsidy) alters consumption patterns towards the subsidized

wheat and rice, more expensive sources of nutrition and non-food items, and away from non-

subsidized, but cheap coarse grains. One implication of this finding is that while the food price

subsidy program fails to improve nutrition among the poor, it changes consumption patterns that

may in turn have substantial impact on agriculture markets – which is an unintended and perhaps

undesirable effect of the policy. The results from this study also imply that the massive allocation

of resources planned under the Right to Food Program in India, estimated to be three percent of

GDP in the first year of its implementation, is not likely to reduce undernourishment.




                                                  26
References

Behrman, Jere R. and Anil B. Deolalikar. 1987. "Will Developing Country Nutrition Improve
    with Income? A Case Study for Rural South India." J.P.E. 95 (3): 492-507.

Behrman, Jere R., Anil B. Deolalikar, and Barbara L. Wolfe. 1988. "Nutrients: Impacts and
    Determinants." World Bank Econ. Rev. 2 (3): 299-320.

Bhalla, Surjit S. 2013. "Manmonia's FSB: 3% of GDP." Indian Express, July 6.

Bouis, Howarth E. 1994. "The Effect of Income on Demand for Food in Poor Countries: Are our
    Food Consumption Databases Giving Us Reliable Estimates?" J. Dev. Econ. 44 (1): 199-
    226.

Bouis, Howarth E. and Lawrence J. Haddad. 1992. "Are Estimates of Calorie-Income Elasticities
    Too High? A Recalibration of the Plausible Range." J. Dev. Econ. 39 (2): 333-364.

Cameron, A. Colin and Pravin K. Trivedi. 2005. Microeconometrics: Methods and Applications.
   New York: Cambridge university press.

Chaudhuri, Arka Roy and E. Somanathan. 2011. "Impact of Biometric Identification-Based
    Transfers." Econ. Polit. Weekly 46 (21): 77-80.

Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 2000. Activity Report 1999-2000. New Delhi:
   Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

Deaton, Angus. 1997. The Analysis of Household Surveys: A Microeconometric Approach to
    Development Policy. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Deaton, Angus and Jean Drèze. 2009. "Food and Nutrition in India: Facts and Interpretations."
    Econ. Polit. Weekly 44 (7): 42-65.

Ecker, Olivier and Matin Qaim. 2011. "Analyzing Nutritional Impacts of Policies: An Empirical
    Study for Malawi." World Dev. 39 (3): 412-428.

Guo, Xuguang, Barry M. Popkin, Thomas A. Mroz, and Fengying Zhai. 1999. "Food Price
    Policy can Favorably Alter Macronutrient Intake in China." J. Nutr. 129 (5): 994-1001.

Hardin, James W. 2002. "The Robust Variance Estimator for Two-Stage Models." Stata Journal
    2 (3): 253-266.

Hardin, James W., Henrik Schmiediche, and Raymond J. Carroll. 2003. "Instrumental Variables,
    Bootstrapping, and Generalized Linear Models." Stata Journal 3 (4): 351-360.


                                              27
Jensen, Robert T. and Nolan H. Miller. 2011. "Do Consumer Price Subsidies really Improve
    Nutrition?" Rev. Econ. Stat. 93 (4): 1205-1223.

Khera, Reetika. 2011. "Trends in Diversion of Grain from the Public Distribution System." Econ.
    Polit. Weekly 46 (21): 106-114.

Kochar, Anjini. 2005. "Can Targeted Food Programs Improve Nutrition? an Empirical Analysis
   of India’s Public Distribution System." Econ. Dev. Cult. Change 54 (1): 203-235.

Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution. 2013. "Annual Report 2010-2011."
    Accessed March 30. http://dfpd.nic.in/fcamin/sites/default/files/userfiles/annual201011.pdf.

Moffitt, Robert. 1989. "Estimating the Value of an in-Kind Transfer: The Case of Food Stamps."
   Econometrica: 385-409.

Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel. 1985. "Estimation and Inference in Two-Step
   Econometric Models." J. Bus. Econ. Stat. 3 (4): 370-379.

National Advisory Council. 2013. "National Food Security Bill, 2011." Accessed May 20.
    http://nac.nic.in/foodsecurity/nfsb_final.pdf.

National Sample Survey Organization. 1996. Nutritional Intake in India 1993-1994. Vol. 405.
    New Delhi: National Sample Survey Organization, Government of India.

———. 2001. Nutritional Intake in India 1999-2000. Vol. 471. New Delhi: National Sample
  Survey Organization, Government of India.

———. 2007. Nutritional Intake in India 2004-2005. Vol. 513. New Delhi: National Sample
  Survey Organization, Government of India.

Ogundari, Kolawole and Awudu Abdulai. 2013. "Examining the Heterogeneity in Calorie–
   income Elasticities: A Meta-Analysis." Food Policy 40: 119-128.

Planning Commission. 2005. Performance Evaluation of Targeted Public Distribution System
    (TPDS). New Delhi: Planning Commission, Government of India.

Ravallion, Martin. 1990. "Income Effects on Undernutrition." Econ. Dev. Cult. Change 38 (3):
    489-515.

Shimokawa, Satoru. 2010. "Nutrient Intake of the Poor and its Implications for the Nutritional
    Effect of Cereal Price Subsidies: Evidence from China." World Dev. 38 (7): 1001-1011.

Staiger, Doug and James H. Stock. 1997. "Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak
     Instruments." Econometrica 65 (3): 557-586.




                                               28
Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas. 1989. "The Shape of the Expenditure-Calorie Curve."
     Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper No. 595.

Subramanian, Shankar and Angus Deaton. 1996. "The Demand for Food and Calories." J.P.E.
    104 (1): 133-162.

Swaminathan, Madhura and Neeta Misra. 2001. "Errors of Targeting: Public Distribution of
   Food in a Maharashtra Village, 1995-2000." Econ. Polit. Weekly 36 (26): 2447-2454.

Umali-Deininger, Dina, Mona Sur, and Klaus W. Deininger. 2005. "Foodgrain Subsidies in
   India: Are they Reaching the Poor?" Paper presented at the American Agricultural
   Economics Association Annual Meeting, Providence, RI, July 24-27.




                                             29
Table 1 Estimates of the Effect of Targeted Public Distribution on Food Price Subsidy and Subsidy Amount

                             Price Discount (in Rupees)                      % Price Discount                              Subsidy Amount (in Rupees)
                             Model 1     Model 2     Model 3     Model 4     Model 1    Model 2     Model 3     Model 4    Model 1   Model 2     Model 3      Model 4
Panel 1: High Rice/Wheat Consuming Districts
Predicted probability of BPL 1.38***     1.37***     1.44***      1.70***    16.25***   16.21***    16.67***    19.28***   15.18***    15.15***    15.69***    17.77***
card ownership*Post TPDS     (0.18)      (0.18)      (0.19)        (0.19)    (1.94)     (1.94)      (2.02)       (2.12)    (1.94)      (1.94)      (1.86)       (1.91)

F-Statistic                     59.91     58.52      59.91       82.26       70.56      69.56       68.06       82.45      61.47       60.68       70.90      86.86
Mean of the dependent           0.197     0.197      0.197       0.197       2.592      2.592       2.592       2.592      1.841       1.841       1.841      1.841
variable before TPDS
N                               13,101    13,101     13,101      13,101      13,101     13,101      13,101      13,101     13,101      13,101      13,101     13,101

Panel 2: Moderate Rice/Wheat Consuming Districts
Predicted probability of BPL 2.34***  2.35***    1.76***         1.94***     21.00***   21.10***    18.73***    18.77***   14.42***    14.44***    11.23***   12.08***
card ownership*Post TPDS     (0.33)   (0.33)     (0.36)          (0.48)      (4.37)     (4.39)      (3.64)      (5.24)     (2.35)      (2.38)      (2.09)     (2.33)

F-Statistic                     51.70     50.98      24.30       16.40       23.14      23.04       26.52       12.82      37.70       36.97       28.73      26.94
Mean of the dependent           0.738     0.738      0.738       0.738       9.918      9.918       9.918       9.918      2.331       2.331       2.331      2.331
variable before TPDS
N                               3,748     3,748      3,748       3,748       3,748      3,748       3,748       3,748      3,748       3,748       3,748      3,748
Model controls for:
Household monthly per           No        Yes        Yes         Yes         No         Yes         Yes         Yes        No          Yes         Yes        Yes
capita expenditure
Mean district monthly per       No        No         Yes         No          No         No          Yes         No         No          No          Yes        No
capita expenditure, District
specific trend
Mean district monthly per       No        No         No          Yes         No         No          No          Yes        No          No          No         Yes
capita expenditure, district-
Post TPDS interactions

Note: Each figure in the top row of each panel is based on a separate regression that controls for household head’s age, education, gender, marital status, and
occupation, education of other household members, household caste and religion, land ownership, household size, whether land is irrigated, ownership of
durables, predicted probability of BPL card ownership, year and district fixed effects, in addition to the factors listed in the Table. The sample of analysis is rural
households with less than the median monthly per capita expenditure. Further, the sample of analysis in panel 1 is restricted to districts where the average
monthly household consumption of wheat and rice is 35kg or higher in the pre-TPDS period; the sample of analysis in panel 2 is restricted to districts where the
average monthly household consumption of wheat and rice is less than 20 kg in the pre-TPDS period. Standard errors are clustered around the district of
residence. Post-TPDS is equal to 1 if the observation is from 2004-2005.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                  30
Table 2: Consumption Pattern in Households before and after the Expansion of the Targeted Public Distribution System
                High rice/wheat consuming districts                                               Moderate Rice/wheat consuming Districts
                                                                      Share of total per capita                                                         Share of total per capita
                Cost per 1,000 calories   Per capita daily calories   daily calories              Cost per 1,000 calories   Per capita daily calories   daily calories
                             Post-                      Post-                        Post-                     Post-                      Post-                        Post-
                Pre-TPDS TPDS             Pre-TPDS TPDS               Pre-TPDS TPDS               Pre-TPDS TPDS             Pre-TPDS TPDS               Pre-TPDS TPDS
                Expansion Expansion       Expansion Expansion         Expansion Expansion         Expansion Expansion       Expansion Expansion         Expansion Expansion
Wheat & rice    1.91         2.38         1178          953           0.598          0.528        1.96         2.59         264           273           0.142          0.157
Open market     (0.01)       (0.01)       (6.75)        (8.32)        (0.003)        (0.004)      (0.01)       (0.02)       (6.52)         (8.23)       (0.003)        (0.005)

Wheat & rice,   1.42         1.65         95            261           0.050         0.147         1.35         1.55         80            182           0.045         0.105
PDS             (0.01)       (0.01)       (2.79)        (6.53)        (0.001)       (0.004)       (0.02)       (0.02)       (2.93)        (8.33)        (0.002)       (0.005)

Coarse          1.17         1.63         175           95            0.087         0.053         1.13         1.74         915           727           0.494         0.410
 Cereals        (0.01)       (0.01)       (4.23)        (3.52)        (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.01)       (0.02)       (9.62)        (12.21)       (0.004)       (0.006)

Pulses          4.63         6.46         100           82            0.052         0.046         5.31         7.41         103           87            0.057         0.050
                (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.95)        (0.58)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.03)       (0.02)       (1.04)        (1.12)        (0.001)       (0.001)

Milk & milk     8.41         11.78        79            73            0.037         0.039         8.21         12.01        62            60            0.034         0.034
Products        (0.06)       (0.12)       (3.71)        (2.72)        (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.09)       (0.12)       (1.38)        (1.62)        (0.001)       (0.001)

Edible oils     3.82         5.71         110           121           0.058         0.069         3.94         5.55         120           157           0.066         0.090
                (0.01)       (0.02)       (0.87)        (0.74)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.01)       (0.01)       (2.55)        (1.89)        (0.001)       (0.001)

Sugar and its   3.03         4.37         87            85            0.046         0.048         3.17         4.62         125           118           0.071         0.068
Substitutes     (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.60)        (0.73)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.02)       (0.04)       (1.23)        (1.42)        (0.001)       (0.001)

Egg, fish &     32.40        45.76        5             5             0.003         0.003         37.36        60.28        7             5             0.004         0.003
Meat            (0.31)       (0.47)       (0.11)        (0.11)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.54)       (1.14)       (0.67)        (0.23)        (0.000)       (0.000)

All other       11.53        17.76        133           118           0.070         0.067         11.20        16.74        150           139           0.087         0.082
 foods          (0.05)       (0.07)       (1.86)        (2.21)        (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.09)       (0.12)       (4.18)        (2.88)        (0.002)       (0.002)

Total           2.94         4.11         1955          1789        1.000        1.000       2.85         4.32         1829          1752         1.000        1.000
                (0.01)       (0.03)       (5.31)        (5.64)      (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.02)       (0.08)       (10.19)       (10.66)      (0.000)      (0.000)
Note: Wheat and rice = wheat, atta (flour), and rice. Coarse cereals are jowar (sorghum), bajara (pearl millet), maize, and ragi (finger millet). Pulses are arhar/tur
(pigeon pea), whole and split gram, moong, masur (red lentil), urd (black gram), peas, soyabean, khesari (grass pea), besan (gram flour), and other pulses and
gram products. Milk products include baby food, milk powder, curd, ghee, butter, and ice cream. Edible oils are vanaspati (hydrogenated oil), margarine, mustard
oil, groundnut oil, and coconut oil. Sugar substitutes are gur, candy, misri, honey, and khandsari. Costs are in current prices. Standard errors are in parenthesis.
The average monthly household consumption of wheat and rice is 35kg or higher in the pre-TPDS period in high wheat/rice consuming districts and less than 20
kg in the pre-TPDS period in moderate wheat/rice consuming districts. Pre-TPDS expansion=1993-1994 and 1999-2000; PostTPDS expansion=2004-2005.



                                                                                     31
 Table 3 Estimates of the Effect of Subsidy Amount on Total Per Capita Daily Calorie Intake and Calorie Intake from Specific Food Items
                               High rice/wheat consuming districts: average monthly wheat+rice consumption≥35 kg/household
                                                       IV                                                IV                   Reduced Form Estimates
                                            IV         Log-          IV                      IV          Log-       IV        Prob(BPLCard)*Post-
                     Mean      OLS          Linear     Linear        Log-log     OLS         Linear      Linear     Log-log   TPDS
                               Model 1      Model 2    Model 3       Model 4     Model 1     Model 2     Model 3    Model 4   Model 5     Model 6
Total Calorie        1897      2.974*** -8.641         -0.004        -0.018      2.955***      -1.479      -0.000     -0.002  -132.444    -19.574
(per capita per day)           (0.477)      (5.775)    (0.003)       (0.015)      (0.476)      (3.335)    (0.002)    (0.009)  (89.698)    (60.767)
Calorie from food items:
Wheat and rice       1253      4.366*** 1.844          0.007         0.030       4.375***       6.395     0.012**    0.055**  37.849      126.642*
                               (0.734)      (5.897)    (0.006)       (0.031)      (0.769)      (4.054)    (0.005)    (0.024)  (95.624)    (74.527)

Coarse cereals         146.0     -1.522***    -8.472***    -0.178**     -0.818**       -1.497***   -10.33***     -0.094*      -0.427*     -134.48***     -185.11***
                                 (0.464)      (3.220)      (0.071)      (0.327)          (0.469)     (2.780)     (0.049)      (0.231)     (50.116)       (47.779)

Pulses                 93.81     0.055        0.501        -0.007       -0.029           0.048     1.340***       0.002         0.011     7.828          23.869***
                                 (0.041)      (0.651)      (0.008)      (0.035)         (0.044)     (0.398)      (0.004)       (0.020)    (10.583)       (7.764)

Edible oils            113.8     0.034        0.064        0.003        0.013            0.033       0.762      0.010***     0.046***     0.841          13.251
                                 (0.060)      (0.709)      (0.005)      (0.025)         (0.062)     (0.471)      (0.004)      (0.018)     (11.266)       (8.708)

Milk, eggs, fish       80.05     0.079        -1.323       -0.028       -0.129           0.100       -0.312       -0.005        -0.022    -20.556        -5.157
& meat                           (0.102)      (1.146)      (0.040)      (0.184)         (0.104)     (0.822)      (0.032)       (0.147)    (18.068)       (14.807)

Sugar and sugar        86.40     0.229***     0.896*       0.049*       0.223*         0.200***    1.612***     0.066***     0.303***     13.875*        28.527***
substitutes                      (0.064)      (0.465)      (0.026)      (0.118)         (0.063)     (0.416)      (0.022)      (0.104)     (7.538)        (7.512)

All other foods        125.2     -0.281**     -2.237*      -0.011*      -0.053*        -0.339**     -1.200       -0.003       -0.016      -35.768*       -21.932
                                 (0.133)      (1.325)      (0.006)      (0.029)         (0.128)     (0.966)      (0.004)      (0.021)     (20.714)       (18.171)
District level trends            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes            No          No           No           No           Yes            No
District*Post-TPDS               No           No           No           No             Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          No             Yes
interactions
N                                  13,090       13,090       13,088       13,088       13,090       13,090       13,088       13,088        13,127        13,127
 Note: Figures in each cell are based on a separate regression that controls for household head’s age, education, gender, marital status, and occupation, education
 of other household members, household caste and religion, land ownership, household size, whether land irrigated, ownership of durables, the predicted
 probability of BPL card ownership, household monthly expenditure, year and district fixed effects. The dependent variable is per capita daily calorie from the
 food item listed in the row heading. The reported figures for Models 1-4 are the coefficients on food price subsidy. OLS=ordinary least squares. IV=two-stage
 instrumental variable regression. The sample of analysis is households with less than the median monthly per capita expenditure in districts where the average
 monthly household consumption of wheat and rice is 35kg or higher in the pre-TPDS period. See notes to Table 2 for definitions of food items. Standard errors
 clustered on district of residence, and corrected for two-stage estimation in IV models, are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                                                                  32
                                        Table 4. Estimates of the Effect of Subsidy Amount on Consumption Pattern
                                High rice/wheat consuming districts: average monthly wheat+rice consumption≥35 kg/household
                                                              IV                                            IV                               Reduced Form Estimate
                                                  IV          Log-         IV                     IV        Log-        IV                   Prob(BPLCard)*Post-
                             Mean     OLS         Linear      Linear       Log-log    OLS         Linear    Linear      Log-log              TPDS
                                      Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4                                        Model 5    Model 6
Total food expenditure       223.0    -0.61*** -1.528** -0.009** -0.04*** -0.62*** -0.820*                  -0.005*     -0.023*              -23.85** -14.357*
(in Rs.at 2004-05 prices)             (0.057)     (0.608)     (0.003)      (0.015)    (0.057)     (0.478)   (0.003)     (0.012)              (9.673)    (8.565)

Expenditure on high-cost     75.44      0.080**     0.112        0.002        0.010       0.068*       0.260        0.005       0.024        1.687       4.626
(per calorie) food                      (0.034)     (0.350)      (0.005)      (0.024)     (0.035)      (0.273)      (0.004)     (0.020)      (5.589)     (4.924)

Total non-food               120.1      0.238***    0.166        0.004        0.018       0.266***     0.308        0.007**     0.034**      2.388       5.223
expenditure                             (0.063)     (0.398)      (0.004)      (0.016)     (0.063)      (0.327)      (0.003)     (0.014)      (6.484)     (6.151)

District specific trend        --        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         No           No          No           No           Yes          No
District*Post-TPDS             --        No           No          No            No          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          No           Yes
interactions
N                                        13,099       13,099      13,097        13,097      13,099       13,099      13,097       13,097       13,136       13,136
  Note: Figures in each cell are based on a separate regression that controls for household head’s age, education, gender, marital status, and occupation, education
  of other household members, household caste and religion, land ownership, household size, whether land irrigated, ownership of durables, the predicted
  probability of BPL card ownership, household monthly expenditure, year and district fixed effects. The dependent variable is listed as row heading. The reported
  figures for Models 1-4 are the coefficients on food price subsidy amount. OLS=ordinary least squares. IV=two-stage instrumental variable regression. The
  sample of analysis is households with less than the median monthly per capita expenditure in districts where the average monthly household consumption of
  wheat and rice is 35kg or higher in the pre-TPDS period. Standard errors clustered on district of residence, and corrected for two-stage estimation in IV models,
  are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                 33
          Table 5. Estimates of the Effect of Food Subsidy Amount and Food price subsidy on Per capita Protein and Fat Intake
                                                       IV                IV Log-         IV                                 IV               IV Log-          IV
                                      OLS              Linear            Linear          Log-log           OLS              Linear           Linear           Log-log
Panel 1: Effect of Subsidy Amount
Sample: High rice/wheat consuming districts
Per capita Protein intake
Subsidy Amount                        0.088***         -0.351*           -0.005          -0.025            0.089***         -0.139           -0.002           -0.008
                                      (0.015)          (0.197)           (0.004)         (0.016)           (0.015)          (0.109)          (0.002)          (0.010)
Mean of the dependent variable 53.03                   53.03             53.04           53.04             53.03            53.03            53.04            53.04
N                                     13,083           13,083            13,081          13,081            13,083           13,083           13,081           13,081
Per capita Fat intake
Subsidy Amount                        0.011            -0.177            -0.004          -0.021            0.011            -0.009           0.003            0.015
                                      (0.012)          (0.122)           (0.004)         (0.019)           (0.012)          (0.102)          (0.004)          (0.017)
Mean of the dependent variable 25.50                   25.50             25.51           25.51             25.50            25.50            25.51            25.51
N                                     13,100           13,100            13,098          13,098            13,100           13,100           13,098           13,098
Panel 2: Effect of Price subsidy (% price discount)
Moderate Rice/wheat consuming Districts
Per capita Protein intake
Price Discount                        0.028            -0.007            0.002           0.017             0.030            -0.068           0.003            -0.002
                                      (0.025)          (0.243)           (0.006)         (0.021)           (0.025)          (0.111)          (0.003)          (0.009)
Mean of the dependent variable 53.15                   53.15             53.17           53.35             53.15            53.15            53.17            53.35
N                                     3,740            3,740             3,739           3,371             3,740            3,740            3,739            3,371
Per capita Fat intake
Price Discount                        -0.017           0.111             0.005           0.011             -0.014           0.200            0.007            -0.003
                                      (0.019)          (0.181)           (0.005)         (0.015)           (0.018)          (0.198)          (0.005)          (0.021)
Mean of the dependent variable 31.90                   31.90             31.91           31.94             31.90            31.90            31.91            31.94
N                                     3,746            3,746             3,745           3,376             3,746            3,746            3,745            3,376
Model controls for:
District specific trend               Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes               No               No               No               No
District*Post-TPDS interactions No                     No                No              No                Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Note: OLS=ordinary least squares. IV=two-stage instrumental variable regression. Each figure in rows 1 and 4 of each panel is based on a separate regression
that controls for household head’s age, education, gender, marital status, and occupation, education of other household members, household caste and religion,
land ownership, household size, whether land irrigated, ownership of durables, the predicted probability of BPL card ownership, household monthly expenditure,
year and district fixed effects, in addition to the controls specified in the Table. Standard errors clustered on district of residence, and corrected for two-stage
estimation in IV models, are in parentheses. The sample of analysis is households with less than the median monthly per capita expenditure. Further, the sample
of analysis in panel 1 is restricted to districts where the average monthly household consumption of wheat and rice is 35kg or higher in the pre-TPDS period; the
sample of analysis in panel 2 is restricted to districts where the average monthly household consumption of wheat and rice is less than 20 kg.
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


                                                                                 34
               Table 6 Estimates of the Effect of Food Price Subsidy (% price discount) on Per Capita Daily Calorie Intake from Specific Food Items
                                  Moderate rice/wheat consuming districts (average monthly wheat+rice consumption≤20 kg/Household)
                                                           IV                                                 IV                        Reduced Form Estimates
                                               IV          Log-        IV                        IV           Log-         IV           Prob(BPLCard)*Post-
                         Mean OLS              Linear      Linear      Log-log      OLS          Linear       Linear       Log-log      TPDS
                                  Model 1 Model 2          Model 3     Model 4      Model 1      Model 2      Model 3      Model 4      Model 5     Model 6
Total calorie            1803       0.989         1.505       0.004       0.020        1.049       -0.618       0.004         -0.001    28.381      -10.526
 (per capita/day)                  (0.725)       (7.220)     (0.005)     (0.020)      (0.717)     (3.781)      (0.003)       (0.010)    (138.099)   (77.088)
Calorie by food items:
Wheat and rice           384.7     1.486*       12.980**     0.028*       0.134       1.548*     13.57***      0.033**       0.164**    241.421** 249.55***
                                   (0.733)       (5.339)     (0.016)     (0.085)      (0.738)     (4.618)      (0.014)       (0.080)    (90.507)    (61.541)

Coarse cereals           852.2      -0.649    -13.965**      -0.061*       -0.247      -0.634      -16.88***     -0.052*     -0.308**     -265.683*     -318.092***
                                   (0.723)      (6.940)      (0.032)      (0.156)      (0.719)       (5.349)     (0.026)      (0.144)     (135.000)     (63.356)

Pulses                   98.10      0.059        0.662        0.004        0.009        0.058        0.391       -0.003       -0.015      12.684        7.649
                                   (0.066)      (0.498)      (0.006)      (0.026)      (0.065)      (0.493)      (0.006)      (0.026)     (8.620)       (9.149)

Edible oils              133.3      -0.020       0.990      0.011**        0.034       -0.018        0.748        0.009        0.018      20.550        16.238
                                   (0.095)      (0.752)     (0.005)       (0.025)      (0.094)      (1.017)      (0.008)      (0.042)     (15.885)      (20.633)

Milk, eggs, fish         68.09      0.067        -0.428       -0.026       -0.097       0.063        0.202        -0.005       -0.072     -7.567        4.268
& meat                             (0.055)      (0.569)      (0.043)      (0.152)      (0.062)      (0.450)      (0.042)      (0.183)     (10.560)      (8.591)

Sugar and sugar          123.4     0.091*       1.480*        -0.003       0.014       0.098*       1.708*       -0.006       -0.048      29.117*       33.994**
Substitutes                        (0.051)      (0.827)      (0.021)      (0.069)      (0.049)      (0.931)      (0.019)      (0.082)     (15.173)      (15.759)

All other foods          142.8      -0.031      0.080        0.005        0.005        -0.049        0.082        0.005       -0.002      3.239         3.733
                                   (0.100)     (1.481)      (0.006)      (0.027)       (0.102)      (1.297)      (0.007)      (0.029)     (28.901)      (25.274)
District-trends                   Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes           No           No           No           No           Yes           No
District-post TPDS                No          No           No           No            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          No            Yes
interaction
N                                  3,744        3,744        3,743         3,375       3,744         3,744       3,743         3,375        3,763        3,763
 Note: Figures in each cell are based on a separate regression that controls for household head’s age, education, gender, marital status, and occupation, education
 of other household members, household caste and religion, land ownership, household size, whether land irrigated, ownership of durables, the predicted
 probability of BPL card ownership, household monthly expenditure, year and district fixed effects. The dependent variable is per capita daily calorie from the
 food item listed in the row heading. The reported figures for Models 1-4 are the coefficients on food price subsidy (% price discount). OLS=ordinary least
 squares. IV=two-stage instrumental variable regression. The sample of analysis is households with less than the median monthly per capita expenditure in
 districts where the average monthly household consumption of wheat and rice is 20kg or less in the pre-TPDS period. See notes to Table 2 for definitions of food
 items. Standard errors clustered on district of residence, and corrected for two-stage estimation in IV models, are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                                                                 35
                                Table 7. Estimates of the Effect of Food Price Discount (% price discount) on Consumption Pattern
                               Moderate rice/wheat consuming districts (average monthly wheat+rice consumption≤20 kg/Household)

                                                                 IV                                                 IV                       Reduced Form Estimates
                                                    IV           Log-         IV                       IV           Log-        IV           Prob(BPLCard)*Post-
                             Mean       OLS         Linear       Linear       Log-log     OLS          Linear       Linear      Log-log      TPDS
                                        Model 1     Model 2      Model 3      Model 4     Model 1      Model 2      Model 3     Model 4      Model 5    Model 6
Total food expenditure        210.1     -0.16**     0.270        0.003        0.013       -0.16***     0.245        0.002       -0.005       6.631      6.716
(in Rs.at 2004-05 prices)               (0.055)     (0.564)      (0.004)      (0.014)     (0.054)      (0.690)      (0.004)     (0.015)      (11.149)   (13.321)

Expenditure on high-cost      87.35     0.082*      0.488        0.004        0.010       0.077*       0.527        0.002       -0.000       10.035       10.990
(per calorie) food                      (0.040)     (0.329)      (0.004)      (0.018)     (0.042)      (0.426)      (0.005)     (0.026)      (6.220)      (7.823)

Total non-Food               125.8      0.106***    0.014        -0.000       0.013       0.105**      -0.112       -0.000      0.011        0.314        -2.203
Expenditure                             (0.035)     (0.540)      (0.005)      (0.022)     (0.036)      (0.499)      (0.005)     (0.021)      (10.819)     (9.870)

District-trends                          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes         No          No           No          No            Yes         No
District-post TPDS                       No           No          No            No          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes           No          Yes
interaction
N                                        3,748        3,748       3,376         3,376       3,748       3,748        3,376       3,376         3,765       3,765
  Note: Figures in each cell are based on a separate regression that controls for household head’s age, education, gender, marital status, and occupation, education
  of other household members, household caste and religion, land ownership, household size, whether land irrigated, ownership of durables, the predicted
  probability of BPL card ownership, household monthly expenditure, year and district fixed effects. The dependent variable is listed as row heading. The reported
  figures for Models 1-4 are the coefficients on food price subsidy (% price discount). OLS=ordinary least squares. IV=two-stage instrumental variable regression.
  The sample of analysis is households with less than the median monthly per capita expenditure in districts where the average monthly household consumption of
  wheat and rice is 20kg or less in the pre-TPDS period. Standard errors clustered on district of residence, and corrected for two-stage estimation in IV models, are
  in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                  36
     y


     A




                           U3
                                    C
                     F




                                        U2
                                E



                                                  U1

                                x0            B        D   x

Figure 1. Food price subsidy




                                             37
Table A1 Estimates of the Effect of Subsidy Amount on Nutrition and Consumption pattern
High rice/wheat consuming districts (average monthly wheat+rice consumption≥35 kg/Household)
                                                                   IV                      Reduced Form
                                                      IV           Log-        IV          Prob(BPLCard)*
                              Mean       OLS          Linear       Linear      Log-log     Post-TPDS
Nutrition:                               Model 1      Model 2      Model 3     Model 4     Model 5
Total Calorie                 1897       3.158***     -0.692       -0.001      -0.004      -5.670
(per capita per day)                     (0.506)      (4.318)      (0.003)     (0.010)     (65.525)

Total Protein               53.03     0.097***     0.006       -0.002       -0.007       0.187
(per capita per day)                                                                     (2.496)
                                      (0.017)      (0.163)     (0.003)      (0.013)
Total Fat                   25.50     0.015        0.003       -0.001       -0.002       0.017
(per capita per day)                  (0.012)      (0.078)     (0.004)      (0.014)      (1.194)
Calorie from food items:
Wheat and rice              1253      4.529***     6.907       0.011*       0.043*       111.126
                                      (0.786)      (5.742)     (0.006)      (0.024)      (87.751)

Coarse cereals              146.0     -1.582***    -6.962*     -0.192**     -0.723**     -105.706*
                                      (0.472)      (3.713)     (0.081)      (0.307)      (56.729)

Pulses                      93.81     0.103**      0.861       0.001        0.005        12.964
                                      (0.051)      (0.648)     (0.008)      (0.029)      (9.986)

Edible oils                 113.8     0.043        -0.419      -0.002       -0.007       -6.602
                                      (0.058)      (0.614)     (0.005)      (0.019)      (9.433)

Milk, eggs, fish            80.05     0.107        0.397       -0.008       -0.029       5.855
& meat                                (0.119)      (0.584)     (0.039)      (0.148)      (9.024)

Sugar and sugar             86.40     0.252***     1.106*      0.079**      0.298**      16.478*
substitutes                           (0.065)      (0.605)     (0.039)      (0.143)      (9.620)

All other foods             125.2     -0.317**     -2.489**    -0.003       -0.010       -38.021**
                                      (0.123)      (1.229)     (0.007)      (0.025)      (16.923)
Consumption Pattern:
Total food expenditure      223.0     -0.585***    -1.549**    -0.008**     -0.031**     -23.477**
(in Rs.at 2004-05 prices)             (0.063)      (0.671)     (0.004)      (0.013)      (9.677)

Expenditure on high-        75.44     0.103**      0.237       0.003        0.013        3.394
Cost (per calorie) food               (0.045)      (0.471)     (0.006)      (0.022)      (7.310)

Total non-Food              120.1     0.269***     0.801       0.010**      0.038**      12.030
Expenditure                           (0.067)      (0.524)     (0.005)      (0.017)      (7.766)

District level trends                 No           No          No           No           No
N                                     13,090       13,090      13,088       13,088       13,127

See note to Table 3.




                                                   38
Table A2 Estimates of the Effect of Food Price Subsidy (% Price Discount) on Nutrition and Consumption pattern
Moderate rice/wheat consuming districts (average monthly wheat+rice consumption≤20 kg/Household)
                                                                    IV                         Reduced Form
                                                      IV            Log-         IV            Prob(BPLCard)*
                              Mean       OLS          Linear        Linear       Log-log       Post-TPDS
Nutrition:
Total Calorie                 1803       0.805        -2.061        -0.001       0.000         -41.985
(per capita per day)                     (0.686)      (5.188)       (0.003)      (0.014)       (120.586)

Total Protein                53.12      0.023        -0.078       -0.001        -0.003       -1.673
(per capita per day)                    (0.024)      (0.152)      (0.003)       (0.013)      (3.578)

Total Fat                    31.91      -0.019       -0.158       -0.008        -0.047**     -3.092
(per capita per day)                    (0.018)      (0.157)      (0.005)       (0.023)      (3.444)
Calorie from food items:
Wheat and rice               384.7      1.701**      9.757***     0.010         0.053        210.097**
                                        (0.686)      (3.363)      (0.009)       (0.049)      (83.527)

Coarse cereals               852.2      -0.989       -9.582       -0.047**      -0.235       -208.904
                                        (0.745)      (6.035)      (0.022)       (0.148)      (160.620)

Pulses                       98.10      0.063        -0.100       -0.001        -0.016       -1.519
                                        (0.066)      (0.460)      (0.005)       (0.030)      (9.930)

Edible oils                  133.3      -0.029       -0.777       -0.013        -0.078       -14.251
                                        (0.101)      (1.113)      (0.011)       (0.051)      (24.250)

Milk, eggs, fish             68.09      0.054        -0.305       -0.032        -0.183       -6.466
& meat                                  (0.061)      (0.528)      (0.032)       (0.122)      (11.524)

Sugar and sugar              123.4      0.077        0.599        -0.013        -0.031       13.209
substitutes                             (0.054)      (0.453)      (0.011)       (0.044)      (9.671)

All other foods              142.8      -0.057       -1.591       -0.010        -0.075**     -32.803
                                        (0.110)      (1.163)      (0.007)       (0.036)      (23.642)
Consumption Pattern:
Total food expenditure       210.1      -0.185***    -1.030       -0.008**      -0.045**     -20.891
(in Rs.at 2004-05 prices)               (0.050)      (0.671)      (0.004)       (0.018)      (15.721)

Expenditure on high-         87.35      0.069        -0.200       -0.005        -0.037       -3.636
Cost (per calorie) food                 (0.041)      (0.442)      (0.006)       (0.024)      (9.757)

Total non-Food               125.8      0.139***     1.283**      0.010*        0.058**      27.638*
Expenditure                             (0.046)      (0.567)      (0.005)       (0.023)      (14.616)

District level trends                   No           No           No            No           No
N                                       3,744        3,744        3,743         3,375        3,763

See Note to Table 6.




                                                      39
