                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE EFFECTS OF MANDATORY TRANSPARENCY IN FINANCIAL MARKET DESIGN:
             EVIDENCE FROM THE CORPORATE BOND MARKET

                                         Paul Asquith
                                         Thom Covert
                                         Parag Pathak

                                      Working Paper 19417
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w19417


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           September 2013, Revised April 2019




We are grateful to Hank Bessembinder, Edith Hotchkiss, Leonid Kogan, Deborah Lucas, Jun Pan,
and Alp Simsek for discussions, and Ola Persson and FINRA for conversations about the data.
We also thank Jane Choi, Abhishek Dev, Daniel Green, Joseph Shayani, Josh Weiss, and Ahmad
Zia Wahdat for their research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2013 by Paul Asquith, Thom Covert, and Parag Pathak. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Mandatory Transparency in Financial Market Design: Evidence from the Corporate
Bond Market
Paul Asquith, Thom Covert, and Parag Pathak
NBER Working Paper No. 19417
September 2013, Revised April 2019
JEL No. D47,G14,G18,L51

                                           ABSTRACT

In July 2002, FINRA began mandatory dissemination of price and volume information for
corporate bond trades. This paper, using recently released data, measures transparency’s effect on
trading activity and costs for the entire corporate bond market. Even though trading costs decrease
significantly across all types of bonds, trading activity does not increase and, by one measure,
decreases. Transparency affects high-yield bonds differently than investment grade bonds. High-
yield bonds have the largest decrease in trading activity, 71.1%, and in trading costs, 22.9%. High-
yield bonds also disproportionately contribute to the estimated reduction in total trading costs of
$600 million a year.

Paul Asquith                                     Parag Pathak
MIT Sloan School of Management                   Department of Economics, E52-426
100 Main Street, E62-660                         MIT
Cambridge, MA 02142                              50 Memorial Drive
and NBER                                         Cambridge, MA 02142
pasquith@mit.edu                                 and NBER
                                                 ppathak@mit.edu
Thom Covert
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
thomas.covert@chicagobooth.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19417
I.      Introduction

        Many financial markets have recently become subject to new regulations requiring
transparency. This paper studies how transparency affects trading in the US corporate bond market. In
July 2002, FINRA began requiring the timely public dissemination of post-trade price and volume
information for the $4.4 trillion-a-year U.S. corporate bond market through TRACE (FINRA’s Trade
Reporting and Compliance Engine). Dissemination took place in Phases over two-and-a-half years.
Actively traded, investment grade bonds became transparent before thinly traded, high-yield bonds.
TRACE has become the template for increased transparency in other over-the-counter financial
markets.3 The increase in information due to TRACE was so significant that it has been likened to the
early 20th century introduction of stock market tickers for equities and electronic screens for Treasuries
(Vames 2003).

         When market participants have timely information about transaction prices and quantities, it
may lower search costs and alter bargaining between customers and dealers. Several models suggest
that post-trade transparency reduces trading costs and improve market performance. In Duffie,
Garleanu, and Pedersen (2005)’s search-and-matching model, bid-ask spreads decrease when investors
have greater bargaining power. In models with information differences, a reduction in information
asymmetries also reduces transaction costs (e.g., Glosten and Milgrom 1985). FINRA’s (then NASD)
stated rationale for TRACE emphasized that more information would level the playing field between
institutional and retail market participants. TRACE proponents anticipated that everyone, including
dealers, would benefit from increased market participation. For instance, SEC commissioner Arthur
Levitt (1999) remarked, “This participation means more trading, more market liquidity, and perhaps
even new business for bond dealers.”

         In this paper, we use previously unreleased data to examine the effects of TRACE on trading
activity and costs over all four Phases of its introduction. The new data includes anonymized dealer
identifiers. These identifiers allow us to directly measure trading costs by measuring the cost of round-
trip trades for all bonds. The data also include transaction information on bond trades that were
collected by TRACE, but not publicly disseminated. The non-disseminated trades allow us to exploit
TRACE’s four distinct Phases to estimate difference-in-differences models of TRACE’s effect. This
provides complete coverage across all segments of the bond market for the first time. In addition, our
research design, which exploits the introduction of TRACE in Phases, isolates the effect of transparency
from other elements of market design since bonds continued to be traded over-the-counter in a dealer
market afterwards.



3Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank) (2010) required that
swaps (including credit default swaps, interest rate swaps, collateralized debt obligations, and other derivatives)
adopt TRACE-like post-trade transparency beginning in 2011. In addition, FINRA has expanded TRACE to several
other asset classes, including Agency-Backed Securities, Asset-Backed Securities, and 144a bonds. TRACE was
expanded in March 2010 to include Agency-Backed Securities and in May 2011 to include Asset-Backed Securities.
FINRA started publicly disseminating 144A transactions on June 30, 2014. European MiFID II/R regulations mimic
TRACE for European corporate bonds and were implemented starting January 3, 2018.

                                                                                                                      1
          Bonds differ substantially between the Phases as does trading activity and trading costs. For
example, bonds in the last Phase (3B) are far more likely to be lower rated high yield bonds than bonds
in the first two Phases (1 and 2), which are all investment grade. In addition, bonds in Phase 3B trade
less frequently than bonds in Phases 1, 2, and 3A. At the same time, Phase 3B bonds have the largest
average trade size and the highest trading-cost per round-trip trade.

         These differences in bonds across Phases allow us to show that TRACE has significantly different
effects on the investment-grade and high-yield segments of the bond market. Using a difference-in-
differences methodology, we find that TRACE results in an 11.7% reduction in the number of trades
overall. 4 This result is driven by Phase 3B bonds. TRACE significantly reduces the number of Phase 3B
trades by 71.1% from the mean number of trades prior to dissemination.5 These findings are robust
across variations of our difference-in-differences research design.

        TRACE does not significantly change trading volume for any Phase, however. Even though the
number of trades for Phase 3B bonds decrease, TRACE increases the average trade size for Phase 3B
bonds significantly increases by 4.3% or $50,101. Moreover, the reduction in the number of trades in
Phase 3B is driven by trades less than 100,000. These are exactly the small retail trades that proponents
of TRACE predicted would increase the most, yet the data show that they decrease the most.

         There is no effect on trading volume even though TRACE reduces round-trip trading costs
significantly in each Phase. A round-trip trade is one where a given quantity of a bond is bought and sold
by the same dealer within a certain amount of time. There is a reduction in round-trip trading costs,
both by trade and by bond traded for each Phase. TRACE reduces round-trip trading costs across all
Phases by 18.5% per round-trip trade and 4.9% per round-trip bond traded. The effects on trading costs
are largest, at 22.9% per round-trip trade and 10.9% per round-trip bond traded, for Phase 3B bonds.
These significant effects are present even though Phase 3B occurs more than two-and-a-half years
following the introduction of transparency in segment of the bond market.

        We also investigate differences between dealer and customer trading. We divide round-trip
trades between those with a customer on both ends and a dealer in between (“CDC”), which we refer to
as customer round trips, and those with no customers (“DDD”), which we refer to as dealer round trips.
The customer trading cost per round-trip trade is larger than for dealers at $2,562 for CDCs versus
$1,035 for DDDs. This fact is consistent with dealers having market power or more information than
customers. TRACE has the largest negative effect on customer round-trip trades, and reduces the
dealer cost advantage, but it does not eliminate it. There is a significant reduction in trading cost per
round-trip trade of $454 for CDCs and a $225 for DDDs. On a percentage basis, however, these effects
are similar, showing that TRACE does not level the playing field between customers and dealers.



4Since there is no systematic data on corporate bond trading prior to TRACE’s introduction, we cannot use our
research design to study Phase 1. Following Bessembinder, et. al. (2005), we use data from the National
Association of Insurance Commissioners together with our difference-in-differences research design to measure
Phase 1 effects on trading activity and costs. Appendix A details these results.


                                                                                                                2
         Finally, we estimate that the aggregate reduction in trading costs across all Phases is $605
million per year. We also estimate TRACE’s effect on trading revenues per dealer and find that dealer’s
revenue dropped approximately by $695 million a year from transparency. Moreover, the high-yield and
infrequently traded bonds in Phase 3B account for 21.8% of the reduction in trading cost per round-trip
trade and 34.4% of the reduction in dealer revenues, even though they represent only 5.1% of the
trades.

        Our results extend the existing literature on TRACE, written before it was fully implemented.
Bessembinder, Maxwell, and Venkataraman (2006), focusing on Phase 1 only, which covered investment
grade and large issue bonds, and using data from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners
(but not TRACE), document a reduction in trade execution costs, estimated using a structural model.
Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar (2007) and Hotchkiss, Goldstein, and Sirri (2007) both using investment-
grade bonds in Phase 2 TRACE data report no effect on trading activity and a decline in transaction costs.

         None of these studies consider the last two Phases of TRACE, which cover primarily smaller issue
size bonds and high-yield bonds. Bonds in these segments trade less frequently and were the subject of
the most vocal concerns of TRACE opponents. It was because of these concerns that FINRA phased-in
TRACE over four Phases, and even delayed disseminating certain transactions in the last Phase of TRACE.
Prior work has also focused on model-based estimates of trading costs or reported round-trip measures
of trading costs for small subsamples of bonds. These estimates may not be representative of TRACE’s
overall impact.

         The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents additional background on
TRACE and reviews the related literature. Section 3 describes the Academic TRACE database and
presents descriptive statistics. Section 4 describes our research design. Section 5 reports on trading
activity, while Section 6 reports on trading costs. Section 7 investigates trade sizes and trading partner
(either dealer or customers). Section 8 examines dealer revenue and the aggregate effect of TRACE. The
last section states our conclusions and discusses the implications of our findings.

II.     TRACE and the Corporate Bond Market
II.A    History and Implementation of TRACE

         The Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine (TRACE) was launched in July 2002, but it has its
origins in the late 1990s when the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) reviewed issues related to
price transparency in U.S. debt markets. After this review, the SEC asked the National Association of
Security Dealers (NASD) to take three steps to enhance the transparency and integrity of the corporate
debt market: 1) adopt rules to report all transactions in U.S. corporate bonds to NASD and develop
systems to receive and distribute transaction prices on an immediate basis; 2) create a database of
transactions in corporate bonds to enable NASD and other regulators to take a proactive role in
supervising the corporate debt market; and 3) create a surveillance program to better detect




                                                                                                         3
misconduct and foster investor confidence in the corporate debt market. NASD changed its name to the
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) in 2007.6

         The SEC and NASD’s stated rationale was to level the playing between institutional and retail
participants in the corporate bond market. Advocates of transparency claimed that almost everyone,
including dealers, would benefit because of increased market participation. As mentioned above, SEC
commissioner Arthur Levitt (1999) remarked, “This participation means more trading, more market
liquidity, and perhaps even new business for bond dealers.”

        The anticipated benefits of TRACE and the absence of harm contrasts sharply with the opinions
of many market participants. TRACE opponents argued that “transparency would add little or no value”
to highly liquid and investment grade bonds since these issues often trade based on widely known US
Treasury benchmarks (NASD 2006). Furthermore, the Bond Market Association warned that there
would be negative effects for lower-rated and less frequently traded bonds (Mullen 2004). Dealers may
be less willing to hold inventory because bid-ask spreads subsidize holding costs and TRACE may reduce
these spreads, particularly for less frequently traded securities. Moreover, opponents saw TRACE as
imposing heavy compliance costs, particularly for small firms (Jamieson 2006). Lastly, there was a
concern that dealers who buy large quantities may be particularly disadvantaged since dissemination
would affect the resale price. Not surprisingly, similar arguments for and against transparency
resurfaced in response to the introduction of the Dodd-Frank’s post-trade transparency requirements
for swaps (Economist 2011).

        By January 2001, the SEC approved rules requiring NASD members to report all over-the-counter
(OTC) market transactions in eligible fixed income securities to the NASD and mandating that certain
market transactions be disseminated. NASD developed a platform, TRACE, to facilitate this mandatory
reporting. The rules, referred to as the "TRACE Rules," are contained in the new Rule 6200 Series that
replaced the old Rule 6200 Series, which governed the Fixed Income Pricing System (FIPS). FIPS, which
reported transactions information on approximately 50 high-yield bonds, started in April 1994.

        On July 1, 2002, FINRA implemented TRACE, requiring dealers to report all bond transactions on
TRACE-eligible securities within 75 minutes. As described in Table 1, FINRA began disseminating price
and volume data for trades in selected investment-grade bonds with an initial issue of $1 billion or
greater (i.e., Phase 1 bonds). FINRA’s dissemination occurred immediately upon reporting for these
bonds. FINRA censored trade size reports at $1,000,000 for high-yield bonds and $5,000,000 for
investment grade bonds, due to the concerns about TRACE’s impact on large trades discussed above
(Vames 2003).7



6 http://www.finra.org/Industry/Compliance/MarketTransparency/TRACE/FAQ/P085430, Last accessed: July 14,
2012.
7 Duffie (2012) states that censoring trade information may “reduce inventory imbalances stemming from large

trades with less concern that the size of a trade or their reservation price will be used to the bargaining advantage
of their next counterparties.”

                                                                                                                    4
         A “TRACE-eligible security” is any US dollar-denominated debt security that is depository-eligible
and registered by the SEC, or issued pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Securities Act of 1933 and purchased
or sold pursuant to Rule 144a.8 Additionally, the 50 high-yield securities disseminated under FIPS were
transferred to TRACE, which now disseminated their trades.9 We denote these bonds as the FINRA50.
520 securities had their information disseminated by the end of 2002.

         At the start of Phase 1, it was not certain when and to what extent TRACE would be expanded.
After all, the FIPS program had existed without expansion for eight years. Initially, a bond transactions
reporting committee comprised of NASD and the Bond Market Association members was established to
study TRACE’s impact. Their mandate was to focus not on the largest, highest quality credit and actively
traded issues, but rather on the rest of the market (Vames 2003). Their recommendation was to expand
TRACE’s coverage. The NASD approved the expansion of TRACE on November 21, 2002 and the SEC
approved it on February 28, 2003.

        Phase 2 of TRACE was implemented on March 3, 2003, and it expanded dissemination to include
smaller investment grade issues. The new dissemination requirements included securities with at least
$100 million par value or greater and ratings of A- or higher. In addition, dissemination began on April
14, 2003 for a group of 120 Investment-Grade securities rated BBB. We denote these BBB bonds as the
FINRA120. 10 After Phase 2 was implemented, the number of disseminated bonds increased to
approximately 4,650 bonds.11

         Finally, on April 22, 2004, after TRACE had been in effect for some bonds for almost two years,
the NASD approved the expansion of TRACE to almost all bonds. The last Phase came in two parts,
which FINRA designates as Phase 3A and Phase 3B. The distinction between Phase 3A and 3B was in
response to concerns about the adverse effects of immediately disseminating information on large
trades. Phase 3B bonds are eligible for delayed dissemination. Specifically, Rule 6250(b)(2)(A) states
that transactions greater than $1 million on BB bonds that trade an average of less than one time per
day will be disseminated two business days from the time of execution. Rule 6250(b)(2)(B) states that
transactions greater than $1 million on bonds rated B or lower that trade an average of less than one




8 The list of eligible security types is: (1) Investment-grade debt, including Rule 144A/DTCC eligible securities, (2)
High-yield and unrated debt of U.S. companies and foreign private companies, (3) Medium-term notes, (4)
Convertible debt and other equity-linked corporate debt not listed on a national securities exchange, (5) Capital
trust securities, (6) Equipment trust securities, (7) Floating rate notes, (8) Global bonds issued by U.S. companies
and foreign private companies, and (9) Risk-linked debt securities (e.g., “catastrophe bonds”). TRACE-eligible
securities exclude debt that is not depository-eligible, sovereign debt, development bank debt, mortgage- and
asset-backed securities, collateralized mortgage obligations, and money market instruments.
9 Alexander, Edwards, and Ferri (2000) examine the liquidity of the bonds in the FIPS dataset.
10 The FINRA120 sample was selected by FINRA to study the impact of dissemination on market behavior and has

been studied by Goldstein, Hotchkiss, and Sirri (2007).
11The FINRA50 subset did not remain constant over our time period. On July 13, 2003, the FINRA50 list was

updated, and the list was then updated quarterly for the next 5 quarters. The FINRA50 list was updated on July 13,
2003, October 15, 2003, January 15, 2004, April 14, 2004, and July 14, 2004.

                                                                                                                     5
time per day will be disseminated four business days from the time of execution.12 TRACE eliminated
delayed dissemination on January 9, 2006.

       In Phase 3A, effective on October 1, 2004, 9,558 new bonds started having their trade
information disseminated. In Phase 3B, effective on February 7, 2005, an additional 3,016 bonds started
dissemination, though sometimes with delay. According to the NASD at that point, there was “real-time
dissemination of transaction and price data for 99 percent of corporate bond trades” (NASD 2005).

         In an effort parallel to increasing the number of bonds with disseminated trade information,
FINRA began reporting transactions (except for delayed disseminations discussed above) more quickly:
the time-lag between the dealer’s report to FINRA and its public release was reduced from 75 minutes
on July 1, 2002, to 45 minutes on October 1, 2003, to 30 minutes on October 1, 2004, and to 15 minutes
on July 1, 2005. On January 9, 2006, the same day that delayed dissemination was eliminated, the time-
lag for public release was eliminated and trades were disseminated immediately.

II.B     Related Literature

          There are three early studies of TRACE which focus on Phase 1 or Phase 2. The first,
Bessembinder, Maxwell, and Venkataraman (2006), studies the impact of Phase 1 of TRACE using the
National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) database, before and after the start of Phase 1.
That database contains insurance company transactions of corporate bonds. Bessembinder et al.
estimate a structural model in which changes in bond prices are regressed on customer buy/sell
dummies and other factors to estimate trade execution costs. They estimate a 4.9-7.9 basis point
reduction in trade execution costs for Phase 1 bonds in a before-and-after comparison. They also
estimate that after Phase 1, transaction costs for bonds not covered in Phase 1 decline by 3.5 basis
points, and that there is a decline in the share of trading activity performed by the 12 largest dealers. In
light of the decline in trade execution costs for non-Phase 1 bonds, they argue that the implementation
of TRACE on the large and high credit quality bonds in Phase 1 had spillover effects on other bonds
whose trades were not disseminated.

         Two other studies examine transaction costs for Phase 2 bonds. Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar
(2007) estimate imputed transaction costs using a structural model, similar to the one used in
Bessembinder et al. They find that disseminated bonds have lower estimated transaction costs. Since
this result may be due to bond characteristics rather than the effect of transparency, they also report a
difference-in-differences analysis, which compares the transaction costs of bonds which are newly
disseminated to three distinct control groups of bonds that do not change dissemination status. The
transaction costs of newly disseminated bonds decrease relative to each control group across the entire

12 In addition, dissemination is delayed for the first two days for newly issued BBB rated TRACE-eligible securities
for trades that are executed in the first two days after pricing (all trades for the first two days are reported on the
third day). Similarly, dissemination is delayed for the first ten days for newly issued BB or lower rated TRACE-
eligible securities for trades that are executed in the first ten days after pricing (all trades for the first ten days are
reported on the eleventh). Note our sample is restricted to bonds that trade at least 90 days before the start of
any Phase and therefore these types of delayed dissemination are not present in our sample.

                                                                                                                              6
range of trade sizes. Both Bessembinder et al. and Edwards et al. estimate that investors could have
saved a minimum of $1 billion per year if trades were transparent.

        Hotchkiss, Goldstein, and Sirri (2007) report on a controlled experiment, commissioned by the
NASD, of 120 BBB bonds, 90 of which are actively traded and 30 of which are relatively inactive. Through
cooperation with the NASD, they construct a matched sample of the 90 actively traded bonds based on
industry, average trades per day, bond age, and time to maturity. When the 90 actively traded bonds
were disseminated on April 14, 2003, the matched bond was not. To increase power, they also compare
the disseminated sample to a larger portfolio of non-disseminated bonds. For the 90 actively traded
bonds, they find declines in transaction costs for all but the group with the smallest trade size. There is
no evidence of a reduction in transaction costs for inactively traded bonds. In subsequent work,
Goldstein and Hotchkiss (2012) study new issues of corporate bonds, and find a secular decline in price
dispersion, measured as the difference between high and low prices charged by the same dealer on the
same day, from July 2002 through February 2007, for newly issued bonds. This fall in price dispersion
does not, however, coincide with the start of any of the TRACE phases.

        While these studies provide evidence that TRACE reduces transaction costs for Phase 1 and
Phase 2 bonds, there is little evidence about actual reductions in trading costs and no evidence about
TRACE’s effect on trading activity or trading costs in Phases 3A or 3B. These last two Phases cover
13,940 bonds (or 82.7% of all bonds) and 55.7% of trading activity from July 2002 – December 2006. The
SEC, and others, saw the evidence above as inconclusive, stating that concerns about liquidity were not
rejected.13 Duffie (2012) concludes “the empirical evidence does not generally support prior concerns
by dealers that the introduction of TRACE would reduce market liquidity.” More recently, Dugalic
(2017) studies the behavior of core and peripheral dealers in the period surrounding the introduction of
TRACE. Following our research design, he finds that transparency influences trading between the core
and peripheral dealers.

          The absence of any adverse effect on trading activity is surprising considering the negative
reaction to TRACE from many market participants. For instance, Bessembinder and Maxwell (2008)
survey dealers and report that bond dealers almost universally perceive that trading became more
difficult after TRACE. (See also Jamieson 2006 and Decker 2007).14 This may be a consequence of the
earlier studies’ focus on Phase 1 and Phase 2 since our paper finds a reduction in trading activity for
bonds in Phase 3B.



13 The SEC’s Director of Market Regulation Nazareth (2004) stated “the NASD commissioned two studies to address
this issue [the impact of TRACE on liquidity]. Neither study provided significant evidence that transparency harms
liquidity. However, neither study was extensive enough to address all concerns raised by dealers and other market
participants.” The industry group, the Bond Market Association, described these studies as largely inconclusive
(Mullen 2004).
14 Bessembinder and Maxwell (2008) are skeptical of these claims given that there was an upward trend in

aggregate corporate bond trading from 2002-2007. This increase in aggregate bond trading does not imply TRACE
increased trading activity, however, since there was also an upward trend in the amount of corporate debt
outstanding due to new issues. When we hold the number of bonds constant by examining bonds newly
disseminated in TRACE’s four Phases, there is a downward trend in the number of trades (see Figure 1).

                                                                                                                7
        A set of studies on municipal bonds is also relevant to the TRACE experiment. On January 31,
2005, the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board (MSRB) started requiring that information about
trades in municipal bonds be reported within 15 minutes, similar to TRACE. Prior to that dissemination,
Green, Hollifield, and Schurhoff (2007a) find significant price dispersion in new issues of municipal
bonds, which they attribute to the decentralized and opaque market design. Green, Hollified, and
Schurhoff (2007b) analyze broker-dealer and customer trades, and report that dealers exercise
substantial market power. Schultz (2012) compares price dispersion at offering date for municipal
bonds before and after this change and finds that it falls sharply. Brancaccio, Li, and Schurhoff (2018)
show that the MSRB transparency rule reduced trading volume in uninsured bonds, but not in insured
bonds.

         Other more recent papers use TRACE data to examine aspects of corporate bond trading but are
not directly related to transparency. Bessembinder et al. (2017) study the time series of dealer margins
and capital commitment between 2006 and 2016. They find that while transaction costs (inferred from
their estimates of a structural model) have been relatively stable, some measures of dealer capital
commitment have fallen. Goldstein and Hotchkiss (2017) show that dealers unwind most corporate
bond trades within a day, especially in infrequently-traded or high-yield bonds. Di Maggio, Kermani, and
Song (2017) use TRACE data to estimate trading relationships between corporate bond dealers. They
find that dealers who frequently transact with each other do so at lower margins, and that central
dealers charge higher markups when transacting with peripheral dealers.

         Finally, the theoretical work on the impact of transparency highlights various mechanisms
through which post-trade transparency can impact trading behavior. (See Biais, Glosten, and Spatt
(2005) for a review of the literature on the impact of transparency on financial markets). Madhavan
(1995) demonstrates that dealers may prefer not to disclose trades because they benefit from the
reduction in information. Pagano and Roell (1996) argue that well-informed dealers may be able to
extract rents from less well-informed customers in an opaque market, but that transparency may result
in more uninformed traders entering the market. Bloomfield and O’Hara (1999) show that transparency
can reduce market-makers incentives to supply liquidity, if market makers have more difficulty
unwinding inventory following large trades. On the other hand, Naik, Neuberger, and Viswanathan
(1999) show that transparency can improve dealers’ ability to share risks, which decreases their
inventory costs and therefore customers’ costs of trading.



III.    Data and Descriptive Statistics

III.A    Academic TRACE data and Phase identification

        Beginning in July 2002, TRACE publicly provided price and volume data for disseminated trades
for Phase 1 bonds.15 Simultaneously, FINRA also collected non-disseminated trade data on all trades in


 During our sample period, FINRA censored reported trading volume at $1 million for high-yield bonds and $5
15

million for investment-grade bonds. That is, for trades greater than this amount, the actual trading volume was not

                                                                                                                 8
corporate bonds in the period before public dissemination. In March 2010, FINRA released a “Historical”
TRACE dataset, which includes both disseminated and non-disseminated transaction records, starting
from TRACE’s initiation in July 2002. In February 2017, FINRA appended anonymized dealer identifiers
to the Historical TRACE dataset (now available as the Academic Corporate Bond TRACE dataset).

         We use a cleaned version of the Academic Corporate Bond TRACE dataset, “Academic TRACE”,
to examine the period from July 1, 2002 through December 31, 2006. Within this database, we identify
which bonds FINRA began disseminating trade data on at the beginning of the four Phases. Since Phase
3B, the last major Phase of TRACE, concluded in February 2005, our time period covers all four TRACE
Phases.

         Cleaning this raw data requires a number of steps to process Academic TRACE into our analysis
dataset. The nature of the reporting process makes cleaning the database an essential task. The raw
FINRA database contains self-reported information by bond dealers who are FINRA members. Dealers
are required to report the bond’s CUSIP, the trade’s execution time and date, the transaction price
($100 = par), and the volume traded (in dollars of par). Since every dealer involved in the trade must,
under FINRA regulations, report a trade ticket, many trades are reported more than once. In addition,
dealers must indicate whether they were the buyer or the seller, the identity of the counterparty to the
trade, whether they were acting as a principal or agent, and whether the counterparty to the trade was
a dealer or a customer. Unlike the Public TRACE database, the Academic TRACE does not censor volume
at $1 million or $5 million. Finally, dealers are required to correct errors in previously reported trades
with flags corresponding to trade cancels, modifies, or reversals.

        The cleaning steps and their rationale are described in detail in the online Data Appendix and
outlined in Table B1 in the Online Appendix. We began the cleaning process by first dropping all bonds
not contained in the Mergent Fixed Income Securities Database (FISD), and all bonds with an equity-like
component (since partial price information may be available from the stock market). Then we eliminate
self-reported errors in the trade reports. These are reports for trades that do not actually take place
and they are later modified, cancelled, or reversed.

         Next, trade reports are eliminated that are reported more than once. This occurs either as part
of agency or interdealer principal transactions. Finally, we correct or eliminate trades based on timing,
price, and volume issues. The online appendix and Table B1 enumerate the number of bonds and trade
reports affected by each step.16 After applying the filters described in Table B1, there are 22,582,689
trades, corresponding to 30,814 CUSIPs, remaining in the “Cleaned Academic TRACE Sample”.



reported and TRACE only reported that the trade size exceeded the cap. As of 2018, FINRA continues to censor
trades in high-yield bonds over $1 million and investment-grade bonds over $5 million. The actual trade amounts
are made public after 6 months.

16We do not exclude bond trades that occurred on the NYSE’s Automated Bond System. Even though they take
place on an exchange with publicly available price and quantity, they constitute a tiny fraction of the market. For
instance, Hotchkiss, Goldstein, and Sirri (2007) state that 99.9% of corporate bond trading in 2004 takes place
over-the-counter.

                                                                                                                      9
Phase Identification

        FINRA’s criterion for a bond’s dissemination Phase is presented in Table 1. The main criteria are
the bond issue size and credit rating. FINRA does not indicate a bond’s Phase designation in the
Academic TRACE dataset. As a result, we contacted FINRA and obtained their listings of the bonds
included at the start of Phases 2, 3A, and 3B. We obtained the list of bonds that are in the FINRA50 or
FINRA120 directly from the FINRA website.17

         Since FINRA did not provide us a list of bonds in Phase 1 we constructed the Phase 1 list by first
requiring a bond to have a publicly disseminated trade before the start of Phase 2. 18 Bonds which are in
either the FINRA50 or FINRA120 are excluded from our Phase lists. The online Data Appendix and Table
B2 in the Online Appendix further describe the steps involved in matching the Phase lists to the Cleaned
Academic TRACE database.

        Table B2 shows that after cleaning, there are 388 Phase 1 bonds, 2,526 Phase 2 bonds, 11,081
Phase 3A bonds, and 2,859 Phase 3B bonds. We designate these 16,854 bonds and 15,952,736 trades as
the “Phase Analysis Sample.” The remaining bonds in the Cleaned Academic TRACE database are not
associated with any Phase because either they did not exist at the beginning of their Phases, they were
not present for the entire 90 days before and after the start of the Phase, they were either issued after
the Phase began or they were called before the start of what would have been their Phase. Finally, 107
bonds are not included in our Phases Analysis Sample because they were at some point a part of
FINRA50 or FINRA120.

III.B    Bond Characteristics

         Table 2 shows the distribution of issue size, credit rating, coupon rate, and maturity for our
sample of bonds by Phases. As mentioned above, when assigning bonds to Phases, FINRA uses issue
size and rating as criteria. Table 2 shows the mean bond issue size decreases from Phase 1 to Phase 3A,
consistent with the rules set by FINRA outlined in Table 1. Phase 1 bonds have by far the largest issue
size with a mean of $1.463 billion and Phase 3A bonds are the smallest with mean issue sizes of $86
million. Phase 3B bonds have a mean issue size of $184 million.

        We also report the quartiles of the issue size distribution as well as the 5th, 10th, 90th, and 95th
percentiles. These quantiles show that there is an overlap in issue size between Phases 2, 3A, and 3B.
For example, the median of Phase 3B bonds equals the 25th percentile of Phase 2 bonds and the 75th
percentile of Phase 3A bonds is close to the 25th percentile of Phase 3B bonds. These overlapping
intervals will later allow us to compare bonds with similar issue sizes across Phases 2, 3A, and 3B.

        Data on credit ratings comes from two sources. We first use rating information from S&P
RatingsXpress if it is available. This covers 75.2% of bonds for the four Phases. If ratings are not
available in S&P RatingsXpress, we use ratings from FISD.19,20 FISD includes ratings from S&P, Moody’s,

17 The FINRA50 and FINRA120 samples are defined in the online Data Appendix.
18 This approach will not capture bonds that are classified by FINRA as Phase 1, but do not trade before Phase 2.
19 Akins (2018) states that the S&P RatingsXpress database is more complete than FISD’s S&P ratings database.



                                                                                                                    10
Fitch and Duff and Phelps. To assign a FISD rating, we first use the S&P value if it exists, otherwise, the
Moody’s value, otherwise the Fitch value, and otherwise the Duff and Phelps value. If FISD does not
have a rating from any of the four, we classify the bond as unrated. Using both sources, there are
ratings for 99.3% of bonds, and only 126 bonds are classified as unrated.

        Table 2 shows the distribution of credit ratings at the start of each Phase. The average rating at
the beginning of the Phase is similar between Phases 1, 2, and 3A, at A, A+, and A-, respectively. Bonds
in Phase 3B have a significantly lower average credit rating of B. The distribution of credit ratings shows
considerable overlap between the ratings in Phases 1, 2, and 3A and far less overlap in ratings between
Phase 3B and the other Phases. For example, the 10th percentile rating in Phase 3B is a BB+, while the
90th percentile ratings in Phase 1, 2, and 3A are BBB, A-, and BBB-, respectively.

         Table 2 also describes bond characteristics not used by FINRA when assigning Phases. For
example, most bonds, about 90% in each Phase, have fixed coupon rates. Consistent with its lower
ratings, Phase 3B bonds have the highest coupon rates. In addition, Phase 1 bonds have the lowest
maturity at issue with a mean of 9.2 years and a median of 6.0 years. Bonds from all three other Phases
have a mean maturity of at least 11.8 years and a median maturity of at least 9.7 years.

         FINRA’s definition of the Phases suggests that the major difference between the Phases 1, 2 and
3A is issue size. Phase 3B differs primarily from the other three Phases because of credit rating. If the
market for high-yield bonds behave differently than that for investment-grade bonds, or more generally
bond market trading differs by credit rating, then FINRA’s definition of Phases captures this
segmentation. Any such differences must be accounted for in our later analysis of trading activity and
costs.

III.C    Measuring Trading Activity and Trading Costs

Trading Activity

         We measure trading activity in several ways. Since most bonds trade infrequently, we use one
day as the minimum unit of time. (In our Phase Analysis Sample, the average number of trades per day
for a bond is 1.03). Figure 1 plots the average daily number of trades per bond averaged by week for the
bonds in Phases 1, 2, 3A, and 3B from July 2002 through December 2006 (note: the graph is on a log
scale).21 The four vertical lines correspond to the starting date for each of the four Phases. For all four
Phases, the average number of trades per bond averaged by week fell by about a half over the entire
period from July 2002 to December 2006. While this decrease in trading may be due to TRACE, we
cannot, at this point, exclude the possibility that there is a pre-existing downward trend independent of
TRACE.

20 FINRA does not rely exclusively on S&P ratings. It also uses ratings from other nationally recognized statistical
rating organizations. If a bond is unrated or split rated, FINRA has specific rules determining the bond’s rating for
Phase classification.
21 Figure 1 does not include trading days that SIFMA recommends that bond dealers take off or operate for less

than a full day. Additionally, Figure 1 does not include the two weeks spanning Christmas and New Year’s Day for
each year due to significantly reduced volume.

                                                                                                                    11
         Table 3 reports summary statistics trading activity and trading costs for each Phase in the
window surrounding dissemination. The upper left panel reports the mean number of trades per bond-
day for the period 90 days before and 90 days after the beginning of each Phase.22 Phase 1 bonds trade
most often, averaging over 15.5 trades per day in the 90 days after dissemination. Phase 3B bonds trade
most infrequently, both before and after dissemination, averaging less than 1/3 trade per day. Table 3
also reports the mean trading volume per day. Here, too, trading activity in Phase 1 swamps that in the
other Phases.

        Differences in trading volume across Phases may be due to a difference in bond issue sizes. A
larger bond issue may generate more after-market trading simply because there are more bonds to
trade. As shown in Table 2, the mean issue size of Phase 1 bonds is 5.5 times greater than those in
Phase 2 and Phase 2 bonds’ mean issue size is three times that of bonds in Phase 3A. To examine
whether the difference in volume across Phases is driven by differences in issue size, Table 3 also shows
trading volume per day divided by issue size. Normalizing by issue size reduces the skewness in
comparisons across Phases but doesn’t eliminate it. Trading volume per day divided by issue size in
Phase 1 is now five times that of Phase 3B.

         Going forward, we will use the number of trades as our primary measure of trading activity.
We focus on the number of trades first because that is where we find the strongest and most robust
effects of transparency on trading activity. We also report on volume and volume divided by issue size
in Table 5.

Trading Costs

        We primarily measure trading costs by computing trading cost per round-trip trade and per
round-trip bond traded. A round trip is defined as two trades of the same size in a particular bond where
the buyer in one trade is the seller in the second trade or vice versa.23 For example, if a dealer purchases
a quantity of a particular bond and then later sells the same quantity of the same bond, we define the
two trades as a round trip. The trading cost per round-trip trade is defined as the difference in the total
cost, which is the price times quantity of the trade, between the second and first trade. The trading
cost per round-trip bond traded is defined as the difference in price between the second and first trade.
We report both trading cost per round-trip trade and per round-trip bond traded because trading costs
vary with the number of bonds transacted. Both measures correspond to trading costs associated with
the total round trip; that is, the sum of the trading costs for two consecutive trades.

         The definition of a round trip requires setting a time interval between the two trades. The
period over which the two trades take place can be an hour, a day, or longer. What is important for
identifying a round trip is that one party participates in both transactions, once as a buyer and once as a
seller, and that the amount traded of a particular bond is the same. We classify round trips over several


22 Since bonds trade infrequently, we use a 90-day window to capture changes in trading behavior. In Table 4, we
also look at 60-, and 180-day windows.
23 Round-trip trading costs are commonly used to measure transaction costs in studies of the over the counter

markets, when trade data include dealer identifiers (see, e.g., Goldstein et. al, 2007).

                                                                                                               12
time intervals, including 1, 7, and 14 days. Most round-trip trades occur within one day, but we identify
17.8% more round trips by using the 7-day definition. We focus on 7-day round trips, but also report
findings for 1 and 14 days with no substantial differences. For any given interval, when the first trade
can be paired with multiple second trades, we match it to the trade that is closest in execution time.

        It should be noted that round-trip trades are a subset of all trades. As a result, the number of
bonds used for analysis of trading costs, shown in Table 3’s sample counts, is lower than the number
used for analysis of trading activity. For example, in Phase 1, there are 364,429 trades in the 90 days
following dissemination. 143,458 (39.4 percent), or 71,729 round trips, of them are 7-day round-trip
trades. We can construct 7-day round-trip trading cost estimates in the 90-day window around
dissemination, where there is at least one round-trip observation before and after dissemination, for
78% of Phase 2, 56% of Phase 3A, and 39% of Phase 3B bonds.

        Figure 2 plots 7-day trading cost per round-trip trade averaged by week from July 2002 through
December 2006.24 The figure shows that there is a reduction in trading cost per round-trip trade over
the entire time period for every Phase. The decline in trading cost per round-trip trade seems to begin
at TRACE’s launch and continues through 2006. Trading cost per round-trip trade are highest for Phase
3B bonds and decline the most of any Phase. Although we do not show it, trading cost per round-trip
bond traded also decline over the time period. Trading cost per round-trip bond traded are usually
highest for Phase 3A bonds and lowest for Phase 1 over the entire period.

          Table 3 reports the mean 7-day trading cost per round-trip trade over a 7-day interval for the
90-day window around Phase start dates. The day associated with the 7-day interval is the day of the
first trade in the round trip. We do not include round-trip trades for which one trade occurs before the
Phase start date and the other occurs after it. Trading cost per round-trip trade is lower after
dissemination for Phases 2, 3A, and 3B.

         Table 3 also shows trading cost per round-trip bond traded. Trading cost per round-trip bond
traded are lowest in Phase 3B, but trading cost per round-trip trade are highest in Phase 3B. The reason
for this difference is that Phase 3B trades are larger than the trades in the other Phases, a fact we
investigate later. As with trading cost per round-trip trade, trading cost per round-trip bond traded are
lower after dissemination for Phases 2, 3A, and 3B.

       Since round-trip trading cost measures are only computed for 36.8 percent of all trades for the
90-day windows around each Phase start, we also calculate the daily price standard deviation. This
measures price dispersion for a larger percentage of trades than just round-trip trades. Daily price
standard deviation measured in dollars is defined for bond i on day t as

                                            σit = (∑j (pijt - pit)2)½,                                         (1)

where pijt is the price of bond i for trade j on day t and pit is the average price of bond i on day t.


24As with Figure 1, Figure 2 does not include trading days on which SIFMA reports that dealers take off or operate
for less than a full day. It also does not include the two weeks spanning Christmas and New Year’s Day.

                                                                                                                13
         Like round-trip trading cost measures, price standard deviation requires that there are at least
two bond trades. Unlike round-trip trading cost measures, these two trades do not have to be of
identical size or have a common buyer/seller. Thus, price standard deviation can be computed on a
larger fraction, 97.1%, of the trades. The number of bonds for which we are able to compute daily price
standard deviation is also higher than the number of bonds for which we are able to compute round-trip
trading costs, but not by as much as the number of trades.

         The bottom right panel of Table 3 reports on price standard deviation in the 90-day window
around when a bond changes its dissemination status. There is a reduction in price standard deviation,
measured in dollars, for bonds in all three Phases. The average Phase 2 bond’s price standard deviation
falls from $0.88 to $0.86 per $100 par. The reduction in price standard deviation is greater for Phase 3A
and 3B bonds. The average Phase 3A bond’s price standard deviation falls by $0.05, from $0.86 to $0.81
which is a 6.4% decrease, while the average Phase 3B standard deviation falls from $0.55 by $0.07,
which is a 13.4% decrease.

         A key assumption for studying the effect of transparency on our trading cost measures is that
the probability of a round trip is not affected by dissemination. That is, if the probability of a round trip
rises or falls after dissemination, then the measured effects of dissemination are confounded by changes
in the composition of bonds for which we can measure trading cost. If the bonds that would have
traded without dissemination substantially differ from the bonds that do trade with dissemination, then
it may be difficult to attribute changes in round-trip trading costs to dissemination. This appears to not
to be an issue for our sample. 25 To further address the role of bond sample composition for our round-
trip trading cost findings, in our analysis, we will construct a matched sample of bonds which holds the
observable characteristics of bonds constant before and after dissemination.

25The probability that any of the Phase 2, 3A, or 3B bonds has a trade that is part of a round-trip trade in the 90
days before dissemination is 9.13%. To test whether this probability changes after dissemination, we estimate the
effect of dissemination on the probability that a bond has a trade that is part of a round-trip trade. The estimates
come from a difference-in-differences regression similar to those estimated in Table 4, where the dependent
variable is an indicator for whether a bond has a trade that is part of a round-trip trade on a given day. (The next
section introduces our difference-in-differences methodology.) There is a statistically significant 2.2% reduction in
the probability of having a trade that is part of a round-trip trade for treated bonds across all three Phases.

Assuming that the likelihood of trading is independent across days, this 2.2% reduction implies that TRACE causes a
negligible reduction in the probability that a bond’s round-trip trading costs can be measured in the 90-day
window. The estimated probability that a bond is no longer in the round-trip trading cost sample due to
dissemination is less than 0.01%. This is calculated as follows: the probability that in any day among the 90
calendar days before there is a trade that is part of a round trip and that in any day among the 90 calendar days
after dissemination there is a trade that is part of a round trip is equal (1-(1-Pr(at least one trade that is part of a
round trip))^64) * (1-(1-Pr(at least one trade that is part of a round trip))^64), where 64 is the average number of
trading days among 90 calendar days. The 2.2% reduction in the probability of having a trade that is part of a
round-trip of 9.13% yields a 0.01% reduction in the probability that a bond will be in round-trip trading cost sample
due to dissemination.



                                                                                                                     14
IV.     Difference-in-Differences Research Design

        The before-and-after comparisons in Table 3 do not establish that dissemination affected
trading activity and trading costs because they are contemporaneous with the market-wide downward
trends that we see in Figures 1 and 2. We, therefore, adjust for potential market trends by comparing
the changes in the sample of newly disseminated bonds (the treated sample) to those who do not
change dissemination status (the control sample) by estimating difference-in-differences models of the
form:

                   yit = i +  Disseminatei +  Postt +  Disseminatei x Postt + it,                       (2)

where yit is bond i’s outcome (i.e., measures of trading activity or trading costs) on day t, i is a bond-
specific effect, Disseminatei is an indicator for whether the bond changes dissemination status (i.e., is in
the treated group) and Postt is an indicator for the trade outcomes on days after the dissemination
period. Since there are repeated observations per bond, in all estimates, the standard errors are
clustered by bond. We include bond fixed effects to adjust for the fact that not all bonds may have an
outcome in the 90 days before and in the 90 days after changes in dissemination. 26 Further, for trading
costs, we require that there is at least one round-trip trading cost observation both in the 90 days
before and in the 90 days after each Phase date for all treated and control bonds.

         In equation (2), any pre-existing difference between bonds that change dissemination status and
those that do not are captured by . Any effects of dissemination that accrue to all bonds – that is,
effects that are not limited to only bonds that change their dissemination status in the Phase – are
absorbed by time effects . The coefficient of interest is , which estimates the direct effect of
transparency on a bond’s trading outcome. The coefficient  reflects the change in trading outcomes
for bonds that change dissemination status compared to the change in trading outcomes for bonds that
do not change dissemination status. Estimates of  therefore, net out aggregate changes in bond
trading outcomes.

        It is possible that changes in dissemination will also affect bonds that do not change
dissemination if the market impounds trading information on newly disseminated bonds into all bond
trading. Indeed, the overall downward trend in the number of trades and trading cost per round-trip
trade in Figures 1 and 2 may be the consequence of TRACE’s introduction in July 2002. However, we
cannot assert that TRACE caused this decrease because we do not observe trading activity before Phase
1. The overall downward trend could instead be due to macroeconomic factors affecting the corporate
bond market. For example, the Federal Reserve raised interest rates 17 times from June 2004 through



26For many of our trading activity measures (number of trades, volume, volume / issue size), we observe the level
of trading activity, or its absence, for every bond on every day. For average trade size and all of the trading cost
measures, we only observe a value for a bond in a day if there is enough data to compute it. For example, a bond
must trade on a given day to compute the average trade size. Moreover, we must observe a round-trip
transaction to measure a round-trip trading cost, and we must observe two transactions on a day to compute price
standard deviation.

                                                                                                                 15
June 2006 (NASD 2006). In our regression equation, the time effects incorporate all these potential
factors, and therefore we cannot interpret the estimates of  as a causal effect of dissemination.

        Our estimate of  isolates the effect of transparency from other elements of market design
since bonds continued to be traded over-the-counter in a dealer market afterwards. That is,  does not
confound the effect of transparency with other reforms such as changes in trading protocols from over-
the-counter to exchange trading. However, for  to provide unbiased estimates of the causal effect of
transparency there are several important necessary assumptions. First, transparency and its
consequences must not have been fully anticipated by market participants; to the degree that impacts
were foreseen by traders and dealers, the impacts on trading activity and costs would appear before the
actual change in dissemination status. If all trade outcomes responded immediately at Phase 1, our
TRACE results for Phases 2, 3A, and 3B would only measure the incremental impact of later Phases of
TRACE. Bessembinder, Maxwell, and Venkataraman (2006) first emphasized this point when they argued
that TRACE’s initiation affected all bonds, not only those in Phase 1. In this case, our estimates
understate the true impact of TRACE. (In Appendix A, we investigate Phase 1 using a separate data set
from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners. That appendix shows that the NAIC data is
not representative of the entire market.)

        It seems unlikely that the effects of TRACE occurred in their entirety at the beginning of Phase 1.
Even though TRACE started collecting information on trade activity for all bonds from July 1, 2002, the
schedule of when transaction data would be disseminated remained uncertain. The timing of the
expansions was not initially known and took place incrementally, depending on both FINRA and SEC
approval. For example, FINRA approved Phase 2 on November 21, 2002, but the SEC did not approve it
until February 28, 2003. Phase 2 was implemented on March 3, 2003. Thus, participants knew in
advance that dissemination would expand, but they did not know its exact timing until shortly before it
occurred.

        The second assumption for  to be a causal estimate is that there are no other changes
simultaneous with the Phase start date that affects the trading activity for those bonds changing
dissemination status. That is, in equation (2), the interaction between Disseminate and Post is
uncorrelated with other unmeasured factors that affect trade activity that change at the same time as
the change in dissemination status (but are not caused by the change in dissemination status). There
are trends in bond market trading during our time period, but we are unaware of any changes to bond
market trading that coincide with the Phase start dates.

         Finally, a third assumption is that we can measure the counterfactual difference in bond trading
with the bonds that do not change dissemination status. That is, we assume that the change over time
in control bonds’ behavior reveals what would have occurred to treated bonds if there had been no
change in their dissemination status. Note this assumption does not mean that control bonds must
have the same characteristics as treated bonds, but rather that the change in their behavior captures
the counterfactual time path. This is important because our treated bonds have different attributes
than our control bonds by definition. FINRA selected bonds for Phases based on characteristics such as
ratings and issue size. For instance, Phase 2 bonds are investment grade and have an original issue size

                                                                                                        16
of at least $100 million. Hence, our third assumption will be violated if bond trading activity varies
substantially over time due to different bond characteristics. We examine the sensitivity of our results
to these three assumptions in the next section.

         To estimate equation (2), there are two implementation decisions. First, it is necessary to
specify the estimation window. Since bonds trade infrequently, a longer time window may be needed
to observe changes in trading activity. A longer time window, however, may undermine the assumption
that the time path of the control group represents the time path of the treatment group absent a
change in dissemination status. Moreover, if dissemination only has a short-run effect, it will be harder
to detect with a longer time window. For these reasons, we calculate estimates of equation (2) for three
different estimation windows covering 60, 90, and 180 days surrounding the Phase start dates.

        The second implementation decision is how to define the control bonds for any Phase for these
regressions. Because of the four distinct TRACE Phases, there are several possibilities for defining
control bonds. Control bonds can be defined as bonds that were already disseminated before the Phase
begins. Alternatively, a control group can be defined as bonds that are disseminated in a later Phase.

        At first, the control bonds for Phase 2 are the disseminated bonds in Phase 1, and the non-
disseminated bonds in Phase 3A and Phase 3B. For Phase 3A and Phase 3B, the control bonds are the
disseminated bonds in Phase 1 and Phase 2. Phase 3A bonds are not a control for Phase 3B and vice
versa because Phase 3A and Phase 3B occur just over four months apart, on October 1, 2004 and
February 7, 2005, respectively. If we use a 90 or 180-day window before and after a Phase to capture
the effects of dissemination, the post-dissemination trading of Phase 3A overlaps with the pre-
dissemination trading of Phase 3B. We examine variations on the control group definition, including
dropping Phase 1 bonds as a control for each Phase.

         Finally, we conduct our analysis for three samples: the sample described above, truncating the
outliers, and winsorizing the outliers. We truncate and winsorize our bond-day data for the entire
sample period (July 2002 – December 2006) for all our trading activity and trading cost outcomes
separately i.e. a trade that is truncated for one measure does not necessarily get excluded in another
measure.27 The statistical significance of our results and their interpretation does not change across
these three samples. We report the results for the truncated samples because we feel they provide a
more accurate representation of the effects of dissemination. This is particularly true since TRACE is a
self-reported dataset that covers an initiation period. We found several obvious data entry errors,
particularly when TRACE first started, and FINRA did not yet screen the data entries.




27For trading activity measures, number of trades, volume, volume/issue size and trade size, we truncate and
winsorize at the right tail at 99.99 percentile. For example, for our 90-day number of trades measure, truncating
for the entire sample period by bond-day eliminates 613 bond-days out of 3,421,687 bond-days across treatment
and control groups. For the trading cost measures, trading cost per round-trip trade, trading cost per round-trip
bond traded, and daily price standard deviation, we truncate and winsorize our bond-day data at 0.01 and 99.99
percentiles. For dealer revenue outcomes in Table 10, we truncate and winsorize at again 0.01 and 99.99
percentiles, but at the dealer-day level.

                                                                                                                17
V. Estimates on Trading Activity

V.A Number of Trades

        Table 4 reports estimates of equation (2) for 60, 90, and 180-day windows for bonds in Phases 2,
3A, and 3B, separately. It also reports pooled estimates, based on equation (2), with data stacked across
the three Phases. In the pooled estimates, i, 0 and 1 vary by Phase, but  does not.

        The estimate of the effect of TRACE on the number of trades per day, pooled across all three
Phases, is negative and significant for all three estimation windows. For example, across all Phases, the
number of trades drops by 0.088 in the 90-day window around dissemination, which is significant at the
1% level. This is a 11.7% reduction from 0.754, the average level before dissemination.

         Across Phases, the reduction in number of trades is driven by Phase 3B, where it is largest and
significant for all estimation windows at the 1% level. In the 90-day window, TRACE reduces the average
number of trades for Phase 3B bonds by 0.236. This represents a 71.1% drop from the average level
before dissemination. The results are similar for the 60-day and 180-day windows.

         The estimates in Table 4 do not tell us how long it takes for the market to react, if at all, to a
change in dissemination. Changes may be immediate or even prior if market participants anticipate the
effects of dissemination in advance of Phase start dates. On the other hand, changes due to
dissemination may occur with delay because of adjustment costs, e.g., rebalancing inventories, faced by
market participants. Delays may also occur if participants require time to utilize the newly available
data. Moreover, the relative infrequency of bond trading may make it difficult to detect the effects of
dissemination in short estimation periods.

         To examine when the effects of dissemination begin, we next estimate an “event-study” version
of the regression model that allows the effects to differ by one-week intervals:

 yit = i + 0 Disseminatei + w One-Week Intervalt + w Disseminatei x One-Week Intervalt + it,     (3)

where the One-Week Intervalt is an indicator of whether day t is in week w. Equation (3) is estimated
for each Phase separately. 0 captures any pre-existing difference between disseminated and non-
disseminated bonds, while w captures the overall trend in trading outcome in week w.

         The estimate of w is the amount by which the average newly disseminated bond deviates in
trading outcomes (either number of trades or trading cost per round-trip trade) from control bonds
during the one-week interval w. If there is a trend in the market that only affects bonds that change
dissemination status, it should be reflected in the relative levels of w. For example, if number of trades
in newly disseminated bonds is trending down in the time period before a change in dissemination, the
w’s will be higher before than after. Since the estimates of w are based on one-week contrasts, they
will be estimated less precisely than models which impose a common effect for the period before and a
separate common effect for the period after as in equation (2).



                                                                                                         18
          Figure 3 plots values of w for number of trades for each week by Phase. We adopt the
convention that week 0 includes the dissemination date and the six calendar days following it. We
normalize w to be zero in the week before the change in dissemination (i.e., week -1) and we add a
vertical line to the plot for that week.28 The horizontal dotted lines before and after the vertical line at
week -1 represent the average value of w in the 90 days before and after dissemination, respectively.
The patterns in Figure 3 for Phase 2 and 3A are consistent with the results in Table 4, i.e. dissemination
has little effect on the number of trades for these bonds since there is only a small change in the
horizontal line after dissemination in Figure 3.

         Phase 3B bonds, however, experience a sharp and significant drop in number of trades from the
period preceding dissemination to the period after it (as shown by the dotted horizontal lines) in Figure
3. The horizontal line after dissemination is substantially below that of the line prior. The plot of week-
by-week estimates shows that the reduction in the number of trades does not appear immediately, but
it occurs approximately five weeks after Phase 3B begins. In addition, for Phase 3B, the level of trading
activity remains lower for the 13 weeks after dissemination begins. This persistent reduction is
consistent with Table 4 which shows a significant reduction in Phase 3B difference-in-differences
estimates for 60, 90, and 180–day windows. The lack of any pre-trend in number of trades for all
Phases provides support for our identification assumption of incomplete anticipation. Moreover,
because the weekly results for trading activity occur only after five weeks, we focus on estimates for the
90-day window.29

V.B. Robustness Checks: Time Trends and Control Groups

         An assumption underlying the difference-in-differences methodology is common parallel trends.
That is, we assume that if treated bonds had not changed their dissemination status, their trading
behavior would follow the same trajectory as the control bonds. However, it is possible that trading
outcomes for newly transparent bonds follow different trajectories than control bonds, even in the
absence of transparency. As discussed above in Section IV, one reason for this possibility is that the
control bonds have different characteristics than treated bonds, particularly since FINRA uses size and
credit ratings to determine Phase classifications.

         In column (5) of Table 4, we relax the common parallel trends assumption by estimating
specifications that allow the trade outcomes for bonds to evolve over time depending on whether they
are investment-grade or not. Specifically, we estimate models with linear and quadratic time trends by
including Phase- and credit-rating-specific quadratic functions of time in equation (2) as follows:

                                 yit = i +  Disseminatei + i t + i t2                                (4)
            + i High Yieldi t + i High Yieldi t2 +  Postt +  Disseminatei x Postt + it,



28 Since the event study includes the period from 90 days before and 90 days after day 0, there is one fewer
calendar day in week -13.
29 Although not shown, results in Table 4 column (6)-(8) and Table 5 with a 60 and 180-day window are similar to

those from a 90-day window.

                                                                                                                   19
where High Yieldi is an indicator for bond ratings of BB+ and below. For each Phase, the variable t starts
at zero at the beginning of the time window. For the pooled estimate, we estimate separate Phase-
specific trends.

       With these flexible time trends, the large and negative 90-day estimate on number of trades for
Phase 3B remains significant at the 1% level. However, the pooled estimate is no longer significant.

        Finally, we address the robustness of the Table 4 results by considering two variations on the
control group. The adequacy of the control group is a substantial concern in any difference-in-
differences research design and may be particularly worrisome in our setting since bonds in each Phase
have different attributes by definition. In particular, high-yield bonds are concentrated in Phase 3B, so if
the high-yield bond market is unrelated to the investment-grade market, there may be no appropriate
control for Phase 3B. However, the necessary assumption is that the time-path of control bonds
represents the time-path that treated bonds would have been on had they not been disseminated, not
that control bonds have the same characteristics as treated bonds.

        We first examine the sensitivity of our estimates to the definition of control bonds by
eliminating Phase 1 bonds from the control group. As discussed above, Phase 1 bonds are larger and
more actively traded than bonds in any other Phase. It is, therefore, possible that the change in trading
behavior of Phase 1 bonds does not provide an adequate counterfactual for non-Phase 1 bonds that
change their dissemination status. In column (6) of Table 4, we report estimates for trading activity
where Phase 1 bonds are not used as controls. This means that for Phase 2, the control bonds are from
Phase 3A and 3B. For Phase 3A and 3B, the control bonds are from Phase 2.

       For the number of trades, our estimate for Phase 3B is sensitive to using Phase 1 as a control, as
shown by comparing column (6) to column (3). The significant decline for the pooled sample and for
Phase 3B disappears.

          Second, we construct a matched sample, restricting the treated sample to bonds for which there
is a suitable control bond with similar pre-treatment characteristics. The pre-treatment bond
characteristics we use to construct the matched sample are issue size, time to maturity at Phase start,
and years since issue at Phase start. To construct the matched sample, we divide the sample (which
includes Phase 1 bonds) by issue size into four quartiles. For the other two characteristics, we construct
two groups: above and below the median time to maturity, and above and below the median years
since issue. This results in 16 potential cells for each Phase. We exclude a cell if there are either fewer
than 5 treated bonds or fewer than 5 control bonds. The match for Phase 3A bonds is not as
comprehensive because of their smaller issue size. Our matched sample covers close to 100.0% of Phase
2 and Phase 3B bonds in our trading activity sample, but only 39.9% of Phase 3A bonds. For round-trip
trading costs, we cover 100% of Phase 2 and 3B bonds in our round-trip trading costs sample, but only
45.3% of Phase 3A bonds.

        The estimates for the matched-sample difference-in-differences regression are in column (7) of
Table 4. To control for bond attributes, we add a dummy variable for each cell to equation (2) and
interact the cell dummy with Post and treated. Their inclusion means that our estimates are a weighted

                                                                                                         20
average of the within-cell difference-in-differences estimates. For the matched sample, the number of
trade estimates in column (7) for the pooled sample and Phase 3B remain negative and significant.

          In summary, bonds in Phase 3B experience a large and economically significant decline in the
number of trades following dissemination. This result is robust to alternative specifications which allow
for more flexible trends and when the sample is matched on size, time to maturity, and years since
issuance. There is also a reduction in the number of trades for the sample pooled across Phases. This
result is sensitive to the assumptions on common trends and the set of control bonds and is primarily
driven by Phase 3B bonds. We do not detect significant changes in trading activity for Phase 2 and 3A
bonds.

V.C. Other Measures of Trading Activity

         We next examine several other measures of trading activity: volume, volume divided by issue
size, and average trade size. The first two measures are zero when there is no trade. Average trade size
is only observed when there is a trade.

         Table 5 shows that dissemination causes no reduction in trading volume pooled across Phases,
or for Phases 3A and 3B. There is a slight reduction in trading volume for Phase 2 bonds, but this result
is marginally significant. The decrease in the number of trades shown in Table 4 is therefore not
associated with a corresponding large change in volume. That is, as measured by trading volume, we do
not find that dissemination systematically reduced trading activity.

        We find some weak evidence that TRACE reduced trading activity as measured by volume/issue
size. For the pooled sample, volume/issue size drops by -0.012, which is a 6.5% reduction from the
mean volume/issue size of 0.186. This effect is driven by Phase 2 bonds only. Bonds in Phase 3A and 3B
do not experience a reduction in volume/issue size.

         The last two columns of Table 5 reports on trade size. The number of trades per day for Phase
3B bonds (shown in Table 3) is about one-fifth that number in Phase 2. However, when a Phase 3B
trades, the average trade size is much larger than that in any other Phase. The average trade size for a
Phase 3B bond is 1,178,134, compared to 709,546 for Phase 2 and 541,930 for Phase 3A.

         Tables 4 and 5 together show that the significant decrease in the number of trades in Phase 3B
is not associated with a corresponding decline in volume. Therefore, it must be the case that there is an
increase in trade size for Phase 3B. In fact, there is a significant increase in trade size for Phase 3B
bonds of 50,101, which is equivalent to 4.3%.30

         In summary, for Phase 3B bonds, we have fewer trades but of larger size, resulting in no
significant effect on volume or volume divided by issue size. These results are noteworthy because of
the aforementioned TRACE provision that Phase 3B bonds are subject to delayed dissemination if their


30 Since trade size is only observed when a bond trades, it is possible that this result confounds changes in trade
size with changes in the sample of bonds that trade. We therefore estimate trade size effects for the sample of
bonds that trades at least three or at least 10 times in the 90 days before the Phase, and we find similar effects.

                                                                                                                      21
transaction size is $1 million or greater, they are infrequently traded, and they are high-yield. Thus, it
appears that TRACE induced a change in trading behavior because of the delayed dissemination
provision since Phase 3B bonds are both less frequently traded but when traded are larger trades. We
will investigate this issue further below.

VI. Estimates for Trading Costs

VI.A Trading cost per round-trip

        We next study the effect of TRACE on trading costs as we did for trading activity by deploying
the same methodology. Table 6 reports estimates of equation (2) for 60, 90, and 180-day windows for
bonds in Phases 2, 3A, and 3B, separately, and pooled together, where the outcome variable is 7-day
trading cost per round-trip trade.

        There is a robust decline in trading cost per round-trip trade due to TRACE. In the 90-day
window, the pooled estimate of the reduction in 7-day round-trip trading cost per round-trip trade is
$241 (18.5%) and is highly significant. When divided by Phase, there is a decline for all three Phases. For
Phase 2, there is a significant 17.7% reduction in trading costs, measured with the 90-day window. For
Phase 3A, the estimate is negative for 60, 90, and 180-day windows, but it is only significant for the 180-
day window. For Phase 3B, the estimate is significantly negative for all the estimation windows. The
percentage reduction is also the largest for Phase 3B compared to the other Phases. For example, in
the 90-day window, the largest drop in trading cost per round-trip trade is $924 for Phase 3B which is
22.9% drop from the mean of $4,030.

        The event study plots in Figure 4 show a clear drop in week-by-week estimates at dissemination
for round-trip trading costs for all three Phases. This is similar to the difference-in-differences results in
Table 6 where the estimate is strongest for Phase 3B bonds, and the reaction to TRACE is most
immediate. As with trading activity, the lack of any pre-trend in round-trip trading costs for all Phases
supports for our identification assumption of incomplete anticipation.

         Table 6 also reports several specifications paralleling those in Table 4 which allow for differential
time trends and control groups. With trends, the estimates of TRACE on round-trip trading costs remain
significant in the pooled sample, but slightly smaller in magnitude (a reduction of $141 vs. a reduction of
$241). The estimates for Phase 2 and 3B are still significant, but smaller.

         Unlike our estimates for trading activity, the estimates on round-trip trading costs are very
similar when we exclude Phase 1 bonds from the control set. The 90-day estimates reported in column
(6) are similar to our base results in column (5) both in magnitude and significance. These estimates are
also quite similar when we use the matched sample of control bonds, shown in column (8).

       Therefore, there is strong evidence that TRACE reduced trading cost per round-trip trade, with
most pronounced effects for Phase 3B bonds. The results for Phase 3B appear in all time windows and
are negative and significant in all the alternative specifications. The results for Phase 2 bonds are



                                                                                                            22
similarly robust, but not as large in magnitude. The point estimates for Phase 3A bonds are negative,
but we cannot definitely assert that dissemination reduced trading cost per round-trip trade.

VI.B Other Measures of Trading Costs

        Table 7 presents several alternative measures of trading costs as robustness tests for the 7-day
trading cost per round-trip trade reported in Table 6. First, we consider two additional windows for
trading cost per round-trip trade: 1 day and 14 days. We then examine trading cost per round-trip bond
traded for 1-day and 7-day windows. Finally, we examine daily price standard deviation per bond.
Compared to the 7-day window in Table 4, there are fewer round-trip trades defined over a 1-day
window and more round-trip trades defined over a 14-day window.

         Our conclusions about the effect of TRACE on trading cost per round-trip trade are similar when
we consider 1-day and 14-day windows. The pooled estimate of TRACE on trading cost per round-trip
trade for 1-day and 14-day round-trips are -$267 (20.6%) and -$273 (20.3%) respectively, both of which
are statistically significant. For Phase 3B bonds, the pattern of estimates and significance levels for 1-
day and 14-day windows is similar to that using the 7-day round-trip measure.

         We next examine trading cost per round-trip bond traded in columns (5)-(8). The mean round-
trip trading cost per round-trip bond traded is lowest in Phase 3B, and highest in Phase 3A pre-TRACE.
In contrast, the mean trading cost per round-trip trade is highest in Phase 3B, and lowest in Phase 3A.
The reason for this difference is the larger average trade size in Phase 3B. Pooling across the three
Phases, the 1-day trading cost per round-trip bond traded decrease significantly by -0.033 after
dissemination, which is equivalent to a 3.9% reduction. The pooled 7-day round-trip trading cost per
trade also decreases significantly by -0.047 or 4.9%.

        Closer examination shows that the decline in trading cost per round-trip bond traded are largest
for Phase 3B bonds. The total trading cost per round-trip bond traded drop by -0.075 and -0.061 over 1-
day or 7-day round-trip windows or 14.1% and 10.9%, respectively. The effects for Phase 3A bonds are
also negative, while the effects for Phase 2 bonds are negative for 7-day round trips but not for 1-day
round trips.

         A limitation of the round-trip trading cost measures, either computed per bond or per trade, is
that it can only be computed for a subset of bonds with round-trip trades. To expand the sample, we
therefore also report estimates on the price-standard deviation. Standard deviation still requires at least
2 trades per bond but does not require the stronger restrictions of a round trip. As with round-trip
trading costs, we restrict the sample to bonds which have at least one measured price standard
deviation observation in the 90 days before and after each Phase date. The sample for standard
deviation has 589,716 bond-days compared to the sample size for 7-day round trips of 415,993 bond-
days. Dissemination significantly reduces price standard deviation for the pooled sample, and for Phase
3A and Phase 3B.

        To summarize, the results on alternative measures of trading costs shown in Table 7 support the
fact that TRACE reduced overall trading costs, in particular for Phase 3B bonds. Phase 3B bonds

                                                                                                        23
experience a significant and large reduction in round-trip trading cost per bond and per trade. The
percentage decrease in trading costs is between 10.9% and 29.0% depending on the measure.

VII. Additional Results

VII.A Trading Activity and Trading Costs by Trade Size

        The difference between trading cost per round-trip trade and trading cost per round-trip bond
traded suggests that trade size must be considered in measuring the effects of dissemination. Moreover,
Table 4 suggested that Phase 3B bonds are more likely to trade in larger quantities because TRACE
regulations allow for some large Phase 3B trades to be disseminated with delay. Finally, a major
motivation for TRACE was to encourage participation by retail investors, who transact in smaller
quantities. For all these reasons, we next consider how trading activity and costs differ by trade size.

         Table 8 reports 90-day difference-in-differences estimates on trading activity and costs pooled
and by Phases for three categories of trade sizes: < $100K (small), $100-$1M (medium), and $1M+
(large). We chose these categories because trades under $100K are often associated with retail trades,
and as discussed above, TRACE had dissemination provisions specific to trades greater than $1M+.

        Panel A of Table 8 shows that roughly two-thirds of all trades are small. In the 90 days before
dissemination, 67.7% of all trades are small, and in the 90 days after dissemination, 68.9% are. In
contrast, most of the volume is accounted for by large trades, with 89.8% and 89.6% before and after
dissemination, respectively.

         Panel B shows the effect of dissemination on the number of trades is significantly negative for
all three trade size categories, when pooled across Phases. The estimates range from -0.066 to -0.012,
or -12.2% to -8.6% for the three size categories. Although not shown in the Table, aggregating this
result across the size categories results in a decrease in the total number of trades of -0.096 which is
similar to the pooled effect on the number of trades reported in Table 4 of -0.088.

        When split by Phase in Panel C, TRACE appears to have reduced the number of trades
differentially across Phases. Large trades drop significantly for Phase 2, medium-size trades drop for
Phase 2 and 3A, and small trades drop for Phase 3B. TRACE did not increase the number of trades for
any size and Phase combination.

         The largest reduction in trading activity occurs for small trades in Phase 3B. In fact, almost the
entire reduction in the number of trades for Phase 3B is due to fewer small trades. Returning to the
question of the effect of the delayed dissemination provision for Phase 3B trades, we find that there is
not an increase in the number of large Phase 3B trades, even though there is an increase in average
trade size. The reason average trade size in Phase 3B increases is because small trades are taking place
less frequently, raising the average trade size. Thus, traders did not appear to increase their number of
large trades to avoid immediate dissemination.

        Finally, these results in Table 9 mean that TRACE did not increase the number of small (retail)
trades as anticipated for any of the Phases, and significantly decreased it for Phase 3B.

                                                                                                          24
         Turning now to trading costs, the 7-day trading cost per round-trip trade for the three different
size categories are shown in columns (7) through (12). The 7-day trading cost per round-trip trade is
$209 for small trades and $6,276 for large trades. Pooling across Phases, TRACE reduced trading costs
significantly.

         When split by Phase, trading costs decrease for each size and Phase combination, but not all are
significant. Trading costs decrease significantly for all size trades in Phase 3B. The largest reduction in 7-
day trading cost per round-trip trade is for medium size trades in Phase 3B, where the reduction is
26.9%.

VII.B Round-Trip Trading Costs by Trading Partner

        Our analysis so far has not distinguished trades by customers from those by dealers. Customers
and dealers may trade for different reasons. Customers typically trade bonds for portfolio and life-cycle
reasons. Dealers may trade bonds for portfolio reasons, but also to intermediate between customers,
e.g., make a market. The effects of transparency on customers and dealers may also differ. For
example, the dissemination of transaction information may provide more new information to customers
than to dealers both because dealers typically transact more frequently and because active traders will
see many trade inquiries that are ultimately executed by other dealers. In this section, we will
investigate the effects of dissemination on Customer (C) and Dealer (D) trades separately.

        The TRACE database only reports trades where one of the two parties is a dealer. These trades
can be between two dealers or between a customer and a dealer. 31 Although not reported in a table,
Dealer-to-Dealer trades represents 28% of all trades and 24% of total volume. Trades in which a
customer sell to a dealer, Customer-to-Dealer, represent 31% of all trades (37% of total volume) and
trades in which a dealer sells to a customer, Dealer-to-Customer, trades are 40% of trades (39% of
volume).

        Table 9 reports on round-trip trades, which we use to measure trading costs based on the
counterparties. In particular, a round trip can be one of three types: (1) Customer-Dealer-Customer
(CDC), (2) Dealer-Dealer-Dealer (DDD), and (3) Customer-Dealer-Dealer (CDD) or Dealer-Dealer-
Customer (DDC). The first two types of round-trip trade involve intermediation by a dealer since a
dealer need not hold inventory outside the round-trip time window. The other two categories imply
that a dealer is bearing risk outside the round-trip time window because some securities are held by
that dealer in inventory either before or after the trade.

        Panel A of Table 9 shows that CDC trades represent roughly 25% of all round-trip trades, DDD
trades represent about 16% of all round-trip trades, and CDD/DDC trades are 59% of all round-trip
trades. We will use CDC trades as a proxy for customer trading costs and DDD trades as a proxy for
dealer trading costs.



31FINRA members must report all trades in which they are involved. Trades between two parties, who are not
FINRA members, are possible, but not recorded.

                                                                                                             25
        Panel B of Table 9 shows that trading costs for CDC round trips are substantially larger than for
DDD round trips, either pooled across Phases or by Phase. For example, pooled across Phases, the mean
CDC trading cost per round-trip trade is $2,562, while the mean DDD trading cost per round-trip trade is
$1,035.

         We next examine the effect that dissemination had on customer and dealer trading costs. Table
9 also shows that both types of round trips become significantly cheaper after TRACE, with a greater
percentage reduction for DDD round-trip trades than CDC round-trip trades (-21.7% vs. -17.7%). When
split by Phase, trading cost per round-trip trade for DDD fall significantly for each Phase. CDCs, however,
only decrease significantly for Phase 3B trades, by $1,589 or 25.3%.

         Therefore, once again, bonds in Phase 3B react differently to dissemination than bonds in other
Phases. Table 8 showed that small trades fell substantially for Phase 3B bonds, while Table 9 shows that
the cost of customer round-trip trades only falls significantly for Phase 3B. In particular, the number of
small size trades in Phase 3B bonds decreases, even though the cost of customer trades for these Phase
3B bonds go down the most.

VIII. Dealer Revenue and Aggregate Trading Costs

VIII.A Dealer Revenue

         In the last section we saw that, in the pooled sample, trading costs for both CDC and DDD
round-trip trades decreased following dissemination. For a CDC round-trip trade, when the trading
costs decrease, the amount customers pay to dealers decreases, and therefore the intermediating
dealer earns less. That is, when the round-trip trading costs for a CDC trade decreases, the revenue
earned by the intermediating dealer decreases. However, in DDD round-trip trades, dealers can benefit
when round-trip trades become cheaper if they are not the intermediating dealer. Just as a customer
obtains better terms in a CDC trade, the dealer who initiates or ends the round trip may obtain better
terms. Since a dealer may work in different capacities, we cannot reach definitive conclusions from the
results in Table 9 on the effects of transparency on dealer trading costs.

        To obtain a measure of dealer performance, we compute the total revenue a dealer makes on
round-trip trades. This is not a measure of a dealer’s total revenue from trading, since dealers also
generate revenue from changes in the value of their inventory. That is, a dealer’s total revenue is the
amount they earn from trading costs plus the amount they earn from holding inventory. For trades that
are not part of round-trip trades, we do not know the initial buy or sell price of these trades. It’s worth
noting that we also do not directly observe a dealer’s holding costs.

         Our estimation approach for dealer trading revenue builds on equation (3). The outcome is the
total revenue from round-trip trades. It differs from equation (3) because all specifications include a
dealer fixed effect. This means our comparisons are a within-dealer contrast of trading revenue for
newly disseminated bonds compared to bonds traded by that dealer whose dissemination status does
not change. To implement this approach, we only consider active dealers who have at least 1,000 bond
trades from July 2002 – December 2006 or are in the top 20% of dealers (ranked by the number of

                                                                                                         26
trades) in a Phase. A dealer that trades at least 1000 times or is in the top 20% for one Phase is included
as a dealer in all other Phases if they trade at least once in the other phases.32

         Table 10 shows that, on average, across the three Phases a dealer’s revenue for round-trip
trades is $1,749. As with round-trip trading costs, the round-trip revenue is greatest in Phase 3B at
$3,789. This is partly a consequence of the fact that the average trade size is largest for Phase 3B bonds.
When comparing revenue per round-trip per bond traded, the revenue per bond traded is largest for
Phase 3A.

         Dissemination causes a statistically significant reduction in dealer revenue per round-trip trade
pooled across Phases. This effect is driven by a large, statistically significant $1,246 reduction for Phase
3B bonds. This is equivalent to a 32.9% reduction in dealer trading revenue per trade. When measured
by revenue per round-trip bond traded, dealers also have a significant decrease of -0.845, or 12.7%, for
Phase 3B. None of the results for either round-trip per trade or round-trip per bond traded are
significant for Phase 2 or Phase 3A.

        The large and significant effect on dealer revenue in Phase 3B with no effects in Phase 2 and 3A
are not surprising, given that dealer revenue on round-trip trades is closely related to round-trip trading
costs.

VIII.B Aggregate Economic Effects of TRACE

         How economically large are the effects of TRACE estimated above? We have seen that TRACE
reduces the number of trades, particularly for Phase 3B bonds, but does not have a significant effect on
overall trading volume. TRACE also has a large and significant effect on trading costs and dealer
revenues. We next investigate the aggregate effects of TRACE by focusing on its effects on overall
trading costs and dealer revenues.

         We benchmark our estimates against the overall level of transaction costs and revenues in the
corporate bond market. For this exercise, it is necessary to extrapolate our estimates of dissemination
effects along three dimensions. First, our research design does not allow us to construct an estimate of
the effect on bonds in Phase 1 or bonds that are not in any Phase. In particular, our research design
does not allow us to conclude much about the first Phase of TRACE. 33 Second, our research design


32 Most members of FINRA are not active corporate bond dealers. There are 2,639 unique hashcodes for dealers
from July 2002 – December 2006 in our data. The mean number of trades for a dealer is 7,751 and the median is
74. Using our definition above, we are left with 599 unique dealers that trade 98.6% of all trades and 99.4% of all
volume in our data.
33 Using a sample of NAIC bonds, Bessembinder, Maxwell, and Venkataraman (2006) argue TRACE reduced

transaction costs [they use the term trade execution costs] for Phase 1 bonds. It is possible to measure bond
trading activity for NAIC bonds before Phase 1 of TRACE. In Appendix A, we use data from the NAIC together with
our difference-in-differences methodology to examine Phase 1 effects. Unlike our TRACE sample, we are not able
to construct a round-trip cost estimate. The Appendix shows two main facts. First, NAIC bond trading has
different characteristics than TRACE trading. NAIC bonds are larger and transact less frequently. They also contain
very few Phase 3B bonds. Second, using our research design, there is no evidence that TRACE influenced NAIC
trading activity or costs for Phase 1 bonds.

                                                                                                                 27
focuses on the 180 days surrounding dissemination, while our sample period covers 4.5 years from July
2002 through December 2006. Finally, since round-trip trades only represent about 35% of all trading
activity, we need to apply our estimate to the remaining trades that are not part of round-trip trades.

         Panel A of Table 11 first uses our estimate of pooled trading cost per round-trip trade as the
basis for extrapolation. If we assume that the mean round trip in the 90 days prior to dissemination
pooled across Phases represents the average trading cost per round-trip trade for the 22.6 million trades
during our time period, the total costs of trading bonds is $14.7 billion. Pooled across Phases, TRACE
reduced the average trading cost per round-trip trade by -$241, which would amount to a $2.7 billion
reduction in trading costs. Since our time period covers 4.5 years, this translates to a reduction in
trading costs of $605 million per year.

          We have also seen that TRACE has different effects across Phases. A second estimate of the
reduction in trading costs takes the average trade cost and dissemination estimates by Phase and
applies it to trading activity specific to each Phase. To implement this approach, we still need to ascribe
a value of trading costs and the effect of TRACE to bonds in Phase 1 and bonds that do not have a Phase.
Table 11 reports aggregate estimates broken down by Phase which use values from Phase 2 for Phase 1,
and the pooled estimate for bonds that are not in a Phase. The total reduction in trading costs per year
from this more refined comparison is $538 million per year. Importantly, trading in Phase 3B bonds
contributes to a 21.8% share of this aggregate reduction, even though Phase 3B only accounts for 5.1%
of all trades. This fact further highlights that studies of TRACE without Phase 3B bonds miss a large part
of the aggregate picture.

         Table 11 also aggregates the reduction in dealer revenue from round-trip trades, using the
estimate from Table 10. The results for this outcome are shown in Panel B. When the pooled estimate
is applied to all trades, we find a $695 million per year reduction in dealer revenue due to TRACE. When
split by Phase in the same way as in Panel A, the estimated reduction in dealer revenue per year is $460
million. The reason the estimate is smaller by Phase is that when split by Phase, a large decrease in
dealer revenue only appears for Phase 3B. As with trading costs, Phase 3B stands out as contributing an
outsize share of the reduction in dealer revenue of 34.5% compared to the number of trades in Phase 3B
bonds.

       Since our estimates show little overall effect on trading volume, the reduction in dealer
revenues is largely a transfer from dealers to customers. That is, customers pay less to transact at the
expense of dealers but experience no overall reduction in trading activity as measured by volume.

         It’s worth emphasizing that the interpretation of the effect on trading activity is not
straightforward absent a view on why corporate bonds trade. First, we find a decrease in the number
of trades. This might influence how quickly prices reflect new information. Moreover, trading activity
outcomes are a consequence of the demand and supply for trades: they do not directly speak to
whether trading has become more difficult, say if dealers are less willing to hold inventory because of
the cut in their margins.



                                                                                                           28
VIII.   Conclusion

         The introduction of TRACE, which was implemented in four Phases over a three-and-a-half-year
period, combined with the availability trading records before and after dissemination for three of the
Phases, provides a unique opportunity to study how previously opaque over-the-counter financial
markets respond to transparency. We use a difference-in-differences research design to isolate the
effect of post-trade transparency from underlying market trends, holding fixed all other institutional
aspects of corporate bond trading. Our study is distinguished by the fact that we examine all Phases of
TRACE, including the less frequently-traded bonds in the last two Phases of TRACE, which have small
issue sizes and low-credit quality, respectively. It also directly measures round-trip trading costs for all
bonds across all four Phases.

         Our main finding is that TRACE causes trading costs to decline significantly for the entire bond
market and for both dealers and customers. In addition, we find the impact on trading activity and
trading costs are largest and most significant for Phase 3B bonds. After transparency, there is a
significant decline in the number of trades for Phase 3B bonds, and a large significant reduction in
trading costs. These results stand out because at the time of Phase 3B, TRACE’s dissemination
provisions had already been implemented for three previous Phases covering a majority of bonds issued.
Bonds in Phase 3B also play an outsized role in our estimates of the aggregate effect of transparency on
total trading costs. Thus, studies of TRACE and transparency that do not examine this segment of the
market are incomplete.

        The results also confirm that transparency has a limited impact on trading activity of investment
grade bonds and the most frequently-traded bonds. There is no significant decrease in trading activity,
either measured by number of trades or trading volume for this segment of the market. On the other
hand, TRACE does not increase overall trading activity, as many proponents anticipated. This is
noteworthy given the significant reduction in trading costs.

         These findings have several other implications. The sharp pervasive reduction in trading costs
may be a consequence of the fact that trading information changes the relative bargaining positions of
investors and dealers, allowing investors to benefit at the expense of dealers. Our best estimate is that
TRACE transferred about $600 million a year from dealers to customers. Since transparency has negative
effects for some trading partners, our result may suggest why transparency reforms need to be
mandated rather than voluntarily adopted.

         These results are also relevant for current and planned expansions of mandated market
transparency. The implicit assumption underlying the use of TRACE as a template for regulations such
as Dodd-Frank is that transparency affects all segments of a market the same way. Our results show
that transparency effects are not uniform across different segments of the bond market. Many of the
securities markets that are newly subject to transparency are akin to Phase 3B bonds. That is, they are
infrequently traded and may not be widely held across dealers. As a consequence, our results support
the view that not every segment of a security market should be subject to the same degree of mandated
transparency.


                                                                                                          29
                                                                           Figure 1. Weekly Number of Trades by Phase



               16.000



                8.000



                4.000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Phase
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1

                2.000                                                                                                                                                                                                     2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3A


                1.000                                                                                                                                                                                                     3B




                0.500



                0.250



                0.125
                              02

                                        02

                                                  03

                                                            03

                                                                      03

                                                                                03

                                                                                          04

                                                                                                    04

                                                                                                              04

                                                                                                                        04

                                                                                                                                  05

                                                                                                                                            05

                                                                                                                                                      05

                                                                                                                                                                05

                                                                                                                                                                          06

                                                                                                                                                                                    06

                                                                                                                                                                                              06

                                                                                                                                                                                                        06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  07
                             20

                                       20

                                                 20

                                                           20

                                                                     20

                                                                               20

                                                                                         20

                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20
                         −

                                   −

                                             −

                                                       −

                                                                 −

                                                                           −

                                                                                     −

                                                                                               −

                                                                                                         −

                                                                                                                   −

                                                                                                                             −

                                                                                                                                       −

                                                                                                                                                 −

                                                                                                                                                           −

                                                                                                                                                                     −

                                                                                                                                                                               −

                                                                                                                                                                                         −

                                                                                                                                                                                                   −

                                                                                                                                                                                                             −
                        07

                                  10

                                            01

                                                      04

                                                                07

                                                                          10

                                                                                    01

                                                                                              04

                                                                                                        07

                                                                                                                  10

                                                                                                                            01

                                                                                                                                      04

                                                                                                                                                07

                                                                                                                                                          10

                                                                                                                                                                    01

                                                                                                                                                                              04

                                                                                                                                                                                        07

                                                                                                                                                                                                  10

                                                                                                                                                                                                            01
Figure does not include trading days that SIFMA recommends that bond dealers take off or operate for less than a full day. Figure also does not
include the two weeks spanning Christmas and New Year’s Day.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               30
                                                     Figure 2. Weekly 7-Day Trading Cost per Round-trip Trade by Phase




               7500




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Phase
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1

               5000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3A

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3B




               2500




                  0
                            02

                                      02

                                                03

                                                          03

                                                                    03

                                                                              03

                                                                                        04

                                                                                                  04

                                                                                                            04

                                                                                                                      04

                                                                                                                                05

                                                                                                                                          05

                                                                                                                                                    05

                                                                                                                                                              05

                                                                                                                                                                        06

                                                                                                                                                                                  06

                                                                                                                                                                                            06

                                                                                                                                                                                                      06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                07
                           20

                                     20

                                               20

                                                         20

                                                                   20

                                                                             20

                                                                                       20

                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                       −

                                 −

                                           −

                                                     −

                                                               −

                                                                         −

                                                                                   −

                                                                                             −

                                                                                                       −

                                                                                                                 −

                                                                                                                           −

                                                                                                                                     −

                                                                                                                                               −

                                                                                                                                                         −

                                                                                                                                                                   −

                                                                                                                                                                             −

                                                                                                                                                                                       −

                                                                                                                                                                                                 −

                                                                                                                                                                                                           −
                      07

                                10

                                          01

                                                    04

                                                              07

                                                                        10

                                                                                  01

                                                                                            04

                                                                                                      07

                                                                                                                10

                                                                                                                          01

                                                                                                                                    04

                                                                                                                                              07

                                                                                                                                                        10

                                                                                                                                                                  01

                                                                                                                                                                            04

                                                                                                                                                                                      07

                                                                                                                                                                                                10

                                                                                                                                                                                                          01
Figure does not include trading days that SIFMA recommends that bond dealers take off or operate for less than a full day. Figure also does not
include the two weeks spanning Christmas and New Year’s Day.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                             31
                              Figure 3. Event Study for Number of Trades

                                                        Phase 2




  0.3



  0.0



 −0.3




                    −10                 −5                   0                  5                  10
                                                         week

                                                        Phase 3A
  0.50



  0.25



  0.00



 −0.25



 −0.50
                     −10                 −5                   0                 5                  10
                                                          week

                                                       Phase 3B
  0.8



  0.4



  0.0



 −0.4



 −0.8
                    −10                 −5                   0                  5                  10
                                                         week
Figure plots coefficients on Disseminate x Week variables from event study regressions where the dependent
variable is weekly number of trades. Disseminate is an indicator for a bond that becomes disseminated in
the Phase. The x-axes represent weeks, where, 0 is week of March 3, 2003 for Phase 2, 0 is week of October
1, 2004 for Phase 3A, and 0 is week of February 7, 2005 for Phase 3B.
                                                                                                        32
              Figure 4. Event Study for 7-Day Trading Cost per Round-trip Trade by Phase

                                                        Phase 2
  800



  400



    0



 −400



 −800
                     −10                 −5                  0                  5                  10
                                                         week

                                                       Phase 3A
  800



  400



    0



 −400



 −800
                     −10                 −5                  0                  5                  10
                                                         week

                                                        Phase 3B



  2000




     0




 −2000



                      −10                −5                   0                 5                  10
                                                          week
Figure plots coefficients on Disseminate x Week variables from event study regressions where the dependent
variable is weekly trading cost per round-trip trade. Disseminate is an indicator for a bond that becomes
disseminated in the Phase. The x-axes represent weeks, where, 0 is week of March 3, 2003 for Phase 2, 0 is
week of October 1, 2004 for Phase 3A, and 0 is week of February 7, 2005 for Phase 3B.
                                                                                                        33
                                           Table 1. Timeline of Major TRACE Regulatory Changes
   Sample                Date                                             Bonds affected                                 Time to report
                                       Investment Grade TRACE-eligible bonds having an initial issue of $1 billion or
Phase 1         July 1, 2002                                                                                           75 Minutes
                                       greater
                                       50 Non-Investment Grade (High-Yield) bonds disseminated under Fixed
FINRA50         July 1, 2002                                                                                           75 Minutes
                                       Income Pricing System (FIPS). First day is 7/1/02, last day is 7/14/04
                                       All Investment Grade TRACE-eligible bonds of at least $100 million par value
Phase 2         March 3, 2003          (original issue size) or greater rated A- or higher; and 50 Non-Investment      75 Minutes
                                       Grade bonds
FINRA120        April 14, 2003         120 Investment Grade TRACE-eligible bonds rated BBB                             75 Minutes
n/a             October 1, 2003        All currently disseminated bonds                                                45 Minutes
                                       All bonds that are not eligible for delayed dissemination (bonds with rating
Phase 3A        October 1, 2004                                                                                        30 Minutes
                                       of BBB- or higher)
                                       All bonds potentially subject to delayed dissemination (bonds with ratings
Phase 3B        February 7, 2005                                                                                       30 Minutes
                                       BB+ or lower)1
n/a             July 1, 2005           All currently disseminated bonds                                                15 Minutes
n/a             January 9, 2006        End of delayed dissemination. All trades immediately disseminated               Immediate
Notes: Information from FINRA press releases available at finra.org. Time to report is the amount of time the dealer has to report the
transaction to FINRA. FINRA collected information on all TRACE-eligible securities on July 1, 2002. A TRACE-eligible security means all
US dollar-denominated debt securities that are depository-eligible and registered by the SEC or issued pursuant to Section 4(2) of the
Securities Act of 1933 and purchased or sold pursued to Rule 144a. FINRA disseminates the transaction for Bonds Affected
immediately after the report, except for bonds subject to delayed dissemination. (1) Bonds subject to delayed dissemination must
meet certain trading, size, and rating criteria described by Rule 6250(b). Transactions that are greater than one million dollars (par
value) in BB-rated TRACE eligible securities that trade on average less than one time per day are disseminated two business days from
the time of execution. See Rule 6250(b)(2)(A). Transactions that are greater than one million (par value) rated B or lower that trade on
average less than one time per day are disseminated four business days from the time of execution. See Rule 6250(b)(2)(B).




                                                                                                                                           34
                                  Table 2. Bond Characteristics by Phase
                                                 Phase 1         Phase 2          Phase 3A        Phase 3B
                                                   (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)

Number of bonds                                     388            2,526           11,081           2,859

Size at issue ($M)
  mean                                             1,463            264             86               184
   p5                                               750             100              1                2
   p10                                             1,000            100              1                8
   p25                                             1,000            150              3               87
   median                                          1,250            200             12               150
   p75                                             1,750            300             80               238
   p90                                             2,500            500             300              350
   p95                                             3,000            600             425              470

Rating at phase start
  mean                                               A               A+              A-               B
   p5                                              AAA              AAA             AAA             BBB-
  p10                                               AA-             AA               AA              BB+
  p25                                               A+               A+              A               BB-
  median                                             A               A+              A-               B
  p75                                              BBB+              A              BBB             CCC
  p90                                              BBB               A-             BBB-              D
  p95                                              BBB-              A-             BB+               D
# with rating information at phase start           388             2,524           11,046           2,770
# where rating is from S&P RatingsXpress           366             2,182           7,754            2,283
# where rating is from FISD                         22              342            3,292             487

Fixed coupon rate
  mean                                              6.7             6.9             5.8              9.0
  median                                            6.8             6.9             5.9              8.8
  number fixed coupon                               346            2,149           10,153           2,638

Maturity at issue (years)
 mean                                               9.2             15.0            11.8            12.4
 median                                             6.0             10.0            10.0            9.7

Years since issue (at phase start)
  mean                                                 1.9           5.5             3.3              5.9
  median                                               1.4           5.1             1.9              5.7
Notes: Bond issue size, coupon, maturity, and issue date characteristics are from FISD. Bond rating are
the most recent rating before the Phase starts. Bond rating characteristics are from S&P RatingsXPress
database. If ratings are not available in S&P RatingsXpress, we use ratings from FISD. To assign a FISD
rating, we first use the S&P value if it exists, otherwise the Moody’s value, otherwise the Fitch value, and
otherwise the Duff and Phelps value. Mean ratings are computed by first converting each rating to a
number (AAA=1, AA+=2, AA=3, …, and D=22) and then converting the number back to a letter rating.
                                                                                                           35
                                      Table 3. Trading Activity and Trading Cost around Phase Start
                                    Trading activity                                                        Trading cost
                         90 days before          90 days after                                  90 days before         90 days after
                              (1)                      (2)                                           (3)                    (4)
                            Number of trades per bond-day                                    7-day trading cost per round-trip trade ($)
Phase 1 (N=388)                 -                    15.527            Phase 1 (N=381)                 -                   1,682
Phase 2 (N=2,526)            1.502                   1.538             Phase 2 (N=1,967)            1,413                  1,053
Phase 3A (N=11,081)          0.696                   0.691             Phase 3A (N=6,151)            947                    822
Phase 3B (N=2,859)           0.332                   0.315             Phase 3B (N=1,106)           4,030                  2,920

                                                                                                 7-day trading cost per round-trip bond
                                  Volume per day ($)
                                                                                                                traded ($)
Phase 1 (N=388)                -                 12,440,080             Phase 1 (N=381)                  -                   0.568
Phase 2 (N=2,526)           952,667               876,079               Phase 2 (N=1,967)             0.806                  0.790
Phase 3A (N=11,081)         377,875               354,424               Phase 3A (N=6,151)            1.087                  1.007
Phase 3B (N=2,859)          387,815               376,500               Phase 3B (N=1,106)            0.561                  0.434

                               Volume/Issue size per day                                              Price standard deviation ($)
Phase 1 (N=388)                   …                    0.902                Phase 1 (N=388)                  …                    0.988
Phase 2 (N=2,526)               0.297                  0.273                Phase 2 (N=2,042)              0.875                  0.861
Phase 3A (N=11,081)             0.163                  0.164                Phase 3A (N=6,369)             0.862                  0.806
Phase 3B (N=2,859)              0.187                  0.169                Phase 3B (N=1,206)             0.554                  0.480
Notes: Sample for number of trades is restricted to bonds in either the 90 calendar days before or after the Phase start. If a bond does not
trade, it contributes to zero trades for that day. The mean reported above is the average daily number of trades in the 90-day window. The
sample for average daily volume is constructed like that of trades and the daily volume is averaged over all bond-days in the 90-day
window. Average daily volume/issue size is the average of daily volume/issue size calculated in the same manner as average daily volume.
For round-trip trading cost measures, we measure the price difference between the two trades in a chain that span at most 7 calendar days
(including the day of the first trade). The sample of bonds is restricted to bonds where there is at least one day in the 90 days before the
Phase start with at least one chain and at least one chain after. The trading cost per round-trip bond traded is the difference in price per
bond between the second and the first trade in the chain (in $100 par). The trading cost per round-trip trade is the difference in price per
bond times the number of bonds. The reported average for the round-trip measures is average of bond-day mean over all bond-days in the
90-day window. The sample for daily price standard deviation is constructed as the round-trip measures but with the additional
requirement of having at least two trades both before and after the start of the Phase. After computing the within-day price standard
deviation for each bond for all days with at least two trades, we average across these days during either the 90 days before or after the
Phase start. Price standard deviation is the average daily price standard deviation across these bonds. There is no transaction information
for Phase 1 bonds in the 90 days before Phase 1 starts. N refers to the number of bonds in the sample that change dissemination status in
the Phase.

                                                                                                                                               36
                                           Table 4. Difference-in-Difference Estimates for Number of Trades
                                                     Alternative time windows                         Alternative specifications (90-day window)

                                                                                                     With linear                               Sample
                     90-day mean
                                                                                                   and quadratic                            matched on
                           for                                                                                           Without
                                                                                                   trends specific                          size, time to
                     disseminated         60 days             90 days             180 days                             Phase 1 bonds
                                                                                                   to investment                            maturity, and
                     before phase                                                                                       as controls
                                                                                                   grade for each                            years since
                          start
                                                                                                        Phase                                 issuance

                           (1)               (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (5)                 (6)                 (7)
                                                                                 A. Pooled
All three phases         0.754           -0.069***           -0.088***           -0.092***             -0.033              -0.030             -0.094***
                                          (0.027)             (0.026)             (0.028)              (0.026)             (0.021)             (0.033)
                                           -9.1%              -11.7%              -12.2%                -4.4%               -4.0%              -12.5%

                                                                                 B. By phase
Phase 2                  1.502            0.094**              -0.033             -0.093**              0.005              -0.069*             -0.054
                                          (0.047)              (0.041)             (0.041)             (0.045)             (0.038)             (0.059)
                                           6.3%                 -2.2%               -6.2%               0.3%                -4.6%               -3.6%

Phase 3A                 0.696           -0.132***             -0.048              -0.041              -0.029              -0.004             -0.109**
                                          (0.044)              (0.038)             (0.045)             (0.037)             (0.036)             (0.055)
                                          -19.0%                -6.9%               -5.9%               -4.2%               -0.6%              -15.7%

Phase 3B                 0.332           -0.238***           -0.236***           -0.169***            -0.194***            -0.001             -0.140***
                                          (0.042)             (0.062)             (0.065)              (0.034)             (0.022)             (0.046)
                                          -71.7%              -71.1%              -50.9%               -58.4%               -0.3%              -42.2%

H0 : Phase effects equal (p-val)           0.000               0.017               0.269                0.000               0.000               0.000

# of Phase 2 bonds                         2,526               2,526               2,526               2,524               2,526                2,524
# of Phase 3A bonds                        11,081              11,081              11,081              11,044              11,081               4,421
# of Phase 3B bonds                        2,859               2,859               2,859               2,768               2,859                2,859

# of trades for Phase 2                  1,496,633           2,116,395           4,132,239           2,105,872           1,503,471           2,046,291
# of trades for Phase 3A                 1,022,128           1,530,186           3,174,160           1,525,675           1,189,969           1,390,655
# of trades for Phase 3B                  506,245             753,767            1,446,740            750,593             372,431             753,767

# of bond-days                             2,320,998            3,421,074          6,804,827           3,386,963           3,310,621           2,317,302
Notes: This table reports estimates of Disseminate x Post for number of trades. Panel A reports estimates from Phases 2, 3A, and 3B pooled together,
while panel B reports estimates for each Phase separately. Robust standard errors clustered by bond and Phase are in parenthesis immediately below
the estimates. All models include bond fixed effects. Mean for Disseminated is the 90-day average for newly disseminated bonds immediately before the
Phase start. The third entry in each row is the percentage effect as computed by dividing the estimate by the Mean for Disseminated. Phase effects equal
reports p-values of tests that the three Phase estimates are equal. The 60-day regressions use trades from 60 calendar days before and after the Phase
change. The 90- and 180-day regressions are defined analogously. There are 8,324 Phase 2, 2,235 Phase 3A, and 2,129 Phase 3B control bonds in
columns (2)-(4). Standard errors in parentheses. The model with trends in column (5) has linear and quadratic functions of time for investment grade
and high-yield bonds specific to each Phase. Column (6) excludes Phase 1 bonds as controls for Phase 2, 3A and 3B. The characteristics used to construct
the matched sample in column (7) are issue size at Phase start, time to maturity at Phase start, and years since issue at Phase start. We divide the sample
into four issue size quartiles, and two groups for the other two characteristics: above/below the median time to maturity and years since issue. We
exclude bonds in cells with 5 or fewer treated bonds or 5 or fewer control bonds.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                                                  37
                      Table 5. Estimates for Alternate Measures of Trading Activity (90-day Window)
                                    Volume ($)                   Volume/Issue size               Average trade size
                               Mean          Estimate          Mean          Estimate           Mean         Estimate
                                (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)
                                                                     A. Pooled
All three phases             462,897         -25,177           0.186         -0.012**          649,910        3,189
                                             (20,264)                         (0.005)                        (10,702)
                                              -5.4%                            -6.5%                           0.5%

                                                                   B. By phase
Phase 2                      952,667      -66,553**             0.297       -0.039***            709,546         -9,121
                                           (32,934)                          (0.009)                            (18,210)
                                            -7.0%                            -13.1%                               -1.3%

Phase 3A                     377,875       -34,729              0.163           0.007            541,930          -968
                                           (34,815)                            (0.007)                          (14,768)
                                            -9.2%                               4.3%                             -0.2%

Phase 3B                     387,815        55,890              0.187           0.003           1,178,134      50,101**
                                           (37,133)                            (0.008)                         (25,197)
                                            14.4%                               1.6%                             4.3%

H0 : Phase effects equal (p-val)             0.042                             0.000                             0.138

# of trades                                  4,533,784                       4,579,932                          4,556,139
# of bond-days                               3,421,206                       3,421,431                           864,168
Notes. This table reports estimates of Disseminate x Post for alternative measures of trading activity following the 90-day
estimates in column (3) of Table 4. The Average Trade Size measure requires that there be at least one trade for a bond in
the before and the after period to be included in the sample. See Table 4 notes for additional details.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%



                                                                                                                              38
                                             Table 6. Estimates for 7-Day Trading Cost per Round-trip Trade
                                                      Alternative time windows                          Alternative specifications (90-day window)

                                                                                                      With linear                              Sample
                       90-day mean
                                                                                                    and quadratic                           matched on
                             for                                                                                          Without
                                                                                                    trends specific                         size, time to
                       disseminated         60 days             90 days            180 days                             Phase 1 bonds
                                                                                                    to investment                           maturity, and
                       before phase                                                                                      as controls
                                                                                                    grade for each                           years since
                            start
                                                                                                         Phase                                issuance

                             (1)              (2)                 (3)                  (4)                (5)                 (6)                 (7)
                                                                                   A. Pooled
All three phases           1,301            -230***            -241***             -192***             -141***             -244***             -228***
                                               (60)               (51)                (40)                (49)                (59)                (65)
                                             -17.7%             -18.5%              -14.8%              -10.8%              -18.8%              -17.5%

                                                                                  B. By phase
Phase 2                    1,413            -282***            -250***                 -60              -205**              -241**             -230**
                                              (104)               (87)                (72)                (86)                (96)              (106)
                                             -20.0%             -17.7%               -4.2%              -14.5%              -17.1%             -16.3%

Phase 3A                    947                -19                 -54              -73**                 -20                 -13                 -46
                                              (56)                (46)               (33)                (44)                (52)                (65)
                                             -2.0%               -5.7%              -7.7%               -2.1%               -1.4%               -4.9%

Phase 3B                   4,030            -813***            -924***            -1,224***             -694**             -969***             -858***
                                              (234)              (225)              (164)                (296)               (222)               (256)
                                             -20.2%             -22.9%             -30.4%               -17.2%              -24.0%              -21.3%

H0 : Phase effects equal (p-val)             0.001               0.000              0.000               0.017               0.000               0.005

# of Phase 2 bonds                           1,841               1,966              2,123               1,965               1,967               1,966
# of Phase 3A bonds                          5,225               6,151              7,623               6,140               6,150               2,787
# of Phase 3B bonds                           959                1,106              1,281               1,089               1,106               1,106

# of round-trips for Phase 2               295,540             413,813             808,282             411,830             283,895             399,824
# of round-trips for Phase 3A              185,810             284,456             608,293             283,513             225,295             245,586
# of round-trips for Phase 3B              96,152              145,334             275,367             144,710             71,848              145,340

# of bond-days                                279,678             416,004             839,624            414,203             347,644            371,344
Notes: This table reports estimates of Disseminate x Post for 7-day trading cost per round-trip trade. There are 8,324 Phase 2, 2,235 Phase 3A, and 2,129
Phase 3B control bonds in columns (2)-(4). See Table 4 notes for details.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%                                                                                           39
                                     Table 7. Estimates for Alternative Measures of Trading Cost (90-day window)
                         Trading cost per round-trip trade                  Trading cost per round-trip bond traded             Daily price standard
                          1-day                     14-day                       1-day                    7-day                 deviation (all trades)
                   Mean        Estimate       Mean       Estimate         Mean        Estimate     Mean        Estimate          Mean        Estimate
                     (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)        (7)           (8)            (9)           (10)
                                                                               A. Pooled
All three phases   1,299       -267***        1,344       -273***         0.842      -0.033***     0.964      -0.047***          0.841      -0.021***
                                  (46)                       (58)                      (0.006)                  (0.007)                      (0.005)
                                -20.6%                     -20.3%                       -3.9%                    -4.9%                        -2.5%

                                                                             B. By phase
Phase 2            1,318         -131       1,448       -387***           0.666       0.008        0.806       -0.027**          0.875        -0.003
                                  (84)                     (99)                      (0.010)                    (0.011)                      (0.009)
                                -9.9%                    -26.7%                       1.2%                       -3.3%                         -0.3%

Phase 3A            965        -164***        996          52             0.970     -0.064***      1.087      -0.065***          0.862      -0.033***
                                  (36)                    (59)                       (0.009)                   (0.010)                       (0.007)
                                -17.0%                    5.2%                        -6.6%                     -6.0%                         -3.8%

Phase 3B           4,017      -1,166***     4,070      -1,072***          0.532     -0.075***      0.561      -0.061***          0.554      -0.042***
                                 (186)                    (237)                      (0.016)                   (0.018)                       (0.012)
                                -29.0%                   -26.3%                       -14.1%                    -10.9%                        -7.6%

H0 : Phase effects equal (p-val) 0.000                   0.000                         0.000                    0.000                         0.011

# of round-trips/trades        715,950                  891,664                        715,978                  843,609                      4,271,416
# of bond-days                  365,946                 430,484                        365,954                  415,993                       589,716
Notes. This table reports estimates of Disseminate x Post for alternative measures of trading cost following the 90-day estimates in column (3) of
Table 6. 1-day and 14-day round-trips are constructed similar to the 7-day round-trips with the restriction that the two trades in the round-trip
span at most 1 and 14 calendar day (including the day of the first trade) respectively. Trading cost per round-trip bond traded is the difference in
price per bond between the second and the first trade in the round-trip at $100 par. The trading cost per round-trip trade measures the total cost
(difference in price per bond times the number of bonds). The daily price standard deviation is the within-day price standard deviation.

                                                                                                                                                   40
                                                                                 Table 8. Estimates by Trade Size
                                                           Number of trades                                                                Trading cost per round-trip trade
                                      Vol < $100k         $100k <= Vol < $1Mil            Vol >= $1Mil                Vol < $100k                $100k <= Vol < $1Mil             Vol >= $1Mil
                                    (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)             (5)        (6)             (7)         (8)                 (9)        (10)             (11)        (12)
                                                                                                   A. Summary statistics
                             Before     After              Before      After           Before      After         Before        After             Before       After            Before       After
# of trades/round-trips    1,440,045 1,568,370            359,352     368,930         328,473 337,924           274,710 315,429                  59,562      63,405            53,780      56,685
Share of trades/round-trips 67.7%      68.9%               16.9%       16.2%           15.4%       14.9%         70.8%         72.4%             15.3%       14.6%             13.9%       13.0%

Volume ($M)                        31,903     34,302      106,948     107,681        1,221,074 1,226,051             3,092       3,342           12,797      12,934            117,017    119,310
Share of volume                     2.3%       2.5%        7.9%        7.9%            89.8%     89.6%               2.3%        2.5%             9.6%        9.5%              88.0%      88.0%

                                                                                                          B. Pooled
                                   Mean      Estimate      Mean       Estimate          Mean       Estimate         Mean        Estimate          Mean       Estimate           Mean      Estimate

All three phases                   0.539    -0.066***      0.139     -0.012***          0.204     -0.018***          209         -8***             950       -106***            6,276     -1,031***
                                             (0.023)                  (0.004)                      (0.005)                         (2)                          (24)                        (322)
                                             -12.2%                    -8.6%                        -8.8%                        -3.8%                        -11.2%                       -16.4%

                                                                                                         C. By phase
Phase 2                            1.126       0.020       0.331      -0.019**          0.212     -0.029***          187            -5             868        -82**             7,056     -1,191**
                                              (0.036)                  (0.008)                     (0.009)                         (3)                         (37)                         (603)
                                               1.8%                     -5.7%                      -13.7%                        -2.7%                        -9.4%                        -16.9%

Phase 3A                           0.514      -0.032       0.106      -0.013**          0.223      -0.011            218         -8***             971         -59*             5,222       -498
                                              (0.031)                  (0.006)                     (0.009)                         (3)                         (35)                        (412)
                                               -6.2%                   -12.2%                       -4.9%                        -3.7%                        -6.1%                        -9.5%

Phase 3B                           0.131    -0.251***      0.098        0.001           0.148      -0.011            218        -31***            1,215      -327***            8,439     -1,664***
                                              (0.056)                  (0.010)                     (0.010)                        (11)                          (75)                        (615)
                                             -191.8%                    1.0%                        -7.4%                       -14.2%                        -26.9%                       -19.7%

H0 : Phase effects equal (p-val)              0.000                    0.274                        0.294                        0.081                        0.005                        0.258

# of trades/round-trips                   3,008,415                    728,282                     666,397                       590,139                     122,967                      110,465
# of bond-days                            3,190,387                   2,341,085                    309,770                       309,770                      90,667                      74,087
Notes: This table reports estimates of Disseminate x Post for number of trades and 7-day trading cost per round-trip trade split by trade size. Numbers in Panel A exclude Phase 1. The
specifications follow those for the 90-day estimate in column (3) of Tables 4 and 6.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


                                                                                                                                                                                            41
        Table 9. Estimates for 7-Day Trading Costs Per Round-trip Trade by Round-trip Type
                               CDC                         DDD                    DDC/CDD
                         (1)          (2)             (3)        (4)           (5)         (6)
                                                  A. Summary statistics
                        Before      After           Before      After         Before      After
# of round-trips       94,596      107,170         62,457      67,438        229,015 258,052
Share of round-trips 24.5%          24.8%           16.2%      15.6%          59.3%      59.6%

Volume ($M)            54,267      56,284          46,227      46,023         33,533      32,656
Share of volume        40.5%       41.7%           34.5%       34.1%          25.0%       24.2%

                                                      B. Pooled
                        Mean      Estimate         Mean     Estimate           Mean       Estimate

All three phases       2,562      -454***          1,035      -225***           579        -71**
                                    (154)                        (52)                       (28)
                                   -17.7%                      -21.7%                     -12.3%

                                                      C. By phase
Phase 2                2,764         -366           904       -290***           708       -196***
                                    (240)                        (74)                        (48)
                                   -13.2%                      -32.1%                      -27.7%

Phase 3A               1,826        -55            1,059        -141*           472        66**
                                   (193)                         (84)                       (31)
                                   -3.0%                       -13.3%                      14.0%

Phase 3B               6,272     -1,589***         1,366       -308**          1,291        -259
                                   (440)                        (153)                      (189)
                                  -25.3%                       -22.5%                     -20.1%

H0 : Phase effects equal (p-val)      0.006                        0.361                     0.000
# of round-trips                     201,766                      129,895                   487,067
# of bond-days                       148,917                      91,801                    259,002
Notes. This table reports estimates of Disseminate x Post for trading cost per round-trip trade by
round-trip type. There are three types of round-trip trades: CDC, DDD and CDD/DDC. Numbers in
Panel A exclude Phase 1. The specification is the same as column (3) of Table 6.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                      42
       Table 10. Daily Dealer Revenue in 7-day Round-trips
                  Revenue per round-            Revenue per round-
                        trip trade                trip bond traded
                   Mean        Estimate           Mean      Estimate
                     (1)            (2)            (3)         (4)
                                        A. Pooled
All three phases 1,749          -277***           7.490     -0.0617
                                   (93)                     (0.0942)
                                 -15.8%                      -0.8%

                                    B. By phase
Phase 2            1,818        -146          5.442         0.115
                               (145)                       (0.132)
                               -8.0%                        2.1%

Phase 3A           1,171        20             8.902        0.112
                               (107)                       (0.155)
                               1.7%                         1.3%

Phase 3B           3,789     -1,246***         6.645      -0.845***
                               (289)                       (0.228)
                              -32.9%                       -12.7%

H0 : Phase effects equal (p-     0.000                         0.001
# of round-trips                839,184                      839,196
# of dealer-days                152,190                      152,187
Notes. This table reports estimates of Disseminate x Post for dealer
revenues from 7-day round-trips. We only include dealers that
have at least 1,000 trades from July 2002 - December 2006 or are
in the top 20% of the dealers (ranked by number of trades) trading
in that phase. A dealer that meets the above criteria in a phase is
also included in other phases conditional on them trading at least
once in that phase. There are 590 dealers in Phase 2, 599 in Phase
3A, and 590 in Phase 3B. See Table 4 notes for details.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                       43
                                              Table 11. Aggregate Reduction in Trading Cost and Dealer Revenue
                                                                                           Reduction per round-          Total reduction in        Reduction in
                    Number of trades       Mean per round-trip    Total cost/revenue
                                                                                              trip (90-day pre-         cost/revenue (Jul 02-    cost/revenue per
                     (Jul 02-Dec 06)       (90-day pre-period)      (Jul 02-Dec 06)
                                                                                                   period)                    Dec 06)                  year
                           (1)                     (2)                     (3)                       (4)                         (5)                    (6)
                                                                 Panel A. Trading cost: cost per round-trip trade
Phase+No phase         22,582,689                1,301              14,690,892,594                   241                   2,721,214,025           604,714,228

Phase 1                 4,130,856                  1,413                2,918,256,531                 250                   516,357,000            114,746,000
Phase 2                 2,934,629                  1,413                2,073,178,112                 250                   366,828,625            81,517,472
Phase 3A                7,742,494                   947                 3,665,481,341                  54                   209,047,338            46,454,964
Phase 3B                1,144,757                  4,030                2,306,807,581                 924                   528,877,734            117,528,385
No Phase                6,629,953                  1,301                4,313,034,972                 241                   798,909,337            177,535,408
Total                  22,582,689                                      15,276,758,537                                      2,420,020,034           537,782,230

                                                                Panel B. Dealer revenue: revenue per round-trip trade
Phase+No phase         22,582,689                  1,749              19,743,034,532                 277                   3,127,702,427           695,044,984

Phase 1                 4,130,856                  1,818                3,754,031,000                 146                   301,552,488             67,011,664
Phase 2                 2,934,629                  1,818                2,666,926,235                 146                   214,227,917             47,606,204
Phase 3A                7,742,494                  1,171                4,531,725,154                 -20                   -77,424,940            -17,205,542
Phase 3B                1,144,757                  3,789                2,168,533,063                1,246                  713,183,611            158,485,247
No Phase                6,629,953                  1,749                5,796,271,251                 277                   918,248,491            204,055,220
Total                  22,582,689                                      18,917,486,705                                      2,069,787,567           459,952,793
This table estimates the aggregated reduction in trading cost and dealer revenue per year in the corporate bond market because of the transparency. Panel A
measures the reduction in trading cost and Panel B measures the reduction in dealer revenue. In both the panels, Phase + No Phase uses the aggregate all phase
estimates. For Phase 1, we use the estimates for Phase 2 (the means in table 2 for Phase 1 and 2 are similar) and for No Phase, we use the aggregate estimates.
In Panel A, the estimates in column (2) and (4) for trading cost per round-trip trade measures are from Table 6. In Panel B, the estimates in column (2) and (4) for
revenue per round-trip trade are from Table 10.




                                                                                                                                                             44
Appendix A: NAIC analysis and Phase 1

        In this Appendix, we briefly review the National Association of Insurance Companies (NAIC)
database and use it to study Phase 1. Although TRACE data did not exist before July 2, 2002, the NAIC
maintains trading records for member insurance companies since 1994. Bessembinder, Maxwell, and
Venkataraman (2006) use NAIC transaction data to estimate trade execution costs in Phase 1 and other
Phases and argue that there are spillovers from Phase 1 to other Phases.

        We use our methodology on the NAIC database to examine the effects of Phase 1 of TRACE.
There are two important differences between our approach and Bessembinder, et al. First, we use a
difference-in-differences research design. Second, we directly measure price standard deviation as a
proxy for trading costs, rather than using a structural model of trading to impute trading costs.

         We find that TRACE does not have a significant effect on price standard deviation using NAIC
data. Further, our analysis of TRACE above shows significant negative effects on both trading costs and
price standard deviation due to dissemination for Phase 3B bonds. It is therefore a surprise that we do
not find similar results for Phase 1. If there are spillover effects from Phase 1, we would have expected
smaller, rather than larger, results for subsequent Phases.

        While using the NAIC database, we discovered a systematic error in how NAIC’s trades are
reported. Many NAIC trades are disaggregated and reported as multiple transactions in the NAIC
database. For example, insurance companies must separately report bonds purchased and sold in the
same calendar year from bonds purchased and held through the end of the year. This means if an
insurance company purchases $1 million par of a bond on January 1, 2001 and sells $500,000 of this
before December 31, 2001 and the remaining $500,000 in the following year, under NAIC reporting
guidelines, this single purchase would be split into two separate purchases of $500,000 each. Total
volume is unaffected by splitting the trade, but the number of trades is overstated and price standard
deviation is understated. A more complete discussion of this misreporting of trades is explained in the
NAIC Data Appendix C online.34

Table A1 reports difference-in-differences estimates of trading activity and price standard deviation
(both grouped and ungrouped) for 90 days before and after Phase 1 using the NAIC database. The
estimating equation is the same as in column (4) of Table 4, but we use non-disseminated NAIC bonds
from Phases 2, 3A, and 3B as control bonds. The mean number of trades for Phase 1 bonds in the NAIC is
0.301 (grouped) and 0.368 (ungrouped). This is substantially lower than the mean number of Phase 1
trades in TRACE of 15.527, shown in Table 3, and shows that the NAIC represents a small percentage of
bond trading. Although not reported in the table, the mean number for Phases 2, 3A, and 3B are even
smaller at between 0.021-0.058 per day. We cannot examine trading costs because we do not have
matched trades. Price standard deviation for Phase 1 bonds is 0.560 (grouped) and 0.437 (ungrouped),
which is lower than the mean of 0.988 for Phase 1 TRACE trades shown in Table 3.



34Previous research on the NAIC database does not mention this problem of disaggregation. We do not know if
other research papers treat these multiple transactions as multiple trades.

                                                                                                              45
         Dissemination of bonds results in a slight increase in trading activity in Phase 1, using NAIC data.
The point estimate is 0.020, with standard error 0.011. These results are unchanged with other
specifications shown in columns (3)-(5), and are also present for the sample of ungrouped trades shown
in Panel B. Dissemination also causes no detectable effect on price standard deviation in Phase 1,
either for grouped or ungrouped trades.35

         There are several possible reasons for why NAIC results on price standard deviation from Phase
1 differ from our TRACE results for Phase 2, 3A, and 3B. First, it may be that TRACE has no effect on
Phase 1 bonds because those bonds were already actively traded, with widespread knowledge about
pricing. Second, the insurance segment of the corporate bond market, which NAIC covers, may behave
very differently than the remainder of the market. Finally, it may be difficult to detect changes since the
amount of trading captured by NAIC is so much smaller than the entire corporate bond market covered
by TRACE. According to the Federal Reserve’s Flow of Funds statement, insurance companies own 24.6%
of outstanding corporate bonds in 2002Q3-2006Q4.36 However, insurance company trading, reported
by the NAIC, is not representative of the rest of the corporate bond market.

        Table A2 compares the cleaned NAIC and TRACE datasets by Phase and shows that insurance
company trades are very different from the rest of the corporate bond market for our time period and
the universe of bonds.37 First, a high percentage of Phase 1, Phase 2, and Phase 3B TRACE bonds are
contained in NAIC (94.3%, 86.6%, and 72.8% respectively). However, NAIC only contains 42.7% of Phase
3A TRACE bonds. Second, even though coverage is comparable, NAIC volume and number of trades are
a small percentage of total volume and number of trades. Even though, as noted above, insurance
companies may own 25% of outstanding bonds, for Phase 1 the share of NAIC trades is 1.37% of all
trades in the 90-day period following dissemination (using grouped trades). For Phases 2, 3A, and 3B,
NAIC trades represent 2.79%, 1.85%, and 3.16% of grouped trades during the 90-day window around
dissemination.

         Table A2 also compares price standard deviation between NAIC and TRACE. The standard
deviation for NAIC trades is typically much smaller than for TRACE. It’s worth noting that the NAIC price
standard deviation is measured using far fewer CUSIPS and bond-days. In Phase 2, for example, we
measure TRACE price standard deviation for 2,099 CUSIPs and 78,386 bond-days, while we only measure
it for 902 CUSIPs and 1,866 bond-days in NAIC using grouped trades. This restricts our ability to draw
strong inferences about price standard deviation using the NAIC sample.

        We conclude that the NAIC database represents a small fraction of the trading in the corporate
bond market covered by TRACE. Summing volume across all four Phases in the 90 days after Phase
start, NAIC volume is only 6.9% of total TRACE volume. NAIC trades are also typically larger than those

35 Although not reported, we also looked at the effect of dissemination on NAIC bonds in Phases 2, 3A, and 3B.
These results are very sensitive to the sample of control bonds used and we cannot draw any firm conclusions.
36 Campbell and Taksler (2003) estimate that insurance companies hold between one-third and 40% of corporate

bonds.
37 In order to examine trading in Phase 1 bonds before the start of Phase 1, we use NAIC data from the period

January 1, 2000 until July 1, 2002. We only compare trading activity between the NAIC and TRACE databases
during the TRACE period, which starts July 2, 2002.

                                                                                                             46
in the TRACE database consistent with buy-and-hold trading strategies of insurance companies. Given
this difference, conclusions drawn about TRACE from the NAIC dataset may not be representative of the
overall corporate bond market.




                                                                                                   47
                                                         Table A1. NAIC Results for Trading Activity and Price Standard Deviation
                                                      Number of trades                                                                     Price standard deviation

                                                      With linear and                  Sample                                                With linear and                  Sample
                      90-day mean                                     Without Phase                          90-day mean                                     Without Phase
                                                        quadratic                   matched on                                                 quadratic                   matched on
                           for             Table 4                      1 bonds as                                for             Table 7                      1 bonds as
                                                      trends specific               size, time to                                            trends specific               size, time to
                      disseminated      estimate (90-                  controls (in                          disseminated      estimate (90-                  controls (in
                                                      to investment                 maturity, and                                            to investment                 maturity, and
                      before start of       days)                      phases 2, 3A                          before start of       days)                      phases 2, 3A
                                                      grade for each                 years since                                             grade for each                 years since
                        the phase                                         and 3B)                              the phase                                         and 3B)
                                                           Phase                      issuance                                                    Phase                      issuance

                            (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)                   (6)             (7)              (8)                (9)      (10)
                                                                                                      A. Grouped
Phase 1                   0.301           0.020*           0.018*          0.020*           0.027**                0.560         -0.139             0.035              0.054     0.597
                                          (0.011)          (0.011)         (0.011)          (0.012)                              (0.150)           (0.153)            (0.158)   (0.363)
                                           6.7%             6.0%            6.7%             9.0%                                -24.8%             6.2%               9.6%     106.5%
# of Phase 1 bonds                          353              345             353              348                                  221               221                221       215
# of trades for treated Phase 1           10,618           10,585          10,618           10,599                                5,450             5,450              5,450     5,385
# of bond-days for treated Phase 1        43,709           42,717          43,709           43,089                                2,002             2,002              2,002     1,976

                                                                                                      B. Ungrouped
Phase 1                   0.368               0.024*             0.022       0.024*           0.033**               0.437           -0.085          0.035              0.046     0.391
                                              (0.014)           (0.014)      (0.014)           (0.016)                             (0.111)         (0.109)            (0.114)   (0.257)
                                               5.5%              5.0%          5.5%              7.6%                              -19.5%           8.0%               10.5%     89.5%
# of Phase 1 bonds                              353               345          353               348                                  262            262                262       258
# of trades for treated Phase 1               13,028            12,992       13,028            13,006                                9,075          9,075              9,075     9,040
# of bond-days for treated Phase 1            43,705            42,713       43,705            43,085                                2,736          2,736              2,736     2,724
Notes: This table reports estimates of Disseminate x Post for number of trades and daily price standard deviation for both grouped and ungrouped trades..
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                                                                                   48
                                             Table A2. Comparison of NAIC and TRACE Trading Activity After Phase Start (180 day window)
                                                                     Phase 1                                 Phase 2                    Phase 3A            Phase 3B
                                                        90-day after       180-day (only NAIC)               180-day                     180-day            180-day
                                                            (1)                    (2)                          (3)                        (4)                 (5)
                                                                                                              A. CUSIPs
CUSIPs
 Phase CUSIPs in Cleaned NAIC Dataset                      366                     366                         2,188                           4,729         2,081
 Phase CUSIPs in Cleaned TRACE Dataset                     388                                                 2,526                          11,081         2,859
  NAIC CUSIPs / TRACE CUSIPs                              94.3%                                                86.6%                          42.7%          72.8%

                                                                                                           B. Trading activity
Volume
 NAIC volume                                          15,721,369,392         15,721,369,392                32,369,436,664              32,648,184,927     4,087,866,879
 TRACE volume                                        275,211,550,501                                      253,914,752,867              485,050,421,819   125,532,896,675
  NAIC volume/TRACE volume                                 5.7%                                                12.7%                        6.7%              3.3%

Trades
 Ungrouped NAIC trades                                    6,970                   6,970                        15,239                        16,895          3,968
 Grouped NAIC trades                                      5,553                   5,553                        12,382                        13,591          3,213
 TRACE trades                                            404,481                                              443,402                        736,470        101,692
  Ungrouped NAIC trades/TRACE trades                      1.72%                                                3.44%                          2.29%          3.90%
  Grouped NAIC trades/TRACE trades                        1.37%                                                2.79%                          1.85%          3.16%

Trade Size
 NAIC Ungrouped Average Trade Size                      2,255,577               2,255,577                    2,124,118                       1,932,417      1,030,208
 NAIC Grouped Average Trade Size                        2,831,149               2,831,149                    2,614,233                       2,402,192      1,272,290
 TRACE Average Trade Size                                680,407                                              572,651                         658,615       1,234,442
  NAIC Ungrouped Average/TRACE Average                     3.32                                                 3.71                            2.93           0.83
  NAIC Grouped Average/TRACE Average                       4.16                                                 4.57                            3.65           1.03

                                                                                                       C. Price standard deviation
CUSIPs / Bond-Days used
 Ungrouped NAIC                                         278 / 1,416            278 / 1,416                 1,084 / 2,756                1,396 / 3,300      507 / 826
 Grouped NAIC                                           250 / 1,063            250 / 1,063                  902 / 1,866                 1,061 / 2,085      405 / 577
 TRACE                                                 342 / 17,784                                        2099 / 78,386               3,979 / 106,802   1,373 / 20,631

Price Standard Deviation
 Ungrouped NAIC                                            0.33                    0.33                         0.21                           0.29           0.17
 Grouped NAIC                                              0.47                    0.47                         0.33                           0.48           0.26
 TRACE                                                     0.99                                                 0.87                           0.80           0.50
   Ungrouped NAIC Std. Dev./TRACE Std. Dev.                0.34                                                 0.25                           0.37           0.33
   Grouped NAIC Std. Dev./TRACE Std. Dev.                  0.48                                                 0.38                           0.60           0.51
Notes. This table reports on comparisons between the cleaned NAIC file and the Academic TRACE file for 180 day window for the Phase Start.
                                                                                                                                                                      49
References


Acharya, V., R. Engle, S. Figlewski, A. Lynch, and M. Subrahmanyam. 2009. “Chapter 11: Centralized
       Clearing for Credit Derivatives.” In Restoring Financial Stability: How to Repair a Failed System,
       Wiley and NYU Stern, 2009.

Akins, B. 2018. “Financial Reporting Quality and Uncertainty about Credit Risk among the
        Ratings Agencies.” The Accounting Review, 93(4): 1-22.

Alexander, G., A. Edwards, and M. Ferri. 2000. “The Determinants of Trading Volume in High-yield
       Corporate Bonds.” Journal of Financial Markets, 3, 177-204.

Asquith, P., A. Au, T. Covert, and P. A. Pathak. 2013. “The Market for Borrowing Corporate Bonds.”
        Journal of Financial Economics, 107, 155-182.

Bessembinder, H. and W. Maxwell. 2008. “Markets: Transparency and the Corporate Bond Market.”
      Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22 (2), 217-234.

Bessembinder, H., W. Maxwell, and K. Venkataraman. 2006. “Market Transparency, Liquidity
      Externalities, and Institutional Trading Costs in Corporate Bonds.” Journal of Financial
      Economics, 82, 251-288.

Bessembinder, H., S. Jacobsen, W. Maxwell and K. Venkataraman 2018, “Capital Commitment and
      Illiquidity in Corporate Bonds.” Journal of Finance, 73: 1615-1661.

Biais, B. and R. Green. 2018. “The Microstructure of the Bond Market in the 20th Century.” Working
          paper, Toulouse University.

Biais, B., L. Glosten, and C. Spatt. 2005. “Market Microstructure: A Survey of Microfoundations,
          Empirical Results, and Policy Implications.” Journal of Financial Markets, 8(2), 217-264.

Bloomfield, R. and M. O’Hara. 1999. “Market Transparency: Who Wins and Who Loses?” The Review of
       Financial Studies 12 (1), 5-35.

Bravo, R. A. 2003. “Corporate-Bond Pricing System May Be Too Open, Critics Say.” Wall Street Journal,
        April 15.

Brancaccio, G., D. Li, and N. Schurhoff. 2017. “Learning by Trading: The Case of the U.S. Market for
       Municipal Bonds.” Unpublished paper. Princeton University.




                                                                                                        50
Corwin, S. A. and P. Schultz. 2012. “A Simple Way to Estimate Bid-Ask Spreads from Daily High and Low
        Prices.” Journal of Finance 67 (2), 719-760.

Decker, M. 2007. “FINRA’s TRACE and the U.S. Corporate Bond Market.” Presentation to Securities
        Industry and Financial Markets Association. September 11.

Di Maggio, M., A. Kermani, and Z. Song. 2017. “The value of trading relations in turbulent times.” Journal
       of Financial Economics, 142 (2), 266-284.

Dow Jones. 2002. “NASD to Increase Bond-Trade Data Available to Public.” Dow Jones Newswires,
       November 22.

Duffie, D. 2012. Dark Markets: Asset Pricing and Information Transmission in Over-the-Counter Markets.
         Princeton University Press.

Dugalic, A. 2017. “Corporate Bond Market Post-Trade Transparency and Dealer Behavior.” Unpublished
        paper. Stanford University.

Economist. 2011. “Derivatives: Unlucky for Some. Proposed Rules on Taming Swaps Markets are Proving
      Controversial.” March 3.

Edwards, A., L. Harris, and M. Piwowar. 2007. “Corporate Bond Market Transparency and Transaction
       Costs.” Journal of Finance, 62 (3), 1421-1451.

Financial Services Forum, Futures Industry Association, International Swaps and Derivatives Association,
        and Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, 2011. “Comment Letter RE: Phase-In
        Schedule for Requirement for Title VII of Dodd-Frank Act.” May 4. Available at:
        http://www.sec.gov/comments/s7-16-10/s71610-177.pdf, Last accessed, March 7, 2019.

French, K., M. Baily, J. Campbell, J. Cochrane, D. Diamond, D. Duffie, A. Kashyap, F. Mishkin, R. Rajan, D.
        Scharfstein, R. Shiller, H. S. Shin, M. Slaughter, J. Stein, and R. Stulz. 2010. The Squam Lake
        Report: Fixing the Financial System. Princeton University Press.

Gemmill, G. 1996. “Transparency and Liquidity: A Study of Block Trades on the London Stock Exchange
      under Different Publication Rules.” Journal of Finance 51 (5), 1765-1790.

Green, R., B. Hollifield, and N. Schürhoff. 2007a. “Financial Intermediation and the Costs of Trading in an
        Opaque Market.” Review of Financial Studies 20 (2), 275-314.

Green, R., B. Hollifield, and N. Schürhoff. 2007b. “Dealer Intermediation and Price Behavior in the
        Aftermarket for New Bond Issues.” Journal of Financial Economics, 86, 643-682.



                                                                                                         51
Grundy, B. and M. McNichols. 1989. “Trade and the Revelation of Information through Prices and Direct
       Disclosure.” Review of Financial Studies 2 (4), 495-526.

Goldstein, M., E. Hotchkiss, and E. Sirri. 2007. “Transparency and Liquidity: A Controlled Experiment on
        Corporate Bonds.” Review of Financial Studies 20 (2), 235-273.

Goldstein, M. and E. Hotchkiss. 2008. “Dealer Behavior and the Trading of Newly Issued Corporate
        Bonds.” Unpublished paper. Boston College.

Goldstein, Michael A. and Hotchkiss, Edith S. 2017. “Providing Liquidity in an Illiquid Market: Dealer
        Behavior in U.S. Corporate Bonds.” Unpublished paper. Boston College.

Hendershott, T., D. Li, D. Livdan, and N. Schurhoff. 2017. “Relationship Trading in OTC Markets.”
       Unpublished paper. University of California.

Jamieson, D. 2006. “Report card for TRACE a mixed bag.” InvestmentNews, July 24.

Ketchum, G. R. “Speech: Bond Dealers Association Annual Conference.” Chicago, IL, October 11, 2012.
       Available at: http://www.finra.org/newsroom/speeches/ketchum/p187314. Last accessed:
       March 7, 2019.

Learner, H. 2011. “An Examination of Transparency in European Bond Markets.” CFA Institute, October,
        Vol. 2011(5). Available at: https://www.cfainstitute.org/en/advocacy/policy-positions/an-
        examination-of-transparency-in-european-bond-markets. Last accessed: March 7, 2019.

Levitt, A. 1999. “Testimony to the U.S. Congress House of Representatives House Subcommittee on
         Finance and Hazardous Materials.” March 18. Available at:
         http://www.sec.gov/news/testimony/testarchive/1999/tsty0499.htm. Last accessed: March 7,
         2019.

Li, D. and N. Schurhoff. 2019. “Dealer Networks.” Journal of Finance, 74: 91-144

Madhavan, A. 1995. “Consolidation, Fragmentation, and the Disclosure of Trading Information.” Review
      of Financial Studies 8 (3), 579-603.

Mullen, D. 2004. “Relating to Proposed Amendments to TRACE Rule 6250 and Related TRACE
        Rules to Disseminate Transaction Information on All TRACE-Eligible Securities and Facilitate
        Dissemination.” Letter from Bond Market Association to SEC, July 23.

Naik, N., Neuberger, A., and S. Viswanathan. 1999. “Trade Disclosure Regulation in Markets with
        Negotiated Trades.” Review of Financial Studies 12 (4), 873-900.


                                                                                                         52
NASD. 2005. “NASD’s Fully Implemented `TRACE’ Brings Unprecedented Transparency to Corporate
       Bond Market.” February 7. Available at: http://www.finra.org/Newsroom/
       NewsReleases/2005/P013274, Last accessed: March 7, 2019.

NASD. 2006. “NASD Response to European Commission; Letter in Response to EU Markets in Financial
       Instruments Directive (MiFiD) Call for Evidence on Pre- and post-trade transparency provisions
       requested June 12, 2006.” Available at:
       http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/securities/docs/isd/consultation_mifid/nasd_en.pdf, Last
       accessed: August 29, 2013.

Nazareth, A. L. 2004. “Testimony before the United States Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and
       Urban Affairs.” Available at: http://www.sec.gov/news/testimony/ts061704aln.htm, Last
       accessed: March 7, 2019.

Pagano, M. and A. Roell. 1996. “Transparency and Liquidity: A Comparison of Auction and Dealer
       Markets with Informed Trading.” Journal of Finance 51 (2), 579-611.

Schultz, P. 2012. “The Market for New Issues of Municipal Bonds: The Roles of Transparency and Limited
         Access to Retail Investors.” Journal of Financial Economics, 106, 492-512.

Securities Industry and Financial Market Association (SIFMA), 2013. “Table 1.1 US Corporate Average
        Daily Trading Volume by Type and Rating.” Available at: http://www.sifma.org/
        research/statistics.aspx. Last accessed, July 25, 2013.

Shenn, J. and D. Scheer. 2009. “FINRA Seeks to Amass Asset-Backed Bond Data on Trace.” October 1,
        Bloomberg.

TRACE Factbook. 2005. National Association of Securities Dealers. Available at:
       http://www.finra.org/Industry/Compliance/MarketTransparency/TRACE/FactBook/. Last
       accessed: March 7, 2019.

Vames, S. 2003. “NASD Expands Bond-Price Reports – Data on Corporate Issues Becomes More
       Transparent.” Wall Street Journal, March 4.




                                                                                                      53
