                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              NEWS DRIVEN BUSINESS CYCLES:
                                INSIGHTS AND CHALLENGES

                                            Paul Beaudry
                                            Franck Portier

                                        Working Paper 19411
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19411


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2013




The authors have benefited from discussion with Fabrice Collard, Martial Dupaigne, Patrick Feve,
Domenico Giannone and Andre Kurmann. They want to thank Dana Galizia for excellent research
assistance. This paper is under review at the Journal of Economic Literature. Beaudry would like to
thank the SSHRC of Canada and the Bank of Canada for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Paul Beaudry and Franck Portier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
News Driven Business Cycles: Insights and Challenges
Paul Beaudry and Franck Portier
NBER Working Paper No. 19411
September 2013
JEL No. E00,E3

                                            ABSTRACT

There is a widespread belief that changes in expectations may be an important independent driver
of economic fluctuations. The news view of business cycles offers a formalization of this perspective.
In this paper we discuss mechanisms by which changes in agents' information, due to the arrival of
news, can cause business cycle fluctuations driven by expectational change, and we review the empirical
evidence aimed at evaluating its relevance. In particular, we highlight how the literature on news and
business cycles offers a coherent way of thinking about aggregate fluctuations, while at the same time
we emphasize the many challenges that must be addressed before a proper assessment of its role in
business cycles can be established.


Paul Beaudry
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, B.C.
Canada, V6T 1Z1
and University of British Columbia
and also NBER
paulbe@interchange.ubc.ca

Franck Portier
Toulouse School of Economics
University of Toulouse
Manufacture des Tabacs
21 Allee de Brienne
31000 Toulouse, FRANCE
franck.portier@tse-fr.eu
1         Introduction
Why do market economies exhibit business cycle phenomena; that is, why do they exhibit
recurring boom periods with higher than average growth in investment, consumption and
employment, followed by recessions characterized by declines in these same macroeconomic
aggregates? The news view of business cycles suggests that these phenomena are mainly the
result of agents having incentives to continuously anticipate the economy’s future demands. If
an agent can properly anticipate a future need, he can gain by trying to preempt the market
and invest early as to make goods readily available when the predicted needs eventually
appear. If many agents adopt similar behavior, because they receive related news about
future developments, this will lead to a boom period. However, by the very fact that such
behavior involves speculation it will be subject to error. In the cases of error, the economy
will have over-invested as the anticipated demand will not materialize. This will cause a
recession and a process of liquidation. Hence, according to the news view of the business
cycle, both the boom and the bust are direct consequences of people’s incentive to speculate
on information related to future developments of the economy.
        An interesting anecdotal evidence for such speculative cycles is given by the satellite
industry. In the early 1980s, in anticipation of long-distance telephone service, video tele-
conferencing and other forms of sophisticated electronic communications, the launching of
telecommunication satellites exploded. A couple of years later, the market realized that the
increase in demand failed to materialize, which caused severe capacity underutilization. On
a weekday afternoon in December 1983, the Federal Communications Commission observed
that only 54% of capacity on communications satellites was in use. Of the 14 satellites stud-
ied, 143 of 312 transponders were idle. Six months earlier, before 48 new transponders had
                                                                                1
been introduced, 36 fewer were idle and capacity utilization reached 59%.           This “transpon-
der glut” repeated in the early 2000s. During the “dot com” boom of the 1990s, prospective
demand for data transmission led the market increase dramatically the number of launched
satellites. In 1998, the satellite industry launched 150 satellites, a nearly 300 percent growth
compared to 1993 (Hague [2003]). It was not a radical change in the launching technology
that caused such a boom, neither the current demand for data transmission 2 , but the per-
ceived future profitability of satellites operation associated with the development of the IT
economy. With the bust of year 2000, the number of satellites launched went down to 75 in
2001 and 69 in 2003, against 150 in 1998 (OECD [2004]).
        While the idea of news driven business cycles is rather simple, and echoes commonly
    1
    “Satellites outpace customers”, The New-York Times, April 10, 1984.
    2
    The growth rate for demand for satellite bandwidth has been 31% between 1995 and 2003, while the
supply of satellite bandwidth grew by 54% during this same timeframe (Futron Corporation [2004]).


                                                 1
found narratives in the business press, as illustrated above, evaluating its relevance is quite
challenging. Difficulties arise on two main fronts. On the one hand, since the main driving
force is agents’ perceptions about the economy’s future needs, it implies that the business
cycle is driven by a force difficult to measure. This generally makes empirical evaluation
depend on subtle identification assumptions and therefore subject of debate. On the other
hand, even if the underlying story appears intuitive, it turns out that it is quite challeng-
ing to build a simple macroeconomic model which captures in a robust way the idea that
changes in agents’ perceptions about the economy’s future needs can cause business cycle
type fluctuations. In fact, we will show why one generally needs to depart at least from some
standard modeling assumption to be able capture the notion of news driven business cycles
within the confines of a dynamic general equilibrium framework. These two issues, modeling
and evaluating news driven business cycles, will be at the heart of this article. In particular,
the goal of this article will be to highlight both the promising paths and the difficulties in
building and evaluating the news view of business cycles.
      The idea of business cycles driven by expectations can be traced back to writing such as
that of Pigou [1927] where he states “The varying expectations of business men ... constitute
the immediate cause and direct causes or antecedents of industrial fluctuations”. According
to Pigou, the very source of fluctuations is the “wave-like swings in the mind of the business
                                                                             3
world between errors of optimism and errors of pessimism”.                       This view is also closely
related to Keynes’ [1936] notion of animal spirits as it relates to these waves of optimism and
pessimism as important driving forces behind economic fluctuations. There are at least three
different ways of interpreting optimism and pessimism in business cycles. At one extreme
is the view that such waves are entirely psychological phenomenon, with no grounding in
economic reality. According to such a perspective, any expansion driven by optimism must
eventually lead to a crash as the expansion is not supported by any change in fundamentals.
At the other extreme is the view that the macro-economy is inherently unstable as it admits
self-fulfilling fluctuations. In this perspective, a wave of optimism creates a boom which
renders the initial optimism rational, and the same is true of waves of pessimism. A third
possibility is the news view whereby agents in the economy are continually trying to predict
future needs, but likely do so imperfectly. In this interpretation, a boom driven by a wave of
optimism arises when agents have gathered information suggesting that future fundamentals
favor high investment demand today. If their information is valid and expectations are
realized, then the boom needs not be followed by a crash. In contrast, if agents have made
an error and have been overly optimistic, then there will be a crash. This type of recurrent
boom and occasional bust phenomena, driven by information and possible errors, is the
  3
      See Collard [1983] and [1996] on the business cycle theory of Pigou.


                                                       2
                                                         4
defining property of news-driven business cycles.
        One important issue that arises when considering any theory of business cycles is whether
it implies that cycles are efficient or not. While we agree on the relevance of this issue, it
will not be a major focus of this article. At this point in time we see the news view of
business cycles as primarily proposing a positive theory of fluctuations where, depending on
the details, the fluctuations may or may not be efficient. In the literature we will review,
some of the models imply that the resulting cycles are efficient while others imply they are
not. We will point out these differences as they arise.
        The remaining sections of the paper are structured as follows. In Section 2, we begin
by presenting a baseline model where booms are driven by optimistic news which favor
current investment, while a bust arises if and when the news are found to be unfounded.
The baseline model offers a simple framework that helps motivate the empirical exercises
reviewed in Section 3. In particular, in Section 3 we provide reduced-form evidence and
summarize VAR evidence which has been presented as supportive of news-driven business
cycles. Then we discuss a set of criticisms related to the identification scheme used in the
VARs and discuss alternatives. In Section 4 we examine the more structural approaches used
to evaluate the importance of news in driving fluctuations. We begin by discussing a set of
theoretical issues related to building general equilibrium models where business cycles can
be driven by news-induced changes in expectations. Section 5 briefly describes the potential
future avenues of research and offers concluding comments.


2         The basic framework
The basic idea in the news view of business cycles, as for example presented in Beaudry
and Portier [2004], is that agents repeatedly receive advanced information that relates to
future developments in the economy. This information, or signals, are referred to as news
and in general are assumed to be noisy; that is, the news may turn out to be validated by
future events or may be wrong in the sense that future developments may not conform to the
content of the original information. The link between current news and agents’ perception
regarding the distribution of future events could take many forms. However, in practice
it has most often been given a rather simple parametric formulation in the spirit of signal
extraction problems. For example, it is generally assumed that there is some exogenous
driving force in an economy that may be predicted by news. The driving force, which we
can denote by θt , is usually modeled as an ARIMA stochastic process, where we can denote
    4
    The word ‘news” is used here to represent exogenous changes in the information sets that agents use to
form their perceptions regarding future economic activity.


                                                    3
innovations to the process by t . The news that agents receive at time t is then modeled as a
signal regarding the value of t+q , that is, the agents receive information at time t regarding
the innovation in θ that will arise at time t + q. The news can then be modeled as a signal
St of t+q as given by
                                              St = t+q + νt ,                                             (1)

where νt is the noise in the agents’ signal, σν2 is the variance of νt and σ2 is the variance in
t . If we further assume that the processes are Gaussian, from the point of view of agents,
the conditional expectation of t+q at time t is then given by

                                                                 σ2
                                     E[t+q | Ωt = St ] =              St ,                                (2)
                                                             σ2 + σν2
                                                               5
where Ωt is the information set of agents at time t.
       A close alternative to this formulation of news is to model the innovation in θt as being
composed of two elements, say 1t + 2t . The news is then modeled as a signal without error
St of the first component of t+q , such that St = 1t+q . Therefore, the expectation of t+q at
time t is given by
                                     E[t+q | Ωt = St ] = St = 1t+q .                                     (3)

       While these two formulations may appear almost identical, they are actually quite dif-
ferent as we will emphasize when discussing VAR approaches to the identification of news
shocks. To give an idea of the difference, in the first formulation, there is a shock νt which
can be referred to as a noise or error shock, and one can be interested in knowing how
the economy responds to such a noise shock. In the second formulation there is no direct
counterpart: there is an anticipated shock 1 and an unanticipated shock 2 , but no noise
shock.
       The main question addressed in the news view of business cycles is whether signals
of the type described above could be important forces driving macroeconomic fluctuations
through their effect on incentives to invest, either by starting or expanding firms, or by
directly accumulating certain capital goods. In principle, the content of the news could be
about many diverse objects. It could be related to information about future policy, news
about demographic trends, news about energy prices or news about future technological
developments, since any one of these forces will affect the economy’s future needs. While all
these different avenues have received some attention, the bulk of the literature on news and
business cycles has focused on the role of technological news; that is, news regarding future
   5
    In this formulation we could easily allow the noise-to-signal ratio to vary over time as to reflect that in
some periods agents may believe signals are more reliable than in other periods. Conceptually, this is very
easy and reasonable but it makes empirical evaluation much more difficult.


                                                      4
developments in productivity. Accordingly, we will focus mainly on the role of technology-
related news in driving business cycles in this paper.

2.1    A baseline dynamic general equilibrium model with techno-
       logical news
According to the news view of business cycles, booms arise mainly as the result of specula-
tion; that is, booms are not initially driven by contemporaneous changes in technology or
preferences but instead are driven by agents’ anticipation of the economy’s future develop-
ments. If agents get news regarding potential technological change in some sector of the
economy, then they may want to take advantage of such news in at least two ways. First,
they may want to directly invest in the sector being affected by the change, or, alternatively,
they may want to invest in complementary sectors which will benefit only indirectly from
the change. The following illustrative model of news-driven business cycles will allow both
these forces to be present, with the qualitative aspects of the model being invariant to which
one of the channels dominates. In this baseline model, we choose functional forms that allow
for an analytical solution for ease of presentation. Later we discuss how the structure of the
economy can be generalized as to maintain the same types of results.
   Let us consider an environment populated by a representative household with preferences
given by
                                      ∞
                                      X        h                   i
                                               t
                                E0           β ln (Ct ) + ν · L − Lt ,
                                                               e                                          (4)
                                       t=0

where Ct is total consumption, Lt is the total time worked, L
                                                            e is total time endowment, ν
is a parameter and E0 is the expectation operator based on the information set Ω0 . The
household can buy some or all of its consumption on the market, it can supply labor time
to the market, it can produce household consumption, it can buy one-period bonds and it
can trade in firm shares. The household budget constraint is given by
                              N
                              X                                                        N
                                                                                       X
             CtM   + Bt+1 +         (Pits   − dit )Zit+1 =   wt LM
                                                                 t   + (1 + rt )Bt +         Pits Zit ,   (5)
                              i=1                                                      i=1


where CtM is amount of consumption goods acquired on the market, LM
                                                                  t is the amount of
time supplied to the market, Bt is the household’s bond holdings, Zit is the number of shares
held in sector i firms, wt is the wage rate, rt is the interest rate on bonds, dit are dividends
and Pits is the price of shares before dividends. Total consumption is made up of market
consumption and household production goods, CtH , where household goods are produced



                                                        5
with time according to the CtH = αLH
                                   t , where α is the productivity of household labor.
                                                                                                             6

Hence, total consumption is equal to CtM + CtH and total time not enjoyed as leisure is equal
to LM    H                                                 M    H                   M    H
    t + Lt . The household maximizes utility by choosing {Ct , Ct , Zit+1 , Bt+1 , Lt , Lt }.
       The production side of the economy consists of a set of intermediate sectors i = 1, . . . , N
and a final good sector that aggregates the intermediate goods into a market consumption
good according to:
                                         N
                                          "                          # φ1
                                        X   1
                                CtM   =       (θit Xit )φ                   ,   φ < 1,                     (6)
                                        i=1
                                            N
where Xit are the quantities of intermediate goods (or services) used in the production of the
market consumption good and θit is a technology shifter in sector i. Both the intermediate
sectors and the final market consumption good sector are assumed to be competitive. The
price of the market consumption good is the numeraire and the prices of the intermediate
goods are denoted by Pit .
       The representative firm in sector i produces the intermediate good Xit using services from
its capital stock Kit combined with labor it directs toward production, denoted LPit . The firm
also hires labor LIit to build up its capital stock. The production of the intermediate good
is given by Xit = Kitγ (LPit )1−γ , 0 < γ ≤ 1. The firm’s capital stock accumulates according
to Kit+1 = Iit + (1 − δ)Kit , with Iit = ln(LIit ).              7
                                                                      Here we can interpret that capital stock
as representing physical capital, organizational capital or a combination of both. So the
firm’s problem can be stated as choosing labor as to maximize the present discounted value
of dividends dit = Pit Xit − wt Lit or, stated explicitly, as solving
                                                    ∞
                                                    X β t C0
                                 max           E0               (Pit Xit − wt Lit ),
                              {LP    I ∞
                                it ,Lit }t=0        t=0
                                                          Ct
                                        s.t. Xit = Kitγ (LPit )1−γ ,
                                                    Kit+1 = ln(LIit ) + (1 − δ)Kit .

In this formulation, firms are assumed to finance themselves by retained earnings and the
total number of shares in each sector is normalized to 1.
   The Walrasian equilibrium for this economy takes a particularly simple form if the house-
hold problem has an interior solution, i.e., LM    H
                                              t + Lt < L. In this case, which we will focus
                                                       e
upon, it can be easily verified that the equilibrium will be characterized by a fixed wage rate
   6
     Home production with linear technology is introduced here for analytical tractability, as it allows us to
easily determine the wage rate and the interest rate.
   7
     We could allow the firm’s production technology for investment goods to take a much more general
form including allowing the firm’s capital stock to also enter the production function of investment goods.
Analytical tractability has dictated the current choice.



                                                            6
wt = α and a fixed interest rate (1 + rt ) = β1 . The optimal choices of labor and investment
for the firm are then given by
                                                              γ1                                ∞
                                                 (1 − γ)Pit           β        1−γ   X                 1
           Lit =   LPit   +   LIit   = Kit                           + γ(1 − γ) γ Et     (β(1 − δ))j Pit+j+1
                                                                                                       γ
                                                                                                                                        (7)
                                                     α                α              j=0

       8
and
                                                                         ∞
                                                                                                            !
                                                 β         1−γ   X                 1
                                Iit = ln           γ(1 − γ) γ Et     (β(1 − δ))j Pit+j+1
                                                                                   γ
                                                                                                                ,                       (8)
                                                 α               j=0

and the price of shares will be given by
                              ∞                       ∞                                           1−γ                     !
                              X                       X              1+ 1−γ              1−γ         γ
             Pits = Et               β i dit+j = Et         βj     Pit+j γ Kit+j                            − αt Lit+j          .       (9)
                              j=0                     j=0
                                                                                          α

       The key equation here is (7) as it emphasizes the forward aspect of the firm’s labor
demand. There are two components to this labor demand. The first component captures
the demand for labor directed at the current production of Xit , while the second component
captures the labor that is hired for investment purposes; that is, in order to build capacity in
anticipation of the economy’s future needs. In order to determine their optimal employment,
firms need to form expectations about the future price of their output. In this model, the
price at time t + j in sector i can be written as
                                                                             !1−φ
                                                                       M
                                                           1         Ct+j            φ
                                                 Pit+j   =                          θit+j .
                                                           N         Xit+j

So to form expectations of future prices, firms will want to have information relevant for
predicting aggregate consumption, aggregate production in their sector and technological
change in their sector. Some of this information may be contained in current news in the
economy. For example, agents may get signals at different points in time about future
changes in the θ’s. In general, if firms receive such signals about future θ’s, the expectation
problem they need to solve is quite involved, as we will emphasize later. However, in the
particular case where φ = 0, the problem becomes very tractable. In the case with φ = 0,
the price in sector k can be written as
                                                                               1
                                                                                    
                                        1     M
                                             Ct+j 1               ΠN
                                                                   i=1 (Xit+j )
                                                                                N                        1
                                                                                                                    
                          Pkt+j       =         =                                           ΠN
                                                                                             i=1 (θit+j )
                                                                                                          N             .
                                        N Xkt+j   N                   Xkt+j
                                                                                                 1−γ        P∞                      1
   8
    Note that investment expenditures by the firm are wt LIit = βγ(1 − γ)                         γ    Et                     j γ
                                                                                                                j=0 (β(1 − δ)) Pit+j+1 ,   so
that total market output in the economy is measured as CtM + αLIit .



                                                                     7
From the point of view of a firm who is choosing current employment and investment levels,
when φ = 0, to predict the price in his sector the firm will want to predict future market
                                                                                            9
consumption and the future output level that will be offered in his sector.                     The firm does not
need to directly care about predicting technology levels. However, in a rational expectations
equilibrium, this problems boils down to predicting a sequence of future aggregate technology
                                  1 N        1
indexes given by Θt+j ≡            Π (θ ) N .
                                  N i=1 it+j
                                                        In particular, given that this price function is
symmetric for all sectors, a symmetric equilibrium implies that the output prices take the
following simple form for all sectors:
                                        1  N            1
                                                           
                                    Pkt+j =Πi=1 (θit+j ) N = Θt+j .
                                        N
       Now to introduce news in this system, let us assume that the technology index Θ follows
the autoregressive process given by
                             Θt = (1 − ρ)Θ + ρΘt−1 + t−q ,              0 ≤ ρ < 1,                           (10)
where t is a Gaussian white noise process with variance σ2 . We normalize Θ = 100 so that a
                                                                                       10
unit shock to t−q induces a 1% deviation of Θ from its steady state.                       News in the system
can then be introduced in the form of a signal St of t−q . We assume that the signal is noisy,
                                                                          11
St = t + νt where νt is a Gaussian white noise error term.                    This is an environment where
agents receive q periods in advance information about future innovations to Θ. Our goal now
is to illustrate how the economy reacts to the shocks t and νt by use of impulse response
functions. The easiest case for this is when γ = 1, that is, the case where employment is
fully forward-looking, and current production results only from past investments. In this
case, the impulse response function for percent deviations of aggregate employment from its
steady state, denoted L
                      bt is given by
                                       q−1                          ∞
                (1 − ρ(1 − δ)β) b      X
                                                     q−j−1
                                                                   X
                                × Lt =     ((1 − δ)β)      ψt−j +     ρj−q+1 t−j
                 (1 − (1 − δ)β)        j=0                         j=q
                                                 q−1
                                                 X
                                            +          ((1 − δ)β)q−j−1 ψνt−j ,                                (11)
                                                 j=0

   9
      Such a mechanism echoes Pigou [1927], who introduces his discussion of the impulses behind changes in
expectations of business men with the proposition that “the dominant causal factor is not on the side of the
supply of mobile resources, but on the side of expectations of profit”.
   10
      Given our formulation for the process of Θ, it is formally possible that it becomes negative, which does
not make sense in our setup. We disregard this possibility in the current presentation, assuming that σ is
small enough compared to Θ.
   11
      An alternative information structure which would give very similar results is one where the the sector-
level technology θit is an unpredictable iid process, say θit = θ + it , with a variance for the , denoted
σ2 (t), that varies over time and is partially predictable by news. For example, the variance could be an
autoregressive process σ2 (t) = (1 − ρ)σ 2 + ρσ2 (t − 1) + ηt−q , and the news could take the form of St = ηt . In
this case, St would signal future variance of sector specific shocks, and this would lead to a lower expectation
of aggregate demand. The model can therefore be extended to account for uncertainty shocks.

                                                          8
                   σ2                                                                                 12
where ψ =       σν2 +σ2
                           captures the information content of the signal St with respect to t .           In
comparison, the impulse response functions for percent deviations of Θ from its steady state
            b t = P∞ ρj t−q−j . Figure 1 plots an example of the of impulse response for L
is given by Θ                                                                             bt
                            j=0
    b t to the shocks  and ν when ρ > (1 − δ)β and ρ > ψ.                     13
and Θ
       There are four panels in the Figure. In panels (a) and (b) we plot the response of L
                                                                                          bt and
Θ
b t to a  shock; that is, to a shock that first comes to the agents in the form of news (in the
signal St ) and then subsequently leads to increased productivity. As can be seen on panels
(a) and (b), on receiving the news employment starts to increase immediately, while Θ
                                                                                    b does
not change. Employment keeps increasing for q periods as firms hire labor to build capacity
in anticipation of the increase in economic activity. The peak of employment arises at the
same time productivity eventually starts to grow. 14 Following the peak, both employment
and Θ
    b gradually decline to their previous steady states, as the shock is only temporary.
In panels (c) and (d) we plot the response to a noise shock ν. This is a shock that first
comes to agents as news about future productivity, but it is actually false information. In
response to this shock, employment increases immediately as the response is identical to the
response to an  shock for the first q − 1 periods. However, in period q, it is realized that the
information was just noise and employment collapses. Through this process, since agents
are reacting to noise, the technology index Θ does not move. A key feature of this model is
that it creates potentially large reversals in employment as the result of agents re-evaluating
their information in period q.
       In order to complete the picture of how this economy reacts to news, we also want
  12
       To derive (11), we start from the equations for Lit which with γ = 1 is given by
                                                     ∞
                                                 β X
                                         Lit =    Et   (β(1 − δ))j Pit+j+1 .
                                                 α j=0

                                                                                         Pj
Then we use the signal to predict prices according   to Et Pit+j = (1 − ρ)j + ρj Θt + ψ k=1 ρj−k St−q+k for
                                             q
j ≤ q and Et Pit+j = (1 − ρ)j + ρj Θt + ψ k=1 ρj−k St−q+k for j > q. Using St = t+q + νt , and summing
                                          P
over the sectors we get
                                            
                                                   q−1
                                 Nβ                X
                  Lt =                      Θ +       ((1 − δ)β)q−j−1 ψt−j +
                          α(1 − ρ(1 − δ)β)         j=0
                                                                      
                           ∞                q−1
                          X                 X                                    Nβ
                              ρj−q+1 t−j +     ((1 − δ)β)q−j−1 ψνt−j  +                   ,
                          j=q               j=0
                                                                           α(1 −  (1 − δ)β)

                                               Nβ
with the steady state being given by L = α(1−ρ(1−δ)β)                       b t = Lt −L .
                                                       . Finally, we define L       L
  13
     The impulse responses are calculated using the following parameters: β = .99, δ = .025, ρ = .999, q = 8,
ψ = .8 and α = 10.
  14
     The peak in employment can arise either q − 1 or q periods after receiving the shock depending on
whether ρ is greater or smaller than ψ.


                                                          9
Figure 1: Response of hours worked L
                                   b and TFP Θ
                                             b to news () and noise (ν) shocks in
period 0

            (a) Response of L
                            b to                            (b) Response of Θ
                                                                             b to 
     1                                                  1


   0.8                                               0.8


   0.6                                               0.6
 %




                                                   %
   0.4                                               0.4


   0.2                                               0.2


     0                                                  0

     0         5         10        15         20        0        5         10        15        20
                      Periods                                           Periods
           (c) Response of L
                           b to ν                            (d) Response of Θ
                                                                             b to ν
     1                                                  1


   0.8                                               0.8


   0.6                                               0.6
 %




                                                   %




   0.4                                               0.4


   0.2                                               0.2


     0                                                  0

     0         5         10        15         20        0        5         10        15        20
                      Periods                                           Periods

Note: This Figure displays responses of hours worked L b and TFP Θb to news () and noise (ν) shocks, as
obtained from equation (11) with parameters β = .99, δ = .025, ρ = .999, q = 8, ψ = .8 and α = 10. Units
are percentage deviations from the steady state level.




                                                   10
to discuss the behavior of stock prices and consumption. Stock prices are given by the
discounted sum of dividends, as follows
                                        ∞
                                        X                      ∞
                                                               X
                            Pits = Et         β i dit+j = Et         β j (Pit+j Kit+j − wt Lit+j ).                           (12)
                                        j=0                    j=0

In contrast to the impulse response for employment, the impulse response for stock prices
it is not a simple linear function. For this reason, we will focus on a first order linear
approximation of the deviation of stock prices from its steady state, which we will denote
by Pbs . Using the firm’s optimality conditions for the choice of employment, the impulse
        t
response for Pbts can be written as
                  q−1 
                            β q−k
                  X                                          
             Pbts =
                                                     
                        K          ψ + 1 + α (1 − δ) L Bk−1 ψ t−k
                  k=0
                          1  −  ρβ
                   ∞ 
                  X         ρk−q                    h                 k−q
                                                                            i
                +      K           + 1 + α (1 − δ) L Ak−1 + Bq−1 (1 − δ) ψ t−k
                  k=q
                          1 − ρβ
                  q−1 
                                                                                                                              (13)
                           β q−k
                  X                                          
                                                     
                +      K           ψ + 1 + α (1 − δ) L Bk−1 ψ νt−k
                  k=0
                          1 −  ρβ
                  X∞ n                                    o
                        1 + α (1 − δ) L Bq−1 (1 − δ)k−q ψ νt−k ,
                                        
                +
                      k=q

                                         1−q+j                                                j+1
                            1−[ρ−1 (1−δ)]                                      1−[(1−δ)2 β ]
                                                                                                                                    
where Aj ≡ ρ1−q+j              1−ρ−1 (1−δ)
                                                 , Bj ≡ [(1 − δ) β]q−j−1         1−(1−δ) β2         , K = 1δ log            β
                                                                                                                       α[1−(1−δ)β]
                                                                                                                                         ,
                 β
and L =     α[1−(1−δ)β]
                        .
       Stock prices will respond to both  and ν shocks as both affect the agents’ information
set. Note that the impulse response for stock prices is very similar to that of employment,
as illustrated in Figure 2. In particular, in response to a shock to t , which only has an effect
on productivity q periods later, stock prices increase immediately. It continues increasing as
we approach the eventual increase in Θ. When Θ increases in period q, stock prices jump
and further increase due to the induced accumulation of capital. However, in response to
the noise shock, stock prices experience an initial boom phase and then collapses once the
                                                                                                           15
agents learn that they were acting on noise as opposed to good information.                                     In this simple
model, we are allowing both stock prices and employment to immediately react to any signal
St and for this reason the two impulse responses are qualitatively similar. However, it may
be more reasonable to assume that stock prices react quicker than employment to news.
For example, this would arise if we modified the model so that employment needs to be
  15
   Note that the initial response of stock prices relative to its peak will generally be greater than that for
employment.

                                                               11
             Figure 2: Response of stock prices to news (ε) and noise (ν) shocks in period 0

                     (a) Response to                                        (b) Response to ν
                                                              2.5

        3
                                                                 2
     2.5

        2                                                     1.5




                                                            %
 %




     1.5
                                                                 1

        1
                                                              0.5
     0.5

        0                                                        0
         0            5        10           15         20         0           5          10            15              20
                             Periods                                                   Periods

Note: This Figure displays responses of stock prices Pbs to news () and noise (ν) Shocks, as obtained from
equation (13) with parameters β = .99, δ = .025, ρ = .999, q = 8, ψ = .8 and α = 10. Units are percentage
deviations from the steady state level.


determined one period in advance. Then, in such a case, upon receiving news, stock prices
would jump immediately, employment would increase with a delay of one period, and finally
Θ would increase with a delay of q periods if the news is realized to be true. Alternatively, if
the news was really noise, then both stock prices and employment would eventually collapse
respectively q and q +1 periods after the initial arrival of news. In this modified environment,
stock prices would be the best indicator of the agents’ information and would be the first
variable to move in response to news. In general, we would expect stock prices to be at least
as good or better in reflecting agents’ information than any other economic variable as it is
the least likely variable to be restricted by frictions and delays. This is a key insight that
will be exploited when discussing the identification of news shocks.
       Market consumption in the version of the model with γ = 1 and φ = 0 can be expressed
as
                                                                             ∞                                
                                     1/N                    1/N            X                        Lt−j−1
               CtM   = Θt   ΠN
                             i=1 Xit        =    Θt ΠN
                                                     i=1 Kit          = Θt               j
                                                                                   (1 − δ) N ln                    .
                                                                             j=0
                                                                                                        N

This implies that market consumption does not respond immediately to news about θ, it
                                    16
only responds with a lag.                Since news affects employment and therefore capital accumula-
tion, when agents get positive news about future technology, market consumption will start
growing after the news through its effects on firms’ capital stocks. It will keep on growing at
  16
       Market consumption in this model moves proportionately to the capital stock.

                                                            12
least until q periods after the news, at which time it will start to reduce substantially if the
news was misleading, or may increase further if the news was right. The fact that market
consumption does not respond immediately to news can be seen as a weakness of the current
model, as we will discuss when looking at empirical results. This will motivate our later
exploration into mechanisms that change this property. Note that allowing γ to be smaller
than 1, so that labor input enters the production of intermediate goods, will not change the
fact that market consumption does not jump in response to news in this model, all it does is
amplify the effects of actual change in technology and of the effects of capital accumulation.
More generally, although we have derived the above impulse responses for the extreme case
where γ = 1, the main qualitative feature about the effects of news remain unchanged if we
extend to the case where γ < 1, it only makes presentation less straightforward.

2.2     Extensions of the basic model
Here we discuss various extensions or alternative interpretations of our basic model.

2.2.1    Alternative news formulation

In our illustration of the effects of news, we have focused on the case where news can be
subject to noise. As noted in the introduction of section 2, an alternative formulation would
be to assume that the innovation in Θt is composed of two elements, say 1t−q and 2t , with
the news taking the form St = 1t . In this case, the impulse response for employment would
be given by
                             q−1                             ∞                      ∞
                                                                                                       !
      bt = (1 − (1 − δ)β)
                             X                               X                      X
      L                            ((1 − δ)β)q−j−1 1t−j +         ρj−q+1 1t−j +         ρj+1 2t−j       .
           (1 − ρ(1 − δ)β)   j=0                             j=q                    j=0


The impulse response to 1t in this case closely resembles the response that we have derived
in the previous case for t with the exception that now the response will be stronger in the
boom period as agents are not downplaying their signal by the factor ψ. In contrast, in this
case we do not have a response that parallels the effect of a noise shock. Instead we have
the effect of a pure unexpected shock which has a simple autoregressive structure. It is this
type of information structure which is the main focus of the VAR literature discussed in the
next section, while the formulation with noise shocks requires a more structural approach as
discussed in Section 4.




                                                13
2.2.2   The non-trivial information processing problem and the interpretation of
        errors

In our baseline model, news is affecting the economy through its effect on the firm’s ex-
pectation of future demand for their product. Under the assumption that φ = 0, meaning
that there is a unit elasticity of substitution between intermediate goods, the expectation
problem faced by firms is reduced to the rather simple problem of predicting the aggregate
technology index Θt . However, if we slightly generalize the price function, for example by
allowing φ 6= 0, then the prediction problem faced by firms becomes much more involved.
To see this, let us consider the case where φ 6= 0, but where we simplify other aspects by
assuming that δ = 1 and that sector productivity is an i.i.d. process where innovations can
be predicted using news only one period in advance, that is, θjt = θ +jt−1 and Sjt = jt +νjt .
   In full generality, let’s denote by Ejt the expectation operator conditional on the infor-
mation set of firm j at time t. With full depreciation and one period news, employment in
sector j is given by Ljt = Ejt [ αβ Pjt+1 ] with the expected price in sector j being given by
                                                                    !1−σ        
                                              PN                   φ
                                                i=1 (it+1 Xit+1 )
                      Ejt Pjt+1 = Ejt                                    φjt+1  ,          (14)
                                                      Xjt

with Xj+1 = ln(Ljt ). In this case, to predict the price that is relevant for them, firms
need to solve a non-trivial problem that involves predicting a non-linear function of all the
future sectoral outputs as well as all the future sector-specific technology shocks. Moreover,
this expectation problem exhibits a type of complementarity structure whereby firms in one
sector will want to increase their production if they expect others to increase their production,
regardless of the actual news received.
   Equation (14) can be rewritten as
                                                              φ !1−σ        
                                  PN                   β
                                        (
                                     i=1 it+1 ln E   [   P
                                                   it α it+1 ]
                Ejt Pjt+1 = Ejt                                       φjt+1 
                                               Xjt

If information is dispersed, the equilibrium involves higher order expectations. We do not
investigate here the possibilities opened by dispersed information, and assume that all agents
observe the full collection of signals {Sjt }N
                                             j=1 . While this type of problem has a rational
expectations solution, it is quite possible that firms in a real economy would find computing
the solution difficult and therefore could possibly make errors in predicting prices even if
the variance of νjt is zero. Moreover, the complementarity structure may lead errors by
some firms to lead to errors by other firms. This possibility opens the door to an alternative
interpretation of the noise shocks in the model: these could reflect information-processing

                                               14
difficulty instead of reflecting simply noise in the signals received by agents. While we will
not purse this interpretation here, we believe that it may be a realistic way of interpreting
why the economy may sometimes make big prediction errors; that is, it is not necessarily
the case that the news on which people acted was noisy but instead that agents’ mapping
between the news and the subsequent realization of prices may have been faulty.

2.2.3    Recessions as liquidation periods

The model we presented emphasizes how the economy can go through a news-driven boom
period based on firms expecting higher demand for their products in the future, followed by
a crash if the actual information content of the news was faulty. Since the boom involved
                                                                                                17
investment, we can interpret the post-crash period as a period of liquidation                        where in-
vestment by firms falls and the capital stock is depleted as one returns to the initial steady
state level. However, in the baseline formulation, the liquidation period is quite mild in
the sense that investment and employment simply return to their steady state values after
the crash and do not fall below their steady state levels. This property arises only because
of the simplifying assumptions of the setup. In particular, if we introduce into the model
elements which cause output prices to respond negatively to past excesses in capital ac-
cumulation, then the dynamics of employment and investment become much richer, and a
more explicit liquidation cycle emerges. To illustrate this, let us modify the baseline model
in the following way. First, let the production of market consumption goods be given by
                    Xt2
CtM = Θt Xt − κ      2
                        ,   where Xt remains the aggregator function and where we replace here
the sectoral shocks with an aggregate shock Θt . In this environment, agents continue to
receive noisy signals q periods in advance regarding innovations to Θt+q (we also continue to
assume that Θt = (1 − ρ)Θ + ρΘt−1 + t+q , γ = 1 and St = t + νt ). Finally, to get a linear
                                                                                                      1
representation for the capital accumulation equations, we assume that Iit = (2LIit ) 2 , where
LIit remains the employment directed to the accumulation of capital by the representative
firm in sector i. In this case, it can be shown that aggregate capital accumulation will be
given by
                                                              ∞
                                                 βλ       X
                             Kt+1 = λKt +                     (βλ)j Et Θt+1+j
                                             alpha(1 − δ) j=0
                                                                        (1+(1−δ)2 β+βα−1 κ
where λ is the root smaller than 1 of the polynomial X 2 −                    (1−δ)β
                                                                                           X   + β1 , with the
property that 0 < λ < (1 − δ) when κ > 0. In this case, the response of investment and
  17
     De Long [1990] discusses the liquidationist view of the Great Depression, incarnated by the U.S. Secretary
of the Treasury Mellon with his formula “Liquidate labor, liquidate stocks, liquidate the farmers, liquidate
real estate”. Interestingly, De Long [1990] develops a simple theoretical model of a “liquidationist” business
cycle, in which large fluctuations in investment are driven by small fluctuations in expectations of the future
productivity.

                                                      15
employment to a shock t remains qualitatively very similar to one we derived previously.
However the response to noise shock νt is quite different. In particular, the response of
investment Ibt – defined in percentage deviations from the steady state – to a noise shock can
be expressed as
                                                         ∞
                                                         X
                                               Ibt = Φ         φj νt−j                                  (15)
                                                         j=0

where
                                              β (βλ)q+1
                              Φ=
                                   α (1 − δ) (1 − ρβλ) (1 − βλ2 )
                     n h                i            h           io
                    λj λ (βλ2 )−1−j − 1 − (1 − δ) (βλ2 )−j − 1 ψ                    if j < q
               φj ≡               h              i
                    − (1 − δ − λ) (βλ2 )−q − 1 λj ψ                                 if j ≥ q
For j ≥ q, it is straightforward to see that φj is negative, increasing and concave in j,
approaching zero as j → ∞. For j < q, it can be verified that φj is positive, increasing and
convex in j.

                 Figure 3: Response of investment to a noise shock in period 0
                          0.25

                           0.2

                          0.15

                           0.1
                      %




                          0.05

                            0

                          0.05

                           0.1
                              0            5                10           15         20
                                                          Per iods

Note: This Figure displays responses of investment Ib to a noise shock ν, as obtained from equation (15) with
parameters β = .99, δ = .025, ρ = .999, q = 8, ψ = .8, α = 25 and κ = 0.1. Units are percentage deviations
from the steady state level.


    A typical impulse response of investment to a noise shock in this case is illustrated
in Figure 3, assumming κ = 0.1. Note that this impulse response also captures, to a first
order linear approximation, the qualitative response of aggregate employment. In this figure,
during the initial q−1 periods, investment (and hence employment) are increasing in response


                                                         16
to firms’ optimistic perception about future demand for their products. However, at time q
it is realized that the information on which these expectations were formed was invalid and
accordingly expectations are revised downward and investment drops suddenly. In contrast
to the previous impulse response to a noise shock, we now see that investment drops below
its steady state after the realization of overly-optimistic past behavior. The reason that
investment drops is that the economy is in a situation of excess capital and firms realize
that this depresses the current and future returns to capital accumulation. Over time, the
excess capital is reabsorbed through depreciation and low investment, causing investment
to gradually returning to its steady state. This figure illustrates clearly how the reaction to
faulty news can cause both a boom and a bust, with the bust not only representing a fall in
economic activity relative to the peak but generating a sustained period where investment
and employment are below their steady state levels. The behavior of consumption during
this process is slightly different, as it increases in the first q periods and then gradually
declines to its steady state without ever falling below its steady state.

2.2.4   The efficiency of news-driven booms and busts

In our baseline model we have assumed that all markets function in a Walrasian fashion.
Moreover, we have assumed that all information arises from exogenous sources. These two
assumptions together imply that the fluctuations that arise as result of news are constrained
efficient; i.e., they are efficient conditional on the agents’ information set. In particular, it
implies that a government with the same information set cannot find a policy which would
increase welfare by reducing fluctuations. However, as hinted to in the introduction, we
do not see the news view of fluctuations as intimately linked to this property. Instead we
interpret the news view of fluctuations as offering a positive theory of fluctuations, which can
                                                                                               18
be embedded into different market structures with different normative implications.                 For
example, suppose we slightly change the labor market in our baseline model as to include
a distortion whereby wages, instead of being at the Walrasian equilibrium level given by
α, are set to equal (1 + τ )α, where τ > 0 represents a distortion. For example, τ could
reflect institutional features of wage determination in the form of worker bargaining power,
or efficiency wage considerations, which could cause wages to be above the worker’s marginal
value of time. In this case, workers will feel constrained in their labor supply as they would
take market employment choices as determined primarily by firms. However, it is easy to
verify that the positive properties of our baseline model would be essentially unchanged.
News would cause fluctuations to arise, and the size of the fluctuations in percent deviations
  18
     Beaudry, Collard, and Portier [2011] is an example of an environment where news creates excessive
fluctuations.


                                                 17
from the steady state would be almost identical to that derived in the Walrasian case. In
this sense, the positive properties of the baseline model are robust to the issue of whether
or not labor market fluctuations represent voluntary or involuntary outcomes. In contrast,
the normative implications can be quite different in the two setups. To see this consider a
case where a boom is driven by noise. Ex post, in the Walrasian setup, the boom period
would be viewed with clear regret as individuals worked too hard compared to the eventual
payoffs of the work. With a distortion in the labor market, the interpretation of the boom
could be quite different. Because market employment and market consumption are too low
in the presence of the distortion, the positive noise shock in this case plays the role of a
coordinating device whereby employment gets closer to its optimal level during during the
boom period and therefore the boom can appear like a good period even if the expectations
that generated the boom are not fulfilled.

2.2.5    The information structure

The information structure in the baseline model specifies news as information about tech-
nological innovations that will be realized at a precise date in the future. This information
structure, while very useful and tractable for discussing impulse responses and VAR im-
plications (as we will see in the subsequent section) is extremely particular. In reality,
news outcomes that affect agents’ expectations of future events likely arise in a much less
structured way. For example, if one gets news today about a potential future technological
breakthrough it is unlikely to take the form of information that is relevant only for pre-
dicting changes at one particular date. The information may well increase the perceived
expected return to certain investment activities, but it is generally not very precise about
exactly when a commercial implementation will take place and therefore imprecise about
which timing one should adopt for investment. Introducing more realistic specifications of
the information structure associated with news appears to us as an important challenge to
                   19
this literature.

2.3     Excluding technological regress
To make presentation simple, we have been specifying a symmetric process for the technolog-
ical driving force with Gaussian innovations. Such a formulation implies that technological
regress is possible. However, one of the attractive features of the news view of business
cycles is that technological regress is not required to explain recessions. Instead recession
  19
    The information structure presented in Blanchard, L’Huillier, and Lorenzoni [2009] is a good example
of how news and noise can be introduced in a more realistic fashion.



                                                  18
can arise due to a liquidation process following overly optimistic expectations. Since tech-
nological regress is not a very appealing feature of a business cycle model it appears more
reasonable to specify a process for technology that does not allow regress. This is concep-
tually straightforward, but generally complicates resolution. The papers by Beaudry and
Portier [2004] and Jaimovich and Rebelo [2009] are examples where the potential effects of
news in creating recessions is studied in environments where technological regress does not
arise. An alternative is to model news about an exogenously evolving technology frontier.
Comin, Gertler, and Santacreu [2009] develop such a model. The new technologies have
to be adopted prior to being used in production. The firms’ investments in adopting new
technologies leads to a shift in labor demand when the news shock hits the economy. Firms
have the right to the profit flow of current and future adopted technologies, in addition to
the value of installed capital. Therefore, revisions in beliefs about this added component of
expected earnings allow us to capture both the high volatility of the stock market and its
lead over output.

2.4    Expectations of new markets as a form technological news
The nature of technological news presented in this section, and modeled in much of the
literature, relates to news on future productivity. An alternative form of news, which may
be more intuitive, is one that relates to the creation of new goods or new markets, as this is
the more common type of news that would be reported in the media. To see the very close
link between technological news and news regarding new markets, consider the case where
aggregate consumption depends on inputs from different sectors according to

                                              Nt
                                                           ! σ1
                                    ξ+1− σ1
                                              X
                           CtM = Nt                 Xitσ          ,   σ < 1,              (16)
                                              i=1

where Xit is the input from sector i, Nt is the number of goods, ξ a parameter that governs the
returns to variety and where we allow Nt to expand over time. In a symmetric equilibrium
where Xit = X t /Nt , consumption will take the form CtM = Ntξ X t . When ξ is positive,
(increasing returns to variety), changes in Nt will play the exact same role as changes in
productivity Θ. Hence, much of the literature on technological news can be re-interpreted as
models with news of expanding markets. Beaudry, Collard, and Portier [2011] develop such
a model in which firms need to invest in order to secure monopoly position on the newly
created goods. In the case where ξ = 0, changes in Nt create cycles driven by competition of
monopoly rents which are socially inefficient as investment only redistributes rents without
having any productive impact.


                                               19
3     Reduced form and Structural Vector Autoregressive
      evidence
There are two main ideas in the news view of business cycles. First, there is the notion that
booms are driven mainly by expectations. In particular, increased demand for investment
arises as the result of agents becoming optimistic about the future prospects of the economy.
According to this view, investment demand should on average lead technological change as
it is trying to anticipate it. Second, this view contends that recessions are mainly periods
of liquidation arising from agents’ revision of expectations. Therefore recessions should
arise after a period of optimism where erroneous interpretation of news has lead to excess
capital accumulation. In this section we will overview some evidence that has been both
presented as supportive of the news view of business cycles as well as discuss work that has
challenged its importance. In subsection 3.1 we will be looking at evidence which tries to
capture the spirit of theory without taking a clear stand on the precise model which could
be generating the data. As news are typically in the information set of the economic agents
but not necessarily in the one of the econometrician, the identification of news shocks can be
subject to a problem known as non-fundamentalness. We will discuss this problem and its
implications in subsection 3.2. In subsections 3.3 and 3.4, we will review evidence obtained
using SVAR approaches to identify the effects of news shocks.

3.1    Reduced form evidence
It is well known that investment fluctuates greatly over the business cycle. The questions
relevant for the news view are (i) whether such fluctuations appear to reflect mainly changes
in the demand or the supply of investment goods, and (ii) if they reflect demand, what is the
type of force driving the demand. In a standard Real Business Cycle model 20 , investment is
pro-cyclical because surprise improvements in technology create a situation where the capital
stock is low relative to the new state of technology. This relatively low state of the capital
stock creates incentives to invest and work more so that the capital stock can catch up to
the level of technology. In particular, in the case of an RBC model in which TFP follows a
random walk, the state of the economy can be summarized by a simple ratio: the ratio of
                                                                                K
capital stock to total factor productivity (TFP ), which we will denote as     TFP
                                                                                   .   If this ratio
is low compared to its long run level, the RBC model predicts that employment should be
high as it is a desirable time to work to produce capital goods. If the ratio is high, then
employment should be low as there are low returns to capital accumulation. So according to
 20
   See Cooley and Prescott [1995] and King and Rebelo [1999] for an exposition of the standard RBC
model.


                                               20
                                                  K
an RBC view, employment and                      TFP
                                                         should be strongly negatively correlated. In contrast,
the news view of business cycles suggest that these variables should most likely have a modest
positive correlation because of countervailing forces. On the one hand, if employment booms
                                                                                                                 K
arise because capital accumulation anticipates growth in TFP, then employment and                               TFP
should be positively correlated in booms. On the other hand, major recessions in the news
                                                       K
view of business cycles arise when                    TFP
                                                                is high and expectations no longer support such a
high capital stock, leading to a recession. The second force should contribute to a negative
                                                               K
correlation between employment and                            TFP
                                                                  .   Since on average agents should be right more
                                                                                K
often than wrong, it suggests that employment and                              TFP
                                                                                     should be positively correlated
if the news view is central to fluctuations. In Figure 4 we plot per capita hours worked
                    K
and the ratio      TFP
                       . 21       Both variables are calculated as percent deviations from a HP-filter
trend, where the HP-filter has been used to remove low-frequency fluctuations not related
                        22
to business cycles.

              Figure 4: Cyclical fluctuations of hours worked and capital/TFP ratio

                              5




                              0
                        %




                                         Capital Stock/ TFP
                                         Hours
                              5
                                  1950       1960             1970     1980   1990   2000    2010

Note: This Figure displays the Hoddrick-Prescott cycle (with smoothing parameter 1600) of the ratio capi-
tal/Total Factor Productivity and of total hours. Capital, corrected TFP and hours series are the ones of
Fernald [2012] for the period 1947Q1-2012Q3. Units are percentage deviations from the HP trend. Grey
areas correspond to NBER recessions. See the appendix for a description of the data.


       As can be seen from the Figure, these two variables do not exhibit the strong negative
correlation predicted by RBC theory. In fact the correlation between the two is actually
  21
       Data are taken from Fernald [2012].
  22
       These low-frequency movements could arise due for example to movements in labor market participation.

                                                                      21
positive and equal to .30. This indicates that, on average, periods when employment is
high are periods where the capital stock is high at least relative to a current fundamental
measured by TFP. This observation runs counter to an RBC view of fluctuations but is
potentially consistent with the news view.
                                                                      K
       To pursue further the information content of the              TFP
                                                                           ratio, in Figure 5 we plot the
                     K
average value of    TFP
                          prior to recessions, that is, we take the average value of this ratio at
the peak of the business cycle and in the three preceeding quarters. According to the news
view of business cycles, recessions should arise after periods where there has been substantial
                                               K
speculative investment, that is, when         TFP
                                                     is high. As can be seen in the figure, almost all
the post war recessions in the US have been preceded by a period where capital accumulation
outstripped growth in TFP. The only exceptions are the recessions of 1973 and 1980. Since
both these recessions are commonly thought as having been driven by energy prices and
monetary factors, not by revised expectations after a period of speculative accumulation, it
is interesting to note that they were not preceded by a period of high capital accumulation.
While most recessions in the sample are preceded by a period of high capital accumulation
relative to the state of technology, the news view of business cycles suggest that high values of
 K                                                                                                         K
TFP
        should not be systematically predicting imminent recessions. Instead a high value                 TFP
should often be predicting further expansion. Interestingly, when we examine the correlation
             K
between     TFP
                  at time t and the growth in hours of employment in the following quarter
(growth between t and t + 1) we find a positive correlation of .24 implying that on average
           K
a high    TFP
                ratio predicts further expansion, even though most recessions are preceded by
                   K
high values of    TFP
                      . 23
                                                                            K
       While the patterns we have reported between the ratio               TFP
                                                                                 and hours worked appear
more consistent with a news view of cycles than an RBC view, it does not yet tell us whether
                                                     K
the observed positive correlation between           TFP
                                                          and hours worked results from periods where
capital accumulation is driven mainly by demand– as would be implied by a news view– or
alternatively by supply. In particular, there is an important class of business cycle theories
that suggests that it may be changes in the supply of investment goods that drive the
cycle instead of demand. The mechanism is again technology-related and comes under the
                                                                24
heading of investment-specific technological change.                 This view of business cycles argues
that surprise improvements in the technology for producing capital goods cause periods
  23
     As a robustness check, we also examined how hours worked co-vary with the ratio of capital to TFP
when capital is measured in units of consumption goods (as opposed to units of output); that is, when we
                                       pK
replace our previous ratio T K
                             F P with T F P where p is the relative price of investment in terms of consumption
good. For this case, we found very similar cyclical properties and we found again that most recessions (with
the exception of those of the 70s and earlier 80s) were preceded by periods where TpK    F P was high.
  24
     See for example Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huffman [1988], Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krussell [2000]
and Fisher [2006]


                                                      22
Figure 5: Average deviation from HP trend of the capital/TFP ratio over the four quarters
preceding a recession

                           2.5

                            2

                           1.5

                            1
                      %




                           0.5

                            0

                          −0.5

                           −1

                          −1.5
                            1940   1950    1960    1970 1980      1990    2000    2010
                                                      Date


Note: This Figure displays the mean value of the Hoddrick-Prescott cycle (with smoothing parameter 1600) of
the ratio capital / Total Factor Productivity over the 4 quarters preceding a NBR recession ( i.e. the quarter
of the peak and the 3 quarters before). Capital and corrected TFP series are the ones of Fernald [2012]
for the period 1947Q1-2012Q3. Units are percentage deviations from the HP trend. See the appendix for a
description of the data.




                                                     23
where investment and employment will be high because the price of investment goods is low.
                                                                                   K
Such a mechanism is consistent with a positive correlation between                TFP
                                                                                        and hours worked.
To differentiate between a story based on the supply of investment goods versus the demand
for investment goods, the first piece of evidence to examine is the behavior of relative prices.
In Table 1 we report the correlation between per capita hours worked and different price
                                 25
indexes for capital goods.            We report the correlations for two samples, one starting in
1960Q1 and the other one starting in 1987Q4 and corresponding to the post-Volcker period
where nominal prices have been more stable. The investment prices we consider are: the
                                                                                                            26
BEA measures for fixed investment, structures, equipment and residential investment.
We also report results using the S&P500 as a measure of the price of investment. This is
closest to the model we have presented where it is the value of having capital goods installed
                                                                                                      27
in firms that is driving fluctuations. All these prices are deflated by the core CPI                       and
HP-filtered. We see in Table 1 a mixed set of results for the cyclical pattern of the relative

Table 1: Various measures of the relative price of investment, deflating with core CPI,
correlations with Hours

                              Variable    1960Q1-2012Q3         Post-Volcker
                              Fixed I          0.42                 0.76
                              Struct.I         0.44                 0.75
                              Equip.I         -0.25                 0.17
                              Resid.I          0.70                 0.80
                              SP500            0.31                 0.56

Note: All variables are quarterly HP filtered with smoothing parameter 1600 and deflated by core
CPI. See the appendix for a description of the data.


price of investment. If we focus on the most recent period where inflation has been stable,
we observe that the relative price of investment is positively correlated with hours worked for
all of our five indexes, with the relation being weak only for the relative price of equipment.
So over this latter period, if investment was driving the cycle then it appears most likely
due to changes in the demand for investment goods as opposed to changes in their supply.
However, if we look at the longer sample, we get a more nuanced picture. The relative price
of fixed investment, structures, residential investment and the stock prices index continue
  25
      Throughout this paper, our preferred measure of the cycle is hours worked. We like this measure since it
is measured directly and not mechanically related to prices used to construct real output or measured TFP.
   26
      Over the post 1960 period, structures represent 23% of fixed investment, equipment 48% and residential
investment 29%.
   27
      We choose to deflate these series by the core CPI to eliminate changes in prices that are due to changes
in the price of oil and commodities.

                                                     24
to show a strong positive relation with employment movements over the longer sample. In
contrast, the relative price of equipment shows a negative co-movement. Hence, over the
longer sample there is room for debate regarding which of investment demand or the supply
of investment goods have more likely played the greater role in fluctuations. From our point
of view, the stock market index is our preferred index since it represents the value to firms
of investing to expand their production capacity and the behavior of this index is consistent
with the pattern implied by the news view of fluctuations. Nonetheless we recognize that
different researchers may or may not find the behavior of the relative price of investment
goods, especially the relative price of equipment, to be consistent with the news view.

3.2     The non-fundamentalness problem and its implications
Structural vector autoregressive methods have been extensively used to explore the effects
of news shocks on economic aggregates, and we will review this literature in the following
subsection. However, before doing so it is important to note that structural VAR methods
require that the underlying data generating process satisfy certain properties related to the
invertibility of the model’s solution when written in moving average form. In the presence of
news, this property may not hold which can render results from SVAR methods meaningless.
Accordingly, in this subsection our aim is to clarify the extent to which this non-invertibility
problem, or alternatively known as a non-fundamentalness problem, limits the usefulness of
SVAR methods in identifying the effects of news shocks.

3.2.1    Introducing the non-fundamentalness problem using univariate processes

To begin, let us consider a simple economic environment where the solution to the model
generating the data is the one-dimensional stationary stochastic process xt with moving
average (MA) representation given by:

                                 xt = θ0 εt + θ1 εt−1 + · · · + θk εt−k + · · ·
                                                                                                           (17)
                                    = θ(L)εt .

where εt is a univariate zero mean white noise process with time-invariant variance and
uncorrelated components. θ(L) is a polynomial of possibly infinite order, whose coefficients
                                                                             28
are absolutely summable and where θ0 can be normalized to 1.                      For simplicity, the process
xt is assumed to be purely nondeterministic, with MA roots exactly on the unit circle being
excluded. We will refer to this process as the structural representation of xt , that is, the
representation that is derived from a model where the εt are economically meaningful shocks.
  28
    If the parameter θ0 = 0, then θ(L) = (θ1 + θ2 L + · · · ) × L. In this case, z = 0 is a root of θ(z) and such
a process is non-fundamental. We are ruling out this case for now.

                                                       25
The question we want to address is whether or not an econometrician is able to recover this
structural model, i.e. the coefficients θk and the shock ε from observations of current and
past values of xt . The advantage of first considering a univariate case is that we can focus on
the issue of fundamentalness, without needing to discuss additional issues associated with
identification which emerge in the multivariate multi-shock case.
                                                                                                29
       A shock εt is said to be a fundamental shock (more precisely xt -fundamental                  ) if it can
be recovered from observing the current and past observations of x. From the inspection
of (17), it is clear that ε can be expressed as a function of current and past values of x if
and only if the polynomial Θ(L) can be inverted, so that εt = [Θ(L)]−1 xt . The condition
for fundamentalness is therefore that all the roots of θ(L), i.e. the solution to the equation
θ(z) = 0, are strictly outside the unit disc. When the shock in (17) is non-fundamental, the
econometrician will typically not be able to recover the ε shocks from estimating the Wold
representation 30 and therefore will not be able to recover the structural impulse response of
                     31
xt to a shock εt .
       We now define a news-rich process as process for which there exists at least one q such
that |θq | > 1. Such processes are of the “news” type in the sense that a larger share of the
variance of xt is attributable to the shock εt−q than to the shock εt , that is, more variance is
due to a shock known q period in advance than due to the current period shock. Structural
models with news shocks, as for examples the ones presented in the previous section, generally
have a solution that correspond to a news-rich process.
       Our goal in this section is to clarify two points. The first point is qualitative: a model
with news shocks may give rise to a non-fundamental representation but does not necessar-
ily give rise to a non-fundamental representation. The second point is quantitative: when
a model with news shocks gives rise to a non-fundamental representation, its fundamental
representation can be “close” to its non-fundamental representation implying that SVAR
methods may nonetheless deliver a good approximation of structural impulse responses even
                                                          32
when the non-fundamentalness problem arises.                   To set the stage, we will begin by high-
lighting a negative result, that is, we will show that a model with news shocks may exhibit
a non-fundamentalness problem and this problem can be severe in the sense that its funda-
mental representation will be far from its (structural) non-fundamental representation. The
  29
      See Lütkepohl [2012] for a formal presentation. See also Alessi, Barigozzi, and Capasso [2008] for a
review of non-fundamentalness and identification in structural VAR models.
   30
      The Wold representation is the unique linear representation of a stationary process where the shocks are
linear forecast errors.
   31
      Recall that the impulse response function (IRF) of xt to a unit shock εt = 1 is given by the sequence of
MA coefficients {θk } for k = 0, 1, ....
   32
      To overcome investibily problems, Lanne and Saikkonen [2011] and [2013] have proposed to directly
estimate non-fundamental representations as non causal autoregressive models.


                                                     26
easiest case to show this problem is in the case where the model’s solution is an MA(1) pro-
cess. However, as we will show, several results from the MA(1) example do not generalize,
and it is for these reasons that the non-fundamentalness issue may not be as serious as it
may first appear from the MA(1) example we present below.

3.2.1.1    The MA(1) case: Consider the following simple rational expectations model 33
:

                                         xt = aEt xt+1 + yt ,
                                         yt = εt + (1 + α)εt−1 ,

with 0 < a < 1, E(εt ) = 0 and E(ε2t ) = σ 2 . xt is an endogenous variable and yt is the
news-rich exogenous process. The assumption that α > 0 is meant to capture the idea that
εt is a news shock as information obtained today implies expected growth in yt . Solving this
model forward, we obtain
                                                   ∞
                                                   X
                                            xt =          aτ Et yt+τ .
                                                   τ =0

Using the process of y, the model’s solution reduces to

                                 xt = (1 + a(1 + α))εt + (1 + α)εt−1 .

                                                                                   α
The solution to the model therefore gives rise to news-rich process if a <        1+α
                                                                                      .   Moreover, this
is the same condition that implies non-fundamentalness, as the root of θ(z) will be inside the
                                  α
unit circle if and only if a <   1+α
                                     .   This simple example shows (i) that news shocks (α > 0) do
not necessarily mean non-fundamentalness and (ii) that if the model solution is a news-rich
MA(1), , the εt s are not fundamental shocks and therefore cannot be recovered from current
and past observations on xt . In other words, one cannot use the Wold representation of the
data to obtain structurally meaningful impulse responses.

3.2.1.2    Is the fundamental representation close to the non-fundamental repre-
sentation in the MA(1) case? The question we now want to address is, suppose we are
in a situation where the solution to a model is non-fundamental, and the researcher is not
aware of the issue and derives an impulse response for xt from its Wold representation. Will
the resulting impulse response be very different from the impulse response for εt implied by
the model?
    33
    See Fève, Matheron, and Sahuc [2009] for a similar model but with a degenerated news-rich process of
the type yt = εt−q with q > 0.



                                                      27
       To explore this, consider the situation where the solution to the model is a news-rich
MA(1) process which in the MA(1) case is equivalent to noting that it is a non-fundamental
process:
                                         xt = εt + (1 + α)εt−1 ,                                   (18)

with α > 0.
       How far from this non-fundamental representation – or structural representation– is the
fundamental representation – or Wold representation? Let the Wold representation be de-
noted by:
                                            xt = εet + θ1 εet−1 ,                                  (19)

             e2 need to be found. We can obtain those two parameters by matching the
where θ1 and σ
autocorrelation functions. Computing variance and autocorrelation from (18) and (19), we
obtain the two equations:
                   
                      E(x2t )     = (1 + (1 + α)2 )σε2 = (1 + θ12 )σεe2 ,
                      E(xt xt−1 ) = (1 + α)σε2         = θ1 σεe2 .

Solving those two equations, we obtain the following fundamental representation
                                                        1
                                          xt = εet +       εet−1 .
                                                       1+α
with E(e              ε2t ) = (1 + α)2 σ 2 .
       εt ) = 0 and E(e
       As illustrated on Figure 6, the fundamental (Wold) representation gives a impulse re-
                                    34
sponse function to a unit shock          which is very different from the structural one. In partic-
ular, the structural IRF shows a hump shape while the fundamental one is monotonic and
decreasing.
       In summary, in the case where the solution of a model with news is a news-rich MA(1) pro-
cess, then the solution is non-fundamental and this non-fundamental solution is qualitatively
different from the fundamental representation. This suggest that the non-fundamentalness
issue is likely very problematic in models with news shocks. However, as the following two
sub-sections will clarify, the MA(1) case may be somewhat misleading because in more gen-
eral settings news-rich processes are not necessarily non-fundamental, and even if they are
non-fundamental, they are not necessarily very different from their fundamental representa-
tion.
  34
    All the IRFs are normalized to be the response to a unit shock. Note that if one computes the IRF to
a one standard deviation shock, the fundamental and structural IRF would not start from the same point,
as the fundamental and structural shocks have different standard deviations.




                                                     28
Figure 6: A structural nonfundamental news-rich MA(1) process and its fundamental rep-
resentation
               xt


            1+α                                          Structural (non-fundamental)
                                                         Fundamental (Wold representation)
                1



               1
              1+α


                          0              1           2                  t


Note: This Figure displays the impulse response functions to a unit shock for the structural non-fundamental
process (18) and its Wold representation (19).


3.2.1.3      News-rich processes are not necessarily non-fundamental: We now con-
sider the news-rich MA(2) process:

                                      xt = εt + (1 + α)εt−1 + βεt−2 ,                                  (20)

with α > 0. Can this process be fundamental, or to put it differently can we find conditions
on β under which the two roots of the polynomial θ(z) = βz 2 + (1 + α)z + 1 are outside the
unit disc? The answer is yes.
                              35
       As can be verified,         a news-rich MA(2) process is fundamental if and only if α <
β < 1. Panel (a) of Figure 7 displays the IRF of x to a unit structural shock ε in such a
case. Note that contrarily to what the MA(1) case suggests, the process is news-rich and
nevertheless fundamental. Panels (b), (c) and (d) illustrate the three reasons for which non-
fundamentalness could occur: α large, β large given α or β low given α. The invertibility
condition α < β < 1 states that the process need not increase too much between period
0 and period 1 (α < 1) and that it not decline too abruptly between period 1 and period
                                                                             2
  35
     The discriminant of the polynomial is ∆ = (1 + α)2 − 4β. If β > (1+α)4  , ∆ < 0. Therefore, the two
roots are complex and conjugate. As the product of the root is equal to β −1 , the two roots are complex
                                              2
and outside the unit disc if and only if (1+α)
                                            4   < β < 1, which defines a non empty set for values of β is
α < 1. If ∆ ≥ 0, the two roots of θ are real. Note that θ(0) = 1 > 0, θ(−1) = β − α and θ(1) = 2 + α + β.
If 0 < β < α, then θ(−1) < 0. Given that θ(0) = 1 > 0, one root has to be between -1 and 0, and the
                                                          2
structural representation cannot be fundamental. If (1+α)
                                                        4   > β > α, then θ(−1) > 0 and θ(1) > 0 and the
two real roots of θ(L) have modulus greater than one.

                                                    29
2 (β > α)). This example nicely illustrates that news-rich processes may or may not be
fundamental.

                                     Figure 7: News-rich MA(2) processes


                         (a) Fundamental                              (b) Nonfundamental: α is too large
      xt                                                             xt
                                                                   1+α
       2                                                              2
                             admissible region for α                                   admissible region
  1+α                                                                                  for α

      1                                        admissible               1
      β                                                                 β
      α                                       region for β


                 0           1        2           3       t                     0   1      2        3          t


           (c) Nonfundamental: β is too large                          (d) Nonfundamental: β is too small
           xt                                                          xt

           2                         admissible region                  2
                                     for α                                               admissible region
    1+α                                                             1+α
      β                                                                                  for α
      1                  admissible                                     1                  admissible
           α             region for β                                   α                  region for β
                                                                        β

                     0           1        2           3       t                 0    1      2       3          t


Note: This Figure displays four possible configurations of the MA(2) process (20), by plotting IRF to a unit
shock. The MA(2) process is described by the couple (α, β). Condition for fundamentalnes is α < β < 1.



3.2.1.4        Non-fundamental structural news-rich processes can be close to their
fundamental representation: The MA(1) case was very stark in the sense that the
fundamental IRF was qualitatively different from the structural non-fundamental one: the
structural IRF was hump-shaped while the fundamental one was not. We show here that
this is also not a general result. To do so, we again restrict to a MA(2) news-rich processes.

                                              xt = εt + (1 + α)εt−1 + βεt−2 ,

                                                              30
with α > 1 or β 6∈ [α, 1], so that ε is non-fundamental. Let us consider the Wold represen-
tation of this MA(2):
                                            xt = εet + θ1 εet−1 + θ2 εet−2 ,

with E(e              ε2t ) = σ
       εt ) = 0 and E(e       e2 . Equating variance, first and second order covariances of the
two representations gives:
              
               E(x2t )      = (1 + (1 + α)2 + β 2 )σε2 = (1 + θ12 + θ22 )σεe2 ,
                 E(xt xt−1 ) = (1 + α)(1 + β)σε2        = θ1 (θ2 + 1)σεe2 ,
                                  2
                 E(xt xt−2 ) = βσε                      = θ2 σεe2 .
              

We obtain the three following equations whose unknowns are θ1 , θ2 and σεe2 :

                    β 2
               σεe2 = σ ,                                                                           (21)
                    θ2 ε
                    (1 + α)(1 + β) θ2
               θ1 =                       ,                                                         (22)
                          β        1 + θ2
                                                                      2
                        1 + (1 + α)2 + β 2                                  θ22
                                                     
                                                 2     (1 + α)(1 + β)
                0 = 1−                     θ2 + θ2 +                                .               (23)
                                β                            β           (1 + θ2 )2

(23) is an order four equation in θ2 and we know that β is a root of this equation. Knowing
θ2 , (21) and (22) trivially gives the values of σεe2 and θ1 . Factorizing with (θ2 − β), (23) can
be written as

         (θ2 − β) β 2 θ23 + β(2β − (1 + (1 + α)2 )θ22 + (β 2 − 2β + (1 + α)2 )θ2 − β = 0.
                                                                                    
                                                                                                    (24)

It is hard to find easily interpretable formulas for θ2 and we therefore simply give here a set
                 36
of examples.          We start with the MA(2) news-rich fundamental process with α = .7 and
.7 < β < 1. We then construct three non-fundamental processes by violating one after the
other the conditions α < 1, β < 1 and β > α. In each case, we move the parameter 20%
above the upper bound of the admissible region for fundamentalness. And for each case,
we compute the Wold representation, which amounts to solving numerically the order three
polynomial (24) and picking up the only real solution for which the θ(L) is invertible.
       Results are displayed in Figure 8. As we can see from the figure, in the three cases, the
fundamental IRF to a unit shock is quite close to the structural one. We do not aim at
showing here that in general non-fundamentalness is not quantitatively relevant, but that it
                                   37
is not true that it is always so        .
  36
    Mertens and Ravn [2010] and Offick and Wohltmann [2013] discuss of a case in which analytical results
can be obtained.
        Pq        If xt = aEt xt+1 + εt−q with |a|< 1, then the model solution is xt = Θq (L)εt , with
  q            q−i i
Θ (L) = i=0 q L . Such a lag polynomial is closely related to a cyclotomic polynomial, so that its roots




                                                          31
Figure 8: Sructural non-fundamental news-rich processes and their fundamental representa-
tion


        (a) α is too large (α = 1.2, β = 1.1)                    (b) β is too small (α = .7, β = .56)
 2.5                                                        2
                                        Fundamental                                              Fundamental
                                        Structural                                               Structural
   2
                                                           1.5

 1.5
                                                            1
   1

                                                           0.5
 0.5


   0                                                        0
    0               1               2                 3      0               1               2                 3

                                    (c) β is too large (α = .7, β = 1.2)
                               2
                                                                     Fundamental
                                                                     Structural

                             1.5



                               1



                             0.5



                               0
                                0               1                2                 3


Note: This Figure displays three configurations of the MA(2) process (20), by plotting IRF to a unit shock.
The MA(2) process is described by the couple (α, β). Condition for fundamentalness is α < β < 1. In each
of this configuration, the process is non-fundamental, and its fundamental representation is also displayed,
as obtained from solving equations (21), (22) and (23).




                                                      32
3.2.1.5    The role of information: The previous MA(2) examples have illustrated that
non-fundamentalness does not necessarily render Wold representations useless for under-
standing the effects of structural shocks. Instead, it suggests that the problem is quantitative
in nature, and depends on the quantity of information in the current and past realizations
of the observable variables. In the next section, we will analyze multivariate processes and
show that the quantity of information available to the econometrician matters for invertibil-
ity and for the distance between the structural representation and the fundamental one. As
a prelude to the more general result, intuition about the relation between the information
set and non-fundamentalness can be obtained in the following simple case where we again
consider the MA(1) news-rich process:

                                             xt = εt + (1 + α)εt−1 ,

with α > 0. We know that ε in this case is non-fundamental, more precisely xt -non-
fundamental if we only have information on xt . Let us now enlarge the observation set
of the econometrician by allowing for the observation of a second variable yt that contains
information about εt (typically, on would think of an asset price variable in the case of tech-
nological news shocks). In order to avoid non-generic singularities, we assume that there is
a second shock νt (with Eνt = 0) that we interpret as pure noise. To save notations, let’s
normalize the covariance matrix of (ε, ν) to the identity matrix. The structural model is
therefore given by

                                         xt = εt + (1 + α)εt−1 + νt ,                                  (25)
                                         yt = γεt + νt ,                                               (26)

with γ > 0 for simplicity. Its matrix representation is
                                                                                     
                        xt               1 + (1 + α)L) 1         εt                    εt
                                 =                                        = Θ(L)                .
                        yt               γ             1         νt                    νt
    The process will be invertible, and therefore ε will be fundamental, when the roots of the
determinant of the matrix Θ(z) are outside the unit disk. In this case, the determinant of
                                               γ−1
Θ(z) has only one root which is z =            1+α
                                                   .
    If γ = 0, meaning that y is uninformative about ε, then |z| < 1 and ε is non-fundamental,
which is the result we had in the previous section. But if y is informative enough about ε,
can be computed analytically.
  37
     Lippi and Reichlin [1993] show that the structural shocks estimated by Blanchard and Quah [1989] can be
non fundamental in a model in which productivity follows an exogenous news-rich process. Such a diffusion
process is also analyzed in Lippi and Reichlin [1994b]. Lippi and Reichlin [1994a] show that nonfundamental
representations can be obtained by the use of Blaschke matrices. Blanchard and Quah [1993] underline the
fact that structural representations can be non fundamental but close to the fundamental one.

                                                       33
meaning that γ is large enough (precisely γ > 2 + α), then ε is fundamental. In the case
where γ < 2 + α, then ε is not fundamental, but it will be “close” to the fundamental shock
if γ is high enough, or in other words if y is informative enough about ε. We now formally
discuss this point in a general multivariate case.

3.2.2   The multivariate case

Consider an economic model who has a representation for {yt } in the state-space form

                                   xt+1 = Axt + Bεt ,                                   (27)
                                      yt = Cxt−1 + Dεt .                                (28)

xt is n × 1 vector of possibly unobserved state variables, yt is a k × 1 vector of variables
observed by the econometrician, and εt is m × 1 vector of structural shocks. The shocks ε
are Gaussian vector white noise with Eεt = 0, Eεt ε0t = I and Eεt εt−j = 0 for j 6= 0. We
restrict to the “square case” in which there are as many shocks as observables in y (k = m)
and in which D has full rank. Our discussion in this section closely follows the presentation
of Fernàndez-Villaverde, Rubio-Ramı̀rez, Sargent, and Watson [2007] and Sims [2012].
   The question we ask is whether or not one can recover the structural shocks from the
following VAR that involves only the observable variables y:

                                    yt = F (L)yt−1 + Gb
                                                      εt ,                              (29)

where F (L) is a infinite order lag polynomial. In other words, does there exist an F (L) and
a matrix G such that εbt = εt ?
   Note that the answer to the question relies on two different sets of properties. First,
assuming perfect observability of the state variables (y = x), the question is whether the
VAR process (27) is invertible, which is a constraint on A. Second, given that information is
imperfect, is the informational content of y enough to recover the structural shocks, which
is a constraint on C and D given A and B. Fernàndez-Villaverde, Rubio-Ramı̀rez, Sargent,
and Watson [2007] derive what they call a poor man’s invertibility condition. If the matrix
A − BD−1 C is stable (meaning that all its eigenvalues are inside the unit disc), then the
structural shocks εt are the innovations of VAR (29), meaning that there are the fundamental
ones. Let us follow Sims [2012] to show this. Solve for εt in (28):

                                    εt = D−1 (yt − Cxt−1 ),

then plug into (27):
                             xt = (A − BD−1 C)xt−1 + BD−1 yt .

                                              34
Solving backward yields
                                                       t−1
                                                       X
                                 −1
                 xt = (A − BD C)          t−1
                                                x0 +          (A − BD−1 C)τ −1 BD−1 yt−τ .   (30)
                                                       τ =0

If limt→∞ (A − BD−1 C)t−1 = 0 (which is the case if (A − BD−1 C) is a stable matrix), then
the history of observables perfectly reveals the current state. One can then plug (30) in (28)
to obtain a VAR in obervables whose innovations are ε:
                                t−1
                                X
                       yt = C          (A − BD−1 C)τ −1 BD−1 yt−1−τ + Dεt .
                                τ =0

The structural shocks ε are therefore fundamental. Note that one will still need to make
identifying assumption related to D to recover the ε from the VAR innovations, which is a
key issue in Structural VAR methods discussed in the next section.
   If A − BD−1 C is not stable, then the structural shocks cannot be obtained from the
estimation of a VAR like (29). In such a case, how close will be the fundamental shocks
to the structural one depends on how much information is contained in y. As shown in
Sims [2012], one can use the Kalman filter to form a forecast of the current state, x
                                                                                    b, given
observables and a lagged forecast:

                                   bt = (A − KC)b
                                   x            xt−1 + Kyt ,                                 (31)

where K is the time invariant Kalman gain and A − KC a stable matrix under some sta-
bilizability and detectability conditions (see Hansen and Sargent [2012], chapter 8). Let us
denote by x et = xt − x
                      bt the forecast error of the filter and Σ
                                                              e its variance matrix. Adding and
substracting Cb
              xt from (28), on obtains

                                            yt = Cb
                                                  xt−1 + ut ,                                (32)

with
                                   ut = C(xt−1 − x
                                                 bt−1 ) + Dεt .                              (33)
Using lagged (31), substituting in (32) and solving backward gives, when t → ∞ and using
the fact that (A − KC) is a stable matrix:
                                         t−1
                                         X
                             yt = C             (A − KC)τ Kyt−1−τ + ut .                     (34)
                                         τ =0

This VAR representation in observables have innovations u which are linear combination of
the structural shocks ε and errors in forecasting the states x
                                                             e. The innovations variance is
given by
                                                 e 0 + DD0 ,
                                          Σu = C ΣC

                                                        35
where we use the assumption that ε has an identity variance matrix.
   When the poor man’s invertibility condition holds, Fernàndez-Villaverde, Rubio-Ramı̀rez,
Sargent, and Watson [2005] 38 show that Σ
                                        e = 0, so that the structural shock is fundamental.
When that condition does not hold, Σ 6 0, and the innovation variance from the VAR
                                   e =
is strictly larger than the innovation variance in the structural model. Invertibility fails
because the observables do not allow for full revelation of the state vector. Put that way, it
                                                                                                          39
becomes clear that non-invertibility is fundamentally an issue of missing information                          . As
Sims [2012] puts it clearly, non-invertibility is not an “either/or” problem, as we have already
illustrated in the univariate MA(2) case. If Σ e is non zero but small (meaning that its spectral
radius is close to zero), then ut is almost equal to Dεt . This implies that SVAR methods
may provide good approximations to the effects of structural shocks even in the presence of
non-fundamentalness. Sims [2012] and Seymen [2012] provide Monte Carlo evidence showing
                                                                                                                 40
this to be the case in a reasonably calibrated macroeconomic model with news shocks.
Fève and Jidoud [2012a] also consider a stylized dynamic model with news shocks in which
the model solution is an infinite order non fundamental VAR. They show that even in such
                                                                                                                41
a case, finite order non fundamental VARs approximated quite well the model solution.

3.3     Structural VAR evidence
In this section we will discuss how SVAR methods have been used to evaluate the relevance
and effects of news shocks. As emphasized in the previous section, the appropriateness of
using VARs to discuss structural shocks relies on the structural shocks either being funda-
mental or that the non-fundamentalness problem –if present– is not quantitatively severe.
We will assume this to be the case in this section, recognizing that the caveats discussed in
the previous section may raise doubts about this assumption.
  38
      Fernàndez-Villaverde, Rubio-Ramı̀rez, Sargent, and Watson [2005] NBER working paper is an extended
version of Fernàndez-Villaverde, Rubio-Ramı̀rez, Sargent, and Watson [2007]
   39
      This interpretation of the econometrician being “short of observations on a sufficient number of series”
is the one of Hansen and Sargent [1994]. It suggests a way to test for non-fundamentalness, as formalized
by Forni and Gambetti [2011]. They characterize necessary and sufficient conditions under which a set
of variables is informationally sufficient in a VAR, i.e. that it contains enough information to estimate
the structural shocks. Then, they propose a testing procedure based on such conditions, which relies on
the fact that the estimated “structural” shocks of the VAR should not be Granger-caused by the principal
components of a large Factor Augmented VAR.
   40
      Fernàndez-Villaverde and Rubio-Ramı̀rez [2006] evaluate nonfundamentalness in a DSGE linearized solu-
tion. They consider the monetary model of Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno [2003] and study two 8-variable
VARs with two different sets of observables from the model. They show that one of the two is fundamental
while the other one is not. This nicely illustrate that fundamentalness is essentially a question of information
sets. Forni, Giannone, Lippi, and Reichlin [2009] have developed Factor Augmented VARs that use a large
number of variables (hundreds) in order to avoid nonfundamentalness.
   41
      See Fève and Jidoud [2012b] for a discussion of short run and long run identification in such an analytical
case.


                                                       36
   The earliest work using VARs and discussing results in terms of news is Cochrane [1994]
using a bi-variate consumption and income VAR. It followed a couple of papers by Blanchard
and Hall. Looking for the sources of the 1990-91 US recession, Blanchard [1993] and Hall
[1993] concluded that the recession was likely to have been caused by a shock to consumption.
As Cochrane [1994] put it, “since consumption is an endogenous variable, the ultimate source
of variability must be news about future values of any the above”, the “above” variables
being “factor prices, especially oil, monetary policy, government purchases, tax increases,
technology shocks, bank regulation, international factors, and sectoral shifts”.
   Beaudry and Portier [2006] focused this idea by examining the potential effects of news
regarding technological opportunities. Since much of the SVAR literature on news pursued
this narrower interpretation, we will begin by presenting the approach used Beaudry and
Portier [2006] and we will implement it on a more up-to-date sample. We then extend the
analysis to higher dimension VARs and present different routes the literature has taken to
identify technological news shocks.
   The central idea in Beaudry and Portier [2006] is that financial variables, and especially
stock prices, are the type of variables most likely to reflect news as they are clearly forward
looking and free to jump in response to revised expectations. Hence, to look at the relevance
of technological news, one can look at the extent to which innovations in stock prices con-
tain information about future technological growth, or alternatively whether periods of high
technological growth are preceeded by increase in stock prices. Beaudry and Portier [2006]
implemented this idea using alternatively a short run and a long run identification scheme
in a bi-variate setting.

3.3.1   A bivariate SVAR

Let us start from a situation where we already have an estimated Wold representation for
the bivariate system composed of Total Factor Productivity (T F Pt ) and a stock prices index
(SPt ). This moving average representation is given by (for ease of presentation we neglect
any drift terms):                                                 
                                   ∆T F Pt                    µ1,t
                                                 = C(L)                  ,
                                    ∆SPt                      µ2,t
                                                 P∞
where L is the lag operator, C(L) = I +           i=1   Ci Li , and where the variance co-variance
matrix of µ is given by Ω. Furthermore, we will assume that the system has at least one
stochastic trend and therefore C(1) is not equal to zero.
   From this Wold representation, we can derive infinitely many alternative representations
with orthogonalized errors. Beaudry and Portier [2006] focused on two representations, one
that imposes an impact restriction and one that imposes a long run restriction, where the

                                                 37
resulting representations can be expressed as :
                                                       
                                  ∆T F Pt            1,t
                                            = Γ(L)          ,                                  (35)
                                   ∆SPt              2,t
                                                     
                               ∆T F Pt             1,t
                                          = Γ(L)          ,                          (36)
                                            e      e
                                ∆SPt               2,t
                                                   e
where Γ(L) = ∞
            P         i e
                                P∞ e i
              i=0 Γi L , Γ(L) =  i=o Γi L and the variance covariance matrices of  and e
                                                                                        
are identity matrices. In order to get such a representation, we need to find the Γ matrices
that solve the following system of equations:
                                 Γ0 Γ00 = Ω,
                               

                                 Γi     = Ci Γ0 for i > 0
      Since the above system has one more variable than equations, it is necessary to add a
restriction to pin down a particular solution.
      Now suppose we believed the data was driven by only two type of shocks: a surprise
technology shock and some sort of demand shock. If we are ready to assume that the
technology process is I(1) and that the demand shock has no permanent effects, then there
are two ways of isolating a technology shock and the demand shock using a bi-variate VAR
composed of TFP and stock prices. In the first case, say as represented by (35), we can use
a short run identification strategy that does not exploit the long run properties of the data.
In this case we can recover the structural shocks by imposing that the (1, 2) element of Γ0
be equal to zero. This strategy chooses an orthogonalization where the second disturbance
2 has no contemporaneous impact on TFP. If the only two shocks to the system are the
technology shock and the demand shock, this should allow us to recover 1 as the technology
shock and 2 as the demand shock since the demand shock should not affect TFP on impact.
In a second case, as represented by (36), we could alternativly use a long run identification
                                                                          = ∞ Γ
                                                                             P e
strategy by imposing that the (1, 2) element of the long run matrix Γ(1)
                                                                     e             i is zero.
                                                                                      i=0
This orthogonalization forces the disturbance e
                                              2 to have no long run impact on TFP. In this
case, e
      1 should represent the technology shock and e
                                                   2 should represent the demand shock
as only the technology should have a long run effect on measured TFP. If we perform both
these exercise, we can then look at the correlation between the shocks derived from the two
different identification strategies. For example, suppose we look at the correlation between
2 and e
       1 . If the data is driven by only a surprise technology shock and a demand shock,
then the correlation between these two shocks should be zero as one represents the demand
disturbance and the other the supply disturbance. This is the exercise performed in Beaudry
                       42
and Portier [2006].
 42
      Haertel and Lucke [2008] apply the same procedure on German data with similar results. Beaudry

                                                 38
    We replicate the estimation of Beaudry and Portier [2006] here, where we extend the
sample to cover the period from 1947Q1 to 2012Q3 as opposed to the period 1947Q1-2000Q1
in the original paper. All the VARs will be estimated with 3 lags in the VECM form, and
4 pages when estimation is done in levels. Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 9 present impulse
responses to a 2 shock identified using the short run identification strategy discussed above.
The results obtained closely replicate the patterns reported in Beaudry and Portier [2006]
                                       43
even if the sample is extended.             The first observation is that the innovation to the stock
market, 2 , that is orthogonal to current TFP by construction, does not affect TFP for about
10 quarters, but does permanently affect TFP in the long run (panel (a)). This shock is
by design reflected instantaneously in the stock market (panel (b)), but interestingly stock
prices respond once and for all to this disturbance with little short run dynamics. In panels
(c) and (d) of Figure 9 we report impulse responses associated with the e
                                                                        1 shock identified
using the long run identifying restriction. Under the assumption that the data are driven by
a surprise technology shock and a demand shock, the responses reported in panels (c) and (d)
should be quite different to those obtained in panels (a) and (b) since one should represent
the effects of a demand shock while the other should represent the effects of a supply shock.
Instead we see by comparing the panels that the responses of each variable are strikingly
similar. This similarity is further illustrated on Figure 10 where we plot e
                                                                           1 against 2 . While
one could have expected these shocks to be almost orthogonal, the two shocks are instead
closely aligned on the 45 degree line, meaning that they are almost indistinguishable one
from another.
    While the patterns in Figure 9 do put into question a two shock model of the economy
driven by a surprise technology shock and a demand shock, the relevant question is whether
the patterns reported in the panels tell us anything regarding news or other models of
the economy. In Beaudry and Portier [2006] it is argued that one simple interpretation
of these observations is that they are driven by a two shock model where one shock is a
technological news shock and the other a surprise trend-stationary technology shock. Under
and Portier [2005] and Vukotić [2011] perform the same type of identification of news shocks using sectoral
data. Lanne and Luetkepohl [2008] use the same bivariate system but estimate a two-state Markov regime
switching model. Imposing orthogonality of the two socks in each of the two regimes allows for identification
of two shocks, so that short and long run identification restrictions can be tested.
  43
     Because of space limitations, we do not present robustness results for alternative specification of this
VAR. The punchline is that the properties of these two identification schemes imposed on a bi-variate VAR
with U.S.TFP and stock prices is a very robust result with respect to lag length and to estimating the VAR
in level or as a VECM. However, if one starts from estimating a VAR in differences with non-co-integration
imposed the results change quite substantially as we will show later. Also, the properties depend on using a
measure of TFP that corrects for capacity utilization. If one uses a measure of TFP that does not correct
for capacity utilization, then the response of TFP to a news shock (as associated with either 2 or e   1 ) is
much quicker.



                                                      39
                        Figure 9: Impulse response in the (T F P, SP ) VAR

               (a) TFP, response to 2                                 (b) SP, response to 2
         1
                                                                 10
        0.8
                                                                  8
        0.6

        0.4                                                       6




                                                             %
    %




        0.2
                                                                  4
         0
                                                                  2
        0.2

        0.4                                                       0
           0     10       20         30   40       50              0   10     20         30     40     50
                               Periods                                             Periods


               (c) TFP, response to e
                                    1                                 (d) SP, response to e
                                                                                           1
         1
                                                                 10
        0.8
                                                                  8
        0.6

        0.4                                                       6
                                                             %
    %




        0.2
                                                                  4
         0
                                                                  2
        0.2

        0.4                                                       0
           0     10       20         30   40       50              0   10     20         30     40     50
                               Periods                                             Periods




Note: This Figure displays impulse responses in the log (T F P, SP ) VAR to a one percent shock. The first
line corresponds the the short run identification, where ε2 is the shock that does not affect TFP on impact.
The second line corresponds to the long run identification, where εe1 is the only shock that affect TFP in
the long run. The VAR is estimated as a VECM with one cointegrating relation and 3 lags. The unit of
the vertical axis is percentage deviation from the situation without shock. Grey areas correspond to the 66%
confidence band. The distribution of IRF is the Bayesian simulated distribution obtained by Monte-Carlo
integration with 10,000 replications, using the approach for just-identified systems discussed in Doan [1992].
The sample is 1947Q1-2012Q3. See the appendix for a description of the data.




                                                        40
     Figure 10: Short run residuals ε2 against long run ones εe1 in the (T F P, SP ) VAR

                            3

                            2

                            1
                                   !1
                      LR residuals !




                            0

                            1

                            2

                            3

                            4
                                   4    3      2       1    0       1        2       3
                                                   SR residuals ! 2


Note: This Figure displays short run residuals ε2 against long run ones εe1 in the log (T F P, SP ) VAR. ε2 is
the shock that does not affect TFP on impact in the short run identification. εe1 is the only shock that affect
TFP in the long run in the long run identification. The VAR is estimated as a VECM with one cointegrating
relation and 3 lags. The sample is 1947Q1-2012Q3. See the appendix for a description of the data.




                                                      41
this interpretation, the shock 2 should capture the news shock as it should be reflected
in stock prices before it is reflected in TFP. If in addition we assume that news relates to
permanent changes to TFP, then e
                               1 identified using the long run restrictions should also
isolate the news shock, thereby explaining the similarity in responses. In that sense, 2 and
equivalently e
             1 correspond to two ways of isolating news about further productivity that
are instantaneously priced in the stock market, although the news does not lead to actual
increases in productivity for a rather long time. As noted, the results from this SVAR
exercise place doubt on the common interpretation of the economy driven primarily by a
demand shock and a surprise technology shock since, if this were the case, innovations in
stock prices which are orthogonal to TFP should reflect the demand shock and should not
                                                                      44
resemble supply shocks identified by long run restrictions.

3.3.2     Extending to a higher dimension VARs

3.3.2.1     Three-variable VARs: There are at least three reasons for exploring the ro-
                                                                                                  45
bustness of the Beaudry and Portier’s [2006] findings to higher dimension VARs.                        First,
as we have discussed before, increasing the information set reduces the likelihood of non-
fundamentalness problems. Second, if this identification scheme is identifying the effects of
news, it is interesting to know how other variables respond to news, and this can be explored
by considering a larger VAR. Third, there are likely more than two types of shocks that drive
macro-fluctuations and therefore considering a system with more shocks appears desirable.
However, the drawback or difficulty with a larger system is that it requires more identifica-
tion assumptions. We will review several different identifying assumptions that have been
made in the literature. To begin, we will focus on the following simple approach to identify-
ing news shocks. To see how the approach can be applied to systems with many variables,
consider a vector of macroeconomic times series of dimension n, whose Wold representation
  44
     It is important to recognize that this “news” interpretation is not the only possible interpretation of
these observations. For example, an alternative view is that TFP is endogenous, and that short run non
technological intrinsic shocks (preference, government spending, taxes, etc...) eventually affect TFP. Such a
view would be for example supported by an endogenous growth model with learning by doing.
  45
     Beaudry and Portier [2006] do not only focus on a bi-variate VAR. They also report results for larger
systems. However, as noted by Kurmann and Mertens [2013] and formally shown in Lucke [2010], some of
the identification schemes used for larger systems in Beaudry and Portier [2006] may be problematic (in the
case of long run restrictions and when the system is not estimated in levels). For this reason, we do not
report results from such schemes here, and instead provide new results.




                                                     42
is estimated to be (again neglecting drift terms):
                                                            
                                  ∆X1t                  µ1,t
                                ∆X2t                 µ2,t   
                                ..  = C(L)                  .                        (37)
                                                            
                                                         ..
                                .                      .    
                                  ∆Xnt                  µnt

Where the two first variables in the system are always TFP and stock prices, X1t = T F Pt and
X2t = SPt , while the n − 2 other variables can be different from one system to another. We
aim at identifying some of the structural shocks from the following alternative representation
with orthogonal innovations:
                                                            
                                   ∆X1t                 ε1,t
                                  ∆X2t               ε2,t   
                                           = Γ(L)            .                        (38)
                                                            
                                   ..                   ..
                                    .                  .    
                                   ∆Xnt                 εnt

   To fully identify the n structural innovations, we need n(n − 1)/2 restrictions. As we aim
at identifying news shocks about future productivity, we can consider a subset of restrictions
that will allow us to identify only the news shock and a surprise technology shock. To do
this, we first assume that only two shocks can permanently affect TFP in the long run.
This amounts to imposing n − 2 zeros for the last n − 2 columns of the first line of the long
run matrix Γ(1). We then need to separate those two technology shocks: this is done by
assuming that the surprise technology shock is the only shock that affects TFP on impact,
which implies that the only non-zero term in the first row of the impact matrix Γ0 is the
(1, 1) term. These 2n − 3 restrictions allows for a unique identification of the news shock ε2
and the surprise technology shock ε1 .
   Figure 11 displays the responses of TFP and stock prices to the ε2 shock (the expected
news shock) estimated using a tri-variate system where the third variable is varied. Con-
fidence bands are the ones obtained for the (T F P, SP, C) system, and the four bold lines
correspond to the response in the four three-variable VARs in which the third variable is
alternatively C, I, Y and H (ie, per capita values of consumption, investment, output and
hours worked). All estimations are in levels. Two main conclusions can be drawn from theses
responses: firstly the responses stay the same when we change the third variable in the sys-
tem; secondly, the responses are remarkably similar to the ones obtained in the two-variable
case.
   Figure 12 shows how four macroeconomic aggregates react to the news shock: consump-
tion, investment, GDP and hours worked all increase on impact. Consumption’s response
is close to a once for all jump, while investment, hours and GDP display a hump shape

                                              43
Figure 11: Impulse response of TFP and Stock Prices to the news shock ε1 in the 3-variable
VARs


                       (a) TFP                                             (b) Stock Prices
         1
                                                                10
        0.8
                                                                 8
        0.6

        0.4                                                      6
                                                            %
    %




        0.2
                                                                 4
         0
                                                                 2
        0.2

        0.4                                                      0
           0     10      20         30    40      50              0   10       20         30   40    50
                              Periods                                               Periods



Note: This Figure displays impulse responses to the news shock ε1 in the log (T F P, SP, X) VAR, where X
is alternatively C, I, Y and H. The news shock is identified as the only shock that does not affect TFP on
impact but that is allowed to do so in the long run. The VAR is estimated as a VECM with two cointegrating
relations and 3 lags when I, C or Y are the third variable. It is estimated in levels with 4 lags when H
enters the system. Each of the four bold lines corresponds to a different VAR. The unit of the vertical axis
is percentage deviation from the situation without shock. Grey areas correspond to the 66% confidence band.
The distribution of IRF is the Bayesian simulated distribution obtained by Monte-Carlo integration with
10,000 replications, using the approach for just-identified systems discussed in Doan [1992]. Its is the one
obtained in the (T F P, SP, C) VAR. The sample is 1947Q1-2012Q3. See the appendix for a description of
the data.




                                                       44
response in the short run. As shown in Table 2, the news shock explains between 60 and
80 % of the variance of C, I, Y and H for horizons between 4 and 16 quarters, although it
explains less that 3% of the variance of TFP at the same horizon, and about one half of its
variance in the long run. Note from the Table that the short run variance decomposition is
robust to level or VECM specification. We also see in Table 2 that long run properties are
not invariant to the co-integration rank specification : the news shock explains more than
                                                                     46
80% of the variance of TFP in the VECM specification,                     but only one half in the level
       47
one.        The possible sensitivity of results to co-integration assumptions will be a recurring
theme.

   Table 2: Share of the variance explained by the news shock in 3-variable VARs (in %)

                                Horizon   1 4 8 12 16 120
                                        Level specification
                                TFP       0 2 2 2 3 56
                                C        39 71 77 77 75 67
                                I        16 53 65 66 65 57
                                Y        30 72 82 80 78 64
                                H        39 70 81 82 79 56
                                  2 coint. relations specification
                                TFP       0 2 2 2 4 84
                                C        22 55 63 65 66 87
                                I         5 36 50 52 53 78
                                Y         4 49 64 64 65 87


Note: This table is obtained from the estimation of a (T F P, SP, X) VAR, where X is alternatively C, I,
Y and H. The news shock is identified as the only shock that does not affect TFP on impact but that is
allowed to do so in the long run. The VAR is estimated as a VECM with two cointegrating relations and 3
lags when I, C or Y are the third variable. It is estimated in levels with 4 lags when H enters the system.
Results for TFP are given for the T F P, SP, C) VAR. The sample is 1947Q1-2012Q3. See the appendix for
a description of the data.




3.3.2.2      Consumer confidence: In the above VAR exercises, we have been using infor-
mation from stock prices to help identify news shocks. It is reasonable to believe that stock
  46
     The results from the VECM system are likely more credible as results from estimating the system in
levels may not lead to consistent estimates of forecast variances. See Phillips [1998] on that point.
  47
     The proper co-integration rank is questionable when hours enter the system, as there is an open debate
on the proper specification of hours (level or difference) (see Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Vigfusson [2004],
Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan [2008] and Fève and Guay [2010]). We have verified that this issue is not
very important in this system as the response of hours is very similar when the VAR is estimated with one
co-integrating relation involving only TFP and SP and hours in levels or in difference.


                                                     45
Figure 12: Impulse response of C, I, Y and H to the news shock ε1 in the 3-variable VARs

                  (a) Consumption                                               (b) Investment
        1.5                                                      4


                                                                 3

         1
                                                                 2




                                                             %
    %




                                                                 1
        0.5

                                                                 0


         0                                                       1
          0     10       20         30     40      50             0       10        20         30   40   50
                              Periods                                                    Periods


                       (c) GDP                                                    (d) Hours
        1.5                                                      1.5


                                                                     1

         1
                                                                 0.5
    %




                                                             %




                                                                     0
        0.5

                                                                 0.5


         0                                                           1
          0     10       20         30     40      50                 0    10       20         30   40   50
                              Periods                                                    Periods




Note: This Figure displays impulse responses to the news shock ε1 in the log (T F P, SP, X) VAR, where X
is alternatively C, I, Y and H. The news shock is identified as the only shock that does not affect TFP on
impact but that is allowed to do so in the long run. The VAR is estimated as a VECM with two cointegrating
relations and 3 lags when I, C or Y are the third variable. It is estimated in levels with 4 lags when H enters
the system. The unit of the vertical axis is percentage deviation from the situation without shock. Grey
areas correspond to the 66% confidence band. The distribution of IRF is the Bayesian simulated distribution
obtained by Monte-Carlo integration with 10,000 replications, using the approach for just-identified systems
discussed in Doan [1992]. The sample is 1947Q1-2012Q3. See the appendix for a description of the data.




                                                        46
prices are good indicators of agents’ perceptions about future economic outcomes. However,
it is interesting to ask whether the news shocks identified using the combination of short and
long run restrictions suggested in this subsection are also reflected in measures of consumer
confidence. If it were not the case, this would put in to question the interpretations of these
          48
shocks.        To this end, we examined how measured consumer confidence – as captured
by the Michigan survey – reacts to a news shock in a 3-variable VAR where the first two
variables remain TFP and stock prices, while the third variable is the index of consumer
sentiment drawn from the Michigan survey. In Figure 13 we report the response of the con-
sumer sentiment index when the news shock is identified as the shock that has no impact
effect on TFP but is allowed to have a long run effect on TFP. As can be seen, in response
to the identified news shock, consumer sentiments jumps up and continues to rise for two
quarters. In terms of variance decomposition, the identified news shocks explain about 80%
of the variance of this consumer sentiment index. Hence, in this system, positive news shocks
appear to be associated with optimism on the part of consumers which is reassuring for the
proposed interpretation. In order to explore the robustness of this result, we also examined
how results changed if we replaced stock prices in this three variable VAR with sequentially
consumption expenditure (non-durable and services) and hours worked. When stock prices
are replaced by consumption expenditures, we find very similar effects of the news shock.
In particular, the identified news shock accounts for the majority of the movement in con-
sumer sentiments. However, when we replace stock prices with hours worked, we get quite
different results. In such a case, the news shock accounts for much less of the movements
in consumer sentiments and it has much less effect on long run TFP movements. How to
interpret this result? First, this result indicates that the identification of news shocks may
be quite sensitive to the variables used in the VAR. This observation should not be too sur-
prising given our discussion of non-fundamentalness where we emphasized that a VAR would
need to include variables with sufficient information content if one hopes to properly learn
about news shocks. Second, these results suggest to us that it may be more appropriate to
identify news shocks using a combination of stock prices and survey evidence as to increase
the information set of the econometrician, as opposed to using only one of the variables.
  48
    Sill [2009], Leduc and Sill [2010] and Barsky and Sims [2012] explore the relationship between economic
activity measures of consumer confidence. Lamla, Lein, and Sturm [2007] identify news shocks making
use of the business tendency surveys of the German Ifo Institute. Milani and Rajbhandari [2012b] exploit
information from the term structure of survey expectations to identify news shocks in a DSGE model with
rational expectations. Recently, Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas [2013] and Fève and Guay [2013] have made
use of consumer confidence data in order to disentangle technological news from “sentiment” shocks.




                                                    47
Figure 13: Impulse response of the index of consumer sentiment to a news shock in the
3-variable VAR (T F P, SP, ICS)

                               6

                               5

                               4

                               3
                           %




                               2

                               1

                               0

                               1
                                0        10       20         30       40       50
                                                       Periods

Note: This Figure displays impulse responses of the index of consumer sentiments ICS to the news shock ε1
in the log (T F P, SP, ICS) VAR. The news shock is identified as the only shock that does not affect TFP on
impact but that is allowed to do so in the long run. The VAR is estimated in levels with 4 lags. The unit of
the vertical axis is percentage deviation from the situation without shock. Grey areas correspond to the 66%
confidence band. The distribution of IRF is the Bayesian simulated distribution obtained by Monte-Carlo
integration with 10,000 replications, using the approach for just-identified systems discussed in Doan [1992].
The sample is 1960Q1-2012Q3, as the index of consumer sentiments is not available before. See the appendix
for a description of the data.




                                                       48
3.3.2.3       Alternative identification schemes in larger systems: Several different av-
enues have been pursed in the literature to identify the effects of technological news using
VARs with many variables. For example, Beaudry and Lucke [2010] consider a framework
which allows for several of the main forces emphasized in the macroeconomic literature to
compete with news shocks. They consider an environment with five types shocks: surprise
TFP shocks, surprise investment-specific technology (IST) shocks, news shocks regarding
TFP, monetary policy shocks and preference shocks. Their baseline model is composed of
five variables: measured total factor productivity, the relative price of investment goods, an
                                                                     49
index of stock prices, hours worked, and the Fed funds rate.              They choose hours of work as
their primary measure of aggregate economic activity, but also document the robustness of
their results by considering alternative measures of economic activity such as consumption,
investment and output. Their data run from 1955Q1 to 2007Q2. The baseline VAR is esti-
mated with three co-integrating relations. Beaudry and Lucke adopt two main identification
schemes. In both, (i) only TFP shocks may have contemporaneous effects on TFP, (ii)
preference shocks and monetary shocks have no long run effects on TFP and (iii) monetary
shocks do not have a contemporaneous effect on economic activity. The first identification,
which is mainly a short run one, also imposes that news, preference and monetary shocks
have no contemporaneous effects on the relative price of investment. The second one, which
relies more on the long run, also imposes that preference and monetary shocks have no
long run effects on the relative price of investment and that investment specific technology
(hereafter IST) shocks do not have a long run effect on TFP.
       Both identification strategies give very similar results as far as news shocks are concerned.
Identified surprise TFP and IST shocks contribute little to the variance of hours at all
horizons and the single most important contributor to hours variance is the news shock.
News shocks have effects very similar to those found in the original bivariate estimation of
Beaudry and Portier [2006] and presented in the previous section. The news shock seems to
convey information about TFP growth that starts 8 to 10 quarters in the future. This shock
nevertheless causes an immediate expansion in hours lasting for about ten quarters. These
identified news shocks also appear to be associated with an increase in nominal interest
rates, although this estimate is mostly insignificant. News shocks seem to have a marginally
significant negative effect on the relative price of investment goods within the first four years
or so. For investment, output and consumption, the same results are obtained: they display
a gradual increase over a year or so in response to a news shock. However, Fisher [2010]
  49
    Bunk [2011] has shown that Beaudry and Lucke’s [2010] identification of news shock is robust to the use
of alternative “forward looking variable” (S&P500, Wilshire 5000, number of patent applications, 3-month
to 10-years treasuries rates). Xu and Fan [2010] have shown that new business formation is also procyclical
when included in a VAR similar to Beaudry and Lucke’s [2010].


                                                    49
points outs that the results in Beaudry and Lucke [2010] are dependent on co-integration
assumptions. For example, if one restricts the VECM to only one or two co-integrating
relationship then results can change quite drastically with IST shocks becoming in some
cases the dominant force driving the variance of hours.
       Beaudry, Nam, and Wang [2011] is another example of using VARs in large systems, but
                                          50
it differs by using sign restrictions          to identify what they call “optimism” shocks. Their
benchmark model contains five variables: TFP, stock price, consumption, the real interest
rate, and hours worked. Investment and output are included in the extended seven-variable
VAR. All estimations are done in levels, and the sample runs from 1955Q1 to 2010Q4.
Optimism shocks are identified by imposing that they lead to increases in stock prices and
consumption as these are generally viewed as the best indicators of how individuals perceive
the future. Moreover, these optimism shocks are constrained to be orthogonal to changes
in TFP on impact. They also consider the further sign restrictions that the real interest
rates increases on impact. Results show that the identified optimism shocks resemble the
news shock with it initially leading hours to increase gradually over time and exhibit a hump
shape response before TFP starts to increase about 8 quarter later. Splitting their sample
in two, they find that macroeconomic variables generally respond more strongly to optimism
shocks in the post-1983 subsample than in the pre-1978 subsample. Also, optimism shocks
seem to have larger permanent effects on variables such as TFP, consumption, investment,
and output in the more recent subsample. In the second part of the paper, Beaudry, Nam,
and Wang [2011] relate this optimism shock to a news shock, i.e. a shock that anticipates by
construction future growth in TFP. This shock is identified as the one that is orthogonal to
current TFP and that maximizes the share of the forecast error variance of TFP attributable
to this shock at a finite horizon h, following an approach originally proposed by Francis,
Owyang, Roush, and DiCecio [2005]. Results show that responses to this identified news
shock are very similar to the responses associated with the optimism shock identified using
sign restrictions.

3.3.2.4      The Barsky-Sims approach: The approach of identifying news shocks by im-
posing that it maximizes a measure of the forecast error variance of TFP at some horizon
can be particularly useful to identify news shocks in large VAR systems. As it has been
shown by Barsky and Sims [2011], it can allow for identification with a rather minimal set of
assumptions. Consider again the Wold representation (37) and the structural representation
  50
    The sign restrictions method has been proposed by Uhlig [2005] and Mountford and Uhlig [2009]. See
also Ko, Miyazawa, and Vu [2012] for the identification of TFP news with sign restrictions using Japanese
data, Berg [2012] for the euro area and Crouzet and Oh [2013] using U.S. data. and focussing on the response
on inventories.


                                                     50
(38). Barsky and Sims [2011] propose to identify a surprise technology shock as the only one
                                  51
that affects TFP on impact.            This shock would correspond to the first shock in a Choleski
identification in which X1 = T F P . Out of the n − 1 other shocks, the news shock ε2 is then
identified as the one that maximizes hj=1 Ω2 (j), where Ω2 (j) is the forecast error variance
                                      P

at horizon j that is attributed to ε2 . Note that this criterion is related but different from
the one proposed in Francis, Owyang, Roush, and DiCecio [2005] where it is simply Ω2 (h)
that is maximized. By summing over all the horizons between 1 and h, the criterion used
in Barsky and Sims [2011] is putting more weight on the short run variance of TFP in the
maximization. As made explicit in Barsky and Sims [2011], if one is ready to assume that no
other shocks affect TFP at any horizon, then no other restrictions are needed to identify a
news shock. In their analysis, Barsky and Sims [2011] choose a horizon of 40 quarters when
maximizing hj=1 Ω2 (j). We follow this identification strategy with a first 4-variable VARs
            P

(T F P, Y, C, H) estimated in levels over the period 1960Q1-2007Q4, as in Barsky and Sims
[2011]. Impulse response functions are displayed on Figure 14 with plain lines. The identified
news shock is very different from the ones obtained using the combination of impact and
long run restrictions suggested in subsection 3.3.2.1. In this figure, we see that hours fall in
response to the identified news shock and stay for at least 20 quarters below their pre-shock
level. Output does not increase much while TFP increases very quickly following the news.
This pattern is the one emphasized in Barsky and Sims [2011] 52 and suggests that the effects
of news shocks may actually be to create a recession – as would be consistent with a RBC
model, as opposed to creating a boom.
       Since this view is drastically different from the one obtained in Beaudry and Portier
[2006], we estimate a second VAR over the full sample 1947Q1-2012Q3 (to be comparable
with the estimates of subsection 3.3.1) that is composed of (T F P, SP, Y, H) of (T F P, SP, Y, C).
The main difference with the previous VAR we have estimated is that those ones include the
stock prices index SP . In Figure 14 we report with dashed lines the impulse obtained using
the method proposed by Barsky and Sims [2011] but with the stock prices index. As can
be seen from the Figure, the impulse responses to the identified news shock now look very
similar to those presented in subsection 3.3.2.1: with both hours and consumption increas-
ing after the arrival of news, and TFP taking several quarters before starting to increase.
These results highlight once again that the identification of news shocks may be sensitive
  51
     As an alternative example of the use of the Barsky Sims methodology to identify news shocks, see
Kurmann and Otrok [2012] and Ben Zeev and Khan [2013].
  52
     Although we estimated the VAR over the same sample 1960-2007, the impulse responses reported here
are slightly different from those presented in Barsky and Sims [2011] because the definition of variables is
not exactly the same. Barsky and Sims measure consumption excluding durable goods and output is Non
Farm Private GDP, while we consider total consumption and total GDP.



                                                    51
to the choice of variables included in the VAR. In particular, this pair of contrasting results
suggest that the inclusion or not of stock prices in a small VAR may drastically change
one’s perception of the effects of news shocks. Further systematic exploration on the role of
the identification methodology proposed by Barsky and Sims [2011] versus the information
content of the VAR appears warranted to get a more complete understanding of the likely
                           53
effects of news shocks.

3.3.2.5    Using large time series models to identify news: Forni, Gambetti, and Sala
[2011] substantially increase the amount of data used to estimate the effects of news shocks by
using a large dimensional factor augmented VAR model. Their FAVAR model comprises 116
US quarterly series, covering the period 1959Q1-2007-Q4. The series include both national
accounting data (GDP, investment, consumption and the GDP deflator), TFP, consumer
sentiment, financial indicators, industrial production indices, CPI, PPI and employment.
They then consider the two or six first factors. In the case of the two first factors, they
identify the news shock in the factor model assuming that it has no contemporaneous effect
on TFP. In the case of the six-factor model, they use Barsky and Sims’ identification: the
news shock is the shock that does not have a contemporaneous impact on TFP and that
has a maximal effect using the Barsky-Sims variance criterion for TFP at h = 40. Their
findings for news shocks are as follows. TFP grows quite rapidly, doing more than half
of the adjustment in the first 6 quarters; investment and output drop on impact and then
gradually grow to a new long run level; consumption does not move on impact and only
after the first quarter does it start to increase; hours fall in the short run. These results
are quite different from many of the results reported to date, with the exception of our
results aimed at reproducing Barsky and Sims [2011]. One of the attractive features of
FAVAR models is that they reduce the probability of a non-fundamentalness problem by
                                         54
enlarging the set of observables.             However, this is not what we believe is the source
of the different results. Instead, we conjecture that the reason for the different results
comes down to information in co-integrating relationships. Unfortunately, FAVAR estimation
requires stationary data, so that Forni, Gambetti, and Sala [2011] estimate their model
in difference (in double difference for variables such as prices) without using any of the
information contained in co-integrating relationships. By excluding the long run relations
  53
      As shown in Beaudry, Nam, and Wang [2011], Barsky and Sims’ method may be sensitive to the choice
of the truncation horizon h. The criterion proposed by Francis, Owyang, Roush, and DiCecio [2005] appears
to give more stable results.
   54
      Ng and Stevanovic [2012] propose the identification of news shocks in a large Factor Augmented Autore-
gressive Distributed Lag model. FADL models estimate the impulse responses directly rather than inverting
a VAR.



                                                    52
Figure 14: IRF to a news, Barsky and Sims’s [2011] identification in the (T F P, C, Y, H)
VAR and in the (T F P, SP, Y, H or C) one


                        (a) TFP                                           (b) Consumption
        0.5                                                       1.2

        0.4                                                        1
        0.3
                                                                  0.8
        0.2
                                                                  0.6
    %




                                                              %
        0.1
                                                                  0.4
         0
                                                                  0.2
        0.1

        0.2                                                        0

        0.3                                                       0.2
           0     10       20         30    40       50               0   10     20         30   40       50
                               Periods                                               Periods


                      (c) Output                                              (d) Hours
        1.2                                                        1

         1

        0.8                                                       0.5

        0.6
    %




                                                              %




        0.4                                                        0

        0.2

         0                                                        0.5

        0.2

        0.4                                                        1
           0     10       20         30    40       50              0    10     20         30   40       50
                               Periods                                               Periods




Note: This Figure displays impulse responses to the news shock ε1 in the log (T F P, C, Y, H) VAR and in the
(T F P, SP, Y, H or C) ones. The news shock is identified following Barsky and Sims [2011] as the shock that
                                                    P40
does not affect TFP on impact and that maximizes j=1 Ω2 (j), where Ω2 (j) is the forecast error variance at
horizon j that is attributed to that shock. The VAR is estimated in levels with 4 lags. The unit of the vertical
axis is percentage deviation from the situation without shock. Grey areas correspond to the 66% confidence
band for the (T F P, C, Y, H) VAR. The distribution of IRF is the Bayesian simulated distribution obtained
by Monte-Carlo integration with 10,000 replications, using the approach for just-identified systems discussed
in Doan [1992]. The sample is 1960Q1-2007Q4 for the (T F P, C, Y, H) VAR and 1947Q1-2012Q3 for the
(T F P, SP, Y, H or C) ones. See the appendix for a description of the data.




                                                         53
between the data, we would argue that it is likely difficult to properly identify a news shock
if it has long and delayed effects. To illustrate the sensitively of results when omitting
information from co-integrating relationships in an SVAR setting, Figure 15 plots impulse
responses of TFP and SP to a news shock identified from (T F P, SP, C, I) VAR, using
the identification scheme discussed in section 3.3.2.1. We perform the estimation for 5
models: one model in first differences with no co-integrating relationships, one in levels, and
three VECM models with 1 to 3 co-integrating relationships. Dashed lines in the Figures
correspond to the impulse responses associated with the estimation where the data are in
difference with no co-integrating relationships. As can be seen, when no information from
long run relationships is used, the impulse responses are very different. TFP jumps quickly on
impact while stock prices decrease on impact and in the long run. In the data, the correlation
between TFP and SP growth rates is -.08. As the long run link between the levels of those
variables is lost in the difference estimation, the VAR catches the negative impact correlation,
which then translate into a very counterintuitive negative long run relation between TFP
and SP. On the contrary, it can be seen on Figure 15 that the levels of TFP and SP are
positively related in the long run, and that the responses are very similar for the models
with one to three co-integrating relations or in levels. Accordingly, we believe it would be
fruitful to explore the FAVAR approach allowing for information contained in co-integrating
relationships.

3.3.2.6   Summary of VAR results: Although in our explorations we have found that
the estimation of impulse responses to news shocks using a combination of different identi-
fying restrictions give quite similar results, we want to recall that there exist configurations
of the data and identification methods that give very dfferent results. In particular it should
be recognized that, even disregarding the issue of non-fundamentalness, there remains con-
siderable debate regarding the effects and importance of identified news shocks since results
can be sensitive to co-integration assumptions and to the choice of variables in the system.
As a rule of thumb, when a VAR is estimated allowing for a high degree of co-integration
between the variables, and when stock prices are included in the system, results tend to
confirm the type of findings first suggested in Beaudry and Portier [2006]. In contrast,
when co-integration relations are restricted or when information contained in stock prices is
omitted, then very different results often emerge.

3.4    Other VAR-based empirical work on news
Up to now we have examined approaches to the identification of news shocks that address the
issue indirectly, treating news as an unobserved disturbance. In contrast, there are a set of

                                              54
Figure 15: Impulse response to a news shock, (T F P, SP, C, I) VAR, levels or 3 to 0 cointe-
grating relations


                       (a) TFP                                             (b) Stock Prices
         1
                                                                10
        0.8
                                                                 8
        0.6

        0.4                                                      6
                                                            %
    %




        0.2
                                                                 4
         0
                                                                 2
        0.2

        0.4                                                      0
           0     10      20         30    40      50              0   10       20         30   40     50
                              Periods                                               Periods



Note: This Figure displays impulse responses to the news shock ε1 in the log (T F P, SP, C, I) VAR. The
news shock is identified as the only shock that does not affect TFP on impact but that is allowed to do so in
the long run. The VAR is estimated in levels with 4 lags or as a VECM with 3 to 0 cointegrating relations
and 3 lags. The unit of the vertical axis is percentage deviation from the situation without shock. Grey
areas correspond to the 66% confidence band for the benchmark VECM with 3 cointegrating relations. The
dashed lines correspond to the estimation in difference (zero cointegrating relations), while the plain lines
correspond to the level estimation or to the ones with one to three cointegrating relations. The distribution
of IRF is the Bayesian simulated distribution obtained by Monte-Carlo integration with 10,000 replications,
using the approach for just-identified systems discussed in Doan [1992]. The sample is 1947Q1-2012Q3, as
the consumer confidence index is not available before. See the appendix for a description of the data.




                                                       55
papers which try to look at the issue of news in a much more direct fashion by systematically
deciphering information that may contain explicit news events.
   One example is given by the research on tax news and government spending news.
Mertens and Ravn [2012] study the impact of tax liability changes using the US tax narra-
tive provided by Romer and Romer [2009]. For each piece of tax legislation they define an
announcement date and an implementation date. When the difference between these two
dates exceeds 90 days, they assume that the tax liability change is pre-announced. They find
that the economy reacts in a different way to pre-announced and surprise tax cuts: a pre-
announced tax cut with an anticipation horizon of 6 quarters gives rise to pre-implementation
declines in aggregate output, investment and hours worked. In contrast, aggregate consump-
tion is hardly affected by the announcement. Mertens and Ravn [2011] then propose a DSGE
model that can account for the impact of such tax policy shocks.
   Once it it recognized that some tax and fiscal changes are anticipated, one should revisit
some of the previous VAR literature on fiscal shocks, as representations are likely to be
non fundamental, as illustrated by Leeper, Walker, and Yang [2008]. Ramey [2011] shows
that both professional forecasts and the narrative approach shocks Granger-cause fiscal VAR
shocks, implying that these shocks are missing the timing of the news, and therefore that
VARs do not properly estimate dynamic fiscal multipliers. Mertens and Ravn [2010] nicely
show that rational expectations models introduce restrictions on the non-fundamental roots
of the MA representations that allows to examine the sensitivity of SVAR based estimates
of the impact of fiscal shocks to news shocks. They use the fact that rational expectations
models imply that fiscal news are discounted at a constant rate, denoted the anticipation rate
by Ljungqvist and Sargent [2004]. This parameter can be used to recover the structural shock
of a fiscal VAR from its non fundamental representation. Leeper, Richter, and Walker [2012]
also identify two types of fiscal news—government spending and changes in tax policy. They
identify news concerning taxes through the municipal bond market, and news concerning
government spending through the Survey of Professional Forecasters. They then map the
reduced-form estimates of news into a DSGE framework. Gambetti [2012] measure fiscal
news as as the difference between the forecast of government spending growth over the next
three quarters made by the agents at time t (measured with the the Survey of Professional
Forecasters) and the forecast of the same variable made at time t. This variable is then
introduced in an otherwise standard VAR, and multipliers are found to be close to one.
   On a different perspective, Bruckner and Pappa [2013] examine the macroeconomic effects
of bidding for the Olympic Games using panel data for 188 countries during the period 1950-
2009. News about the Olympics makes output and investment surge already at the time of the
bidding. In unsuccessful bidding countries the agents’ optimism turns out to be unjustified

                                             56
and, as a result, the economy returns to its original trend, while hosting economies enjoy
quantitatively large and significant positive effects from hosting.
    Approaches where news events are directly observed and measured have an important
advantage over SVAR approaches as they tend not to be subject to the problem of non-
fundamentalness and therefore more likely to produce credible and less controversial results.
However, since these papers are not focused on business cycle issues and do not examine the
effects of technological news, their findings cannot be compared with the SVAR reviewed
in the previous subsection. One paper that is more closely related is Alexopoulos [2011].
Alexopoulos [2011] identifies dates where there are publications of books related to new
technological developments. She then uses these identified episodes to look at how the
economy reacts after a flurry of such technological dissemination. The main finding is that
TFP tends to increase with a substantial lag after such episodes, especially in the sectors
most likely to take advantage of such technological developments. Moreover, Alexopoulos
finds that economic activity tends to pick up after these news events, which supports the
idea that such positive news creates an expansion. Baron and Schmidt [2013] propose the
use of technological standardization as a novel indicator of technological change. They find
that standardization is an essential mechanism for revealing news about future movements
of macroeconomic aggregates as evidenced by the positive and immediate reaction of stock
                                            55
market data to a technology shock.


4     Building and Estimating Structural Models with News
As we discussed in the previous section, the are several limitations of using VAR approaches
to evaluating the plausibility and importance of news driven business cycles. The main
alternative to VARs is to use fully specified dynamic general equilibrium models (either
estimated, calibrated or a mixture of both) to do model-based structural decompositions of
the sources of fluctuations. However, this alternative approach also has its limitations. As
is well known, when doing model-based structural decompositions the resulting inferences
depend critically on the assumed structure being right. If, for example, one adopts a dynamic
general equilibrium model where the underlying structure is such that the economy’s response
to news can never cause a generalized boom or bust – that is, the assumed structure is such
that news can never cause outcomes where consumption, investment and employment all
co-move positively together — then by construction such an approach will almost surely
  55
     The results in Lucke [2013] can viewed as an intermediate steps between these two approaches. He uses
information on patent filings in the US and Germany to see if the news shocks identified using a methodology
similar to that used in Beaudry and Portier [2006] predicts patent filings. He finds they do and interprets that
as supporting the idea that the identified shocks contain news about subsequent technological developments.


                                                      57
attribute little importance to news in driving fluctuations, even if in fact they are relevant.
Therefore, before discussing the insights regarding news-driven business cycles obtained by
doing model-based structural decompositions, it is important to first ask the following two
questions: (i) in what types of dynamic general equilibrium models does news have the
potential to create business cycle-type fluctuations, and (ii) is the resulting class of models
reasonable? Once we clarify the answer to these two questions we will be in a better position
to discuss results from the model-based structural decompositions found in the literature.

4.1    In what DSGE environment can news creates business cycle
       fluctuations?
It appears intuitive to many that if agents in an economy wake up to news about new market
opportunities developing on the horizon, this will likely cause increased activity immediately
as agents both start to invest early to be ready when the new demand patterns materialize
and start to consume early as they feel richer. We have shown in the previous section
that such an intuitive pattern emerges from the VAR literature that aim at identifying
the effect of TFP news shocks. However, it turns out that such patterns are difficult to
generate within the confines of many of the simple dynamic general equilibrium models
used in macroeconomic literature. In particular, the difficulties arise on two fronts, which
we will refer to as the dynamic front and the static front. On the dynamic front, as we
shall show, in many simple dynamic models it is difficult for positive technological news to
cause an increased desire to invest today. On the static front, we will show that even if
positive technological news causes increased desire to invest, in many models this will not be
translated into increased consumption and investment today. Instead, it is most generally
be associated with either consumption or investment decreasing today.
   To set the stage, let us begin by considering a very simple DSGE model in the RBC
tradition where (i) there is a representative agent who discounts the future at rate β with
per-period utility U (Ct , L − Lt ) that depends on consumption Ct and leisure L − Lt , where
both consumption and leisure are normal goods ( Lt represent hours worked, and L is the
labor endowment), (ii) there is one final good that is produced with capital and labor using
a Cobb-Douglas technology θt Ktα L1−α
                                  t   , where θt is a stochastic technology index and (iii)
the final good can be consumed or invested, with capital accumulation obeying Kt+1 =
(1 − δ)Kt + It , where δ is the rate of depreciation and It is investment. In this environment,
what happens if today the representative household receives news that indicates that θ will
increase in q periods? As first hinted to in Barro and King [1984], and discussed in more
detail below, in such an environment it will never be the case that the news will lead to an


                                              58
immediate increase in consumption, investment and employment. Moreover, under standard
calibrations, the news will not even lead to an increased desire to invest in anticipation of
the future technological change but will instead lead to a decrease in current investment and
employment. Hence, if someone chose to use such a framework to evaluate the importance
of news using model-based structural decomposition, then almost certainly the results will
be that news does not play a very important role. While that may be the right conclusion,
before drawing such a conclusion it is important to understand which assumptions cause
which difficulties for the news view of business cycles. To this end, we will present here a
framework which helps separate static difficulties and dynamic difficulties. An underlying
message of the section will be to show that standard DSGE models do not easily embody
the narrative of news-driven business cycles without significant modifications. This can be
interpreted in two ways: either the news view should be discounted as it does not fit into
mainstream models, or our standard business models are very restrictive and may need to
be generalized. Moreover, while the literature has recognized and offered solutions to the
static problem, this section will also emphasize a dynamic challenge that is somewhat less
recognized.

4.1.1   Addressing the static problem between news and business cycles

As mentioned previously, the mechanisms behind the news view can be divided into two
distinct elements. First, there is the effect of news on agents’ and firms’ desire to invest in
order to be well placed to take advantage of future developments. We refer to this as the
dynamic element since it depends primarily on how agents’ perceptions about the future
translate into investment demand. Second, there is the notion that increased investment
demand leads to increased economic activity without creating negative co-movements be-
tween investment and consumption. We refer to this second element as the static element
since it looks at current adjustment conditional on how agents perceive the future. In this
subsection we want to restrict attention to situations where (by assumption) news generates
increased incentive to invest, and focus on clarifying the conditions under which the increased
investment demand creates a boom. In order to make this distinction between the static
and dynamic elements operational, it is helpful to explicitly model the continuation value of
capital in preferences. In particular, let us start by assuming that we have a representative
agent with a current utility function given by U (Ct , 1 − Lt ), where both consumption and
leisure are normal goods. Furthermore, let us summarize the agent’s perceived future utility
by the value function Ve (Kt+1 , Γt+1 ). Here, Kt+1 is the stock of capital the agent will have
next period and Γt+1 is the state of the world next period.



                                              59
4.1.1.1    A one-sector economy:              Consider a one-sector economy in which there is a
representative firm that hires labor and rents capital to produce output using the concave
production function F (Kt , Lt , θt ). There is also a representative household whose objective
can then be stated as follows:
                                                 h                     i
                        max U (Ct , 1 − Lt ) + βE V (Kt+1 , Γt+1 ) | Ωt ,
                                                   e
                      Ct ,Kt+1 ,Lt

                             s.t.    Ct + Kt+1 = wt Lt + Kt (1 − δ + rt ) + πt ,
where wt and rt are the wage rate and the rental rate of capital, and πt are firm profits. Ωt
is the agent’s information set in period t which can for example include the current state of
technology θt and any signal St that the agent may have received as exogenous news. We
will refer to this simple macro model as the RBC structure. For ease of exposition it will be
helpful to define a continuation value function V (·) as follows
                                             h                                   i
                     V (Kt+1 , θt , St ) = βE Ve (Kt+1 , Γt+1 ) | Ωt = {θt , St } .

So the continuation value function of an agent is just the expectation of his value function
and therefore depends on the stock variables one brings in to next period, which in the RBC
structure is only Kt+1 , and on his information set Ω which he used to form his expectations.
The information set in this case is comprised both of the current state of technology θt as
well as extra information arrived in the form of news denoted by St . Although in general
the news could be multi-dimensional, we will assume for now that it corresponds simply to
a scalar where a higher value of St corresponds to more productive technology in the future.
While the agent’s continuation value function depends on future utilities U (Ct+i , 1−Lt+i ) and
future production possibilities, for now we will bypass thinking about these links explicitly
and instead assume that an increase in the signal St increases the desire to invest by assuming
that
                                 ∂ 2 V (Kt+1 , θt , St )
                                                         > 0.
                                      ∂Kt+1 ∂St
That is, we assume that an increase in the signal increase the perceived marginal value of
entering next period with greater capital. We are not being specific about the type of tech-
nological change that the news St could be forecasting or why it would cause an increase in
the marginal value of acquiring capital. The conditions under which an expected technology
improvements cause the perceived value of holding capital to go up will be discussed in the
subsection under the heading of dynamic challenge. By taking this property of the value
function as given, and assuming that VKK (·) ≤ 0, we can focus solely on how the economy
adjusts immediately to an increased desire to hold capital, which is a static problem, without
needing to get entangled with dynamics. In other words, we study the temporary equilib-
rium of the economy for given expectations, those expectations being embedded into the V

                                                   60
function. The Walrasian equilibrium quantities for this problem, Kt+1 , Ct and Lt , can then
be represented as the solution to the three following equations:
                      ∂V (Kt+1 , θt+1 , St )]
                                              = UC (Ct , 1 − Lt ),                         (39)
                           ∂Kt+1
                                                −UL (Ct , 1 − Lt )
                          FL (Kt , Lt , Θt ) =                     ,                       (40)
                                                 UC (Ct , 1 − Lt )
                              Ct + Kt+1 = F (Kt , Lt , θt ) + (1 − δ)Kt .                  (41)

Equation (39) is the usual intertemporal Euler equation, (40) is the intratemporal consumption-
leisure decision (the labor market equilibrium in a decentralized version) and (41) is the
economy resource constraint. This setup allows us to examine how Kt+1 , Ct and Lt change
in response to an increase in St by performing a simple comparative static exercise on this
three-equation system. It is here that we can see what we refer to as the static challenge for
news-driven business cycles. In this setup, if the news increases the desire to invest (which we
are assuming it does by assumption) then it will lead to a decrease in consumption; that is,
the news cannot cause a generalized boom with both consumption and investment increasing.
This property of the RBC structure was first noted in Barro and King [1984] and made more
explicitly related to news (or expectations) in Beaudry and Portier [2007]. The property can
be seen directly from equation (40): the intratemporal labor market equilibrium condition.
From this equation, under the assumption that consumption and leisure are both normal
goods, it can be directly verified, by simply taking a total differential holding capital and
technology constant, that consumption and employment cannot move in the same direction.
Hence consumption and investment cannot move in the same direction. This is the precise
point made by Barro and King [1984].
   Why is Barro and King’s [1984] observation a difficulty for a news view of business
cycles? To the extent that we interpret the previous VAR result as suggesting that in
response to news the economy expands with both consumption and investment increasing
(at least weakly) throughout the substantial period where technology has not yet increased,
then such features cannot be generated within the structure. Furthermore, even if one is
unsure about the VAR results, but one believes that news may offer a reasonable theory
of the business cycle, then it is useful to identify conditions under which news shocks do
not create negative co-movement between consumption and investment. Accordingly, we
take this static difficulty as a challenge for news-driven business cycles and we proceed here
to discuss the different solutions proposed in the literature. However, before looking at
different possibilities we want to first clarify the limited role played by income effects in
creating the difficulty, since there appears to be some confusion on this point. In fact, Barro
and King’s [1984] result is not at all driven by income effects on labor supply. If we exclude

                                              61
income effects on labor supply, for example by assuming that the utility function is of the
form U (Ct − τ1 L1+τ
                 t
                     2
                       ), where τ1 and τ2 are positive parameters, then we get the exact same
               56
difficulty.         Actually, the problem becomes even simpler in the absence of income effects
on labor supply since with such preferences, technology and preferences pin down output,
independently of the value function. Hence in this case news can only cause purely off-setting
changes in Ct and It , keeping the sum constant.
       In response to this static challenge, the literature has proposed several departures from
the simplest RBC-style structure to explain why news shocks do not necessarily imply an ini-
tial phase of negative co-movement between investment and consumption. These departures
range from modest to substantial. We will start be discussing changes that to do not require
modifying the arguments of the value functions, and then discuss those that do require such
              57
changes.

4.1.1.2       Changing preferences: One simple departure that overcomes Barro and King’s
[1984] problem is to allow consumption or leisure to be inferior goods. In particular, if
we assume that consumption is an inferior good then the difficulty does not necessarily
emerge. Moving away from the normality assumption about goods may at first pass appear
unreasonable, but Eusepi and Preston [2009] argue that the representative agent’s preferences
should be thought of as an aggregation of preferences for workers and non-workers (under
complete insurance) and that in the presence of non-convexities the resulting aggregate
preference may have consumption as an inferior good even if the preferences of the underlying
agents have both consumption and leisure as normal goods. Using this idea they then show
that in a reasonably calibrated model, the arrival of news can lead to an immediate increase
in both consumption and investment. Eusepi and Preston [2011] use a similar framework to
                                                                                                        58
show how learning dynamics create shifts in expectations and generate business cycles.
In a different take on this idea, Karnizova [2010b] suggests that news directly affects labor
  56
      This should not be surprising as these preferences were not ruled out by our assumptions.
  57
      Wang [2012] has proposed a review of the models that generate positive co-movements. Those properties
are nicely presented in terms of labor market structure (upward or downward sloping labor supply, outwards
shifting labor demand following a technological news). Eusepi [2009] shows that in a one-sector model with
economy-wide externalities, there is a tight connection between positive co-movements and indeterminacy,
as conditions for positive co-movements are necessary to obtain indeterminate equilibria. That connection
is broken in two-sector economies. Guo, Sirbu, and Suen [2012] show that good technological news actually
creates an aggregate recession in Eusepi [2009] simple on-sector model. Guo, Sirbu, and Weder [2012] also
discuss the link between positive co-movements and indeterminacy. Sorge [2012] show that news-driven
models and indeterminate equilibrium economies with i.i.d. fundamentals are observationally equivalent.
   58
      Zhang [2012] study the stability under learning (E-stability) of Jaimovich and Rebelo’s [2009] model,
and shows that when agents do not observe current state variables when forming expectations, the rational
expectations equilibrium is not learnable for calibrated parameter values capable of generating news-driven
recessions.


                                                    62
supply which relaxes the resource constraint allowing both investment and consumption to
increase. This is achieved by assuming that financial wealth enters the utility function. She
calls this effect the Spirit of Capitalism and shows how news can cause consumption and
investment to grow on impact. While these are interesting ideas, they both imply that the
initial expansion following news is due to a labor supply effect instead of increased demand
for labor. This implies that real wages should be counter-cyclical. Again, to the extent that
the VAR results are informative about the effects of news, such an implication may be at odds
with the data as real wages appear to be weakly increasing in response to news. However,
more exploration along this front will be needed to assess the validity of such mechanisms.

4.1.1.3   Allowing for sticky prices and accommodative monetary policy: An-
other avenue discussed in the literature for overcoming the ‘static problem” associated with
news is to allow for sticky nominal prices. When prices are fixed, the very mechanism of IS-
LM imply that C, Y and H all increase following an exogenous increase in I, that is driven by
“animal spirits”. When prices are not fixed but sticky, this avenue has been pursued in many
papers including Christiano, Ilut, Motto, and Rostagno [2010], Khan and Tsoukalas [2012],
Lorenzoni [2009], Auray, Gomme, and Guo [2009], Fujiwara, Hirose, and Shintani [2011],
Jinnai [2013a] and Blanchard, L’Huillier, and Lorenzoni [2009]. However, as we shall show,
it is not sticky prices in and of themselves that is needed to overcome the static problem,
but it is sticky prices combined with a particular type of monetary policy. In effect, what is
required is that monetary policy be sufficiently accommodative to news. To understand how
news and sticky prices interact on impact, consider a slight generalization of the one-sector
framework where agents can now hold money and capital, and where we assume that the
nominal price of goods is predetermined. Money is directly introduced in the agents’ value
functions as a short hand for its eventual liquidity services. The representative household’s
problem can then be stated as

                max            U (Ct , Lt ) + βE[V (Kt+1 , Mt+1 , θt , St ),
          Ct ,Kt+1 ,Mt+1 ,Lt
                                              Mt+1                             Mt       τt
                    s.t. Ct + Kt+1 +               = wt Lt + (1 − δ + rt )Kt +    + πt + ,
                                               Pt                              Pt       Pt
where Pt is the price of goods in terms of money, and τt is an exogenous money transfer with
next period’s money supply given by Mt+1 = Mt + τt . Money balances are directly assumed
to enter the function V (·) with V22 < 0. To give sticky prices their full force, we will assume
that Pt does not react to news. Without loss of generality we can therefore set Pt = 1. To
complete the model we need to specify how the money transfer τt is determined. Since the
nominal price of goods is assumed to be fixed, a simple monetary rule is to have τ react to


                                                          63
deviations of output for a long run average according to:

                                               τt = α(Yt − Y )

where Y is a reference rate of output, Yt = Ct + It and α governs the extent to which
monetary policy either leans against demand shocks or amplifies them: if α < 0 monetary
policy leans against demand shocks; if α > 0 then monetary policy is pro-cyclical in the
sense of expanding when demand is high. The equilibrium levels of consumption Ct and
investment It are then determined by the set of equations

                           VK (Kt+1 , Mt+1 , θt , St ) = VM (Kt+1 , Mt+1 , θt , St ),
                                        UC (Ct , Lt ) = VK (Kt+1 , Mt+1 , St ),
                                         F (Kt , Lt ) = Ct + Kt+1 − (1 − δ)Kt ,
                                              Mt+1 = Mt + α(Ct + It − Y ),
                                                  It = Kt+1 − (1 − δ)Kt .

       Now consider the arrival of a signal St that increases the marginal value of holding capital
(VKS > 0). How does this affect investment and consumption? To simplify the analysis,
assume that U (Ct , Lt ) is separable between consumption and employment, and assume that
V (Kt+1 , Mt+1 , St ) is separable between capital and money with St only affecting the value
of capital. In this case, investment increases but the response of consumption is ambiguous
as it hinges on the sign of α in the monetary rule. If α < 0 then consumption decreases
in response to news that increases the demand for investment. If α = 0 then consumption
is unchanged. Only if α > 0 do we have both consumption and investment increasing in
response to the news. The positive co-movement arises because monetary policy becomes
expansionary in response to the news. Hence, sticky prices offers an avenue to overcome the
static problem with news-driven business cycles, but the mechanism is somewhat fragile since
                                                                       59
it relies crucially on how monetary policy reacts to news.                  For example, in a simple New
                      60
Keynesian model            in which price stickiness is the only distortion and without cost push
shocks, the optimal monetary policy replicates the flex price allocations. The model is then
a standard RBC model (without capital), and consumption and hours worked always move
in opposite directions following a news shock. It is only when monetary policy is suboptimal
                                                61
that C and H can co-move positively.
  59
     Karnizova [2010a] study a simple New Keynesian monetary business cycle model with news shocks and
sunspot ones when monetary policy is passive or active. Another model that also leads to countercyclical
markups is proposed by Pavlov and Weder [2013]. Using Gali’s [1994] monopolistic competition framework
in which investment and consumption have a different price elasticity of demand, they show that news shocks
imply countercyclical markups and can therefore generate positive co-movements.
  60
     See for example chapter 3 in Galı́’s [2008] book.
  61
     Guo [2007] explores the optimal response of a central bank when a news shock hits the economy in

                                                       64
4.1.1.4     Adopting a two sector structure: One of the reasons that increased invest-
ment demand leads to decreased consumption in an RBC model structure is due to the
one-sector assumption. With only one sector, investment goods and consumption goods are
                       62
perfect substitutes         and therefore it is generally optimal to reduce one when there is in-
creased demand for the other. In contrast, with a two-sector model, where factors are specific
to the sector, investment and consumption are not direct substitutes and accordingly it turns
out to be much easier to generate increased investment in response to news without having
consumption decrease. To see this, let us slightly extend the previous setup to allow for two
sectors, maintaining for now the assumption of a representative household. The first sector
is the consumption sector with Ct = F (KtC , LC    C           C
                                              t ; θt ), where Lt is the level of employment in
the sector, KtC is the capital used in the sector, θtC is a technology index in the consumption
sector and F (·; θC ) is a concave function. The second sector is the investment sector with
ItI + ItC = G(KtI , LIt ; θtI ), where ItI and ItC are the investments directed to the accumulation
of capital in the investment and consumption sectors, respectively. KtI and LIt are sector-
specific factors, and G(·; θI ) is a concave function. The accumulation of capital is given by
 I
Kt+1                      C
     = ItI +(1−δ)KtI and Kt+1 = ItC +(1−δ)KtC . The household’s utility is assumed to take
the form U (Ct , LC    I
                  t , Lt ), where we allow for the possibility that labor from the two sectors are
imperfect substitutes in preferences. Finally, as before, we summarize the agent’s perception
                                                                 I      C
about the future as given by the continuation value function V (Kt+1 , Kt+1 , θtI , θtC , St ), so
that the agent’s problem can be stated as
                    max            U (Ct , LC    I         C      I      C      I
                                            t , Lt ) + V (Kt+1 , Kt+1 , θt+1 , θt+1 , St ),
                  C ,K I ,LC ,LI
             Ct ,Kt+1 t+1 t    t

            s.t. Ct + PtI (Kt+1
                            C      I
                                + Kt+1 )=
            wtC LC    I I     C    I           C      C    I           I      C    I
                 t + wt Lt + Kt (Pt (1 − δ) + rt ) + Kt (Pt (1 − δ) + rt ) + πt + πt ,

where PtI is the price of investment goods and the superscripts C and I indicate the con-
sumption and investment sectors. In this setup, suppose the representative household re-
ceives news about future technological change that leads him to believe that the marginal
value of holding capital – either in one or both sectors – increases. What happens to con-
sumption and employment in each sector assuming a Walrasian equilibrium? In contrast to
the one-sector model, consumption does not necessarily decrease in this case. The easiest
a two-sector model with price rigidities in each of the non-durable and durable sectors. Blake [2012] also
shows that monetary policy can be designed to mitigate the effects of news shocks on output and inflation.
Romero Alom [2012] presents a simple New-Keynesian model in which it is optimal to include asset prices in
the Taylor rule when there are news shocks. On monetary policy with news shocks, see also Jinnai [2013b].
  62
     If capital is fully mobile between the two sectors, then the Walrasian equilibrium in the two-sector model
behaves similar to that of the one-sector. In particular, in response to news that increases the marginal value
of holding capital, the production of the consumption good will decrease. See Beaudry and Portier [2007]
for details.

                                                         65
case to see this is the one where U (Ct , LC    I
                                           t , Lt ) is separable in its three arguments.
                                                                                                      63
                                                                                                           In such
a setup, consumption and employment in the consumption sector are determined by the two
equations:

                                      −ULC (LCt )
                                                  = FLC (KtC , LCt ),
                                       UC (Ct )
                                               Ct = F (KtC , LC
                                                              t ).


Under the assumption of separability in the utility function, these two equations can be
solved independently of the decisions in the investment sector, and therefore independently
from any change in the information set Ωt which would be affected by news. In other
words, employment and output in the consumption sector do not respond to news. In
contrast, employment in the investment goods sector will generally be directly affected by
news. Investment decisions and employment in that sector are determined by the set of three
equations:
                                       −ULI
                              GLI =          ,
                                        VK I
                                       −ULI
                              GLI =          ,
                                       VK C
                       G(KtI , LIt ) = Kt+1
                                         I
                                             − (1 − δ)KtI + Kt+1
                                                             C
                                                                 − (1 − δ)KtC .

Therefore, if news increases either VK I or VK C , then it will lead to increased employment and
output in the investment sector. Hence, in such a two-sector structure, news that increases
demand for investment does not give rise to a negative co-movement between consumption
and investment or, stated differently, the static problem with news seen in the one-sector
model does not arise. However, in the separable case, since consumption neither increases
nor decreases in response to news, it may be considered a knife-edge result.
       Recall from the VAR results that consumption seemed to increase immediately in re-
sponse to news, so it would be interesting to know if both consumption and investment
can respond positively to news in the Walrasian equilibrium of a two sector model. It is
actually possible to have both consumption and investment strictly increase in response to
news in this setup but, if we maintain a representative agent assumption, it requires quite
uncommon non-separability assumptions for the utility function U (Ct , LC    I
                                                                        t , Lt ).
                                                                                                     64
                                                                                                           A more
  63                                 e (Ct − hC (LC ) − hI (LI )), where U
     Or when it can be written as U               t          t
                                                                          e (·) is a concave function and where the
functions h(·) are convex
  64
     For example if the U (Ct , LC     I                  I 1+τ2
                                 t , Lt ) = ln(Ct − τ1 (Lt )      ) − ν · LC
                                                                           t then an increase in VK I or VK C will
lead to a simultaneous increase in consumption and total investment. Alternatively, if we summarize the
                                                     1
two sector production possibilities by (cσt + Itσ ) σ = F (Kt , Lt ) with σ < 1, we can also get news to lead
to an increase in both consumption and investment, as shown in Beaudry and Portier [2007] for details.


                                                        66
promising avenue for having both consumption and investment increase in response to news
in a two-sector framework is, according to Beaudry and Portier [2013], to depart from the
representative agent setup. It is shown there that, in a two sector model where households
                                                                                                65
are specialized in the sense of being attached to one sector for their employment                    , then
increased demand for investment goods will most often be associated with an immediate
increase in aggregate consumption as those employed in the investment goods sector will
use part of their increased income to buy consumption goods. To summarize, moving from
a one-sector to a two-sector framework greatly reduces, and can even overcome, the static
problem of having news cause negative co-movement between consumption and employment.

4.1.1.5    Current Employment in the Value Function: A fourth avenue which has
been suggested as a way to solve the negative co-movement problem between consumption
and investment is to have the level of past employment directly enter the value function, with
the property that news increases the marginal value of past employment. At least two dif-
ferent rationales have been advanced for why past employment may enter the value function
this way, the simplest being adjustment costs to labor. In the presence of convex adjustment
costs for labor, current news that anticipates later employment growth will directly favor
employment today as to reduce the adjustment costs. This increased labor demand then
leads to increased production, which can be split between consumption and investment.
Hence, the presence of convex adjustment to labor offers a very simple resolution of the
static problem with news. However, there are a few potential drawbacks of this mechanism.
First, much of the microeconomic evidence suggests that labor adjustment costs are either
fixed or linear, not convex. Second, to the extent that the microeconomic literature does
find evidence of convex adjustment costs to labor, they tend to be small which means that
in response to news this mechanism may be quantitatively too weak to offset the negative
co-movement problem. Third, with convex labor adjustment costs, the response when agents
discover that they have been accumulating too much capital will no longer cause an abrupt
fall in employment – which is a feature we believe is desirable. Instead the adjustment will
tend to be gradual.
    The papers by Den Haan and Kaltenbrunner [2009] and that by Gunn and Johri [2011]
implicitly exploit ideas that work somewhat similarly to convex adjustment costs to labor
Katayama and Kim [2012] have built a two-sector model whose key elements are frictions in intersectoral
labor mobility and non-separable preferences in consumption and leisure, along with adjustment costs to
investment and variable capital utilization. That model is able to generate comovements in response to both
contemporaneous shocks and news shocks about fundamentals.
  65
     This result also relies on incomplete insurance markets so that the economy does not aggregate to a
representative setup.



                                                    67
but offer plausible mechanisms. In particular, Den Haan and Kaltenbrunner [2009] explored
the effects of news in a search and matching model. The search frictions give rise to a mech-
anism by which news leads firms to want to post vacancies immediately as to have sufficient
employed workers when the expected demand forecasted by the news is eventually realized.
This is similar in spirit to convex adjustment cost to labor, but with better microeconomic
support. Den Haan and Kaltenbrunner [2009] showed that the static problem associated with
                                              66
news can be overcome in such a setup.              In a quite different spirit, Gunn and Johri [2011]
have suggested that learning by doing creates a reason why news may directly affect labor
demand today. In response to news, it becomes profitable to hire more workers today as to
have more human capital built up through learning-by-doing when new demand arises. They
show that such a learning-by-doing mechanism can also overcome the negative co-movement
                                                                                                    67
problem, and it works essentially by giving a dynamic value to current employment.
       In summary, we have defined the static challenges associated with news as the difficulty of
getting both consumption and investment to increase when agents get information regarding
a future technology improvement. While this problem is present in the Walrasian equilibrum
of a one-sector representative agent model, we have shown that the problem can be overcome
by departing from such a simple model. In particular, we have discussed, among others,
how sticky prices, adjustments costs to labor and adopting a two-sector formulation can
mitigate the tendency of increased investment to cause a decrease in consumption. While the
different mechanisms presented each have their strengths and weaknesses, further empirical
                                                                                           68
exploration is needed to identify which path offers a more plausible solution.

4.1.2      The dynamic challenge of news and business cycles

As mentioned previously, there are two central elements to the news view of business cycles
that we have set out. Firstly, there is the idea that news about future developments in
the economy create incentives for either firms or individuals to start investing immediately
in preparation for the eventual changes. Second is the idea that the increased investment
demand induced by news stimulates economic activity in a way that generates an aggregate
boom in both consumption and investment. One challenge for a news theory of business
cycles, especially one based on technological news, is to present plausible but simple DSGE
  66
     In their survey on the news shocks literature, Krusell and McKay [2010] also propose a simple search
model that generate cycles driven by news shocks.
  67
     See also Qureshi [2009] for a similar mechanism.
  68
     All the mechanisms we have discussed in this section have assumed a production structure which is not
subject to increasing returns-to-scale. However, increasing returns to scale offers an alternative mechanism
which can explain how changes in expectations can lead to increases in both consumption and investment.
In fact, as shown in Benhabib and Farmer [1994], in the presence of increasing returns to scale the economy
can exhibit business cycles driven by self-fulfilling beliefs.


                                                     68
models that capture these two features. In the previous section we have discussed what we
have referred to as the static challenge; that is, identifying environments where increased
investment demand can lead to aggregate booms in both investment and consumption. In
this section we want to discuss a dynamic challenge, that is, clarifying how and when news
of future technological improvements creates increased incentive to invest today. In terms
of our notation, the dynamic challenge refers to presenting environments where the agents’
continuation value functions have the property that positive technological news increases the
marginal value of bringing capital into the future. While the literature has recognized the
static challenge related to the co-movement problem and suggested solutions, the dynamic
                                                                                69
challenge has been much less discussed or recognized.                                 To highlight the nature and extent
of the dynamic challenge, we begin by discussing it within the context of a two-sector model,
since such structure allows us to consider separately the effects of expected technological
improvements in either the consumption or the investment sector. Note that the one-sector
model is just a special case of our two-sector setup.

4.1.2.1        Two-sector case: Let us return to the two-sector model we have previously in-
troduced in this section, where F (KtC , LC    C
                                          t , θt ) is the production function in the consumption
sector and G(KtI , LIt , θtI ) is the production function in the investment sector. For simplicity,
                    j
let us assume that θt+1 = ρθtj + jt with j ∈ {C, I} and where jt is an innovation that affects
technology at time t + 1 but is known by agents through news at time t. If the representative
agent’s period utility is given by U (Ct , LC    I
                                            t , Lt ), competitive allocations can be obtained from
a social planner problem and the planner value function at time t can be defined as
                                                                                ∞
                                                                                X
       Ve (KtC , KtI , Σt ) =                    max                 ∞
                                                                           Et         U (Ct+i , LC      I
                                                                                                 t+i , Lt+i ),
                                        C
                                {Ct+i ,Kt+1+i   I     ,LC     I
                                              ,Kt+1+i   t+i ,Lt+1+i }i=0        i=0
                                         C
               s.t.      Ct+i =      F (Kt+i , LC      C
                                                t+i , θt+i ),
                           C               C         I               I          I
                         (Kt+1+i − (1 − δ)Kt+i ) + (Kt+1+i − (1 − δ)Kt+i ) = G(Kt+i , LIt+i , θt+i
                                                                                               I
                                                                                                   ),

where Σt = (θtC , θtI , C    I
                         t , t ) is the vector of current exogenous states. The issue we want to
examine is how do changes in news represented by changes in C and I affect the marginal
value of holding capital. Using the envelope condition, the marginal value of having capital
in period period t + 1 can be expressed, for each type of capital, as

                      C      I
              VeK C (Kt+1 , Kt+1 , Σt+1 ) =UC (Ct+1 , Lt+1 , LIt+1 )FK C (Kt+1
                                                                           C
                                                                               , LC      C
                                                                                  t+1 , θt+1 )
                                                      (1 − δ)
                                           +                             − ULI (Ct+1 , LC        I
                                                                                          t+1 , Lt+1 )
                                              GLI (Kt+1 , LIt+1 , θt+1
                                                      I             I
                                                                       )
  69
       One paper that emphasizes and addresses this dynamic challenge is Dupor and Mehkari [2013].


                                                                69
and
                                                                            I
                              C      I              −ULI (Ct+1 , Lt+1 , Lt+1 )
                      VeK I (Kt+1 , Kt+1 , Σt+1 ) =        I
                                                                               ((1 − δ)
                                                    GLI (Kt+1            I
                                                              , LIt+1 , θt+1 )
                                                               I
                                                      + GK I (Kt+1             I
                                                                   , LIt+1 , ρθt+1 )).

    Let us now follow some standard parameterizations in the literature by assuming that
the utility function is of the form ln Ct − ν · (LC    I
                                                  t + Lt ) and that the production functions are
                                       C          C                             I        I
Cobb-Douglas: F (·) = θtC (KtC )α (LC
                                    t )
                                        1−α
                                            and G(·) = θtI (KtI )α (LIt )1−α . The linearity in
the disutility of work is not important but will make our argument more transparent. Under
these two parametric assumptions, the expected marginal values of bringing capital into the
next period (that is, the derivative of the continuation value function) can be expressed as
                                                                                       !
                                             C                            I     αI
                C      I                   α           ν(1  −   δ)E  t (L t+1 )
         VK C (Kt+1 , Kt+1 , Σt+1 ) = β      C
                                                 +                                         ,       (42)
                                          Kt+1     (1 − αC )(θtI + It )(Kt+1  I
                                                                                   )αI
                                                                                               !
                                                              I     αI                   I
                C      I                       ν(1 − δ)E t (L t+1 )              νE t (L t+1 )
         VK I (Kt+1 , Kt+1 , Σt+1 ) = β                                     +          I
                                                                                                 . (43)
                                          (1 − αC )(θtI + It )(Kt+1
                                                                   I
                                                                        )αI         Kt+1

There are several aspects we want to emphasize about how these particular parametric as-
sumptions on utility and production functions restrict the incentive to hold capital. First,
note that the only endogenous variable as of time t + 1 to appear in either (42) or (43)
is employment in the capital goods sector. Second, the information related to future tech-
nological progress in the consumption sector C
                                              t does not appear anywhere in these two
expressions except potentially through the expectation of LIt+1 . Finally, the information on
technological progress in the investment sector appears directly only in the denominator of
these expressions. Under these parametric assumptions, we can see why it will be very dif-
ficult for positive technological news to create an incentive to hold more capital. Actually,
it can be shown that under these assumptions, news about technological improvements in
the consumption goods sector never increases the marginal value of holding capital since it
does not affect LIt . Hence this type of parameterization entirely rules out the possibility that
expected technological improvements in the consumption good sector creates incentives for
                                                                                               70
agents start accumulating capital immediately to take advantage of the news.                        For tech-
nological news regarding the investment sector, such a general statement is harder to obtain.
Nonetheless, we have found the effect of positive news to almost always decrease the value
of holding capital. This later property should not be surprising, as expected technological
  70
     This effect is closely related to the fact that in a Lucas tree model, an increase in future productivity
of trees does not increase the price of the tree in terms of the consumption good when utility is of the form
U (Ct ) = ln(Ct ).



                                                        70
improvement in the capital goods sector creates a very intuitive incentive to postpone buying
                                                                                             71
capital now when one knows that improvements in the sector are imminent.
       What to take from these observations on the continuation value function? On the one
hand, if one is wedded to standard parameterizations of business cycle models, these observa-
tions suggest that positive technological news is unlikely to be an important driving force in
investment demand. On the other hand, if one believes the business press, which commonly
suggests that investment demand is an important driver of business cycles, then it favors
considering models which allow substantial departures from standard parameterization of
DSGE models. In the latter case, there are two avenues that appear to us to be most
promising. The first relates to reducing the sensitivity of the stochastic discount factor.
In the above setup, one of the main reason that positive news about future technology
is not associated with increased incentives to invest is that it simultaneously leads to an
increased interest rate that fully offsets the expected increase in the marginal productivity
of capital. There are potentially many avenues to reduce the effect of news on the interest
rate including: changing the preference structure 72 , allowing for heterogeneous agents with
some agents having inter-temporal elasticity of substitution greater than one, or adopting
a sticky price setting with lax monetary policy. A second avenue for obtaining VKI > 0 is
to consider production structures where technological news has a much greater effect on the
marginal product of capital in comparison to the average product of capital. With a Cobb-
Douglas structure, technological change causes the average product of capital to increase
in the same proportion as the marginal product of capital, and the expectation of such
a change is therefore associated with a substitution effect (induced by the increase in the
marginal product of capital) that favors more investment to be offset by a large income effect
(induced by the increase in the average product of capital) that favor postponing investment.
Departing from a Cobb-Douglas structure can change the relative size of the effects. For
example, if one adopts a CES structure where labor and capital are very complementary and
the news relates to labor augmenting technological change, the news will then increase the
                                                                        73
marginal product of capital more than the average product.                   and this will create incentives
to invest. Alternatively, if capital and labor are very substitutable and the news relates to
capital augmenting technological change, the effect of the news on the marginal productivity
of capital will be greater than the average effects thereby again creating clear incentives to
  71
      Note that this structure implicitly nests a more standard one-sector model when one assumes that
α = αI , and accordingly implies that positive technological news in a one-sector model with Cobb-Douglas
 C

technology and log preferences for consumption will generally decrease the incentive to invest, not increase
them.
   72
      In the model of Section 2, we completely eliminate this interest rate effect by allowing for home produc-
tion.
   73
      This is the mechanism used in Beaudry and Portier [2004].


                                                      71
invest in response to the news as the substitution effect will dominate the income effect. A
third way to proceed is to consider technological change more in a Schumpeterian tradition
where new opportunities tend to displace old ones making the private gains to investing much
                                                                          74
greater that the social gain (which drives the income effect).                 Accordingly, in response to
news that favors creative destruction, the return to new investment can be high even if the
net effect on output can be low. Such an avenue appears promising but it doesn’t fit easily
into the standard DSGE framework.

4.1.2.2      Jaimovich and Rebelo’s [2009] Approach:                     We have emphasized two types
of challenges facing news-driven business cycles when trying to embed the idea within a
simple DSGE structure. These challenges arise largely because we have been wanting to
build a model where news-driven booms reflect a period where agents have an incentive to
accumulate or install new capital early on as to be ready when future demand materializes.
However, this may be the wrong focus. Instead, it may be that good technological news in
fact reduces the incentives to accumulate capital and instead favors a rapid depreciation of
the current capital stock through increased utilization. In such a case, the induced increase
in utilization could itself cause a boom. This alternative view of how news may affect the
economy is most clearly captured in the work of Jaimovich and Rebelo [2009], and has the
attractive feature that it can easily overcome some of the challenges faced by our preferred
perspective which relies on news increasing the incentive to accumulate capital during the
anticipation stage.
       In Jaimovich and Rebelo [2009], news is introduced in a quite standard one-sector repre-
sentative agent business cycle model. The model includes two important elements: variable
capacity utilization and adjustments costs to investment, 75 which are both quite reasonable
assumptions. These two elements interact in a way that can give rise to news-driven busi-
ness cycles where the main effect of the news is to encourage quicker capital depreciation
today as opposed to increasing the incentive for capital accumulation. The quicker capital
depreciation results from an increased utilization rate which favors producing more today
and thereby causing a boom. Since Jaimovich and Rebelo [2009] study the properties of
the Walrasian equilibrium, equilibrium outcomes can be presented as the solution to a so-
cial planner’s problem. In particular, the social planner’s problem in their setup takes the
  74
     See Beaudry, Collard, and Portier [2011] for an example along these lines.
  75
     Jaimovich and Rebelo [2009] also emphasize a preference structure which minimizes wealth effects on
labor supply. While this feature is important for the quantitative aspects of their model, it is not central to
its qualitative properties and therefore we will not emphasize it much here.




                                                      72
following form
                                                   ∞
                                                   X
                        max                  Et           U (Ct+i , Lt+i ),
            {Ct+i ,Kt+1+i ,Lt+i ,µt+i }∞
                                       i=0
                                                    i=0
                                                                                                     ψ
       s.t Ct+i + Kt+1+i = F (µt+i Kt+i , Lt+i , θt+i ) + (1 − δ(µt+i ))Kt+i −                         (It+i − It−1−i )2 ,
                                                                                                     2
            It+i = Kt+1+i − (1 − δ(µt+i ))Kt+i ,

where the depreciation rate of capital δ(µt+i ) is an increasing function of utilization rate µt+i ,
and where ψ(It+i − It−1−i )2 captures the adjustment cost to investment.                                   76
                                                                                                                  Let us again
assume that agents get news one period in advance about θ, where θt+1 = ρθt + t , with
t being the news received at time t about technology at t + 1. To simplify this problem,
and allow easy comparison with the framework we have already set out, it is useful again to
summarize the future using a continuation value function. Given this setup, the expected
continuation value function will depend on the capital stock coming into the period, last
period’s investment rate, last period’s state of technology and the news (regarding innovation
in next period’s technology), so that the optimization problem becomes:

                                max                U (Ct , Lt ) + V (Kt+1 , It , Θt , t ),
                         {Ct ,Kt+1 ,It ,Lt ,µt }
                                                                                              ψ
                  s.t. Ct + Kt+1 = F (µt Kt , Lt , θt ) + (1 − δ(µt ))Kt −                      (It − It−1 )2 ,
                                                                                              2
                        It = Kt+1 − (1 − δ(µt ))Kt .

The equilibrium outcomes for Ct , Kt+1 , µt , Lt , It is then given implicitly as the solution to
the following equations plus the two constraints above

                                                           VK (Kt+1 , It , Θt , t )
                        Fµ (µt Kt , Lt , θt ) = Kt δµ (µt )                          ,
                                                                 UC (Ct , Lt)
                                                                                                   
                  VI (Kt+1 , It , Θt , t )                               VK (Kt+1 , It , Θt , t )
                                            ) = ψ(It − It−1 ) + 1 −                                   ,
                      UC (Ct , Lt)                                             UC (Ct , Lt)
                         −UL (Ct , Lt )
                                              = FL (µt Kt , Lt , θt ).
                          UC (Ct , Lt)

The first of these equations is the optimality condition for the setting of the utilization rate
µt . It states that the utilization rate should be chosen such that its marginal productivity
is equal to the marginal cost, where this cost is high if VK (·) is high. So the effects of news
on utilization depends on how t affects VK (·). In this model, it is the case that positive
news about tomorrow’s technology (i.e., an increase in t ) will generally be associated with
  76
    In Jaimovich and Rebelo [2009], news about both labor-augmenting technological change and investment-
specific technological change are allowed. For simpler exposition, here we focus only on news about labor-
augmenting technological change.


                                                                   73
a fall in VK (·) – because the economy is more productive in the future. In other words,
good technological news in the setup proposed by Jaimovich and Rebelo [2009] reduces
the incentives of agents to accumulate capital. However, due to the adjustment costs to
                                                                      77
investment, it creates an incentive to increase investment.                These two forces may at
first pass appear contradictory, but with variable capacity utilization the two incentives
can be met by increasing capacity utilization in response to the news, thereby reducing
the capital shock while simultaneously having high investment. Hence, the first-order effect
of positive news in this setup is to increase capacity utilization. Since labor is assumed
to be complementary to capital services this leads to an increase in labor demand and an
                               78
expansion in the economy.           Because VK (·) is lowered by the news and VI (·) is increased,
the expansion will be associated with an increase in both consumption and investment. The
more difficult effect to sign in the model is the effect of the news on the capital stock taken
into next period. Here there are offsetting effects. The increase in utilization tends to
decrease Kt+1 while increased investment tends to increase it. The net effect depends on
the precise parameters of the model. In our experience, the most standard parameterization
causes a decrease in Kt+1 reflecting the direct effect of the news which is to decrease the
value to holding capital next period.
       Jaimovich and Rebelo’s [2009] model thereby offers an alternative perspective on how
technological news may affect the economy. In contrast to a narrative based on a stronger
incentive to accumulate and install new capital (or start new firms), their narrative is based
on the inverse incentive, one where there is an incentive to decrease capital in response
to news by increasing the utilization rate. This mechanism becomes more forceful when
one consider news about technological change which directly affects the future production
of capital, and they emphasize this in their paper. One of the very attractive features of
Jaimovich and Rebelo’s [2009] mechanism is that it fits very nicely within the confines of
standard quantitative DSGE models.
       One dimension where the implications of the Jaimovich and Rebelo’s [2009] model differ
substantially from the one we presented at the beginning of this paper relates to the state
of the economy after a period where agents falsely anticipated fast technological progress.
In Jaimovich and Rebelo’s [2009] setup, the economy will generally arrive in such a state
with a low capital stock due to the high depreciation induced by the news, and therefore
on realizing their errors agents will want to start rebuilding this stock. Hence, prediction
errors in Jaimovich and Rebelo’s [2009] setup are unlikely to lead to a recession induced by
  77
     The same mechanism is also found in Flodén [2007].
  78
     In contrast to the Barro and King’s [1984] observation, both consumption and employment increase in
this case because the increased capacity utilization acts like an increase in current productivity.



                                                  74
liquidation incentives. Looking at the relevance or not of liquidation forces after a speculative
boom seems to be a fruitful area to evaluate these different views.

4.2       Evaluating the relevance of news using structural models
The are two main approaches that have been used for evaluating the relevance of news using
structural models. The first focuses on a set of facts of interest and then asks whether a
model with news can explain such observations. The second starts from a model with many
shocks and examines the relative role of news in explaining the general properties of the
data. In this section we will discuss both types of contribution in sequence.

4.2.1      Can news explain recessions and excessive booms?

One of the key features of US macroeconomic data is the presence of recessions; that is,
the existence of periods where we observe broad-based declines in economic activity. There
are many proposed explanations in the literature for recessions, including contractions in
monetary policy, increases in oil prices and technological regress. The news view of business
cycles offers an alternative perspective on recessions, one that can be referred to as a fall
in aggregate demand induced by a revision in expectations. The question of whether tech-
nological news can help explain recessions is a central focus of the papers by Beaudry and
Portier [2004] and Jaimovich and Rebelo [2009]. There are many similarities in how these
papers explain recession; in particular, both papers rely on noise shocks as a central force
                           79
causing the recession.          However, the mechanisms in the paper are quite different, which
leads to somewhat different implications.
       In Beaudry and Portier [2004], recessions are presented foremost as liquidation cycles.
The narrative is essentially the one given in Section 2 of the paper. Recessions arise after a
period of fast capital accumulation, where the expectations driving the expansion are eventu-
ally revised downward because agents were reacting to noise as opposed to valid news. Once
agents realize that they have been overly optimistic about future prospects, economic activ-
ity drops and remains depressed until the excess capital accumulated during the anticipation
stage is depleted. The model has a two-sector structure, where capital and technological
change in the consumption sector are strong complements. This complementarity allows for
news about future technological change to create a demand for capital, and the two-sector
structure assures that consumption does not fall in response to the increased investment
  79
    Rodriguez Mora and Schulstad [2007] found evidence of news/noise phenomenon in the fact that official
estimates of gross national product are substantially revised over time and that once announcements are
taken into account, the true value of GNP growth at time t has no predictive power in determining growth
at any future time. All the predictive power lies in the announcements, and not in the true level of growth.


                                                    75
demand. The technological change in the model is set up to always be positive, so as to rule
out technological regress as a force behind recessions. Agents receive signals about future
productivity growth, which forces them to solve a signal-extraction problem in order to form
expectations of the economy’s future needs in terms of capital. The effects of news and
                                                                                                           80
noise are examined for the Walrasian equilibrium of the model with no nominal rigidities.
The parameters of the model are obtained by a combination of calibration and estimation
(simulated method of moment estimation). In particular, the parameters of news and noise
processes are estimated since it is unclear how far ahead of time agents get information
regarding future technological progress and how precise signals are. The estimated parame-
ters are set to minimize the distance between model-generated and data-generated standard
business cycle moments. The best fit of the model arises when agents receive information 5
quarters ahead of actual technological progress and when signals are correct 82% of the time.
Given the estimated parameters, the paper then evaluates the extent to which the model
produces recessions that are similar to the ones observed in the data. In particular, the
paper looks at whether the estimated model reproduces the frequency, depth and duration
of US recessions. The main result of the paper is to show that such a model is capable of
explaining recessions of the right size and duration in a Walrasian setting without needing
technological regress. Note that the results rely heavily on the estimation of a very strong
degree of complementarity between capital and technological change in the consumption
good sector.
       Jaimovich and Rebelo’s [2009] paper shares many of the features and goals of Beaudry
and Portier’s [2004] paper. For example, they also explore the extent to which a Walrasian
                                                                                                           81
model with news and noise can explain recessions without relying on technological regress.
The main difference between the two papers are the mechanisms relating news to economic
activity. In Jaimovich and Rebelo’s [2009] model, the main force driving a recession remains
the realization that past expectations were overly optimistic, and that the downward revision
of expectation changes behavior. However, the recession does not arise after a period of fast
capital accumulation. Instead it arises after a period of fast capital depreciation (with
positive gross investment but negative net investment) induced by high capacity utilization.
The original news favors fast depreciation, as producing capital in the future is expected to
be less costly. Hence, in this model the recession is not associated with liquidation. Instead,
the recession simply arises due to the downward revision in future wealth which leads to
  80
     See Hairault, Langot, and Portier [1997] for an early attempt to introduce news and noise in an otherwise
standard estimated RBC model.
  81
     The reasons these papers focus on explaining recessions in an environment where technological regress
does not arise is because models that do rely on technological regress to explain recessions are viewed by
most macro-economist as rather unconvincing.


                                                     76
a fall in consumption, a reduction in capital depreciation and a fall in gross investment.
Jaimovich and Rebelo [2009] show that a reasonably calibrated version of their model is
capable of reproducing important features of economic downturns without needing to rely
on the liquidation forces emphasized in Beaudry and Portier [2004]. As mentioned previously,
an attractive feature of Jaimovich and Rebelo’s [2009] paper is that it builds on a model
environment which is commonly used in the DSGE literature.
       The paper by Christiano, Ilut, Motto, and Rostagno [2010] moves away from the recession
focus and instead examines the role of news in generating excessive expansions. In particular,
they argue that standard monetary policy rules are not well designed and that focusing on
stabilizing inflation when an expansion is driven by news can lead to excessive output growth.
The paper is motivated by the observation that many expansions, especially those with strong
stock market booms, are simultaneously associated with periods of below trend inflation.
The goal of their model is to show how news can explain such a pattern. To this end, they
take a sticky price model in the New Keynesian tradition (similar to that in Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Evans [2005]) and add technological news. Agents in their model receive
information ahead of time about innovations to TFP. On receiving the news, agents foresee
an expansion of the economy and, given the smoothing tendencies of monetary policy, they
predict inflation to be low in the future. This prediction of low future inflation leads firms to
immediately set lower prices as a means of adjustment in a sticky price world. The change
in current pricing behavior in turn causes current inflation to fall. When the monetary
authorities see current inflation fall, they react by decreasing interest rates and stimulating
the economy. As a result of the stimulative policy, the economy starts experiencing a boom
                                82
on the arrival of the news.          Note that the model is such that in the absence of sticky
prices, news should have caused a recession by favoring an increase in consumption and a
decrease labor supply. Accordingly, the expansion that arises ahead of the actual change in
technology is excessive and sub-optimal in this setup. The optimal monetary policy would
actually be to increase interest rates in response to the news instead of letting then fall.
To look at the relevance of this mechanisms, the authors use a carefully calibrated New
Keynesian model and show that it can replicate the sub-trend behavior of inflation observed
in many expansions. The model delivers a boom in both activity and stock prices following
news, while at the same time producing a fall in inflation of a magnitude similar to that
documented in the motivation section of the paper. The authors also discuss how monetary
policy could be improved so as not to let news generate an excessive expansion. By showing
how news and monetary policy can interact to create unwarranted booms, the paper makes
  82
    Fujiwara [2008] shows that positive comovements are harder to obtain in such a model when the TFP
process is non stationary.


                                                 77
a very important contribution to both our understanding of macroeconomic fluctuations and
to the design of optimal policy. For example, the paper suggests that a measure of credit
could be added to a standard rule, and that by increasing interest when credit expands will
allow monetary authorities to get closer to the optimal policy.

4.2.2         Letting news compete with other shocks using structural models

One means of evaluating the relevance of news in macroeconomic fluctuations is to consider
a fully specified DSGE model where there are both conventional shocks and news shocks,
and then use an estimated version of such a model to calculate the fraction of output or
                                                                                                              83
hours variation that is due to news. Such an exercise has been performed, among others,
by Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe [2012], Fujiwara, Hirose, and Shintani [2011] and by Khan and
Tsoukalas [2012].
          Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe [2012] performed their exploration within a real setting while
the two others work within a New-Keynesian environment with sticky prices. In all three
                                                                      84
cases, the models are estimated using Bayesian methods.                    Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe [2012]
consider an environment similar in structure to that presented in Jaimovich and Rebelo [2009]
85
     , while Fujiwara, Hirose, and Shintani [2011] and Khan and Tsoukalas [2012] use a model
more closely related to that of Smets and Wouters [2007], Christiano, Eichenbaum, and
Evans [2005] and Christiano, Ilut, Motto, and Rostagno [2010]. Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe
[2012] allow for seven sources of shocks, and for each shock they allow for an unexpected
component, a component that is known to agents 4 quarters in advance, and a shock that is
                                                  86
known to agents 8 quarters in advance.                 So in total there are 21 types of shocks in their
model. Their main finding is that news shocks account for close to 50% of output fluctuations.
     83
      Davis [2007] is estimating a model closely related to Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans [2005] with news
shocks and an emphasis on the term structure. Born, Peter, and Pfeifer [2011] analyzes the contribution
of anticipated capital and labor tax shocks to business cycle volatility in an estimated New Keynesian
DSGE model. Milani and Treadwell [2012] estimate a New Keynesian model that incorporates news about
future policies to try to disentangle the anticipated and unanticipated components of policy shocks. They
show that news shocks play a larger role in influencing the business cycle than unanticipated policy shocks.
Perendia and Tsoukis [2012] incorporate a fiscal rule in the Smets and Wouters [2007] model and study the
impact of news shocks, modeled as revisions of expectations in the consumption Euler equation. Milani and
Rajbhandari [2012a] run a horserace in a DSGE model in which expectations are either rational with or
without news, formed with adaptive learning or taken from observed survey. See Milani [2012] for a survey
of the various way of modeling expectations in DSGE models.
   84
      Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe [2012] also use maximum likelihood.
   85
      Avdjiev [2011] repeats Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe’s [2012] with the inclusion of asset prices in the dataset.
   86
      Leeper and Walker [2011] study the property of Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe’s [2012] estimated framework
when news are  PQ“correlated”. Let z be an exogenous variable. Instead of assuming a process of the type
zt = ρzt−1 + q=0 εq,t−q where εq is the news that arrives q period ahead, they assume a process of the form
               PQ
zt = ρzt−1 + q=0 ζq εt−q where the ζq are real numbers. They show that “correlated news” help generating
hump-shaped responses. Se


                                                       78
However, it should be noted that relevance of news regarding technology innovations is rather
limited, with most of the effects of news they report being associated with news about
preference shocks and news about wage mark-up shocks. This result is echoed in Khan and
Tsoukalas [2012]. Although the setup is different, Khan and Tsoukalas [2012] also find that
technological news plays a very limited role in business cycle fluctuations. Fujiwara, Hirose,
and Shintani [2011] find a slightly greater role for technological news in driving fluctuations
than in Khan and Tsoukalas [2012], even if the two environments are very similar. The
difference is likely due to the fact that Fujiwara, Hirose, and Shintani [2011] do not allow
for news about non-technological factors, and they do not allow for a shock to the marginal
efficiency of investment (which is a shock that Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti [2010]
and [2011] have argued plays an important role in fluctuations). Overall, the literature based
on estimating fully specified DSGE models with many shocks provides very little support to
the idea that technological news may be a key driver of fluctuations. One criticism of the
literature, since it may indicate mis-specification, is that it attributes a very large fraction of
hours variance to wage mark-up shocks (either of the unanticipated or anticipated variety).
For example, in Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe [2012], 69% of hours fluctuations are due to wage
mark-up shocks, in Fujiwara, Hirose, and Shintani [2011] it is close to 80% and in Khan
and Tsoukalas [2012] it is 60%. As wage mark-up shocks are considered by many to be an
unconvincing explanation to hours fluctuations, this raises the question of how the results
from such an approach should be interpreted.

4.2.3   Examining the importance of noise

Although the papers by Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe [2012], Fujiwara, Hirose, and Shintani
[2011] and Khan and Tsoukalas [2012] allow for very many shocks, they do not allow for
noise shocks. In all three cases, news takes the form of perfect information about different
components of future innovations. In contrast, part of the attraction of the news view of
fluctuations is that it can give rise to periods where the economy is reacting to invalid
information due to noise in agents’ signal extraction problem. In response to such a noise
shock, the economy will likely go through a period of inappropriate decisions in terms of
consumption and investment. The net effect of a noise shock would be temporary, but
possibly long lived. These properties of noise shocks has motivated researchers to search
for ways of evaluating their relevance in fluctuations. While noise shocks are present in
both the papers of Beaudry and Portier [2004] and in Jaimovich and Rebelo [2009], neither
papers try to quantify the precise relevance of noise in generating overall business cycles,
as both papers focused mainly on understanding recessions using news shocks containing
noise. The main focus of the papers by Blanchard, L’Huillier, and Lorenzoni [2009] and by

                                                79
Barsky and Sims [2012] is to quantify the relevance of noise shocks in fluctuations. However,
Blanchard, L’Huillier, and Lorenzoni [2009] show that VAR methods cannot be used to
evaluate the effects of noise shocks because of a fundamental non-invertibility problem, and
for this reason it is necessary to adopt a structural estimation approach when addressing
this question. Before discussing the application of structural methods to the evaluation
of noise shocks, it is helpful to indicate why VAR approaches cannot be used to quantify
their relevance while more structural methods can. In particular, we want to show that the
nature of the invertibility problem associated with noise shocks is different from the one we
previously discussed in Section 3 and may be considered more problematic.
   To understand the problem of identifying noise stocks, consider a very simple environment
where we have an agent which controls a decision yt and faces a signal extraction problem.
The signal extraction problem is the key element which will cause the non-invertibility prob-
lem. The exogenous driving force, denoted θt , at the heart of the signal extraction problem
has a temporary component and a persistent component as given by

                                  θt = t + νt + αt−1 ,     0 < α < 1,                   (44)

where t and νt are mean zero iid Gaussian processes with variances σ2 and σν2 . Now suppose
the agent’s optimal decision is of the form

                                            yt = E[θt+1 | Ωt ],                           (45)

where Ωt is the agent’s information set at time t. The agent’s optimal decision is simply to
set yt to match his expectation of θt+1 . To introduce the signal extraction problem, let us
suppose that the agent’s information set at t is composed of θt , t−1 and νt−1 , that is, the
agent at time t does not see t and νt separately but instead must infer their values from
his knowledge of θt and t−1 . νt is qualified as noise because it blurs the observation of the
persistent shock . In this case, the agent’s expectation of θt+1 will be given by
                                                                           σ2
                      E[θt+1 | Ωt ] = ψα(θt − αt−1 ),            ψ=             .        (46)
                                                                       σ2 + σν2
The structural moving average representation for θt and yt can then be written in matrix
from as                                                  
                         θt          1  1     t     α 0     t−1
                                  =        ×      +       ×
                         yt         αψ αψ     νt     0 0     νt−1
The problem with this moving average representation is that the impact matrix is singular,
which implies that it is not invertible. Hence this process can not be written as a VAR with
innovations that are linear combinations of t and νt . In other words, if one estimates a VAR
on these two variables, the innovations of the VAR will not be linear combinations of the

                                                    80
structural shocks t and νt and therefore there is no orthogonalization of the VAR innovations
that will recuperate the structural innovations. Since VAR-based methods reduce to choices
of orthogonalization, this is why they cannot be used to evaluate the respective roles of t
and νt in generating movements in yt . Note that the singularity of the impact matrix is a
direct and robust consequence of the signal-extraction problem, since it derives from the fact
that the agent’s decision variable and the observed signal move in proportion to each other.
       While the presence of a signal extraction problem generally makes VAR-based methods
                                                            87
inappropriate for recuperating structural shocks,                the structural shocks can be recovered
using other methods. For example, in the case at hand, the three parameters of the model–
α, σ2 and σν2 – can be recovered by a simple method of moments approach which equates
the variance of at , the variance of yt and the first order autocorrelation of θt to its model
                88
counterpart.         With these parameters in hand, then the noise shock in the agents decision
problem, which in this case is νt , is then calculated as
                                    yt  yt+1 θt+1                         σ2
                             νt =      + 2 −      ,              ψ=             .                        (47)
                                    αψ α ψ    α                       σ2 + σν2
Note that the calculation of νt uses information at t + 1, which is not available to the agents
at t, which in part explains why it can’t be recuperated by a VAR.
       The papers by Blanchard, L’Huillier, and Lorenzoni [2009] and by Barsky and Sims [2012]
aim at evaluating the effects of noise shocks and have many similarities. Both consider a New
Keynesian environment in which the representative agent receives noisy signals about future
productivity growth. They also both use a moment-matching approach to examine the role
                                                                            89
of the noisy signal in generating business cycle fluctuations.                   However, the two papers
arrive at quite different conclusions. On the one hand, Blanchard, L’Huillier, and Lorenzoni
[2009] find that noise shocks account for a large fraction of the higher-frequency movement
in consumption and output. On the other hand, Barsky and Sims [2012] find that noise
(which they refer to as animal spirits) plays a very minor role even though they attribute a
substantial fraction of fluctuations to news. While there are many small differences between
these two studies which likely contribute to the different findings, we believe that the key
  87
      Forni, Gambetti, Lippi, and Sala [2013b] propose to achieve identification by means of dynamic rotations
of the reduced form residuals in such a case of non-fundamentalness. While a contemporaneous linear combi-
nation of the VAR residuals cannot deliver the structural shock, a dynamic combination, i.e. a combination
of present and future residuals, can. They show that, once the reduced form VAR has been estimated, the
structural shocks and the corresponding impulse response functions can be obtained by applying Blaschke
transformations to the residuals and the reduced-form impulse response functions. In simple words, struc-
tural shocks are recovered as function of future reduced form ones, not current ones. The same idea is applied
in Forni, Gambetti, Lippi, and Sala [2013a] in the context of an asset price model.
   88
      Even when the solution is fundamental, it is possible that the model’s parameter cannot be identified
when news shocks hit the economy, as shown by Sorge [2013].
   89
      Blanchard, L’Huillier, and Lorenzoni [2009] also use a maximum likelihood method.

                                                     81
difference relates to the nature of the signal extraction problem. The information problem
faced by agents in Blanchard, L’Huillier, and Lorenzoni [2009] is much more intense than
that faced by agents’ in Barsky and Sims [2012]. In both cases, agents are trying to forecast
future technology based on past information and on a signal, but in Blanchard, L’Huillier,
and Lorenzoni’s [2009] formulation agents have much less information than in Barsky and
Sims’s [2012] formulation and so learn at a lower speed. It is the slow learning speed that
allows noise to have large effects. To see this most clearly, let us denote the technology index
at time t by θt . Then the growth in θt in both papers can be written as
                                    ∞
                                    X                                    ∞
                                                                         X
                            ∆θt =         ρi1 1t−i   + 2t + (ρ2 − 1)         ρi2 2t−i−1
                                    i=0                                  i=0

where 1t and 2t are mean zero i.i.d. processes, with 0 ≤ ρ1 < 1 and 0 ≤ ρ2 ≤ 1. If ρ2 < 1,
this is a process with both permanent and temporary shocks to the level of θt , with both
shocks having prolonged effects of the growth rate. In the special case where ρ2 = 1, the
process is one with a random walk component driven by 1t , and where 2t has only a one-
period effect on the growth rate. Barsky and Sims [2012] consider this latter special case,
while Blanchard, L’Huillier, and Lorenzoni [2009] consider the more general case allowing ρ2
                    90
to be estimated.         However, since Blanchard, L’Huillier, and Lorenzoni [2009] estimate ρ2 to
be rather close to 1, this is not where the two differ most. The main difference relates to the
nature of the signal. Blanchard, L’Huillier, and Lorenzoni [2009] endow agents with a noisy
signal of 1t , while Barsky and Sims [2012] endow agents with a noisy signal of ∞    i
                                                                                P
                                                                                 i=0 ρ1 1t−i .
Hence, in Barsky and Sims [2012] agents know more and therefore learn very quickly what
forces are affecting at and accordingly do not make very persistent mistakes. This explains
why the noise in agents’ signals is not found to explain business cycle-type movements. In
contrast, agents in the Blanchard, L’Huillier, and Lorenzoni [2009] setup have rather limited
information and learn much more slowly, which allows noise to have very persistent effects
on their behavior. Accordingly, in Blanchard, L’Huillier, and Lorenzoni [2009] agents can
be mistaken about their interpretation of the environment for long periods of time which
explains why in their framework noise shocks can be found to have substantial effects on
fluctuations. In summary, the evaluation of the role of noise shocks in fluctuations seems to
depend critically on the nature of the information-processing problem assumed to be faced by
agents. If the problem is not too difficult, agents will learn quickly and noise will have very
temporary effects, while if the information-processing problem is very difficult, then noise
has the potential to have important effects. Building and estimating models which embed
  90
    The first section in Blanchard, L’Huillier, and Lorenzoni [2009] focuses on a special case where ρ1 = ρ2 .
In this special case, the univariate process for θt can be a random walk.


                                                          82
the two possibilities, and letting the data decide on the best approach, appears needed to
make further progress on the issue.


5     Frontiers and concluding comments
There are many questions that a news view of business cycles raises and which have only
begun to be explored.
    Although most of the literature has focused on a closed economy setting, extensions to
an international setting have seen developed. Among the papers that have examined news-
driven business cycles in an international setting are Devereux and Engel [2006], Corsetti,
Dedola, and Leduc [2009], Beaudry, Dupaigne, and Portier [2011], Haan and Lozej [2010],
Jaimovich and Rebelo [2008], Fratzscher and Straub [2010], Cova, Rebucci, Matsumoto,
and Pisani [2008] and Sakane [2013]. Fluctuations in the future growth prospects have
implications on the current account of an economy, as good news typically imply a current
account deficit. This link is explored by Cao and L’Huillier [2012] and Hoffmann, Krause, and
Laubach [2013] . Adding financial frictions, Gunn and Johri [2013b] explore the possibility
that changing expectations about future sovereign default themselves can lead to financial
stress (as measured by credit spreads) and recessionary outcomes. Changes in expectations
are modeled in the “news- shock” framework, as sovereign debt-holders receive imperfect
signals about the portion of debt that a sovereign may default on in the future.
    The role of financial market imperfections in propagating and amplifying the effects
of news appears extremely promising as suggested by the work of Jermann and Quadrini
[2007], Kobayashi and Inaba [2006], Kobayashi and Nutahara [2007], Chen and Song [2013],
Kobayashi, Nakajima, and Inaba [2012], Guo [2011] and Walentin [2009], and therefore pur-
suing this line further may have great promise for our understanding of macroeconomic
fluctuations. One example is given by the recent work of Gunn and Johri [2013a]. The au-
thors examine a situation with financial intermediation where the news relates to changes in
the technology of the banking sector. They use the model to examine, among others things,
the behavior of credit spreads leading up to the financial crisis of 2008. Görtz and Tsoukalas
[2011] have developped a two-sector DSGE model with financial intermediation. They find
that news about future capital quality is a significant source of aggregate fluctuations, ac-
counting for around 37% in output variation in cyclical frequencies.
    Extensions to housing price dynamics have also been considered in the recent years.
Lambertini, Mendicino, and Punzi [2010] analyzes housing market boom-bust cycles driven
by changes in households’ expectations. Lambertini, Mendicino, and Punzi [2011] study
the potential gains of monetary and macro-prudential policies that lean against news-driven


                                              83
boom-bust cycles in housing prices and credit generated by expectations of future macroeco-
nomic developments. Kanik and Xiao [2011] propose a model based on the work of Iacoviello
[2005] and Iacoviello and Neri [2010]. They construct a general equilibrium model in which
credit-constrained borrowers use their housing assets as collateral to finance their purchases.
Optimistic news raises these agents’ expected future net worth, expands their borrowing ca-
pacity, and allows them to purchase more housing and consumption goods. Higher housing
demand raises housing prices and creates a housing boom. Gomes and Mendicino [2012] also
extend Iacoviello and Neri’s [2010] model of the housing market to include news shocks and
estimate it using Bayesian methods and U.S. data. On the empirical side, Soo [2013] develop
a measure of sentiment across local housing markets by quantifying the positive and negative
tone of housing news in local newspaper articles. She finds that this housing sentiment index
forecasts the boom and bust pattern of house prices at a two year lead, and can predict over
70 percent of the variation in aggregate house price growth.
       Some historical episode are particularly interesting to look at from a news shock per-
spective. The Japanese economy in the 1990s is such an episode. Beaudry and Portier
[2005] identify a series of downward revisions of growth in the early 1990’s. Portier [2006]
show how a downward revision of growth prospects cans explain the main patterns of the
Japanese “lost decade” in a sticky price model with a zero lower bound or in the flex price
model of Beaudry and Portier [2004]. Tyers [2012] reviews the claimed sources of Japan’s
stagnation, and identify error-prone forward looking expectations as the main cause of the
boom and bust cycle of the late 1980s and early 1990s. This is confirmed but the studies of
                                                            91
Ko, Miyazawa, and Vu [2012] and Karnizova [2013].
       One of the areas which appears to us especially promising is to exploit the synergies
between the literature of dispersed information and social learning with the literature on
          92
news.          One important paper which has pursued this line of research is Lorenzoni [2009].
As emphasized in Lorenzoni [2009], dispersed information tends to substantially slow down
the capacity of agents to infer or learn the state of the economy, and this allows noise shocks
to have long-lasting effects on economic activity. More generally, if agents are trying to
infer the future state of the economy by looking at current economic activity, this could give
  91
     See also Karnizova [2012] for an account of the 1995-2003 US boom-bust cycle with unrealized TFP
news estimated from the data. More generally, whether news shocks amplify or not fluctuations has been
studied by Fève, Matheron, and Sahuc [2009] in an abstract framework, by Winkler and Wohltmann [2009]
and Winkler and Wohltmann [2012] within the Smets and Wouters’ [2003] model and by Matsumoto, Cova,
Pisani, and Rebucci [2011].
  92
     The literature on dispersed information and social learning is vast. Important contributions include
Zeira [1987], Zeira [1994], Banerjee [1992] and Chamley and Gale [1994]. See also the excellent books by
Chamley [2004] and Veldkamp [2011]). Lorenzoni [2011] proposes a survey of models with news shocks, with
a particular focus on the different assumptions about the agents’ information structure.



                                                   84
rise to important feedback effects that come close to creating self-fulfilling prophesies. For
example, if a subset of agents start to hire and produce more because they are optimistic
about the future, and others look at aggregate activity to form their expectations, this will
have a reinforcing effect which could spark and sustain a prolonged boom before the reality
                                           93
of the situation is properly inferred.          This type of narrative is very close to that given in
Pigou [1927]. Another step is made by Angeletos and La’O [2010] , who develop a theory
of fluctuations in a unique-equilibrium, rational-expectations, macroeconomic model, but
that accommodate the notions of “animal spirits” and “market sentiments”. They introduce
trading frictions and imperfect communication between agents that receive heterogeneous
information about the aggregate shocks hitting the economy. Correlated errors in expec-
tations of the underlying technology shocks act as a demand shock that triggers positive
co-movements between employment, output, and consumption. Angeletos and La’O [2012]
show that with trading frictions and imperfect communication, correlation in the agents’
beliefs of their idiosyncratic economic outcomes creates business cycle fluctuations.
       However, building explicit models which capture the richness of dispersed information
and social learning and which can be brought to data is still in its infancy and therefore
offers room for productive research.

       We have in this survey presented a baseline model of economic fluctuations driven by
news, in order to motivate the empirical analysis and the theoretical developments we have
reviewed. We hope to have given a comprehensive tour of the contributions to the news view
of business cycles. How credible and relevant is the “news view”? At this point in time it is
still hard to say. On one hand, the theoretical literature has clarified many channels by which
news can cause booms and busts in aggregate economic activity, the empirical literature has
documented several data patterns that support this force as an important contributor to
macroeconomic fluctuations and the underlying narrative is echoed often in the business
press. On the other hand, the evidence advanced in support of the news view of business
cycles is questioned by many because of invertibility problems, identification issues and
methodological weaknesses. In light of this state of affairs, where should research direct its
attention? There are at least two directions which appear promising to us. Exploring further
the interaction between news and social learning will likely give new insights about how
dispersed information regarding the future evolution of the economy may affect expectations
and thereby cause macroeconomic fluctuations. Pursuing further the use of tight structural
methods for evaluating the role of news in fluctuations appears especially fruitful if this
  93
    Nimark [2013] considers the model structure of Lorenzoni [2009] and enriches it by assuming that infor-
mation structures in which some types of signals (“man-bites-dog” signals) are more likely to be observed
after unusual events.


                                                    85
approaches builds on environments which do not a priori constrain the role of news but
instead allow the data to decide on its relative importance.




                                             86
6      References
Alessi, L., M. Barigozzi, and M. Capasso (2008): “A review of nonfundamentalness
 and identification in structural VAR models,” Working Paper Series 922, European Central
 Bank.

Alexopoulos, M. (2011): “Read All about It!! What Happens Following a Technology
 Shock?,” American Economic Review, 101(4), 1144–79.

Angeletos, G., F. Collard, and H. Dellas (2013): “Confidence and the Business
 Cycle Confidence and the Business Cycle. News, Uncertainty, or Animal Spirits?,” mimeo,
 MIT and University of Bern.

Angeletos, G.-M., and J. La’O (2010): “Noisy Business Cycles,” in NBER Macroe-
 conomics Annual 2009, Volume 24, NBER Chapters, pp. 319–378. National Bureau of
 Economic Research, Inc.

             (2012): “Sentiments,” mimeo, forthcoming in econometrica, MIT and Chicago
    Booth.

Auray, S., P. Gomme, and S. Guo (2009): “Nominal Rigidities, Monetary Policy and
 Pigou Cycles,” Working Paper 09005, Concordia University, Department of Economics.

Avdjiev, S. (2011): “News driven business cycles and data on asset prices in estimated
  DSGE models,” BIS Working Papers 358, Bank for International Settlements.

Banerjee, A. V. (1992): “A Simple Model of Herd Behavior,” The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 107(3), pp. 797–817.

Baron, J., and J. Schmidt (2013): “Technological Standardization, Endogenous Produc-
 tivity and Transitory Dynamics,” mimeo, IHEID, Geneva and CERN, Paris.

Barro, R. J., and R. G. King (1984): “Time-Separable Preferences and Intertemporal-
 Substitution Models of Business Cycles,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 99, 817–
 839.

Barsky, R. B., and E. R. Sims (2011): “News shocks and business cycles,” Journal of
 Monetary Economics, 58(3), 273–289.

          (2012): “Information, Animal Spirits, and the Meaning of Innovations in Consumer
    Confidence,” American Economic Review, 102(4), 1343–77.

Beaudry, P., F. Collard, and F. Portier (2011): “Gold rush fever in business cycles,”
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 58(2), 84–97.

Beaudry, P., M. Dupaigne, and F. Portier (2011): “Modeling News-Driven Interna-
 tional Business Cycles,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 14(1), 72–91.




                                            87
Beaudry, P., and B. Lucke (2010): “Letting Different Views about Business Cycles
 Compete,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009, Volume 24, NBER Chapters, pp.
 413–455. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Beaudry, P., D. Nam, and J. Wang (2011): “Do Mood Swings Drive Business Cycles and
 is it Rational?,” NBER Working Papers 17651, National Bureau of Economic Research,
 Inc.

Beaudry, P., and F. Portier (2004): “An exploration into Pigou’s theory of cycles,”
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 51(6), 1183–1216.

          (2005): “The “news view” of economic fluctuations: Evidence from aggre-
  gate Japanese data and sectoral US data,” Journal of the Japanese and International
  Economies, 19(4), 635–652.

         (2006): “Stock Prices, News, and Economic Fluctuations,” American Economic
  Review, 96(4), 1293–1307.

         (2007): “When can changes in expectations cause business cycle fluctuations in
  neo-classical settings?,” Journal of Economic Theory, 135(1), 458–477.

        (2013): “Understanding Non-Inflationary Demand Driven Business Cycles,” in
  NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2013, Volume 28, NBER Chapters. National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Inc.

Ben Zeev, N., and H. Khan (2013): “Investment-Specific News Shocks and U.S. Business
 Cycles,” mimeo, European University Institute and Carleton University.

Benhabib, J., and R. Farmer (1994): “Indeterminacy and increasing returns,” Journal
 of Economic Theory, 63(1), 19–41.

Berg, T. (2012): “Did monetary or technology shocks move euro area stock prices?,”
 Empirical Economics, 43(2), 693–722.

Blake, A. P. (2012): “Equally shocking news,” Economics Letters, 117(3), 866–869.

Blanchard, O. J. (1993): “Consumption and the Recession of 1990-91,” Anerican Eco-
  nomic Review, 83, 270–74.

Blanchard, O. J., J.-P. L’Huillier, and G. Lorenzoni (2009): “News, Noise, and
  Fluctuations: An Empirical Exploration,” NBER Working Papers 15015, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Inc.

Blanchard, O. J., and D. Quah (1989): “The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand
  and Supply Disturbances,” American Economic Review, 79(4), 655–73.

         (1993): “The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand and Supply Disturbances:
  Reply,” American Economic Review, 83(3), 653–58.



                                          88
Born, B., A. Peter, and J. Pfeifer (2011): “Fiscal News and Macroeconomic Volatil-
 ity,” Bonn Econ Discussion Papers 08-2011, University of Bonn, Germany.

Bruckner, M., and E. Pappa (2013): “News shocks in the data: Olympic Games and
 their macroeconomic effects,” mimeo, National University of Singapore and European
 University Institute.

Bunk, P. (2011): “News-driven Business Cycles in SVARs,” Discussion Paper 040,
 Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin.

Cao, D., and J.-P. L’Huillier (2012): “Technological Revolutions and Debt Hangovers
 - Is There a Link?,” Working Papers Series 1216, Einaudi Institute for Economic and
 Finance (EIEF).

Chamley, C. (2004): Rational herds: economic models of social learning. Cambridge Uni-
 versity Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Chamley, C., and D. Gale (1994): “Information Revelation and Strategic Delay in a
 Model of Investment,” Econometrica, 62(5), 1065–85.

Chari, V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2008): “Are structural VARs with
 long-run restrictions useful in developing business cycle theory?,” Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 55(8), 1337–1352.

Chen, K., and Z. Song (2013): “Financial Frictions on Capital Allocation: A Transmis-
 sion Mechanism of TFP Fluctuations,” mimeo, forthcoming in the journal of monetary
 economics, Emory University and University of Chicago.

Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and C. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and the
 Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1),
 1–45.

Christiano, L., C. L. Ilut, R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2010): “Monetary Policy
 and Stock Market Booms,” NBER Working Papers 16402, National Bureau of Economic
 Research, Inc.

Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and R. Vigfusson (2004): “The Response of Hours
 to a Technology Shock: Evidence Based on Direct Measures of Technology,” Journal of
 the European Economic Association, 2(2-3), 381–395.

Christiano, L. J., R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2003): “The Great Depression and
 the Friedman-Schwartz hypothesis,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 35, 1119–
 1215.

Cochrane, J. H. (1994): “Shocks,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Pol-
 icy, 41(1), 295–364.

Collard, D. (1983): “Pigou on Expectations and the Cycle,” Economic Journal, 93(37),
 411–14.

                                          89
        (1996): “Pigou and Modern Business Cycle Theory,” Economic Journal, 106(437),
  912–24.

Comin, D. A., M. Gertler, and A. M. Santacreu (2009): “Technology Innovation
 and Diffusion as Sources of Output and Asset Price Fluctuations,” NBER Working Papers
 15029, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Cooley, T., and E. Prescott (1995): “Economic Growth and Business Cycles,” in Fron-
 tiers of Business Cycle Research, ed. by T. Cooley. Princeton University Press,, Princeton,
 New Jersey, USA.

Corsetti, G., L. Dedola, and S. Leduc (2009): “Demand Imbalances, Exchange Rate
 Misalignment and Monetary Policy,” mimeo.

Cova, P., A. Rebucci, A. Matsumoto, and M. Pisani (2008): “New Shocks, Exchange
 Rates and Equity Prices,” IMF Working Papers 08/284, International Monetary Fund.

Crouzet, N., and H. Oh (2013): “Can news shocks account for the business-cycle dy-
 namics of inventories?,” Discussion paper no.: 1213-13, Columbia University.

Cummins, J. G., and G. L. Violante (2002): “Investment-Specific Technical Change
 in the US (1947-2000): Measurement and Macroeconomic Consequences,” Review of Eco-
 nomic Dynamics, 5(2), 243–284.

Davis, J. M. (2007): “News and the Term Structure in General Equilibrium,” mimeo,
 Northwestern University.

De Long, J. B. (1990): ““Liquidation” Cycles: Old-Fashioned Real Business Cycle Theory
 and the Great Depression,” Working paper 3546, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Den Haan, W. J., and G. Kaltenbrunner (2009): “Anticipated Growth and Business
 Cycles in Matching models,” Journal of Monetary Economics., 56(3), 309–327.

Devereux, M. B., and C. Engel (2006): “Expectations and Exchange Rate Policy,”
 Working Paper 12213, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Doan, T. (1992): Rats Manual. Estima, Evanston, IL.

Dupor, B., and S. Mehkari (2013): “The Analytics of Technology News Shocks,” Work-
 ing paper, University of Richmond.

Eusepi, S. (2009): “On expectations-driven business cycles in economies with production
 externalities,” International Journal of Economic Theory, 5(1), 9–23.

Eusepi, S., and B. Preston (2009): “Labor Supply Heterogeneity and Macroeconomic
 Co-movement,” NBER Working Papers 15561, National Bureau of Economic Research,
 Inc.

        (2011): “Expectations, Learning, and Business Cycle Fluctuations,” American
  Economic Review, 101(6), 2844–72.

                                            90
Fernald, J. (2012): “A quarterly, utilization-adjusted series on total factor productivity,”
  Working Paper Series 2012-19, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Fernàndez-Villaverde, J., and J. F. Rubio-Ramı̀rez (2006): “Economic and VAR
  Shocks: What Can Go Wrong?,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 4(2-3),
  466–474.
Fernàndez-Villaverde, J., J. F. Rubio-Ramı̀rez, T. J. Sargent, and M. W. Wat-
  son (2005): “A, B, C’s (and D)’s for Understanding VARs,” NBER Technical Working
  Papers 0308, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
          (2007): “ABCs (and Ds) of Understanding VARs,” American Economic Review,
  97(3), 1021–1026.
Fève, P., and A. Guay (2010): “Identification of Technology Shocks in Structural Vars,”
  Economic Journal, 120(549), 1284–1318.
Fève, P., and A. Guay (2013): “Sentiments in SVARs,” Mimeo, UQUAM and Toulouse
  School of Economics.
Fève, P., and A. Jidoud (2012a): “Identifying News Shocks from SVARs,” Journal of
  Macroeconomics, 34(4), 919–932.
         (2012b): “News Shocks, Information Flows and SVARs,” TSE Working Papers
  12-286, Toulouse School of Economics (TSE).
Fève, P., J. Matheron, and J.-G. Sahuc (2009): “On the dynamic implications of
  news shocks,” Economics Letters, 102(2), 96–98.
Fisher, J. (2006): “The Dynamic Effects of Neutral and Investment-Specific Technology
  Shocks,” Journal of Political Economy, 114(3), 413–451.
Fisher, J. D. M. (2010): “Comment on “Letting Different Views about Business Cycles
  Compete”,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009, Volume 24, NBER Chapters, pp.
  457–474. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Flodén, M. (2007): “Vintage Capital and Expectations Driven Business Cycles,” CEPR
  Discussion Papers 6113, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
Forni, M., and L. Gambetti (2011): “Testing for Sufficient Information in Structural
  VARs,” Discussion paper, Università di Modena e Reggio Emilia and Universitat Au-
  tonoma de Barcelona.
Forni, M., L. Gambetti, M. Lippi, and L. Sala (2013a): “Noise Bubbles,” mimeo,
  Università di Modena e Reggio Emilia, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Università di
  Roma La Sapienza and Università Bocconi.
         (2013b): “Noisy News in Business Cycles,” mimeo, Università di Modena e Reg-
  gio Emilia, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Università di Roma La Sapienza and
  Università Bocconi.

                                            91
Forni, M., L. Gambetti, and L. Sala (2011): “No News in Business Cycles,” CEPR
  Discussion Papers 8274, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.

Forni, M., D. Giannone, M. Lippi, and L. Reichlin (2009): “Opening The Black
  Box: Structural Factor Models With Large Cross Sections,” Econometric Theory, 25(05),
  1319–1347.

Francis, N., M. T. Owyang, J. E. Roush, and R. DiCecio (2005): “A Flexible
  Finite- Horizon Alternative to Long-run Restrictions with an Application to Technology
  Shocks,” Working paper 2005-024F, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

Fratzscher, M., and R. Straub (2010): “Asset Prices, News Shocks and the Current
  Account,” CEPR Discussion Papers 8080, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.

Fujiwara, I. (2008): “Growth Expectation,” IMES Discussion Paper Series 08-E-21, Insti-
  tute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan.

Fujiwara, I., Y. Hirose, and M. Shintani (2011): “Can News Be a Major Source of
  Aggregate Fluctuations? A Bayesian DSGE Approach,” Journal of Money, Credit and
  Banking, 43(1), 1–29.

Futron Corporation (2004): “How Many Satellites Are Enough? A Forecast of Demand
  for Satellites, 2004-2012,” www.futron.com.

Gali, J. (1994): “Monopolistic Competition, Business Cycles, and the Composition of
 Aggregate Demand,” Journal of Economic Theory, 63(1), 73–96.

Galı́, J. (2008): Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to
 the New Keynesian Framework. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.

Gambetti, L. (2012): “Government Spending News and Shocks,” Discussion paper, Uni-
 versitat Autonoma de Barcelona.

Gomes, S., and C. Mendicino (2012): “Housing Market Dynamics: Any News?,” Work-
 ing Papers 2012/23, Department of Economics at the School of Economics and Manage-
 ment (ISEG), Technical University of Lisbon.

Görtz, C., and J. Tsoukalas (2011): “News and Financial Intermediation in Aggregate
  Fluctuations,” MPRA Paper 34113, University Library of Munich, Germany.

Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and G. Huffman (1988): “Investment, Capacity Util-
 isation, and the Real Business Cycle,” The American Economic Review, 78, 402–417.

Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and P. Krussell (2000): “The Role of Investment-
 Specific Technological Change in the Business Cycle,” European Economic Review, 44,
 91–115.

Gunn, C. M., and A. Johri (2011): “News and knowledge capital,” Review of Economic
 Dynamics, 14(1), 92–101.

                                          92
        (2013a): “An expectations-driven interpretation of the “Great Recession”,” Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 60(4), 391 – 407.

         (2013b): “Fear of Sovereign Default, Banks, and Expectations-driven Business
  Cycles,” Working paper 08, McMaster University.

Guo, J.-T., A.-I. Sirbu, and R. M. Suen (2012): “On expectations-driven business
 cycles in economies with production externalities: A comment,” International Journal of
 Economic Theory, 8(3), 313–319.

Guo, J.-T., A.-I. Sirbu, and M. Weder (2012): “News about Aggregate Demand and
 the Business Cycle,” School of Economics Working Papers 2012-01, University of Adelaide,
 School of Economics.

Guo, S. (2007): “Optimal Monetary Policy and Expectation Driven Business Cycles,”
 MPRA Paper 1928, University Library of Munich, Germany.

        (2011): “News Shocks and the External Finance Premium,” The B.E. Journal of
  Macroeconomics, 11(1), 1–27.

Haan, W. J. D., and M. Lozej (2010): “Pigou Cycles in Closed and Open Economies with
 Matching Frictions,” in NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2010, NBER
 Chapters, pp. 193–233. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Haertel, T., and B. Lucke (2008): “Do News Shocks Drive Business Cycles? Evidence
 from German Data,” Economics - The Open-Access, Open-Assessment E-Journal, 2(10),
 1–21.

Hague, L. (2003): “Global Launch Services Prospects in a Declining Commercial Satellite
 Market,” Discussion paper, AIAA Space 2003 Conference & Exposition.

Hairault, J., F. Langot, and F. Portier (1997): “Time to Implement and Aggregate
 Fluctuations,” Journal of Economics Dynamics and Control, 22, 109–21.

Hall, R. E. (1993): “Macroeconomic Theory and the Recession of 1990-91,” Anerican
 Economic Review, 83, 275–79.

Hansen, L., and T. Sargent (1994): “Two Difficulties in Interpreting Vector Autore-
 gressions,” in Rational Expectations Econometrics, ed. by L. Hansen, and T. Sargent, pp.
 77–119. Westview Press, Boulder.

          (2012):   “Recursive Linear Models of Dynamic Economies,” Unpublished
  manuscript.

Hoffmann, M., M. U. Krause, and T. Laubach (2013): “The expectations-driven U.S.
 current account,” Discussion Paper 10, Deutsche Bundesbank.

Iacoviello, M. (2005): “House Prices, Borrowing Constraints, and Monetary Policy in
  the Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 95(3), 739–764.

                                           93
Iacoviello, M., and S. Neri (2010): “Housing Market Spillovers: Evidence from an
  Estimated DSGE Model,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(2), 125–64.

Jaimovich, N., and S. Rebelo (2008): “News and Business Cycles in Open Economies,”
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 40(8), 1699–1711.

        (2009): “Can News about the Future Drive the Business Cycle?,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 99(4), 1097–1118.

Jermann, U. J., and V. Quadrini (2007): “Stock market boom and the productivity
  gains of the 1990s,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(2), 413–432.

Jinnai, R. (2013a): “News shocks and inflation,” Economics Letters, 119(2), 176 – 179.

         (2013b): “News shocks and inflation,” Economics Letters, 119(2), 176–179.

Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2010): “Investment shocks and
  business cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(2), 132–145.

        (2011): “Investment Shocks and the Relative Price of Investment,” Review of
  Economic Dynamics, 14(1), 101–121.

Kanik, B., and W. Xiao (2011): “News, Housing Boom-Bust Cycles, and Monetary
 Policy,” mimeo, Binghamton University.

Karnizova, L. (2010a): “News versus sunspot shocks in a New Keynesian model,” Eco-
 nomics - The Open-Access, Open-Assessment E-Journal, 4(19), 1–27.

        (2010b): “The spirit of capitalism and expectation-driven business cycles,” Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 57(6), 739–752.

        (2012): “News Shocks, Productivity and the U.S. Investment Boom-Bust Cycle,”
  The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, 12(1), 1–50.

       (2013): “Letting the speculative and the news views of the Japanese business cycle
  compete,” Economics Bulletin, 33(2), 1146–1158.

Katayama, M., and K. H. Kim (2012): “Costly Labor Reallocation, Non-Separable Pref-
 erences, and Expectation Driven Business Cycles,” Departmental Working Papers 2010-05,
 Department of Economics, Louisiana State University.

Keynes, J. M. (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. London:
 Macmillan.

Khan, H., and J. Tsoukalas (2012): “The Quantitative Importance of News Shocks in
 Estimated DSGE Models,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 44(8), 1535–1561.

King, R. G., and S. T. Rebelo (1999): “Resuscitating real business cycles,” in Hand-
  book of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, vol. 1 of Handbook of
  Macroeconomics, chap. 14, pp. 927–1007. Elsevier.

                                            94
Ko, J.-H., K. Miyazawa, and T. K. Vu (2012): “News shocks and Japanese macroeco-
 nomic fluctuations,” Japan and the World Economy, 24(4), 292–304.

Kobayashi, K., and M. Inaba (2006): ““Irrational Exuberance” in the Pigou Cycle under
 Collateral Constraints,” Discussion Paper 06-E-015, Research Institute of Economy, Trade
 and Industry, Tokyo, Japan.

Kobayashi, K., T. Nakajima, and M. Inaba (2012): “Collateral Constraint And News-
 Driven Cycles,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 16(05), 752–776.

Kobayashi, K., and K. Nutahara (2007): “Collateralized Capital and News-Driven
 Cycles,” Economics Bulletin, 5(18), 1–9.

Krusell, P., and A. McKay (2010): “News shocks and business cycles,” Economic
 Quarterly, pp. 373–397.

Kurmann, A., and E. Mertens (2013): “Stock prices, news, and economic fluctuations:
 comment,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-08, Board of Governors of the
 Federal Reserve System (U.S.).

Kurmann, A., and C. Otrok (2012): “News Shocks and the Slope of the Term Structure
 of Interest Rates,” mimeo, forthcoming in the American Economic Review, University of
 Virginia and Federal Reserve Board.

Lambertini, L., C. Mendicino, and M. T. Punzi (2010): “Expectations-driven cycles
  in the housing market,” Working Paper 1021, Banco de España.

        (2011): “Leaning Against Boom-Bust Cycles in Credit and Housing Prices,” Work-
  ing Papers CELEG 1104, Dipartimento di Economia e Finanza, LUISS Guido Carli.

Lamla, M. J., S. M. Lein, and J.-E. Sturm (2007): “News and Sectoral Comovement,”
  KOF Working papers 07-183, KOF Swiss Economic Institute, ETH Zurich.

Lanne, M., and H. Luetkepohl (2008): “Stock Prices and Economic Fluctuations: A
  Markov Switching Structural Vector Autoregressive Analysis,” Economics Working Papers
  ECO2008/29, European University Institute.

Lanne, M., and P. Saikkonen (2011): “Noncausal Autoregressions for Economic Time
  Series,” Journal of Time Series Econometrics, 3(3), 1–32.

        (2013): “Noncausal Vector Autoregression,” Econometric Theory, 29(03), 447–481.

Leduc, S., and K. Sill (2010): “Expectations and economic fluctuations: an analysis using
  survey data,” Working Paper Series 2012-09, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

Leeper, E. M., A. W. Richter, and T. B. Walker (2012): “Quantitative Effects of
  Fiscal Foresight,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(2), 115–44.

Leeper, E. M., and T. B. Walker (2011): “Information Flows and News Driven Business
  Cycles,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 14(1), 55–71.

                                           95
Leeper, E. M., T. B. Walker, and S.-C. S. Yang (2008): “Fiscal Foresight: Analytics
  and Econometrics,” NBER Working Papers 14028, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc.

Lippi, M., and L. Reichlin (1993): “The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand and
  Supply Disturbances: Comment,” American Economic Review, 83(3), 644–52.

         (1994a): “Diffusion of Technical Change and the Decomposition of Output into
  Trend and Cycle,” Review of Economic Studies, 61(1), 19–30.

         (1994b): “VAR analysis, nonfundamental representations, blaschke matrices,” Jour-
  nal of Econometrics, 63(1), 307–325.

Liu, Z., D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2011): “Sources of macroeconomic fluctuations:
  A regime-switching DSGE approach,” Quantitative Economics, 2(2), 251–301.

Ljungqvist, L., and T. J. Sargent (2004): Recursive Macroeconomic Theory. The MIT
  Press, Cambridge, Mass., 2nd edn.

Lorenzoni, G. (2009): “A Theory of Demand Shocks,” American Economic Review, 99(5),
  2050–84.

          (2011): “News and Aggregate Demand Shocks,” Annual Review of Economics,
  3(1), 537–557.

Lucke, B. (2010): “Identification and overidentification in SVECMs,” Economics Letters,
  108(3), 318–321.

         (2013): “Testing the technology interpretation of news shocks,” Applied Economics,
  45(1), 1–13.

Lütkepohl, H. (2012): “Fundamental Problems with Nonfundamental Shocks,” Discussion
  Papers of DIW Berlin 1230, DIW Berlin, German Institute for Economic Research.

Matsumoto, A., P. Cova, M. Pisani, and A. Rebucci (2011): “News shocks and
 asset price volatility in general equilibrium,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
 35(12), 2132–2149.

Mertens, K., and M. O. Ravn (2010): “Measuring the Impact of Fiscal Policy in the Face
 of Anticipation: A Structural VAR Approach,” Economic Journal, 120(544), 393–413.

         (2011): “Understanding the aggregate effects of anticipated and unanticipated tax
  policy shocks,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 14(1), 27 – 54, Special issue: Sources of
  Business Cycles.

          (2012): “Empirical Evidence on the Aggregate Effects of Anticipated and Unan-
  ticipated US Tax Policy Shocks,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(2),
  145–81.



                                            96
Milani, F. (2012): “The Modeling of Expectations in Empirical DSGE Models: a Survey,”
 Working Papers 121301, University of California-Irvine, Department of Economics.

Milani, F., and A. Rajbhandari (2012a): “Expectation Formation and Monetary DSGE
 Models: Beyond the Rational Expectations Paradigm,” Working Papers 111212, Univer-
 sity of California-Irvine, Department of Economics.

        (2012b): “Observed Expectations, News Shocks, and the Business Cycle,” Working
  Papers 121305, University of California-Irvine, Department of Economics.

Milani, F., and J. Treadwell (2012): “The Effects of Monetary Policy “News” and
 “Surprises”,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 44(8), 1667–1692.

Mountford, A., and H. Uhlig (2009): “What are the effects of fiscal policy shocks?,”
 Journal of Applied Econometrics, 24(6), 960–992.

Ng, S., and D. Stevanovic (2012): “Factor Augmented Autoregressive Distributed Lag
 Models,” mimeo, Columbia University, New-York.

Nimark, K. (2013): “Man-Bites-Dog Business Cycle,” Working Papers 700, Barcelona
  Graduate School of Economics.

OECD (2004): Space 2030 : Exploring the Future of Space Applications. OECD Publishing,
 Paris.

Offick, S., and H.-W. Wohltmann (2013): “News shocks, nonfundamentalness and
 volatility,” Economics Letters, 119(1), 17 – 19.

Pavlov, O., and M. Weder (2013): “Countercyclical markups and news-driven business
  cycles,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 16(2), 371 – 382.

Perendia, G., and C. Tsoukis (2012): “The Keynesian multiplier, news and fiscal policy
  rules in a DSGE model,” Dynare Working Papers 25, CEPREMAP.

Phillips, P. C. B. (1998): “Impulse response and forecast error variance asymptotics in
 nonstationary VARs,” Journal of Econometrics, 83(1-2), 21–56.

Pigou, A. C. (1927): Industrial Fluctuations. MacMillan, London.

Portier, F. (2006): “Comment ’A &quot;News&quot; View Of Japan’s Lost Decade’:
 Monetary Policy During Japan’s Lost Decade,” The Japanese Economic Review, 57(2),
 345–357.

Qureshi, H. (2009): “News Shocks and Learning-by-doing,” Working Papers 09-06, Ohio
 State University, Department of Economics.

Ramey, V. A. (2011): “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s all in the Timing*,”
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1), 1–50.



                                          97
Rodriguez Mora, J. V., and P. Schulstad (2007): “The effect of GNP announcements
 on fluctuations of GNP growth,” European Economic Review, 51(8), 1922–1940.

Romer, C., and D. Romer (2009): “A Narrative Analysis of Postwar Tax Changes,”
 mimeo, University of California, Berkeley.

Romero Alom, C. (2012): “Asset prices, news and monetary policy,” mimeo, Toulouse
 School of Economics (TSE).

Sakane, M. (2013): “News-driven international business cycles,” mimeo, forthcoming in
  the B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics (Topics), Sophia University.

Schmitt-Grohé, S., and M. Uribe (2012): “What’s News in Business Cycles,” Econo-
  metrica, 80(6), 2733–2764.

Seymen, A. (2012): “Sequential Identification of Technological News Shocks: A Technical
  Discussion,” mimeo, ZEW, Mannheim.

Sill, K. (2009): “News about the future and economic fluctuations,” Business Review, Q4,
  22–33.

Sims, E. R. (2012): “News, Non-Invertibility, and Structural VARs,” Working Papers 013,
  University of Notre Dame, Department of Economics, forthcoming in Advances in Econo-
  metrics, Vol. 28, DSGE Models in Macroeconomics - Estimation, Evaluation, and New
  Developments.

Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2003): “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equi-
  librium Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(5),
  1123–1175.

       (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE Approach,”
  American Economic Review, 97(3), 586–606.

Soo, C. K. (2013): “Quantifying Animal Spirits: News Media and Sentiment in the Housing
  Market,” mimeo, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.

Sorge, M. M. (2012): “News shocks or parametric indeterminacy? An observational
  equivalence result in linear rational expectations models,” Economics Letters, 114(2), 198
  – 200.

         (2013): “A Note on Information Flows and Identification of News Shocks Models,”
  EERI Research Paper Series EERI RP 2013/08, Economics and Econometrics Research
  Institute (EERI), Brussels.

Tyers, R. (2012): “Japanese Economic Stagnation: Causes and Global Implications,” The
 Economic Record, 88(283), 517–536.

Uhlig, H. (2005): “What are the effects of monetary policy on output? Results from an
 agnostic identification procedure,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(2), 381–419.

                                            98
Veldkamp, L. L. (2011): Information Choice in Macroeconomics and Finance. Princeton
 University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, USA.

Vukotić, M. (2011): “A Sectoral Approach to News Shocks,” mimeo, Warwick University.

Walentin, K. (2009): “Expectation Driven Business Cycles with Limited Enforcement,”
 Working Paper Series 229, Sveriges Riksbank (Central Bank of Sweden).

Wang, P. (2012): “Understanding Expectation-Driven Fluctuations-A Labor-Market Ap-
 proach,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 44(2-3), 487–506.

Winkler, R., and H.-W. Wohltmann (2009): “Rational Expectations Models with
 Anticipated Shocks and Optimal Policy: A General Solution Method and a New Keynesian
 Example,” Kiel Working Papers 1507, Kiel Institute for the World Economy.

        (2012): “On the (de)stabilizing effects of news shocks,” Economics Letters, 114(3),
  256–258.

Xu, Z., and H. Fan (2010): “Firm Dynamics in News Driven Business Cycle: The Role of
 Endogenous Survival Rate,” MPRA Paper 30203, University Library of Munich, Germany.

Zeira, J. (1987): “Investment as a Process of Search,” Journal of Political Economy, 95(1),
  204–10.

         (1994): “Informational Cycles,” Review of Economic Studies, 61(1), 31–44.

Zhang, C. (2012): “Bad News for News Shocks? The Expectational-Stability and Comove-
  ment Tradeoff in a News-Driven Business Cycle Model,” mimeo, University of California,
  Irvine.




                                            99
A     Data Appendix
    - Hours: BLS, Series Id: PRS85006033, Nonfarm Business sector, 1947Q1-2012Q3, sea-
      sonally adjusted, downloaded: 12/2012
    - Output: BEA, Table 1.1.3. Real Gross Domestic Product, Quantity Indexes, 1947Q1-
      2012Q3, seasonally adjusted, downloaded: 12/2012
    - Consumption: BEA, Table 1.1.3. Real Gross Domestic Product, Quantity Indexes,
      1947Q1-2012Q3, seasonally adjusted, downloaded: 12/2012
    - Investment: BEA, Table 1.1.3. Real Gross Domestic Product, Quantity Indexes,
      1947Q1-2012Q3, seasonally adjusted, downloaded: 12/2012
    - TFP: Utilization-adjusted quarterly-TFP series for the U.S. Business Sector, produced
      by John Fernald, series ID: dtfp util, 1947Q1-2012Q3, downloaded: 12/2012
    - Capital: capital input, Perpetual inventory stocks calculated from disaggregated quar-
      terly NIPA investment data, then growth rates are weighted using estimated user costs
      of capital, produced by John Fernald, series ID: dk, 1947Q1-2012Q3, downloaded:
      12/2012
    - Investment price index: BEA, Table 1.1.4., Price Index for Gross private domestic
      investment, 1947Q1-2012Q3, seasonally adjusted, downloaded: 12/2012
    - Fixed investment price index: BEA, Table 1.1.4., Price Index for Gross private domes-
      tic investment, Fixed Investment, 1947Q1-2012Q3, seasonally adjusted, downloaded:
      12/2012
    - Nonresidential investment price index: BEA, Table 1.1.4., Price Index for Gross pri-
      vate domestic investment, Nonresidential, 1947Q1-2012Q3, seasonally adjusted, down-
      loaded: 12/2012
    - Structures price index: BEA, Table 1.1.4., Price Index for Gross private domestic
      investment, Structures, 1947Q1-2012Q3, seasonally adjusted, downloaded: 12/2012
    - Equipment price index: BEA, Table 1.1.4., Price Index for Gross private domestic in-
      vestment, Equipment and Software, 1947Q1-2012Q3, seasonally adjusted, downloaded:
      12/2012
    - Residential investment price index: BEA, Table 1.1.4., Price Index for Gross private
      domestic investment, Residential, 1947Q1-2012Q3, seasonally adjusted, downloaded:
      12/2012
    - Quality Adjusted Investment Price: kindly provided by Tao Zha, referred to in Liu,
      Waggoner, and Zha [2011], Series ID: TornPriceInv4707CV, computed as a weighted
      average index from four quality-adjusted price indexes (private nonresidential struc-
      tures investment, private residential investment, private nonresidential equipment &
      software, personal consumption expenditures on durable goods). The methodology is
      the one of Cummins and Violante [2002].

                                            100
- Index of Consumer Sentiment: Table 1, Surveys of Consumers, Thomson Reuters-
  University of Michigan, 1960Q1-2012Q3, downloaded: 12/2012

- Stock Prices: S&P500 index deflated by CPI, obtained from the homepage of Robert
  J. Shiller.




                                     101
