                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            COMPENSATION MATTERS:
                   INCENTIVES FOR MULTITASKING IN A LAW FIRM

                                           Ann Bartel
                                      Brianna Cardiff-Hicks
                                          Kathryn Shaw

                                       Working Paper 19412
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19412


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2013




The authors acknowledge helpful comments from participants at the Columbia Business School
Microeconomics Faculty Lunch, the Trans-Pacific Labor Seminar and the Association for Private
Enterprise Education Annual Conference. All remaining errors are their own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Ann Bartel, Brianna Cardiff-Hicks, and Kathryn Shaw. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Compensation Matters: Incentives for Multitasking in a Law Firm
Ann Bartel, Brianna Cardiff-Hicks, and Kathryn Shaw
NBER Working Paper No. 19412
September 2013
JEL No. J33,L23,L84

                                             ABSTRACT

Due to the limited availability of firm-level compensation data, there is little empirical evidence on
the impact of compensation plans on personal productivity. We study an international law firm that
moves from high-powered individual incentives towards incentives for “leadership" activities that
contribute to the firm's long run profitability. The effect of this change on the task allocation of the
firm's team leaders is large and robust; team leaders increase their non-billable hours and shift billable
hours to team members. Although the motivation for the change in the compensation plan was the
multitasking problem, this change also impacted the way tasks were allocated within each team, resulting
in greater teamwork.


Ann Bartel                                          Kathryn Shaw
Graduate School of Business                         Graduate School of Business
Columbia University                                 Stanford University
3022 Broadway, 623 Uris Hall                        Stanford, CA 94305-5015
New York, NY 10027                                  and NBER
and NBER                                            kathryns@gsb.stanford.edu
apb2@columbia.edu

Brianna Cardiff-Hicks
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
bcardiff@stanford.edu
                                        Compensation Matters:

                       Incentives for Multitasking in a Law Firm

                        Ann Bartel∗, Brianna Cardiff-Hicks†and Kathryn Shaw‡§

                                                   August 23, 2013


                                                        Abstract

     Due to the limited availability of firm-level compensation data, there is little empirical evidence on the

impact of compensation plans on personal productivity. We study an international law firm that moves

from high-powered individual incentives towards incentives for “leadership” activities that contribute to the

firm’s long run profitability. The effect of this change on the task allocation of the firm’s team leaders is

large and robust; team leaders increase their non-billable hours and shift billable hours to team members.

Although the motivation for the change in the compensation plan was the multitasking problem, this change

also impacted the way tasks were allocated within each team, resulting in greater teamwork.



1      Introduction

Firms face the difficult task of aligning their employees’ interests with the long run goals of the
firm. A multitasking problem can arise if measured individual performance omits important
contributions to the firm that are essential for long term profitability. If a firm can measure
individual performance, pay for such performance will raise productivity (Lazear, 2000).
But pay based on individual productivity alone is only desirable if other activities cannot be
measured or do not contribute to the long run profitability of the firm. While economists have
    ∗ Columbia Business School and NBER
    † StanfordGSB
   ‡ Stanford GSB and NBER
   § The authors acknowledge helpful comments from participants at the Columbia Business School Microeconomics Faculty

Lunch, the Trans-Pacific Labor Seminar and the Association for Private Enterprise Education Annual Conference. All remaining
errors are their own.



                                                             1
built models of optimal compensation plans,1 there is a lack of extensive empirical evidence
on how a variety of typical compensation plans actually alter an employee’s allocation of
time across competing tasks.2 Data on compensation practices and productivity are often
not available within firms; even more rare is an experiment which enables the researcher to
precisely measure the impact of a change in the compensation plan on productivity.
   We study the impact on task allocation and personal productivity when a firm moves
from high-powered individual performance incentives towards incentives for enhancing the
long term growth of the firm. The data come from one international law firm headquartered
outside of the U.S., with 431 lawyers, for the time period 2005 to 2010, with 14,430 lawyer-
month observations. The firm is continuously organized into teams, having 177 teams over
this time period; each team is headed by a team leader (who is a senior lawyer or partner)
and has, on average, an additional two to seven members.
   A new compensation plan was implemented to encourage team leaders to take a long term
view of the firm. This was in response to difficulties in getting team leaders to spend time on
activities that benefitted the firm but took time away from the leaders’ billable hours. Both
individual output and these other activities were valuable to the firm, but the firm’s original
compensation plan tied wages to personal productivity with little or no reward for leadership
activities that would enable the firm to increase its long run profitability. Since individual
output and leadership activities were both valuable to the firm, the compensation plan needed
to balance the tradeoff between the two. In order to do this, the firm reduced the commission
that the leader received for billable hours and introduced a bonus that included objective
and subjective metrics that measured a variety of leadership activities. The activities on
which the bonus was based were: setting the future direction of the firm and enhancing its
reputation (done in part through client selection, firm meetings, conference presentations,
and writing newspaper articles), enhancing long run commercial success (via cross-selling
  1 See  Lazear (1986); Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991); Gibbons (1998); Prendergast (2009) for models of optimal compensation
design in the presence of multitasking.
   2 For summaries of the empirical literature, see Lazear (1999), Lazear and Oyer (2012), Lazear and Shaw (2007), Ichniowski

and Shaw (2003, 2012), and Bloom and Van Reenen (2011).



                                                             2
or attracting business for the firm), contributing to financial success (via selection of good
clients and controlling costs), and training, mentoring and managing associates.
   The model we develop shows that a change in the compensation plan that puts greater
emphasis on leadership activities will increase the team leaders’ non-billable hours (a measure
of leadership activities) and will decrease the team leaders’ billable hours (a measure of the
leader’s individual client output). An interesting aspect of our model is that it is able to show
how a change in the leader’s billable hours impacts the time that his team members bill, i.e.
the time they individually spend on client output. The model shows that, when team leaders
spend less time on client output and reduce their billable hours, two things happen. First,
there is a scale effect. Since the team is less busy because the leader has brought less client
work to the team, team members’ billable hours will fall. Second, there are conditions under
which this scale effect will be more than offset by an increase in the percentage of the team’s
billable hours accounted for by the team members. Thus, in addressing the multitasking
problem, the new compensation plan can also change the way tasks are allocated within
each team.
   Since there were no additional organizational changes in the firm at this time, we can
attribute the observed changes in leaders’ behavior to the change in the compensation plan.
Our findings are:

  1. When incentive pay shifts from high-powered personal incentives towards leadership
     incentives, the team leaders decrease their billable hours and increase their non-billable
     hours. Leaders’ billable hours fall by six hours per month (a 4% drop) and leaders’
     non-billable hours rise by seven hours per month (a 35% increase).

  2. The move towards leadership incentives results in an increase in the billable hours of
     subordinate team members of 12 hours per month (a 9% increase) per team member,
     indicating a shift in the allocation of billable hours within teams.

  3. The change in incentives does not change the take-home pay of leaders, but increases

                                               3
      pay for subordinates by 11%, thereby reducing the variance in pay across all lawyers in
      the firm.

   This paper is related to several literatures. First, there has been considerable theoretical
work on how a firm should structure compensation to provide incentives for competing tasks
(see Lazear, 1986; Holmstrom and Milgrom, 1991; Baker, 1992; Gibbons, 1998; Prendergast,
1999, 2009). But there is little empirical work on how behavior changes in response to
incentive plans that address the multitasking problem. Griffith and Neely (2009) show that
a move towards multi-dimensional Balanced Scorecard performance pay increases profits
when managers are experienced; inexperienced managers find it difficult to optimize their
behavior in response to multiple metrics. Drago and Garvey (1998) show that helping efforts
are reduced when pay through promotion emphasizes individual performance.
   Second, the paper extends the literature on leadership. Leadership is often defined as
providing a vision and accumulating a group of followers. There is a small economics lit-
erature and a very large organizational behavior literature on leadership.3 Our definition
of leadership assigns a general role for leaders in guiding the followers on their teams and
setting a vision for the firm, but our leaders have additional day-to-day tasks to undertake
as well. For the empirical analysis of leadership incentives, the literature has focused on the
compensation of CEOs, where data have been available.4 Designing optimal compensation
for CEOs requires balancing the tradeoff between incentives for personal productivity and
incentives for activities that serve the long run interest of shareholders.
   Third, this paper is related to the literature on teamwork since the leaders and associates
work together to produce a product.5 Teamwork is increasingly important in firms: surveys
show greater use of teams over the last twenty five years (Lazear and Shaw, 2007; Bloom and
Van Reenen, 2011) and a number of papers have studied the formation of teams and their
  3 See  Hermalin (1998) and Lazear (2012) for examples of the work on leadership and a summary of the literature.
  4 Murphy   (forthcoming) provides a thorough overview of CEO compensation in the U.S. and other countries. Wulf (2007)
studies the sensitivity of division managers’ pay to division performance and firm performance.
   5 See Lazear (1998) and Kandel and Lazear (1992) for models of optimal teamwork. See Holmstrom (1982) on incentives for

teams. For peer interactions within teams, see Falk and Ichino (2006) and Mas and Moretti (2009).



                                                            4
impact on productivity (e.g. Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul, 2012; Hamilton, Nickerson,
and Owan, 2003). When our firm changes its compensation plan to include incentives for
leadership, it is also moving towards greater teamwork. The leaders invest in activities that
build a stronger team, and the leaders share more work with their team members. Unlike
past studies, we are able to identify individual output and model whether the change in
incentive pay affects the productivity of each team member.6
    Finally, the paper contributes to the literature on service sector firms. Most papers on
incentives study manufacturing or agriculture (see footnote 2 above). Services have become
a mainstay of employment in the United States making this an important industry to study.7
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the theoretical
framework; Section 3 discusses the data and treatment; Section 4 introduces the empirical
hypotheses; Section 5 presents the empirical analysis and results; and Section 6 concludes.



2     Theoretical Framework

Since the law firm we study is continuously organized into teams, with each team headed
by a team leader (who is a senior lawyer or partner), we seek to model how the team leader
allocates his time to a variety of activities and how this allocation changes in response to
a change in the firm’s incentive plan.8 The team leader must divide his time between work
aimed at meeting his clients’ needs and leadership activities that help to build the firm.9
Because of the way work is organized in the firm, the leaders’ choices affect not only their
   6 Freeman and Kleiner (2005) and Helper, Kleiner, and Wang (2010) both examine the shift from piece-rate to time-rates

in a team setting as we do. However, they only have plant-level data preventing observation of the underlying distribution of
tasks within a team. Individual level data provides additional insights into how task allocation within the team changes when
incentives change. Our paper is also related to Boning, Ichniowski, and Shaw (2007) which shows that there is a complementarity
between incentive pay and problem-solving teams; incentivizing employees to take actions that benefit the team only make sense
when team members are empowered to problem-solve and have authority to make decisions that affect team production.
   7 For other service sector studies, see Encinosa, Gaynor, and Rebitzer (2007) and Gaynor, Rebitzer, and Taylor (2004) who

analyze the effects of group based pay on physician performance and Dumont, Fortin, Jacquemet, and Shearer (2008) who
study the multi-dimensional response of physicians to changes in their incentives.
   8 Levin and Tadelis (2005) and Carr and Mathewson (1990) explain why it is generally optimal for law firms to be organized

as partnerships.
   9 For models of task allocation in hierarchies within law firms, see Garicano (2000), Garicano and Hubbard (2007) and

Garicano and Van Zandt (2012). For a model of how law firms are organized, see Rebitzer and Taylor (2007); for models of the
hiring of lawyers, see Oyer and Schaefer (2009, 2010). For a model of task allocation by managers and variable incentives for
managers, see Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul (2007, 2009).



                                                              5
own output, but determine the output of their team members as well.
    Leaders initially received piece rate compensation for their individual client output, a
small salary, and a profit-sharing bonus. In the new regime, piece rate pay for individual work
on client matters was decreased, pay for long-term leadership activities was introduced and
was determined both objectively and subjectively, and the salary component was increased.10
The model below derives the changes in hours allocation by team leaders and team members
that result from the change in the firm’s compensation plan.11
    For simplicity, we assume that leaders have a time constraint, T . Empirically, this is a
reasonable assumption because we observe that the leaders in this firm do not change their
total work hours after the new incentive plan is introduced.12 Leaders must decide how to
divide their total work time, T , between time spent on client work, h, and time spent on
leadership activities that help the firm to grow, f .13
    The leader’s choice regarding allocation of his hours between client work and leadership
activities affects the hours spent on client work by his team members. Team members depend
on their leader to bring in business for the team and to assign tasks. We model the client
output of team members as the product of a factor µ and leader client output to capture
the fact that leaders must be generating clients in order for the team to have work. Thus, a
team member’s client output is µ ∗ h, where h is the client output of the team leader. For
a given µ, the more time the leader spends on client output (i.e. the higher is h) the more
time team members spend on client output because the workload for the team increases.
    We assume µ is an increasing function of the leader’s non-billable hours, f , for the fol-
   10 The increase in salary reduces the riskiness of pay, which is not studied here. See Prendergast (2000, 2002) and Oyer and

Schaefer (2011). It also reduces gaming (Larkin, forthcoming).
   11 Standard task incentive models predict that, as a result of these changes, team leaders would reallocate their time from

client work towards leadership activities. As shown below, we modify the standard model to incorporate the fact that team
leaders share in the profits of the firm and that team members may be able to perform some of the client-related tasks done by
leaders.
   12 An alternative way of modeling the leader’s time allocation problem is to combine disutility of effort with production

functions indicating how effort is turned into output. The conclusions should be the same, but the mathematics are less
straightforward.
   13 For firms producing services, it is often the case that individual output is equivalent to time spent on work for a client. In

other industries time at work and output are different.




                                                                 6
lowing reasons. The new compensation plan reduces incentives for leaders to hoard hours.14
Rather than leaders taking on as many hours as they can to boost their pay they may instead
spend more time on leadership activities. This may require team members to spend more
time on client work as the leader passes on billable hours to team members. Additionally,
the new emphasis on developing firm capabilities may encourage leaders to train associates
and billable hours are a potential source of valuable on-the-job training. We further assume
that the second derivative of µ with respect to f is negative so that time spent on leadership
increases µ at a decreasing rate.
    The leader’s maximization problem is:

                                                          L                               L
                                                                                                       !
                                                          X                               X
                   max sj + αhj + βfj + γ             a         (hi + ni µ(fi )hi ) +           (b(fi ))
                   hj ,fj
                                                          i=1                             i=1
                                          L                          L
                                                                                                       !
                                          X                          X                                                    (1)
                            −γ     F+           (αhi + βfi ) +             (c1 ni µ(fi )hi + c2 ni gi )
                                          i=1                        i=1

                                                                                    s.t. T = hj + fj

where j ∈ 1, 2, ..., L denotes a particular leader, s is salary, αh is compensation for individual
client work, βf is compensation for leadership, and γ(∗) is a profit-sharing bonus (with
γ < 1). Profit is calculated as revenue brought in from total client work plus the direct impact
of leadership activities on revenue minus fixed costs and employee variable compensation.
In equation (1), a is the revenue brought in per hour of client work15 and the first sum
is the client output generated by all the teams’ (with each team denoted by its leader i)
composed of the client work of the leader (h) and the client work of the n team members
each producing µ(f )∗h. The second sum is the revenue generated by the leadership activities
of all leaders, where b(f ) is the direct impact of leadership on revenue (we assume it has a
positive first derivative and negative second derivative).16 F is the fixed cost (which includes
  14 See Landers, Rebitzer, and Taylor (1996) on excessive hours worked by lawyers.
  15 The  model abstracts away from differences in revenue for leader and team member client work. Using two different
parameters for per hour revenue adds complication without changing any substantive results.
  16 In a multi-period model, leadership activities could be considered an investment in the future. As such, profit in future

periods would be positively impacted by leadership activities. For simplicity, we use a single period model and incorporate the



                                                                 7
the salaries of all workers), the third sum is the variable compensation for leaders, and the
fourth sum is the variable compensation for associates which is composed of compensation
for associate client work (c1 nµ(f )h) and associate non-client work (c2 ng where g is time
spent on non-client work).
    Substituting in the leader’s time constraint, we can rewrite the maximization problem for
an individual leader as (we omit subscripts in the first order condition to simplify notation):

                                                             L                                            L
                                                                                                                           !
                                                             X                                            X
           max sj + α(T − fj ) + βfj + γ                 a         ((T − fi ) + ni µ(fi )(T − fi )) +           (b(fi ))
             fj
                                                             i=1                                          i=1
                                           L                                 L
                                                                                                                           !
                                           X                                 X
                              −γ    F+            (α(T − fi ) + βfi ) +             (c1 ni µ(fi )(T − fi ) + c2 ni gi )
                                           i=1                                i=1
                                                                       
        ∂                   ∂b                        ∂µ
⇒ FOC:    = −α + β + γ −a +    + α − β + n(a − c1 )      (T − f ) − µ(f )   =0
       ∂f                   ∂f                        ∂f

Applying the Implicit Function Theorem to the first order condition (FOC)17 allows us
to determine what will happen to time spent on leadership activities as the incentive for
leadership increases (an increase in β).

                      ∂F OC
          ∂f      ∂β                                         1−γ                          ∂f
             = − ∂F OC = −                                                          ⇒    >0
          ∂β      ∂f      γ               ∂2b
                                                  + n(a − c1 ) (T − f ) ∂f
                                                                          2
                                                                         ∂ µ
                                                                              − 2 ∂µ      ∂β
                                          ∂f ∂f                            ∂f     ∂f


             ∂2b           ∂µ                    ∂2µ
Because     ∂f ∂f
                    < 0,   ∂f
                                > 0, and        ∂f ∂f
                                                        < 0, the denominator is negative, making the entire
expression positive (assuming that a > c1 which must be true if the firm makes money on
associate client work). As the compensation for leadership increases, the time the leader
spends on leadership activities increases.18 Since µ is a positive function of f , µ will increase
and there will also be a decrease in leader client output (via the time constraint).
    Although the effect of an increase in f on team member client output is seemingly ambigu-
positive impact of leadership activities on profit through b(f ). This makes sense for time periods that are long (for example a
year) and, in our case, because the leaders at the firm were focused on the short-term before the compensation change.
  17 We focus on the case 0 < f < T . It is reasonable to assume that a leader must spend some time on leadership activities

(so f 6= 0) and the core business of the firm is client work (so f 6= T ) making corner solutions unlikely.
  18 A similar exercise for changes in α yields ∂f < 0 indicating that decreasing α has the same directional effect as increasing
                                                ∂α
β. The effects of other parameters on f can be determined similarly, however, in some cases the values of the variables at which
the change occurs must be known in order to sign the impact.



                                                                   8
ous (because µ is increasing and h is falling), the impact can be obtained by differentiating
µ(f )(T − f ) with respect to f . If (T − f ) ∂µ
                                              ∂f
                                                 − µ(f ) > 0 then increases in f will have a
positive impact on team member client output. This will be the case for parameter values
                                               ∂b
that satisfy (α − β)(1 − γ) + γ(a −            ∂f
                                                  )   > 0 which can be seen by rearranging the first order
condition:19

                                                                                      ∂b
                                  ∂µ           (α − β)(1 − γ) + γ(a −                 ∂f
                                                                                         )
                         (T − f )    − µ(f ) =
                                  ∂f                   nγ(a − c1 )

                                                         ∂b
   The inequality (α − β)(1 − γ) + γ(a −                 ∂f
                                                            )   > 0 means that the parameter that measures
the incentive the leader receives for leadership activities (β) must be less than the parameter
that measures the incentives for individual client output (α) and the revenue received from
an additional unit of client work (a) must be greater than the revenue generated from an
                                         ∂b
additional unit of leadership activity ( ∂f ), or if one of these terms is negative it is outweighed
by the other positive term. As client work is the primary business of the firm, it is likely that
these conditions are met.20 On the other hand if the inequality does not hold, both team
leader and team member client output would fall. It is unlikely that a firm would structure
compensation this way because this would imply a drop in short term profits. Though it
is sometimes worthwhile to trade off short term profits for long term growth, in this case
enhanced long term profitability (through more time spent on leadership) can be achieved
without sacrificing short term profits if team member client output rises. Assuming the
compensation plan is designed to maintain overall client output, increasing incentives for
leadership activities will change the allocation of tasks within the team, as team members
spend more time on client output while team leaders spend less. This model will be used to
derive three hypotheses in section four below.
 19 Note that the denominator, nγ(a − c1 ), is positive.
 20 Assuming  the revenue generated from client work is greater than the revenue generated from leadership activities, one
would expect that the incentive for client work would be greater than the incentive for leadership.




                                                            9
3     Data and Background

3.1    Data Set

The data come from a large, international law firm headquartered outside the U.S. The firm
has many office locations and takes on cases in all law specialties, particularly corporate
law and litigation. A leader is a partner or senior lawyer who heads a team of two to four
associates and two to four trainees.21 Lawyers split their time between billable and non-
billable hours. Leaders decide how to divide their team’s billable hours among members.
Associates have law degrees but are less experienced than leaders and do not have control
over how many billable hours they receive.
    Data from the firm are for the time period 2005-2010 with observations at the individual-
month level and sample sizes of 4,745 leader-months and 9,685 associate-months.22 Over the
six year time period, the data set includes 431 unique lawyers who are part of 177 different
teams. There are 131 leaders, some of whom sequentially lead different teams, and 375
associates with 75 associates promoted to the position of leader during the six years. Team
membership is stable for established teams; however, promotions create new teams. For
each lawyer and each month, the data include tenure, the number of hours spent working,
the break-out of billable hours, and the compensation received. We calculated non-billable
hours as the difference between the total number of hours spent working and the number
of billable hours. To protect confidentiality, hours are normalized to a base of 1800 total
annual hours in January of 2005 and compensation is deflated and converted to U.S. dollars
using the 2005 exchange rate. The country where this firm is headquartered experienced a
recession lasting four quarters. Because this overlaps with the time period under the new
compensation plan, these months are dropped from all regressions.
 21 The behavior of trainees may be quite different from associates because trainees may be law students and/or part time

workers. We do not include them in the analysis.
 22 The sample size used in the tables is smaller because we remove recession months.




                                                           10
3.2    Treatment Effect: Changes in Compensation

Prior to June 2007, the firm used high-powered individual incentives or “eat what you kill”
compensation practices23 and in June 2007, individual incentives were reduced and leadership
incentives were introduced. Although there was a significant change in the compensation
plan, the firm’s management structure, structure of production and culture were unchanged.
Thus we are able to attribute the changes we observe after June 2007 to the change in
the compensation plan. Leadership incentive pay is determined by objective and subjective
evaluation of the following activities: setting the future direction of the firm and enhancing
its reputation (done in part through client selection, firm meetings, conference presentations,
and writing newspaper articles), enhancing long run commercial success (via cross-selling or
attracting business to the firm), contributing to financial success (via selection of good clients
and controlling costs), and training, mentoring and managing associates.
   Beginning operations in the 1990s, the firm was focused on using the talents of their few
lawyers to gain market share. As the firm grew rapidly, it became less concerned with bring-
ing in new clientele and more concerned with building the firm’s capabilities. More lawyers
meant a greater need for coordination within the firm. Additionally, the firm branched out
into other practice areas switching from a specialty law firm to a full service corporate law
firm. Younger lawyers, in the process of developing their talents, needed to be trained for
the future.
   The firm’s management wanted team leaders to take a long term view of the company.
The concern was that “people think only of themselves and only of output, not the whole.”24
Despite this, the firm’s management believed the prevalent culture was successful and wanted
to shift the focus of leaders without changing the overall culture of the firm. Rather than
focus on personal billable hours, they wanted team leaders to provide direction for the firm
and invest in their teams. The firm’s management expressed difficulty in getting team leaders
 23 Rebitzer  and Taylor (1995) examine the ex ante rents received by lawyers.
 24 This   quote and subsequent quotes are from a personal interview with the firm’s Managing Director.




                                                             11
to participate actively in firm meetings when individual billable hours were the emphasis.
Incentives needed to emphasize “the firm [making] money, not just the leaders.” The new
compensation plan was phased in over several months, targeting take home pay to be roughly
equivalent across the two compensation schemes. This included a transition period of about
six months where there were both new and old incentives.
    The new compensation plan substantially changed the composition of pay for leaders.
Although we do not have compensation breakdowns by type of incentive, the managing
director indicated in an interview that the percentage of client revenue that was paid to
a leader for the business he brought in fell from a range of 30-50% prior to June 2007
to 15% after June 2007. This change documents the sharp drop in individual incentives.
Additionally, 10% of a leader’s compensation was in the form of profit-sharing bonuses
before and after June 2007. Monthly data are available on total compensation and salaried
pay. We observe that prior to the change in the compensation plan, 6% of the leaders’
compensation was in the form of salary while after the change, this percentage rose to 29%.
Total compensation for leaders was unchanged over the time period with the income from
individual incentives replaced by salary and leadership incentives.
    Although associates also experienced a decrease in individual incentive pay during this
time period, they are unable to choose how they allocate their time between billable and
non-billable hours as the leaders assign tasks to associates. Associate hours are a by-product
of the leader’s time allocation and the empirical analysis below is based on this relationship.



4    Empirical Hypotheses

The theoretical model implies that the shift towards leadership incentives and salary should
result in more leadership activities targeted at raising the long run profitability of the firm.
Three empirical hypotheses follow from this expected shift.
    Hypothesis 1: Following a shift towards leadership incentives, leaders’ billable hours will


                                              12
                                                                                                                ∂h
decrease and non-billable hours will increase. From Section 2 this corresponds to                               ∂β
                                                                                                                     < 0 and
∂f
∂β
     > 0.
     Leaders’ billable hours are the measure of individual leader client output. In the profes-
sional services industry, output is not typically a physical product but instead is represented
by time spent on a project, service or task. The product sold is the time and effort of the
professionals in the firm. Thus, the number of hours the leader is engaged in billable work
for a client is a measure of output as it directly corresponds to what generates short run
revenue for the firm.25
     Leaders’ non-billable hours measure the time leaders spend on activities that benefit the
long run growth of the firm. As described above, these activities, which we label leadership
activities, involve setting the direction of the firm, through, for example, the solicitation
of new clients, firm-level meetings, attending outside conferences, mentoring and training
associates, and coordinating their teams. All of these activities involve time on the job that
is not billable.
     To test Hypothesis 1, we estimate the following regressions:


                              hLit = ψ L + η L It + XitL θ1L + σiL + δjL + τtL + Lit                                      (2)

                             fitL = φL + ρL It + XitL θ2L + κLi + ωjL + λLt + νitL                                         (3)


where a superscript L is for leaders, hit is billable hours, fit is non-billable hours, It is a
dummy variable for leadership incentives being in place, Xit is a set of controls, σi and κi
are individual fixed effects, δj and ωj are fixed effects for law specialty, τt and λt are fixed
effects for calendar months, and it and νit are the error terms. An observation is at the
lawyer-month level. Hypothesis 1 predicts that η L < 0 and ρL > 0 as leaders reduce their
billable hours and increase non-billable hours following an increase in β, i.e. a shift towards
leadership incentives.
  25 Note that even if the client and firm later negotiate over the number of hours that is ultimately paid for, this is still a

reasonable measure of output. This is akin to measuring output as hourly production in a manufacturing firm because the
amount produced is not necessarily the amount sold.


                                                              13
   The individual fixed effect, σi or κi , controls for personal work effort or the skills of the
person. These attributes are fixed over time for each person and affect the number of hours
worked. The law specialty fixed effect, δj or ωj , accounts for differences in the baseline
hours of work for different law areas. Certain specialties may have systematically different
standard lengths of cases that do not vary over time. The calendar months fixed effect, τt
or λt , permit some months to be busier than other months. Robust standard errors are
clustered at the individual level to account for correlations across observations of the same
individual. Xit includes additional controls for tenure (in months) and team size.
   Hypothesis 2: Following a shift towards leadership incentives, associates’ billable hours
will increase. As discussed in Section 2, although h falls, this is likely to be more than offset
by the increase in µ making billable hours of the associates rise.
   To test this prediction, we estimate the following regression for associates:


                              hA     A   A      A A      A    A    A    A
                               it = ψ + η It + Xit θ1 + σi + δj + τt + it                     (4)


where a superscript A is for associates and the variables are defined as above in equation
(2). We expect that ηA > 0.
   Although the model in Section 2 is silent about the non-billable hours worked by asso-
ciates, we estimate the impact of the change in the compensation plan on associates non-
billable hours with the following regression:


                              fitA = φA + ρA It + XitA θ2A + κA    A    A    A
                                                              i + ωj + λt + νit                (5)


where variables are defined as above in equation (3). This empirically tests the degree of
substitutability between the two tasks for associates and the impact on the total hours
worked.26
   Hypothesis 3: Following a shift towards leadership incentives, associates will receive more
 26 The   non-billable activities of associates are likely training and administrative work.




                                                                 14
billable hours for each leader billable hour. In other words, µ(f ) in equation (1) increases
when f increases in response to the new incentive plan.
    To test this hypothesis, we estimate the following regression:


                     hA     A    L       L            A A      A    A    A    A
                      it = ψ + ζhit + ξ(hit ∗ It ) + Xit θ1 + σi + δj + τt + it                                           (6)


where a superscript A is for associates and the variables are defined as above in equation
(2). Unlike leaders, associates do not choose how many billable hours to work; their billable
hours are assigned to them by their leader, as measured by the parameter ζ under the original
compensation plan and ζ + ξ under the new compensation plan (these terms represent the
empirical estimates of µ as described in Section 2). As explained in Section 2, leaders who
bring in more business (and thus have more billable hours that the team must complete), will
have associates who work more. Thus, we expect ζ > 0. The additional variables in equation
(6) control for possible differences in assignment of hours to associates. As shown in Section
2, after the increase in leadership incentives (β), µ will increase because µ is an increasing
function of the leader’s non-billable hours. Hence in equation (6), we expect ξ > 0.27 ξ > 0
can be interpreted as an increase in the amount of sharing that the leader does with his team
members.



5     Empirical Analysis

5.1     Summary Statistics

The summary statistics show a shift in leader hours (Table 1). After the introduction of
incentives for leadership, the average billable hours for leaders drop and their non-billable
hours rise. The opposite is true for associates. Table 1 also shows that total compensation
for leaders is unchanged after the change in incentive pay, while it decreases for associates.
  27 Note that we are not capturing a multiplicative effect of interactions between leaders and associates (see Hayes, Oyer, and

Schaefer, 2006; Hamilton, Nickerson, and Owan, 2003).




                                                              15
By design, salary increased for both leaders and associates after the change.


5.2     Leader Billable and Non-Billable Hours

Table 2 shows the results of estimating equations (2) and (3). Leadership Incentives is a
dummy variable equal to one in months when the new compensation plan is in effect. The
results are consistent with Hypothesis 1. Leaders decreased their billable hours by six hours
after the introduction of leadership incentive pay, though the decrease is not statistically
significant (column 1, Table 2). Leader non-billable hours increased by seven hours (or 35%)
after the introduction of leadership incentive pay (column 2, Table 2), a significant and
substantial increase in time spent on leadership activities.28
    Leaders do not change their total work hours following the shift to leadership incentive
pay: the rise in non-billable hours is offset by a drop in billable hours. In the total hours
worked regression (column 3, Table 2), the coefficient on the treatment effect of leadership
incentives is not statistically significant. Thus, the increase in leader non-billable hours by
about seven hours per month should be offset by a decrease in billable hours of roughly the
same magnitude, as it is in columns 1 and 2.29
    The new compensation plan may cause leaders to sort into or out of the firm in response
to the change in incentives. Incentive pay that aims for increased leadership activities should
induce those who are more skilled at these tasks to join the firm or remain with the firm.30
Regression results show no evidence of leader sorting in response to the change in incentives.
The regression test for leader sorting is the following. Consider first the equation for non-
billable hours. When the firm puts in place enhanced incentives for non-billable hours, we
observe an increase in the non-billable hours in the fixed effects regression: each lawyer
  28 Our results are in keeping with the multitasking findings of Helper, Kleiner, and Wang (2010) who estimate that a shift

to time-rates (from piece-rates) results in a 20% decline in an easy to observe task and a 16-19% increase in a hard to observe
task. For our team leaders, we find a 4% drop in our measure of individual output (an easy to observe task) and a 35% increase
in our measure of leadership (a hard to observe task).
  29 Controls for law specialty, month, and person effects are significant in the Table 2 regressions indicating that these variables

influence hours in important ways. Tenure and team size are not consistently significant.
  30 Compensation policy as a sorting device is emphasized in Lazear (2000), Salop and Salop (1976), Lazear (1986), Eriksson

and Villeval (2008), Lo, Ghosh, and Lafontaine (2011), Oyer and Schaefer (2005).




                                                                 16
reallocates hours towards leadership activities. In the OLS regression there may be a greater
increase in non-billable hours if those who prefer leadership activities are promoted from
the associate position or are more likely to stay with the firm. Coefficients from an OLS
regression capture both the within-person change in hours and the across-person change in
hours. Thus, comparing OLS and fixed effects coefficients provides a measure of employee
sorting. In the non-billable hours regression, the OLS coefficient on leadership incentives
(column 5) is the same as the fixed effects coefficient on leadership incentives (column 2).
The same is true for the billable hours: the OLS coefficient (column 4) is the same as the
fixed effects coefficient (column 1). This indicates that leader sorting did not accompany the
compensation change.


5.3     Associate Billable and Non-Billable Hours

We find that associates experience an increase in their billable hours after the introduction of
leadership incentives confirming Hypothesis 2 (column 1, Table 3). Associate billable hours
increase by 12 hours (a 9% rise) following the shift to leadership incentive pay. This effect
is large and highly significant.31 There is no prediction for associate non-billable hours and
these hours show no change after the introduction of leadership incentive pay (column 2,
Table 3). Consistent with the increase in billable hours and no change in non-billable hours,
total work by associates increases by 12 hours (column 3, Table 3).
    Additionally, there is evidence that, with leadership incentives in place, associates gain
billable hours within teams relative to their leaders. In the regression in column 4, Table
3 the dependent variable is the difference between the average of the team’s associates’
billable hours and the team leader’s billable hours. The positive coefficient on the leadership
incentive variable indicates that the gap between the billable hours worked by the team’s
average associate and the team’s leader is narrowed by 12 hours.
    Although associates are unable to decide how to allocate their time since tasks are assigned
  31 Similar to Table 2, controls for law specialty, month, and person effects are significant in the regressions in Table 3, while

tenure and team size are not consistently significant.


                                                                17
by leaders, there can be a sorting response to the increase in billable hours assigned to them.
We do find some evidence that the composition of associates changed in response to the
new compensation plan. The coefficient on leadership incentives is half as large in the OLS
regression of billable hours as in the fixed effects regression (column 5, Table 3). Three types
of changes in the composition of associates could explain the smaller impact of leadership
incentives: 1) associates with high billable hours may be promoted to the position of leader,
2) associates with high billable hours may leave the firm, 3) associates with low billable
hours may be hired into the position. In our data, the summary statistics show that the
associates who are promoted have higher billable hours and the associates who leave the firm
have lower billable hours (not shown). We introduce dummy variables for each of the three
possible explanations of composition change into the OLS regression of billable hours and
find no predominant factor that explains the observed pattern; the changing composition of
associates is apparently due to a combination of the three factors.
    Column 7, Table 3 shows the results of estimating equation (6). We find that ζ is 0.16
(row 2) and consistent with Hypothesis 3, we find that ξ > 0 (row 3).32 Column 1 shows
that a 10 hour increase in leader billable hours results in an additional five hours of associate
billable hours per team before leadership incentives, but over seven additional associate hours
per team after leadership incentives are introduced.33 Thus, the introduction of leadership
incentives resulted in a larger increase in billable hours for associates whose leaders have
more billable hours.
    Our results demonstrate that, the change in incentive pay led to a substantial change
in the way lawyers do business and the extent of teamwork. Each leader decreases his
billable hours and increases his non-billable hours by about six hours a month (Table 2). On
average, associates increase their billable hours by 6.75 hours per month (column 5, Table
  32 We also estimated a version of the column (7) regression that included the leadership incentive dummy. This variable was

insignificant and its inclusion did not affect the coefficients on the leader’s billable hours or the interaction term between the
leader’s billable hours and leadership incentives. In that version of the regression, we can reject that the leadership incentive
dummy and the interaction term are both zero at the 1% level.
  33 Calculations based on coefficient estimates and three associates per team.




                                                               18
3). Because every leader has an average of three associates,34 the total billable hours of the
team of associates rises by 20 hours. This is a large shift in the allocation of hours within
the team. The ratio of billing rates for leaders to associates is approximately 3:1 making the
overall cost to the clients about the same after this shift in billable hours.35


5.4       Employee Income

Leaders control their hours of work. Therefore, a change in the level of compensation follow-
ing the treatment could change the hours of work outcomes, through traditional income or
substitution effects of pay on labor supply. For leaders, the firm aimed to keep total hours
of work and pay unchanged.36 Table 2 shows that total hours of work are unchanged after
the treatment. Table 4 shows that total compensation is unchanged for leaders in the post
period; in column 1, where the dependent variable is the log of a leader’s total income, the
coefficient on leadership incentive pay is insignificant. For each associate, income rises at the
same rate as total hours worked. Column 3, Table 4 shows that an associate’s total income
increased by 11% in the post period.37 Regressions of total hours worked indicate that each
associate increased his work hours by 10% (see column 4, Table 3). Increased income roughly
kept pace with their increased work hours.
    The compensation data breaks out the salary component of total compensation. The
change in compensation operates in part through an increase in salaried pay and so we
should observe increases in salary for leaders and associates. Regression results show that
salaries did rise substantially (columns 2 and 4, Table 4). Salaries increased by almost 60%
for associates and more than doubled for leaders.
    Data on profits were not provided by the firm preventing us from connecting the com-
pensation changes to profits. In the short run, there is no apparent change in total hours of
  34 InTable 1, the average team size is larger because it includes trainees.
  35 Calculations  using compensation data suggest that this is the rough ratio of billing rates.
  36 Based on interviews with the Managing Director.
  37 This differs from the summary statistics in Table 1. The summary statistics show a decline in associate income thereby

implying that there is sorting toward lower paid associates in the post period. This is consistent with composition changes of
associates discussed in section 5.3.



                                                             19
work and pay for the leaders. For associates, hours and pay went up at the same rate. To
the extent that profits depend on employee compensation and work hours, profits may be
unchanged because pay and hours are either unchanged (for leaders) or rise at the same rate
(for associates). However, profits likely depend on several other factors making it impossible
to determine the overall effect. Furthermore, the move to leadership incentives was aimed
at increasing long run profitability making it difficult to determine conclusively whether it
achieved this goal.


5.5   Robustness

In this section, we report the results of a number of robustness checks. Table 5 shows three
robustness checks for leader’s billable and non-billable hours while Table 6 show three ro-
bustness checks for associates’ billable and non-billable hours. Additional robustness checks
are discussed below but not included in the tables.
   First, the change in incentive pay occurred in part during the recession and, as explained
above, the recession months were dropped from the analysis. When these recession months
are reintroduced, the decrease in leaders’ billable hours resulting from the introduction of
leadership incentives is twice as large (11 hours per month) and the increase in associates’
billable hours is half as large (six hours per month); see column 1 in Tables 5 and 6, for leaders
and associates, respectively. This is expected if the firm experienced a slight slowdown in
business resulting in fewer billable hours during the recession. The impacts of leadership
incentives on leaders’ and associates’ non-billable hours are unchanged (column 2 in Tables
5 and 6). Column 7, Table 6 also shows that reintroducing the recession months has little
effect on the estimates of ζ and ξ for associate billable hours.
   Second, we consider the impact of dropping the six month transition period during which
the new pay plan was phased in. It is possible that behavior over this time period, where
parts of both the old and new compensation plans were in effect, may be different than what is
observed when the new compensation plan is fully implemented. If these transition months

                                               20
are dropped from the regressions in Tables 2 and 3, the treatment effects are essentially
unchanged (see columns 3-4 in Table 5 and columns 3-4, 8 in Table 6).
   Third, we consider the impact of leaders’ tenure. The leaders who have been with the
firm the longest may be the most resistant to change, making the treatment effect from new
leadership incentives fall with tenure. An interaction term between leadership incentives and
a dummy variable for the leader having above median tenure is not significant (see columns
5-6, Table 5). Similarly, an interaction term between tenure and leadership incentives is
insignificant (not shown). Overall, it appears that the response to the treatment is fairly
uniform across experience levels of leaders. There is also no difference in hours allocations
for more experienced associates following the compensation change (not shown).
   The third robustness check for the associates is shown in columns 5, 6 and 9 of Table 6
where we control for differences in behavior across teams by adding team dummy variables.
Associates on the same team may receive a similar number of hours. The results are basically
the same with a slightly larger coefficient on the leadership incentive variable for billable
hours.38
   There are four additional robustness checks not shown in Tables 5-6. First, using the
log of hours for all the hours-related dependent variables does not change the regression
results. Hours are not rightward skewed. Second, in order to consider whether the results
are sensitive to seasonal factors or business cycle factors, we allowed the practice areas to
have different seasonal effects, by interacting practice areas with month dummy variables.
The results are largely unchanged for leadership incentives with slightly greater statistical
significance for leaders and slightly smaller coefficients for associates compared to Tables 2
and 3.
   We also explored whether alumni connections affect billable hours allocations. We have
data on the law school that each lawyer attended. Leaders may allocate hours differently
to those associates who attended the same law school that they did or they may interact
 38 Leader   fixed effects are equivalent to team dummies in the leader regressions.



                                                               21
differently with a team who has an alumnus from their law school. This could be because
they have previous experience with the person, have had similar training, communicate
more easily, or simply show a preference for their law school. To test this, we estimate leader
regressions that include a dummy variable that equals one if at least one team member went
to the same law school as the leader and associate regressions that include a dummy variable
that equals one if the leader went to the same law school as the associate. In neither case was
the coefficient on the law school variable significant. We also tested for whether there is a
difference for those who attended a law school that was part of a public or private university.
Again, there does not appear to be a differential effect. We have also interacted the dummy
variable for attending the same law school as the leader with leadership incentives and leader
billable hours and found insignificant results. Behavior does not appear to vary based on
the educational connections between leader and associates.
    Finally, we estimated regressions considering differences by gender, office location, and
practice area. In none of these cases, do we find a consistent and statistically significant
difference. Results hold under a variety of different lawyer and work environment charac-
teristics demonstrating robustness. In sum, our results are robust to numerous alternative
specifications.



6    Conclusion

While economists have built models of optimal compensation plans that address the mul-
titasking problem, the lack of detailed firm-level data on compensation practices and pro-
ductivity has prevented the accumulation of systematic empirical evidence on the impact
of compensation plans on productivity. Using a unique data set from an international law
firm that moved from high-powered individual performance incentives towards incentives for
leadership activities, we show how the change in compensation impacted the allocation of
tasks.


                                              22
    Because individual output and leadership activities were both valuable to the firm, the
new compensation plan aimed to balance the tradeoff between the two. The firm reduced
the commission that the team leaders received for billable hours and introduced a bonus
that included objective and subjective metrics rewarding a variety of leadership activities.
We find that this change in the compensation plan resulted in the team leaders engaging
in more leadership activities, as measured by their shifting approximately six hours of work
each month from billable hours to non-billable hours. This is particularly striking in that the
initial culture of this firm was geared towards individual productivity with little attention
to leadership activities that were essential for long term profitability.
    Since our data enable us to identify individual output we can study how the change in
incentive pay affects the productivity of each team member, thereby making an important
contribution to the literature on teamwork. An interesting by-product of the change in
the leaders’ compensation plan was that the billable hours of the team members increased
as the leaders decreased their billable hours. While the motivation for the change in the
compensation plan was the multitasking problem, this change also impacted the way tasks
were allocated within each team, resulting in greater teamwork.
    Despite the fact that results come from one particular law firm during one time period,
the findings may apply to other firms. Analyses favor firms that have a fairly concrete
output measure (such as billable hours), but the principles at work behind the outcomes are
more broadly applicable. Just as boards of directors must determine the balance between
individual and leadership incentives for their CEOs, many firms seek to find this balance
for employees who are in leadership positions. The firm studied here demonstrates that the
performance of leaders and their subordinates responds to changes in incentive pay in the
absence of other organizational changes.


7    Tables



                                               23
                     Table 1: Summary Statistics

Leader Pre-Period                      Mean          Std. Dev.         NT
Billable Hours                         146.271         74.114          1417
Non-Billable Hours                     20.793           24.59          1417
Tenure                                   65.8          41.463          1417
Size of Team                            4.600           2.513          1417
Total Income                         $23,359.12       $9,280.94        1338
Total Salary                          $1,277.45       $2,840.17        1369
Leader Post-Period
Billable Hours                         135.554         62.843          2323
Non-Billable Hours                     28.661          30.569          2323
Tenure                                 85.279          47.808          2323
Size of Team                            4.069           2.026          2323
Total Income                         $23,141.22       $8,384.71        1303
Total Salary                          $6,426.32       $4,449.65        1340
Associates Pre-Period
Billable Hours                        127.817          55.803          3306
Non-Billable Hours                     23.672           27.16          3306
Tenure                                 41.951            27.82         3306
Size of Team                            6.07            3.076          3306
Team Leader’s Billable Hours          135.868           82.582         3306
Total Income                         $10,306.46       $4,484.21        3221
Total Salary                          $938.78          $817.96         3226
Associates Post-Period
Billable Hours                         132.832         57.488          4402
Non-Billable Hours                     23.793          27.199          4402
Tenure                                 43.271           32.211         4402
Size of Team                            5.073            2.018         4402
Team Leader’s Billable Hours           131.913          66.636         4402
Total Income                          $9,228.48       $4,019.97        2449
Total Salary                          $1,729.78        $826.65         2511
Hours are normalized by a base of 1800 total annual hours in January of 2005.
Income and salary are monthly. Tenure is measured in months.
Team size includes associates and trainees.
Leader and associate differences in average team size stem from large teams
having many associates contributing to the overall associate average team size
but only one leader contributing to the overall leader average team size.




                                     24
                                                        Table 2: Leader Billable and Non-Billable Hours

                                            (1)                           (2)                           (3)                    (4)                      (5)
                                   Leader Billable Hours       Leader NonBillable Hours         Leader Total Hours   Leader Billable Hours   Leader NonBillable Hours
     Leadership Incentives                 -5.75                       6.90∗∗∗                         1.15                   -5.66                  6.42∗∗∗
                                          (4.50)                        (2.06)                        (3.91)                 (5.77)                   (2.43)
     Tenure                                0.12                         -0.088                         0.031                0.59∗∗∗                   -0.22∗
                                          (0.14)                       (0.097)                        (0.15)                 (0.16)                   (0.12)
     Tenure Squared                      -0.0017∗                      0.0010                        -0.00072             -0.0040∗∗∗                 0.0017∗
                                         (0.0010)                     (0.00073)                     (0.00094)              (0.0011)                 (0.00086)
     Size of Team                          2.28∗                         0.22                         2.50∗∗                  2.66                     1.19∗
                                          (1.16)                        (0.44)                        (1.01)                 (1.60)                   (0.66)
     Constant                            145.8∗∗∗                        4.52                        150.3∗∗∗               43.7∗∗                     15.7
                                          (9.33)                        (4.94)                        (8.55)                 (19.8)                   (16.5)
     Practice Area Dummies                  Yes                          Yes                            Yes                    Yes                      Yes
     Month Dummies                          Yes                          Yes                            Yes                    Yes                      Yes
     Person Fixed Effects                   Yes                          Yes                            Yes                    No                       No
     NT                                    3740                          3740                          3740                   3740                     3740
     N                                      131                           131                           131                    131                      131
25




     R2                                    0.405                        0.507                          0.412                 0.141                    0.170

     Leadership Incentives is a dummy variable equal to one in months when the new compensation plan is in effect.
     Four quarters omitted due to recession.
     Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level.
     ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                                                              Table 3: Associate Billable and Non-Billable Hours

                                                      (1)             (2)           (3)              (4)              (5)          (6)          (7)
                                                   Associate       Associate    Associate   Diff. Avg. Associate   Associate    Associate    Associate
                                                    Billable      NonBillable     Total          and Leader         Billable   NonBillable    Billable
                                                     Hours          Hours        Hours         Billable Hours        Hours       Hours         Hours
     Leadership Incentives                          12.0∗∗∗          -0.32       11.7∗∗∗           12.0∗∗∗          6.75∗∗        0.86
                                                     (3.27)         (1.50)        (3.17)            (4.33)           (2.69)      (1.42)
     Leader’s Billable Hours                                                                                                                  0.16∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                              (0.017)
     Leader BillableXLeadership                                                                                                              0.072∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                              (0.017)
     Tenure                                             -0.085      -0.28∗∗∗     -0.37∗∗           -0.082            0.21∗        -0.099       0.033
                                                         (0.15)      (0.084)      (0.17)           (0.18)            (0.12)      (0.070)       (0.15)
     Tenure Squared                                    -0.00046     0.0017∗∗     0.0012           0.0018∗          -0.0018∗     0.000060     -0.00096
                                                       (0.0013)    (0.00082)    (0.0015)         (0.00099)         (0.0010)     (0.00067)    (0.0013)
26




     Size of Team                                         -0.20        0.29        0.12             -1.06             0.25        0.70∗∗        -0.73
                                                         (0.49)       (0.30)      (0.45)           (1.54)            (0.51)       (0.33)       (0.49)
     Constant                                           77.5∗∗∗      46.0∗∗∗    123.5∗∗∗           -23.4∗           60.1∗∗∗      64.9∗∗∗      74.5∗∗∗
                                                         (12.7)       (7.12)      (10.8)           (12.5)            (7.02)       (7.61)       (13.7)
     Practice Area Dummies                                 Yes         Yes         Yes               Yes              Yes           Yes          Yes
     Month Dummies                                         Yes         Yes         Yes               Yes              Yes           Yes          Yes
     Person Fixed Effects                                  Yes         Yes         Yes               Yes               No           No           Yes
     NT                                                   7708         7708        7708             3198              7708         7708         7708
     N                                                     375         375         375               117               375          375          375
     R2                                                  0.311        0.470       0.314             0.266            0.116         0.209       0.348

     Leadership Incentives is a dummy variable equal to one in months when the new compensation plan is in effect.
     Leader BillableXLeadership is the product of the Leadership Incentives variable and the Leader’s billable hours.
     Four quarters omitted due to recession.
     Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level.
     ∗   p < 0.10,   ∗∗   p < 0.05,   ∗∗∗   p < 0.01
                                                       Table 4: Leader and Associate Compensation

                                                      (1)                     (2)                 (3)                  (4)
                                                    Leader                 Leader              Associate          Associate
                                              Log(Total Income)       Log(Total Salary)   Log(Total Income)   Log(Total Salary)
     Leadership Incentives                          -0.0020                2.21∗∗∗              0.11∗∗∗             0.57∗∗∗
                                                    (0.022)                 (0.11)              (0.031)              (0.10)
     Tenure                                        0.0021∗∗               0.015∗∗∗             0.010∗∗∗           -0.013∗∗∗
                                                  (0.00091)               (0.0041)             (0.0016)            (0.0045)
     Tenure Squared                               0.0000076               0.000041           -0.000036∗∗         0.00026∗∗∗
                                                 (0.0000060)             (0.000033)           (0.000015)         (0.000050)
     Size of Team                                   -0.0062                 -0.043             -0.00029             0.027∗∗
                                                   (0.0056)                (0.035)             (0.0061)             (0.014)
     Constant                                       9.81∗∗∗                4.65∗∗∗              8.51∗∗∗             6.07∗∗∗
                                                    (0.051)                 (0.24)              (0.089)              (0.19)
     Practice Area Dummies                            Yes                     Yes                 Yes                 Yes
     Month Dummies                                    Yes                     Yes                 Yes                 Yes
     Person Fixed Effects                             Yes                     Yes                 Yes                 Yes
     NT                                              2641                    2709                5670                 5737
27




     N                                                109                     106                 304                 308
     R2                                              0.785                   0.798               0.791               0.671

     Leadership Incentives is a dummy variable equal to one in months when the new compensation plan is in effect.
     Four quarters omitted due to recession.
     Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level.
     ∗   p < 0.10,   ∗∗   p < 0.05,   ∗∗∗   p < 0.01
                                                       Table 5: Robustness Checks for Leader Billable and Non-Billable Hours

                                                     (1)               (2)                  (3)              (4)                   (5)              (6)
                                                  Leader            Leader               Leader           Leader               Leader           Leader
                                              Billable Hours    NonBillable Hours    Billable Hours   NonBillable Hours    Billable Hours   NonBillable Hours
     Leadership Incentives                        -10.8∗∗           7.31∗∗∗                -8.77          8.70∗∗∗                -1.78           7.80∗∗
                                                   (4.74)            (2.02)               (5.77)           (2.80)               (6.68)           (3.14)
     Tenure                                        0.066              -0.12               0.078            -0.068               -0.028            -0.11
                                                   (0.14)           (0.095)               (0.14)           (0.10)               (0.19)           (0.11)
     Tenure Squared                               -0.0013           0.0012               -0.0013          0.00080              -0.0011          0.0011
                                                 (0.0010)          (0.00072)           (0.00097)         (0.00076)            (0.0012)         (0.00079)
     Size of Team                                  2.43∗∗             0.41                2.30∗            0.069                 2.23∗             0.21
                                                   (1.06)            (0.45)               (1.21)           (0.43)               (1.15)           (0.44)
     Sr. Leader                                                                                                                   12.0             1.75
                                                                                                                                (9.49)           (6.09)
     Sr. LeaderXLeadership                                                                                                       -6.38            -1.56
28




                                                                                                                                (8.73)           (3.05)
     Constant                                     142.4∗∗∗            15.8∗∗∗           143.9∗∗∗              7.56            145.2∗∗∗             4.42
                                                   (7.85)              (4.46)            (9.05)              (4.88)             (9.24)           (4.98)
     Practice Area Dummies                          Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes                 Yes              Yes
     Month Dummies                                  Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes                 Yes              Yes
     Person Fixed Effects                           Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes                 Yes              Yes
     NT                                             4686                4685              3270                3270               3740             3740
     N                                               131                 131               131                 131                131              131
     R2                                            0.400               0.509             0.404               0.531               0.406           0.507

     Leadership Incentives is a dummy variable equal to one in months when the new compensation plan is in effect.
     Sr. Leader is a dummy variable for being a leader with above average tenure.
     Sr. LeaderXLeadership is the product of the Leadership Incentives variable and the Sr. Leader variable.
     Columns 1-2 include the full time period, 3-4 omit the recession and the transition period, 5-6 omit the recession.
     Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level.
     ∗   p < 0.10,   ∗∗   p < 0.05,   ∗∗∗   p < 0.01
                                           Table 6: Robustness Checks for Associate Billable and Non-Billable Hours

                                            (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)             (5)             (6)            (7)           (8)         (9)
                                         Associate      Associate      Associate      Associate       Associate       Associate      Associate     Associate   Associate
                                          Billable     NonBillable      Billable     NonBillable       Billable      NonBillable      Billable      Billable    Billable
                                           Hours         Hours           Hours         Hours            Hours          Hours           Hours         Hours       Hours
     Leadership Incentives                 6.16∗          0.69          12.8∗∗∗         -1.68          13.4∗∗∗          0.39
                                           (3.14)        (1.60)          (4.42)        (2.04)           (3.18)         (1.56)
     Leader’s Billable Hours                                                                                                          0.18∗∗∗       0.15∗∗∗     0.17∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                      (0.016)       (0.017)     (0.018)
     Leader BillableXLeadership                                                                                                      0.057∗∗∗      0.077∗∗∗    0.079∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                      (0.015)       (0.021)     (0.016)
     Tenure                                -0.040         -0.30∗∗∗        -0.18        -0.25∗∗∗         -0.033         -0.21∗∗∗        0.056         -0.059      0.097
                                            (0.15)         (0.080)       (0.15)         (0.091)         (0.15)          (0.074)        (0.14)        (0.15)      (0.15)
     Tenure Squared                       -0.00056        0.0018∗∗     0.00024         0.0015∗         -0.0012         0.0013∗∗       -0.0014      -0.00026     -0.0015
                                          (0.0012)       (0.00076)     (0.0013)       (0.00090)       (0.0013)        (0.00067)      (0.0013)      (0.0013)    (0.0013)
     Size of Team                           0.064            0.21         -0.60           0.34           -1.01           -0.074         -0.57       -0.98∗∗     -1.68∗∗
29




                                            (0.46)          (0.27)       (0.47)          (0.31)         (0.70)           (0.38)        (0.44)        (0.48)      (0.73)
     Constant                              72.3∗∗∗         45.1∗∗∗      87.5∗∗∗        44.8∗∗∗          37.4∗∗          14.7∗∗∗       68.2∗∗∗       83.0∗∗∗       27.9
                                            (11.5)          (6.89)       (11.9)          (6.85)         (16.5)           (5.60)        (12.3)        (12.5)      (17.6)
     Practice Area Dummies                   Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes        Yes
     Month Dummies                           Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes        Yes
     Team Dummies                             No              No           No              No             Yes             Yes            No            No         Yes
     Person Fixed Effects                    Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes        Yes
     NT                                      9619            9615         6919            6919           7708             7708          9619          6919        7708
     N                                       382             382           373            373             375              375           382           373        375
     R2                                     0.305           0.472        0.324           0.474           0.341           0.512         0.349          0.359      0.378

     Leadership Incentives is a dummy variable equal to one in months when the new compensation plan is in effect.
     Leader BillableXLeadership is the product of the Leadership Incentives variable and the Leader’s billable hours.
     Columns 1-2 include the full time period, 3-4 omit the recession and the transition periods, 5-6 omit the recession and include Team dummy variables.
     Column 7 includes the full time period, 8 omits the recession and the transition periods, 9 omits the recession and includes Team dummy variables.
     Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level.
     ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
References

Baker, G. (1992): “Incentive Measures and Performance Measurement,” Journal of Political Economy,

  100, 598–614.

Bandiera, O., I. Barankay, and I. Rasul (2007): “Incentives for Managers and Inequality Among

  Workers: Evidence from a Firm-Level Experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(2), 729–

  773.

           (2009): “Social Connections and Incentives in the Workplace: Evidence from Personnel Data,”

  Econometrica, 77(4), 1047–1094.

           (2012): “Team Incentives: Evidence from a Firm Level Experiment,” Journal of the European

  Economic Association, forthcoming.

Bloom, N., and J. Van Reenen (2011): “Human Resource Management and Productivity,” Handbook of

  Labor Economics, 4, 1697–1767.

Boning, B., C. Ichniowski, and K. Shaw (2007): “Opportunity Counts: Teams and the Effectiveness of

  Production Incentives,” Journal of Labor Economics, 25(4), 613–650.

Carr, J., and F. Mathewson (1990): “The Economics of Law Firms: A Study in the Legal Organization

  of the Firm,” Journal of Law and Economics, 33, 307–330.

Drago, R., and G. Garvey (1998): “Incentives for Helping on the Job: Theory and Evidence,” Journal

  of Labor Economics, 16(1), 1–25.

Dumont, E., B. Fortin, N. Jacquemet, and B. Shearer (2008): “Physicians’ Multitasking and Incen-

  tives: Empirical Evidence from a Natural Experiment,” Journal of Health Economics, 27(6), 1436–1450.

Encinosa, III, W. E., M. Gaynor, and J. B. Rebitzer (2007): “The Sociology of Groups and the

  Economics of Incentives: Theory and Evidence on Compensation Systems,” Journal of Economic Behavior

  and Organization, 62, 187–214.

Eriksson, T., and M. Villeval (2008): “Performance-Pay, Sorting and Social Motivation,” Journal of

  Economic Behavior and Organization, 68(2), 412–421.

Falk, A., and A. Ichino (2006): “Clean Evidence on Peer Effects,” Journal of Labor Economics, 24(1),

  39–57.

                                                  30
Freeman, R., and M. Kleiner (2005): “The Last American Shoe Manufacturers: Decreasing Productivity

  and Increasing Profits in the Shift from Piece Rates to Continuous Flow Production,” Industrial Relations:

  A Journal of Economy and Society, 44(2), 307–330.

Garicano, L. (2000): “Hierarchies and the Organization of Knowledge in Production,” Journal of Political

  Economy, 108(5), 874–904.

Garicano, L., and T. Hubbard (2007): “Managerial Leverage is Limited by the Extent of the Market: Hi-

  erarchies, Specialization, and the Utilization of Laywers’ Human Capital,” Journal of Law and Economics,

  50, 1–43.

Garicano, L., and T. Van Zandt (2012): “Hierarchies and the Division of Labor,” in Handbook of

  Organizational Economics, ed. by R. Gibbons, and J. Roberts. Princeton University Press.

Gaynor, M., J. B. Rebitzer, and L. J. Taylor (2004): “Physician Incentives in HMOs,” Journal of

  Political Economy, 112, 915–931.

Gibbons, R. (1998): “Incentives in Organizations,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(4), 115–132.

Griffith, R., and A. D. Neely (2009): “Incentives and Managerial Experience in Multi-Task Teams:

  Evidence from within a Firm,” Journal of Labor Economics, 27(1), 48–82.

Hamilton, B., J. Nickerson, and H. Owan (2003): “Team Incentives and Worker Heterogeneity: An

  Empirical Analysis of the Impact of Teams on Productivity and Participation,” Journal of Political Econ-

  omy, 111(3), 465–497.

Hayes, R., P. Oyer, and S. Schaefer (2006): “Coworker Complementarity and the Stability of Top-

  Management Teams,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 22(1), 184–212.

Helper, S., M. Kleiner, and Y. Wang (2010): “Analyzing Compensation Methods in Manufacturing:

  Piece Rates, Time Rates, or Gain-Sharing?,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hermalin, B. E. (1998): “Toward an Economic Theory of Leadership: Leading by Example,” The American

  Economic Review, 88(5), 1188–1206.

Holmstrom, B. (1982): “Moral Hazard in Teams,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 13(2), 324–340.

Holmstrom, B., and P. Milgrom (1991): “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive Contracts,

  Asset Ownership, and Job Design,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 7(0), 24–52.

                                                    31
Ichniowski, C., and K. Shaw (2003): “Beyond Incentive Pay: Insiders’ Estimates of the Value of Comple-

  mentary Human Resource Management Practices,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(1), 155–180.

         (2012): “Insider Econometrics,” in Handbook of Organizational Economics, ed. by R. Gibbons, and

  J. Roberts. Princeton University Press.

Kandel, E., and E. Lazear (1992): “Peer Pressure and Partnerships,” Journal of Political Economy,

  100(4), 801–817.

Landers, R. M., J. B. Rebitzer, and L. J. Taylor (1996): “Rat Race Redux: Adverse Selection in the

  Determination of Work Hours in Law Firms,” The American Economic Review, 86(3), 329–348.

Larkin, I. (forthcoming): “The Cost of High-Powered Incentives: Employee Gaming in Enterprise Software

  Sales,” Journal of Labor Economics.

Lazear, E. (1986): “Salaries and Piece Rates,” Journal of Business, 59(3), 405–431.

         (1998): “Globalization and the Market for Teammates,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of

  Economic Research.

         (1999): “Personnel Economics: Past Lessons and Future Directions,” Journal of Labor Economics,

  17(2), 199–236.

         (2000): “Performance Pay and Productivity,” The American Economic Review, 90(5), 1346–1361.

         (2012): “Leadership: A Personnel Economics Approach,” Labour Economics, 19(1), 92–101.

Lazear, E., and P. Oyer (2012): “Personnel Economics,” in Handbook of Organizational Economics, ed.

  by R. Gibbons, and J. Roberts. Princeton University Press.

Lazear, E. P., and K. L. Shaw (2007): “Personnel Economics: The Economist’s View of Human Re-

  sources,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(4), 91–114.

Levin, J., and S. Tadelis (2005): “Profit Sharing and the Role of Professional Partnerships,” The Quarterly

  Journal of Economics, 120(1), 131–171.

Lo, D., M. Ghosh, and F. Lafontaine (2011): “The Incentive and Selection Roles of Sales Force Com-

  pensation Contracts,” Journal of Marketing Research, 48(4), 781–798.

Mas, A., and E. Moretti (2009): “Peers at Work,” American Economic Review, 99, 112–145.

                                                    32
Murphy, K. J. (forthcoming): “Executive Compensation: Where We are, and How We got There,” in

  Handbook of the Economics of Finance, ed. by G. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz. Elsevier Science

  North Holland.

Oyer, P., and S. Schaefer (2005): “Why do some Firms give Stock Options to all Employees?: An

  Empirical Examination of Alternative Theories,” Journal of Financial Economics, 76(1), 99–133.

          (2009): “The Personnel-Economic Geography of US Law Firms and Law Schools,” Unpublished

  paper, Stanford University.

           (2010): “Firm/Employee Matching: An Industry Study of American Lawyers,” Unpublished

  manuscript, Stanford University Graduate School of Business.

          (2011): “Personnel Economics: Hiring and Incentives,” Handbook of Labor Economics, 4, 1769–1823.

Prendergast, C. (1999): “The Provision of Incentives in Firms,” Journal of Economic Literature, 37(1),

  7–63.

          (2000): “What Trade-Off of Risk and Incentives?,” The American Economic Review, 90(2), 421–425.

           (2002): “The Tenuous Trade-Off between Risk and Incentives,” Journal of Political Economy,

  110(5), 1071–1102.

          (2009): “Contracts and Conflict in Organizations,” Unpublished manuscript, Graduate School of

  Business, University of Chicago, Chicago. Retrieved September, 28, 2011.

Rebitzer, J. B., and L. J. Taylor (1995): “Efficiency Wages and Employment Rents: The Employer-Size

  Wage Effect in the Job Market for Lawyers,” Journal of Labor Economics, 13(4), 678–708.

Rebitzer, J. B., and L. J. Taylor (2007): “When Knowledge is an Asset: Explaining the Organizational

  Structure of Large Law Firms,” Journal of Labor Economics, 25(2), 201–229.

Salop, J., and S. Salop (1976): “Self-Selection and Turnover in the Labor Market,” Quarterly Journal of

  Economics, 90(4), 619–627.

Wulf, J. (2007): “Authority, Risk and Performance Incentives: Evidence from Division Manager Positions

  Inside Firms,” Journal of Industrial Economics, LV(1), 169–196.




                                                    33
