                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DO THE LAWS OF TAX INCIDENCE HOLD? POINT OF COLLECTION AND THE
                 PASS-THROUGH OF STATE DIESEL TAXES

                                          Wojciech Kopczuk
                                            Justin Marion
                                          Erich Muehlegger
                                            Joel Slemrod

                                         Working Paper 19410
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19410


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2013




Harold Stolper and Ajin Lee provided excellent research assistance. We wish to thank seminar participants
at Cornell, Maryland, Dartmouth, Drexel, Harvard, Wharton, UC Davis, UC Santa Cruz, the National
Tax Association Annual Conference, and the 1st Northeast Workshop on Energy Policy and Environmental
Economics at Cornell for helpful comments. All four authors declare that they have no relevant or
material financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Wojciech Kopczuk, Justin Marion, Erich Muehlegger, and Joel Slemrod. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do the Laws of Tax Incidence Hold? Point of Collection and the Pass-through of State Diesel
Taxes
Wojciech Kopczuk, Justin Marion, Erich Muehlegger, and Joel Slemrod
NBER Working Paper No. 19410
September 2013
JEL No. H22,H26,H71,Q48

                                              ABSTRACT

The canonical theory of taxation holds that the incidence of a tax is independent of the side of the market
which is responsible for remitting the tax to the government. However, this prediction does not survive
in certain circumstances, for example when the ability to evade taxes differs across economic agents.
In this paper, we estimate in the context of state diesel fuel taxes how the incidence of a quantity tax
depends on the point of tax collection, where the level of the supply chain responsible for remitting
the tax varies across states and over time. Our results indicate that moving the point of tax collection
from the retail station to higher in the supply chain substantially raises the pass-through of diesel taxes
to the retail price. Furthermore, tax revenues respond positively to collecting taxes from the distributor
or prime supplier rather than from the retailer, suggesting that evasion is the likely explanation for
the incidence result.


Wojciech Kopczuk                                     Erich Muehlegger
Columbia University                                  Harvard Kennedy School
420 West 118th Street, Rm. 1022 IAB                  79 JFK Street
MC 3323                                              Cambridge, MA 02138
New York, NY 10027                                   and NBER
and NBER                                             erich_muehlegger@hks.harvard.edu
wk2110@columbia.edu
                                                     Joel Slemrod
Justin Marion                                        University of Michigan Business School
Engineering II                                       701 Tappan Street
University of California Santa Cruz                  Room R5396
Santa Cruz, CA 95064                                 Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
marion@ucsc.edu                                      and NBER
                                                     jslemrod@umich.edu
      1      Introduction
      The independence between statutory and economic incidence of a tax is a widely accepted result
      in the theory of taxation. The textbook law of tax incidence holds that the party responsible for
      remitting the tax to the government has no impact on who actually bears the burden, at least
      in the long run. Despite its general acceptance, this law holds only under special circumstances.
      In particular, when parties differ in their ability to evade taxes, the identity of the tax remitter
      may impact the pattern of post-tax prices and therefore the location of their burden. Due to
      different evasion technologies available to the different sides of a market, a tax levied on the
      demand side may shift the demand curve to a different degree than a similar tax levied on supply
      side would shift the supply curve.
          This issue is relevant to the current debate on whether a carbon tax should be levied on
      upstream suppliers or downstream users. Opportunities to avoid taxes vary at different points
      in the supply chain. Although a number of papers (e.g. Metcalf (2009), Neimeier et al. (2008),
      Fischer et al. (1998)) highlight the administrative, distributional and political advantages of
      levying a carbon tax at different points in the supply chain, the literature largely assumes away
      an impact on the incidence of taxes. For example, Metcalf (2009) notes “One might argue that
      it would be better to levy the tax downstream because the carbon price would be more visible
      to end users and thus more likely to figure into energy consumption and planning decisions.
      Such an argument ignores a basic principle of tax incidence analysis: the ultimate burden and
      behavioral response to a tax does not depend on where in the production process the tax is
      levied.” Similarly, Fischer et al. (1998) comments “...a downstream approach will have the
      same ultimate effects on fossil fuel and other prices as an upstream program. This corollary of
      the basic proposition that the ultimate incidence of a tax is independent of where it is applied
      is frequently misunderstood by proponents of downstream-based GHG emissions trading.”
          In this paper, we empirically examine how the identity of the tax remitter affects incidence
      in the diesel fuel market and present empirical evidence that the identity of the remitting party
      affects both collections and the incidence of taxes. Our context is state diesel fuel taxes. States
      differ in the stage of the supply chain responsible for remitting the tax (none requires final
      consumer remittance), and over time states have in general moved the point of tax collection
      to higher in the supply chain. In the early 1980s, states were almost evenly split between
      collecting taxes from retail stations and collecting from intermediate wholesale distributors.
      Over the subsequent twenty years, many states have moved away from collecting from retail
      stations and toward collecting from prime suppliers. States changed tax collection regimes at
      different points in time, a fact which we will exploit in this paper.
          In addition to the considerable variation in the point of collection, the nature of tax evasion in
      the diesel market makes it a desirable setting for studying the effect of remittance on incidence.
      Several factors contribute to creating opportunities for evading diesel taxes. Due to fixed per-
      firm costs, it is relatively costly to monitor the remittance of the tax when there are many
      remitters each responsible for a small fraction of total revenue, as when taxes are collected from
      retail stations. Also, variation in tax rates across jurisdictions and across the uses of diesel
      create opportunities for misstating the ultimate state of sale or the intended use of a gallon of
      diesel.1 Importantly, the opportunities for evasion differ considerably across the stages of the
   1
     As we discuss below, the rate of tax on diesel fuel depends on whether the fuel is used for residential heating or
for commercial purposes.


                                                          2
supply chain. For instance, hiding taxed sales is more difficult for prime suppliers because they
are relatively less costly to monitor. On the other hand, a gallon of diesel sold at the retail
level is usually intended for on-highway use, so retailers will find it more difficult to evade by
misstating the intended use or state of sale. Which form of evasion is more important for tax
collection is an empirical matter.
    We find that the rate of pass-through of diesel taxes to retail prices is dependent on the
location of remittance responsibility. Retail diesel prices are higher, and diesel taxes are passed
through to retail prices to a greater extent, in states where the point of collection is at the
distributor or prime supplier level rather than at the retail level. This suggests that this collec-
tion regime reduces evasion. Lending credence to this result, we are able to trace the impact
of collecting at the prime supplier level through the supply chain. An increase in the tax raises
the wholesale price in supplier-remitting states, although not in retailer-remitting states. More-
over, conditional on the wholesale price, supplier remittance has no effect on pass-through. In
other words, the effect of an increase in taxes on retail prices in supplier remitting states can
be entirely explained via their effect on wholesale prices.
    To examine tax evasion as an explanation for this result, we estimate the response of tax
collections to the point of tax collection. We find evidence suggesting that, ceteris paribus,
states see less tax revenue when taxes are collected at the retail level. This is consistent with
the incidence results, which suggest that retailers have more ability to evade taxes than higher
levels of the supply chain.
    The tax collection regime is unlikely to be randomly assigned, and may be chosen in a way
that maximizes revenues or minimizes the cost of tax collection. While this may suggest that our
estimated effects of the tax collection regime are local, heterogenous treatment effects are less
of a concern in this paper since we are merely testing a null hypothesis of tax collection regime
having no effect on the pass-through of prices. More importantly, however, is the concern
that unobserved variables may influence both evasion and the tax regime. To alleviate such
concerns, we exploit the timing of changes in tax collection regime, showing that both incidence
and collections change discontinuously at the date of the change in remitting party.
    The tax literature has recognized for some time the importance of tax administration and
collection, such as Musgrave (1969). Sorensen (1994), Kau and Rubin (1981), and Balke and
Gardner (1991) suggest links between the size of government or the structure of tax systems and
tax administration. However, theoretical work has largely ignored the implications of evasion
and tax collection on incidence, with a possible exception being Tanzi (1992). Slemrod (2008)
suggests that statutory and economic incidence are not necessarily independent in the presence
of evasion, and discusses the conditions under which the textbook invariance principle fails.
    Despite its prominent place in the theory of taxation, there is scant empirical work testing
the independence of statutory incidence. Saez et al (2012) examine the payroll tax in Greece,
where a rule change extended the earnings cap for individuals starting work in 1993 or later.
They find that the increase in the employer portion of the tax was passed through to wages, while
the employee portion was not, perhaps since posted salaries exclude the employer portion of the
payroll tax. The authors suggest that institutional factors may therefore play an important role
in the incidence of a tax.
    The nature of tax enforcement and how it affects parties at different points in the supply
chain is considered in the context of the value-added tax (VAT) by De Paula and Scheinkman



                                                 3
      (2010). They show that the self-enforcing nature of the VAT leads to spillovers in informality
      between firms at neighboring levels of the supply chain. In related work, Pomeranz (2011) finds
      in a randomized field experiment that random audit announcements are transmitted to the
      compliance behavior of firms up the supply chain.
          Prior empirical work has examined evasion and enforcement of diesel taxes. Marion and
      Muehlegger (2008) study the dyeing of untaxed diesel, a key enforcement innovation in the U.S.
      Agostini and Martinez (2012) study the tax reporting effects of audit threats in Chile.
          A handful of recent studies have estimated the pass-through rate of fuel taxes to retail prices.
      Doyle and Samphantharak (2008) estimate the effect of gas tax holidays in Illinois and Indiana
      on retail prices. Marion and Muehlegger (2011) estimate the dependence of the pass-through
      rate of fuel taxes on a variety of factors related to supply conditions in the fuel market. Other
      relevant work in the pass-through rate of fuel taxation includes Alm et al (2009), Chouinard
      and Perloff (2004,2007).2 The literature related to the pass-through rate of retail sales taxes
      broadly is more sparse, as suggested by Poterba (1996). Besley and Rosen (1999), who estimate
      the pass-through rate of city sales taxes to prices for twelve commodoties, is an exception. A
      number of papers including Sung, Hu and Keeler (1994), Barnett et al (1995), Delipalla and
      O’Donnell (2001), Harding et al (2009), and Chiou and Muehlegger (2009) estimate cigarette
      tax incidence. A smaller literature has examined the incidence of labor market taxes, which are
      often assumed to be fully borne by workers (Fullerton and Metcalf, 2002). Rothstein (2009)
      finds that the EITC expansion in the 1990s reduced wages among low-skilled workers, so that
      low-skilled single mothers benefitted by only 70 cents per dollar of tax credits received. Wages
      declined for non-eligible low-skilled workers as well, which resulted in employers benefitting by
      0.72 cents for every dollar of benefits.
          The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Sections 2 and 3 analyze a model of the evasion
      decision and describes under what circumstances statutory incidence alters economic incidence.
      Section 4 provides relevant institutional details. Section 5 describes the data and methodology.
      Section 6 describes the empirical results regarding pass-through, and section 7 shows the effect
      of remittance on tax compliance. Section 8 concludes.


      2     Pass-through in the Presence of Tax Evasion
      Standard models of tax incidence treat compliance and monitoring as costless activities, which is
      a simplification that in many circumstances does not hold and could have important implications
      for the distribution of the burden of taxation. To see this, consider the demand and supply sides
      of a market, where these can either be thought of as consumers and firms, or alternatively two
      different levels of a supply chain. In equilibrium, price equates demand and supply: Q(p) =
      S(p). Introducing a per-unit tax that must be remitted by suppliers alters this equilibrium to
      Q(pr ) = S(pr − tr ), where pr denotes the retail price faced by consumers and tr is the retail
      stage tax. Alternatively, a similar tax that is instead remitted by the demand side of the market
      results in an equilibrium price ppr (price received by producers selling to the retail consumers)
      such that Q(ppr + tr ) = S(ppr ). The quantity sold and the pattern of net-of-tax prices must be
   2
     Early empirical work on incidence includes Due (1954), Brownlee and Perry (1967), Woodard and Siegelman
(1967), and Sidhu (1971). Chernick and Reschovsky (1997) consider the distributional impact of the gasoline tax by
examining gasoline expenditures across different deciles of the income and expenditure distribution.



                                                        4
      the same in these two equilibria, where ppr + tr = pr .3
           This irrelevance result is driven by demand and supply depending only on the tax-adjusted
      prices. Allowing for differences in either the evasion technology or the cost of monitoring across
      the demand and supply sides of the market potentially alters this conclusion. Consider the
      possibility that demand or supply depends not just on the relevant prices but also on the tax rate
      remitted by each side: the overall tax rate remains tr , but ts of it is to be paid by the suppliers
      and tr − ts by the consumers so that the demand is given by Q(ppr + tr , tr − ts ) = S(ppr , ts ).
      In some cases (as in the payroll tax) statutory incidence is indeed split between the two sides
      of the market and we are asking how a change in it would modify the actual incidence. More
      often statutory incidence and remittance responsibility fall on one side, but even in such a case
      it is still illuminating to consider marginal changes. Due to differences between the two sides of
      the market in terms of the potential for tax evasion or compliance costs, or due to behavioral
      or institutional reasons, demand and/or supply can depend on the remitted tax independently
      of the price.
           It is easy to show by differentiating the equilibrium condition Q(ppr + tr , tr − ts ) = S(ppr , ts )
      with respect to ts , that the effect of change in the tax share of each side will in general alter
                                         ∂S    ∂Q
                               dp        ∂tr + ∂tr                                ∂S        ∂Q
      the equilibrium price:   dts   =   ∂Q
                                             − ∂S    . Only in the special case   ∂tr   +   ∂tr   = 0 will the price not
                                          ∂p   ∂p
      respond to a change in remittance responsibility. The textbook case assumes that both terms
      are zero, leading to the result of the irrelevance of statutory incidence.
          More generally, if being a remitter is beneficial holding price constant (e.g., when it creates
      evasion opportunities), then both terms would be positive. As the tax responsibility is shifted to
      producers, their price should fall reflecting gains that they accrue. If bearing a tax is costly (e.g.,
      due to compliance costs), this conclusion would be reversed. The effect on output depends on
      the relative responsiveness to the tax and price on either side: assuming a positive effect of being
      the remitter of the tax (evasion opportunities), shifting the statutory to the relatively more tax
      sensitive side increases output. Only in a knife-edge case, when these relative sensitivities are
      the same, would the tax not matter for output.
          Figure 1 shows how evasion can affect the equilibrium price in the special case when only
      suppliers can evade. When evasion is not possible, the supply and demand curves are standard.
      Introducing opportunities for evasion can shift the supply curve to the right due to evasion
      opportunities that it affords to suppliers, leading to a new equilibrium with higher output and
      lower producer and consumer prices. A tax can have a smaller impact on prices in the presence
      of evasion (or, more generally, when the tax is collected from the side of the market more able
      to evade). The rest of this section is devoted to micro-founding this intuition in the context
      corresponding to diesel taxation, where evasion opportunities exist.


      2.1    Homogeneous firms
      We offer a simple model to understand the impact of tax evasion on tax incidence and the pass-
      through rate. We assume, as before, that demand is Q(pr ), where pr denotes the tax-inclusive
      price charged by retailers to final consumers. The supply side of the market consists of retailers
      and wholesalers. Retailers buy product from wholesalers at price pw and face variable costs that
      scale with size, cr (qr ), where qr is the amount that each retailer sells with fixed costs Fr .
  3
    We will assume throughout perfect competition, though this argument also survives considering market power.
See Appendix A for details.


                                                               5
                                 Figure 1: Equilibrium effect of tax evasion




                     Price
                                     Q(p)




                                     tr                                  Supply with no evasion



                                             tr
                                                                                 Supply with evasion




                                                                      Quantity




    The government levies a per-unit tax of tr on retailers. Firms required to remit the tax can
evade it. We denote the quantity of evasion as er and the private cost of tax evasion as φr (er , qr ).
This function reflects the resources expended in concealing tax liabilities and the expected value
of penalties assessed by the tax authority. Throughout the model, we maintain the assumption
that the marginal cost of evasion is positive and increasing in the quantity evaded. We begin
by assuming that the evasion cost function is identical across firms, an assumption that we will
later relax to allow for a more complete characterization of the distributional impact of taxation.
    For expositional simplicity, we focus on a specific case where: (1) all firms evade at an interior
solution, and (2) the cost of evasion is independent of the total quantity produced by the firm.
In this case, profits of the retailer are given by:

                             Πr (qr , er ) = (ppr − pw )qr − cr (qr ) + tr er − φr (er ) − Fr             (1)

where ppr = pr − tr is the net-of-tax price. Given the simple evasion technology, the solution
for tax evasion is independent of the quantity sold and is characterized by tr = φ′r (er ) so that
evasion is a function of the tax rate only, e∗r (tr ), and the ability to evade provides a rent of
R(tr ) = tr e∗r (t) − φr (e∗r (tr )) that is increasing in the tax rate (note that R′ (tr ) = e∗r (tr ) by the
envelope theorem).

Observation 1. Holding the net-of-tax price constant, a higher tax rate increases rents from
tax evasion and hence the profits of tax-remitting retailers.

     Higher taxation hurts retailers unless fully passed-on to consumers, yet increases rents from
tax evasion. Intuitively, higher taxes provide to remitters a valuable opportunity to steal po-
tential tax revenue.
     The production decision of a firm is fully characterized by the first-order condition ppr − pw =
c′ (qr ) yielding the solution of qr∗ (ppr − pw ). We denote the maximized tax-exclusive operating
(i.e., accounting for the variable but not the fixed cost) profits as

                         ΠVr (ppr − pw ) = (ppr − pw )qr∗ (ppr − pw ) − cr (qr∗ (ppr − pw ))



                                                            6
           To complete the model, we assume that there is free entry in this industry. In equilibrium,
       firms earn zero profits and markets clear so that

                      Πr (qr∗ (ppr − pw ), e∗ (tr )) =   ΠVr (ppr − pw ) − (Fr − R(tr )) = 0 and
                              N · qr∗ (ppr − pw ) =      Q(ppr + tr ),

       where N is the number of firms in equilibrium. The first equation, a zero-profit condition, pins
       down the value of ppr . The second condition determines the number of firms that will exist in
       equilibrium.
          A higher value of tr must imply a lower value of ppr : because higher taxes generate rents,
       the tax-exclusive operating profit of firms must decline in order to maintain the zero-profit
       condition. In other words, the industry supply curve does not remain constant when the tax
       rate changes but instead shifts down, as in Figure 1.4 More specifically, we need to have:
                                                                
                                         ∂ΠVr       dppr   dpw
                                                         −           + R′ (tr ) = 0 .                               (2)
                                          ∂p        dtr    dtr

       Using the envelope theorem for both ΠVr () and R() implies that

                                            dppr        e∗ (tr )    dpw
                                                 = − ∗ rp         +     .                                           (3)
                                            dtr     qr (pr − pw )   dtr

       For now, we assume that pw is fixed. We will relax this assumption in Section 3 when we intro-
       duce the wholesale sector explicitly. Under this assumption, we have the following observation.
                                                                                            dpp               e∗
       Observation 2. When tr rises, the net-of-tax price received by the retailers           r
                                                                                            dtr    falls by     r
                                                                                                              qr∗   and
                                                                       e∗
       correspondingly the consumer price increases by 1 −             qr∗ .
                                                                         r



           Hence, incidence of the tax is determined here by the extent of tax evasion. Absent tax
       evasion, full incidence falls on the consumers, since free entry implies that supply is infinitely
       elastic to the pre-tax price. With tax evasion, aggregate supply adjusts in response to the
       tax rate due to rents associated with it. The effective tax rate for each (price-taking firm) is
                 e∗
       tr · 1 − qr∗ , and this is the amount that is shifted to the consumers.
                 r




       2.2    Heterogeneous evasion ability
       The burden of taxes may vary across firms according to their ability to evade. In this section,
       we introduce such heterogeneity, and we examine in detail the effect of taxes on industry profits
       and on the distribution of the tax burden across firms.
          We modify the model to allow for heterogeneity along two dimensions. Potential firms are
       heterogeneous in fixed cost Fr and a parameter ar that indexes evasion technology. Upon
       observing its value of these two parameters, the firm makes a decision whether to remain in the
       industry. These parameters are jointly distributed G(Fr , ar ), with the corresponding density of
       g(Fr , ar ).5 The composition of firms in the industry (which depends on how many firms with a
       given set of characteristics exist) will be an important aspect of our analysis.
   4
   Note that in the homogeneous-firm case the supply curve is horizontal.
   5
   It is certainly possible that Fr and ar are correlated. Considering firms that may to some effect choose/invest in
combinations of the two skills is an interesting extension but beyond the scope of this paper.


                                                            7
                       Figure 2: Entry as the result of a price increase (Panel A) and tax increase (Panel B)
                                                               F-aR(t)=constant



                                                                                                                                                                 Entry
                                                      Entry
ability to evade (a)




                                                                                              ability to evade (a)
                                                       Fixed cost (F)                                                                                       Fixed cost (F)



                                   (a) Price Increase                                                                                     (b) Tax Increase



               We specify the evasion technology in a simple way by writing the cost function as φr (er , ar ) =
           ar φr (er /ar ) so that er (t, ar ) = ar er (t, 1) and R(tr , ar ) = ar R(tr , 1) ≡ ar R(tr ). Thus, the
           parameter ar scales up both the level of tax evasion and tax evasion rent proportionally.
               We define an effective fixed cost M = Fr − ar R(tr ), which we will use to index firms given
           the value of tr . It summarizes the information relevant for the firm’s entry decision, with each
           firm comparing the value of its tax-exclusive operating profits ΠV to M .
               The shaded areas of Figure 2a illustrate the characteristics of firms that enter, as well as the
           effect of increasing the price on the threshold values of ar and Fr required for entry. Denote
           the effective fixed cost of the marginal firm as M    c. As M c increases, the frontier shifts out to the
           right uniformly, and for any value of ar firms with higher fixed costs, Fr , enter.
               Figure 2b shows the effect of an increase in the tax rate. For any value of ar , increased
           evasion rents allow for firms with a higher Fr to now enter. The strength of this effect depends
           on ar , because the ability to evade determines the rent from tax evasion. In particular, at ar = 0
           a change in the tax rate does not stimulate entry.
               To obtain the number of retailers entering the market, we integrate the joint density of fixed
           costs and evasion ability over those values of Fr and ar that lead to nonnegative profits. The
           interior integral in the following expression determines the number of firms at each value of ar
           for whom the fixed cost is sufficiently low to enter. The outside integral then integrates across
           all values of ar .
                                                                                                                     Z       ∞   Z   c+aR(tr )
                                                                                                                                     M
                                     c, tr ) = P (Fr − ar R(tr ) < M
                                   H(M                             c) =                                                                          g(F, a) dF da
                                                                                                                         0       0

                                                                                  c and tr :
           It is straightforward to evaluate how the number of firms changes with M

                                                        c, tr )               Z       ∞
                                                     ∂H(M                                   c + aR(tr ), a) da
                                                                =                         g(M
                                                        c
                                                       ∂M                         0

           and

                     c, tr )       Z    ∞                                                 Z                          ∞
                  ∂H(M                        ′       c+aR(tr ), a) da =                                                                                   c, tr ] ∂H
                                                                                                                                    c+aR(tr ), a) da = E[e|M
                             =              aR (tr )g(M                                                                  e(tr , a)g(M
                    ∂tr             0                                                                 0                                                             c
                                                                                                                                                                   ∂M


                                                                                          8
where the latter formula uses the fact that aR′ (tr ) = e by the envelope theorem. E[e|M     c, tr ]
denotes the average value of evasion for the marginal firms (those with M = Mc), and its presence
signifies that taxation encourages entry in proportion to the extent of evasion.
    To trace out the supply curve, note that in free-entry equilibrium all retail firms satisfying

                                        ΠVr (ppr − pw ) ≥ M = Fr − ar R(tr )                       (4)

enter. Hence, the overall supply curve is given by

                           S(ppr − pw , tr ) = H(ΠVr (ppr − pw ), tr ) · qr (ppr − pw ) ,

where the first term represents the number of firms entering the industry and the second term
denotes output per firm. The elasticity of industry supply, depends on the elasticity of the
number of firms and the elasticity of output per firm: εpS = εpN + εpq . Industry supply is (weakly)
increasing in price and, as long as there is at least some tax evasion, in the tax rate as well.
(See Appendix A for details.)
    To understand the effect of a change in tr on the equilibrium price, consider how profits
change for a given value of ar . The location of a marginal firm Fr∗ is determined by

                                                                                          dF ∗
             ∂ΠVr         dppr         d{Fr∗ − ar R(tr )}        dppr    e(ar , tr )     r

                  ·                  −                    = 0 =⇒      =−             + dtr .       (5)
              ∂p          dtr                 dtr                dtr        qr         qr

This identity highlights two different forces that determine pass-through. The retail price re-
ceived by the producers falls in proportion to tax evasion — this is a shift in the supply curve
due to a change in tr . This effect is mitigated by entry in the industry corresponding to an
increase in the fixed cost that allows firms to survive — this corresponds to a shift along the
new supply curve. Critically, the pass-through rate is reduced by the extent of tax evasion.


2.2.1    Equilibrium pass-through rate
Identity (5) reflects the pass-through rate only implicitly because it depends on unknown effects
on entry, dF
           dtr . The shift along the supply curve depends on supply and demand elasticities. To
              r


determine them, we need to consider the equilibrium of the market, i.e. where S(ppr − pw , tr ) =
D(ppr + tr ). Differentiating with respect to the tax rate yields
                                                                                 
                                      ∂S         dppr         ∂S    ∂D       dppr
                                         ·                  +     =               +1 ,
                                      ∂p         dtr          ∂tr   ∂p       dtr

which after substitution for the derivative of the supply curve and expressing in terms of elas-
ticities yields
                       dppr        εpD               εpN           c, tr ]
                                                               E[e|M
                            = p      p    p − p        p   p ·             ,                 (6)
                       dtr    εN + εq − εD      εN + εq − εD       qr
where εpD < 0, εpN , and εpq are the price elasticities of demand, the number of firms, and per firm
quantity, respectively. (Note that we normalize all elasticities by multiplying through by ppr .)
In the absence of evasion (e = 0), this is the standard formula for tax incidence since εpN + εpq is
the supply elasticity.
                                                             c r] p
    The effect due to tax evasion is represented by E[e|qM,t r
                                                                 εN , and it counteracts the demand


                                                                9
                      Figure 3: Changes in the composition of firms in equilibrium


                                                                                           Marginal firms under old tax




                            ability to evade (a)
                                                                                                                    New entry
                                                   Marginal firms under new tax,
                                                   new equilibrium

                                                                                               Marginal firms under new tax,
                                                                                               no price change


                                                                                        Exit



                                                                                                   Fixed cost (F)




       effect. As identity (5) highlights, the increase in rents from tax evasion reduces pass-through.
       That identity corresponds to a fixed level of ar , but integrated over all levels of ability, the
                                 c
       impact of evasion is E[e|qMr ,tr ] as in formula (6). The importance of the evasion channel depends
       on how elastic is entry relative to other determinants of supply and demand.
           Equation (6) illustrates that the pass-through of benefits from evasion depend on the evasion
       of the marginal entrant. An increase in the tax rate increases rents for all existing tax evaders in
       proportion to their evasion, but this effect is inframarginal and does not enter the pass-through
       rate. What does enter is tax evasion on the margin, E[e|qM̂r ,tr ] . The higher is marginal evasion,
       the less consumer price changes.6 To understand this point, consider two extreme assumptions.
       At one extreme where entry is not allowed and εP        N = 0, all tax evasion is inframarginal and
       has no effect on pass-through. The other extreme, when εP       N = ∞, corresponds to the case of
       homogeneous firms as in Section 2.1. Here, the last term of (6) reduces to E[e|qM̂r ,tr ] , so that
       evasion rents reduce pass-through one-for-one.
           The case of inelastic demand (εpD = 0) is likely to be of interest for fuel markets. Here the
                                                                             εp
       impact of tax evasion on the pass-through rate is qualified by εp +ε   N
                                                                                p , so that it depends on the
                                                                                q
                                                                            N
                                                                       7
       relative importance of entry in the overall supply elasticity.


       2.2.2    Taxation and industry firm composition
       Figure 3 shows the logic of entry/exit decisions. An increase in the tax rate encourages firms to
       enter the tax-remitting industry by shifting the frontier out to the dashed line. The reduction in
       price that follows reduces profits and induces firms to exit. Entering firms are disproportionately
       those with high ability to evade. Exiting firms are spread out over the distribution. As a result,
       the composition of firms in the industry shifts away from low-evading firms (low values of a) to
       high-evading firms (high values of a).
           Changes in taxation affect inframarginal firms through the price of output and the rents to
   6
     This effect is not one-for-one, though, because a lower producers’ price discourages entry by reducing regular
profits in an analogous way to the standard incidence effect.
   7
     It is worth noting that the precise formulation is driven by the clean separation between evasion and output per
firm that we have assumed.


                                                                                   10
evasion. An increase in taxation increases evasion rents for all firms and reduces the net-of-tax
output price. These conflicting effects create winners and losers among firms that stay in the
industry, depending on the ability to evade. For firms with a high value of ar , the evasion rent
effect dominates and net profits increase. This implies that firms more able and willing to evade
taxes should prefer (and lobby) that taxes be collected from their stage of production.


2.2.3    Taxation and industry profits
In the standard case without evasion, the pass-through fraction determines how the overall
burden of tax is split between the two sides of the market. This is not the case here. While
the effect of the tax on consumers goes through the price only, the effect on producers has two
components: a price effect and the direct effect on the rents from tax evasion. Consider total
industry profits:
                              Z
                                                                                 
             Π=                                ΠVr (ppr − pw ) − Fr + R(tr , ar ) dG(ar , Fr ) ,
                                     p
                  Fr −ar R(tr )≤ΠV
                                 r (pr −pw )



where the integration is over all producing firms. Taking derivatives of this expression with
respect to tr is simplified by the fact that marginal entering firms have zero profits, so that the
effect of a change in the number of firms vanishes. Consequently,
                                     Z                                            
                 dΠ                                        dppr
                     =                                                q + e(tr , ar ) dG(ar , Fr ) .
                 dtr                                       dtr
                                            p
                         Fr −ar R(tr )≤ΠV
                                        r (pr −pw )



Writing ē for average tax evasion and q̄ for average output (which in our context is the same as
each firm’s output), this can be rewritten as
                                                                                      
                               dΠ̄                                         dppr   ē
                                   = H(ΠVr (ppr − pw ), tr )q̄                  +          .
                               dtr                                         dtr    q̄

As before, if not for the presence of q̄ē , this result would be standard: the effect on industry
profit is proportional to output and the change in the price margin (and because the effect
on consumers is also proportional to the output, it is the price change that determines the
relative burden on the producers). The presence of tax evasion increases profits and mitigates
the impact of the price change, and the burden on producers is lower than the pass-through rate
would indicate.
    Substituting from formula 6 yields

        dΠ̄ .                                εpD        ē     εpN            c, tr ]
                                                                           E[e|M
               H(ΠVr (ppr − pw ), tr )q̄ = p    p    p +    − p   p    p ·             .               (7)
        dtr                               εN + εq − εD   q̄ εN + εq − εD       q̄

Equation (7) says that the role of tax evasion in determining the full impact of the tax rate
on industry profits flows through two channels. One reflects the average tax evasion, which
influences (positively) industry profits from rents. The other reflects the effect of tax evasion on
the margin, which is critical for determining the effect on the equilibrium price.
    In general, marginal and average tax evasion are not restricted (they depend on the shape
of the distribution and, in particular, the correlation between fixed cost and ability to evade) so


                                                       11
            Figure 4: Changes in the composition of firms depending on point of taxation




                           ability to evade (a)



                                                  Marginal firms when
                                                                            B




                                                  no evasion
                                                                                     Marginal firms under tax
                                                                                     with evasion




                                                                        A
                                                                                             Fixed cost (F)




       that the overall effect can go in either direction. Trivially, the impact of taxation on profits may
       be negative — it will be so when tax evasion is not present. If non-evaders have low fixed cost,
       the average tax evasion can be close to zero while marginal tax evasion is substantial, so that the
       sum of the last two (evasion-related) terms can be negative. Furthermore, the whole expression
       can also be positive. To see this, note that making some of the inframarginal firms better at
       evasion would increase average tax evasion without affecting either these firms’ behavior or the
       equilibrium. As a result, a judicious choice of the distribution of characteristics will allow for
       making q̄ē sufficiently large and turning the whole expression positive.
          In sum, the cost of the tax for the industry as the whole may be lower or higher than the
       standard formula would indicate.


       2.2.4    How Evasion Affects Firm Composition and Industry Profits
       Recall that Figure 1 illustrates the effect of a tax remitted by retailers on the market equilibrium.
       To illustrate the effect of evasion on retailer prices and industry profits, we show the equilibrium
       both with and without evasion. Two observations are worth noting. First, compared to the
       no evasion case, evasion shifts the supply curve outward. This effect partially compensates
       consumers for the presence of the tax. Second, evasion has distributional implications for the
       producers. The higher pass-through under no evasion corresponds to a movement up the demand
       curve, so that overall output is lower relative to the case with evasion. Hence, eliminating evasion
       corresponds to (1) higher regular profits for the surviving firms (because price increases) and (2)
       fewer firms in the industry (because output per firm is higher and yet overall output is lower).
          Figure 4 illustrates the effect on the composition of the firms. Firms in region B exist when
       evasion is possible but disappear when evasion is not possible. Low fixed cost but evasion-averse
       evading firms in region A do not exist when evasion is possible, but the increase in output price
       when evasion is eliminated makes it possible for them to enter and survive.
          For the effect on industry profits as the whole, equation (7) provides some guidance.8 As
   8
    The comparison of the right-hand sides makes sense when output levels are identical, because otherwise there
are also level differences in profits. One such case is when we consider a small tax around t = 0. Another is when



                                                                                12
      previously discussed, the effect of evasion is ambiguous in general. When there is no tax evasion,
      the formula still applies but the tax evasion terms naturally vanish. Hence, predictions about
      under which regime the right-hand side of this formula is bigger depend on the distribution of
      firms and behavioral elasticities.
          Thus, eliminating tax evasion has multiple effects from the point of view of the industry.
      First, it creates winners and losers among firms. Second, the effect on the overall profits in the
      industry is in general ambiguous and depends on the relative tax evasion pursued by average
      versus marginal firms. Third, it reduces the number of firms in the industry.


      3     Remitting party and pass-through
      We now consider adding a wholesale sector to the model, which will allow us to analyze moving
      the remittance responsibility to a different level of the supply chain. As with the retail sector,
      we assume there is a large number of potential wholesalers, heterogeneous with respect to fixed
      cost Fw and ability to evade aw , that make entry decisions and maximize profits. The tax (if
      any) that is levied on wholesale firms is denoted by tw , and these firms are not directly affected
      by the tax imposed on the retailers tr . We denote by ppw the net-of-tax price that is charged by
      the producers, so that pw = ppw + tw . Maximized profits in the wholesale sector are denoted by
      ΠVw (ppw ) and the rents from tax evasion are Rw (tw , aw ) = aw Rw (tw ). The partial equilibrium
      analysis of the effect of changes in ppw and tw on this upstream stage is the same as before.
          An equilibrium relationship links demand and the output levels in the two sectors:

                                 D(ppr + tr ) = S(ppr − ppw − tw , tr ) = W (ppw , tw ) ,

      where W is the overall supply in the wholesale industry that depends on the price it charges
      and the tax that it can evade. Focusing first on the effect of tr on ppw , we can use the equality
      between final demand and wholesale output to obtain:
                                                                                            
                            ∂D       dppr            ∂W dppw    dppw   εp            dppr
                                          +1       =         =⇒      = pD                 +1               (8)
                            ∂p       dtr             ∂p dtr     dtr   εW             dtr

      where εpW is the elasticity of wholesale output (and, where as before, we are defining it by
      multiplying by ppr ). Substituting into (6), recalling εpS = εpN + εpq , and simplifying yields:

                     dppr       εp (εp + εp )            εpN εpW             c, tr ]
                                                                         E[e|M
                          = p p D Sp p W P p − p p         p p       p ·             .
                     dtr   εS εW − εD εS − εD εW εS εW − εD εS − εP
                                                                  D εW       qr

      Hence, our original conclusions are modified only slightly: the standard formula has to be
      modified to reflect supply responses along the whole supply chain,and the effect of evasion is
      mitigated by εP            P
                      W . When εW = ∞, the price in the wholesale sector is fixed, so that our previous
                                 P
      analysis applies. When εW < ∞, the effect of tax evasion on retail price is mitigated because
      it is partially accommodated on the wholesale side. See appendix A for the effect of tr on the
      wholesale price ppw .
          The effect of the tax in the wholesale sector can be analyzed in the same way as the tax in
demand is inelastic, εpD = 0. In what follows, when considering the wholesale tax we will consider a marginal shift of
the tax across sectors.


                                                           13
      the retail sector. First, note that analogously to equation (6) we can derive

                           dppw       εp     εp            c, tW ]
                                                     E[eW |M           εp   dppr
                                = − p S p − p W Np ·               + p S p                                          (9)
                           dtw     εS + εW εS + εW       qW         εS + εW dtw

      so that the pass-through rate of the wholesale tax modifies regular pass-through by the impact
      of the wholesale tax on evasion in the wholesale industry, scaled by the entry elasticity in
      that industry (εpW N ), and needs to be adjusted for the impact of the tax on the price in the
                     dpr
      retail sector, dtw
                          , if any. Then, by differentiating the equilibrium condition in the final goods
                   p               p   p
      market D(pr +   trp) = S(p
                                 r − pw − tw , tr ) with respect to tw to establish the relationship between
                 p
      dpp       ε     dp
      dtw = εp −εp     dtw + 1 and substituting, one obtains
        r        S       w
               S   D



                       dppw          εpD εpS            εpW N (εpS − εpD )           c, tw ]
                                                                               E[ew |M
                            = p p     p p     P  p − p p       p p      P  p ·                                     (10)
                       dtw   εS εW − εD εS − εD εW  εS εW − εD εS − εD εW          qw

      As to the impact on the retail price:
                                                                                                         c, tw ]
       dppr     εp             dppw                          εP  P
                                                              S εW                  εpW N εpS        E[ew |M
            = p S p                 +1       =                             −                     p ·               .
       dtw   εS − εD           dtw               εpS εpW      p p     P  p
                                                           − εD εS − εD εW    p  p    p p     P
                                                                             εS εW − εD εS − εD εW       qw

      Finally, in order to compare the impact of the two types of taxes on the retail price, note that
      dpr    dpp             dpr  dpp
      dtr = dtr + 1, while dtw = dtw . Hence, considering ∆tr + ∆tw = 0 yields
                r                   r



                                                                                                       !
         dpr       dpr        εP                         εpW N          c, tw ]
                                                                  E[ew |M          εp        c, tr ]
                                                                                         E[e|M
             ∆tr +     ∆tw = P X P                     p       p                − p N p                    ∆tr ,   (11)
         dtr       dtw      εX − εD                   εW N + εW q     qw         εN + εq     qr

                       εp εp
      where εpX = εpS+εWp , the whole supply chain output elasticity. The sign of this effect depends
                    S   W
      on the sign of the term in parentheses. When either (1) εpq = 0 or εpN = ∞ and (2) εpW q = 0
      or εpW N = ∞ (i.e., in each market the entry margin solely determines responsiveness), the
                                                             c          c
      expression in brackets reduces to E[ewq|wM,tw ]
                                                      − E[e|qMr ,tr ] , so that shifting the tax to the retail
      sector increases consumer prices if the retail sector has relatively less evasion on the margin and
      decreases prices otherwise. Notice that the first term in (11) is the standard incidence expression,
      implying that the point of taxation choice scales the standard incidence by the difference in tax
      evasion in the two sectors.9
          As an example, consider the case of the degenerate distribution where all firms have an
      identical fixed cost and evasion ability so that εpN = εpW N = εpS = εpW = εpX = ∞. In this case,
      equation (11) reduces to
                                                                                       
                                             dpr       dpr                  e∗w   e∗r
                                                 ∆tr +     ∆tw =              ∗
                                                                                −           ∆tr .                  (12)
                                             dtr       dtw                  qw    qr∗

      Only in the special case when evasion happens to be exactly the same in each sector does the
      point of taxation not matter.
9
    See Appendix A for the effect of incidence shift on the wholesale price.




                                                                   14
       3.1    The effect on equilibrium and taxable quantity
       The effect of a change in the remittance pattern
                                                          (∆tr + ∆tw = 0) on the equilibrium output
                             ′      dpr       dpr
       Q, given by ∆Q = Q (pr ) dtr ∆tr + dtw ∆tw is simply proportional to the effect on the retail
       price that is described by formula (11). The effect on taxable output is more complicated.
       Overall taxable output differs from the equilibrium quantity by the amount of tax evasion in
       the two sectors, Q − E − Ew , where E is overall evasion in the retail sector and Ew is the overall
       evasion in the wholesale sector. Overall evasion in each sector is simply the aggregate of evasion
       by all firms in that sector. Hence, evasion in the retail sector is
                                     Z    ∞   Z   ΠV (pp
                                                       r −pw )+aR(tr )
                                E=                                       e(tr , a)g(F, a) dF da
                                      0       0

       and evasion in the wholesale sector is analogous.
           The effect of a change in taxation reflects two different channels. First, it affects marginal
       firms by changing the fixed cost required for entry ΠV (ppr − pw ) + aR(tr ) (for any a). The rent
       from evasion R(t) changes in both sectors, as do price margins and thereby profits. As we have
       discussed in the previous section, these effects reflect the tax evasion of the marginal firms.
           Second, the change in taxation affects tax evasion of existing firms, e(tr , a) and ew (tw , a).
       Recall that tax evasion in this model has been purely determined by tax evasion technology
       aφx (e/a) (where x ∈ {r, w}) as tx = φx (e/a). We have not restricted φr and φw other than
       assuming that they are increasing and convex. Holding the sign of the difference in tax evasion
       for marginal (low a) firms in the two sectors constant, we can vary the shape of these two
       functions to obtain the opposite relationship for the infra-marginal firms. Hence, in general,
       the effect of a change in the point of remittance on total evasion in the two sectors reflects the
       interplay between the marginal and inframarginal effects that can in principle go in the direction
       that is opposite to what the effect on the price (which is determined by marginal evasion only)
       might indicate. However, it is natural to expect that some notion of a “high-evasion” sector
       might translate into high evasion both on the margin and for existing firms.
           Finally, this observation also suggests that the effect of a change in the point of taxation on
       the responsiveness of taxable quantity to overall tax rate is unlikely to follow a simple pattern.
       In particular, inframarginal firms in the high evasion sector may be less responsive (e.g., because
       they have reached the feasible limit on the amount of evasion that they can pursue) than those
       in the low-evasion sector, so that taxable quantity need not be less responsive when it is shifted
       to the low-evasion sector.


       4     Institutional Details
       4.1    The Diesel Supply Chain and Tax Remittance
       Crude oil is distilled into its constituent products at oil refineries. After the distillation process,
       No. 2 distillate, the general term describing diesel fuel, is further processed to meet regulatory
       standards dictating sulfur content, which differs depending on location of eventual sale, season,
       and intended use.10 The final product is held by prime suppliers at bulk terminals. There
  10
     From October 1993 to August 2006, the allowable sulfur content for on-highway diesel fuel was 500 parts per
million (ppm). Federal regulations did not constrain the sulfur content of diesel intended for other uses. Beginning


                                                               15
      it is purchased by regional wholesale distributors, sometimes called “jobbers,” for eventual
      delivery to retail outlets or directly to larger-scale end-users such as trucking companies. No. 2
      distillate for use in home heating and industrial processes is referred to as fuel oil, while that
      used in vehicles is referred to as diesel. The two types are chemically equivalent other than the
      potentially different regulated sulfur content.
          Diesel intended for highway use is subject to federal taxes of 24.4 cents per gallon and state
      taxes that currently range from 8 to 35.1 cents per gallon. Federal fuel taxes are the primary
      source of revenue for the Federal Highway Trust, which funds infrastructure investment.
          Over time, the responsibility for the remittance of federal taxes has moved up the supply
      chain. Federal tax collection traditionally occurred at the retail level. In 1988, the point
      of taxation was moved to the wholesale distributor level, and in 1994 the responsibility for
      remittance was shifted again to its current location at the prime supplier level. There has also
      been considerable variation in the point of collection for state diesel taxes, both across states
      and over time, which we exploit in our empirical analysis that follows.


      4.2     Opportunities for Evasion and Avoidance
      Several characteristics of the market for diesel and the method of tax collection affect the
      opportunities for tax evasion and therefore how remittance can impact tax incidence. With a
      few exceptions, evasion can generally be grouped into one of three categories: the misreporting
      of the intended use of fuel, not remitting owed taxes, and bootlegging.
          An incentive to misreport exists because diesel is taxed differentially depending on use. On-
      highway use is subject to state and federal taxes, but diesel used for home heating, industry
      or agriculture is untaxed. Because both taxable and non-taxable uses are significant sources of
      demand for diesel,11 prime suppliers and distributors responsible for tax remittance may be able
      to credibly misreport diesel sold to retail stations as being for untaxed use. Historical evidence,
      documented in Marion and Muehlegger (2008), suggests that misreporting reduced tax revenues
      by 25-30 percent prior to the introduction of red dye for untaxed diesel fuel.12
          Some evasion of this type is done by end-users who consume both taxed and untaxed fuel.
      To this extent, the placement of statutory incidence in the supply chain is not relevant. Large
      scale schemes, where wholesalers purchase fuel oil and sell this to retail outlets as on-highway
      diesel, presumably would be curtailed by retail collection.
          A second form of evasion involves an incurred tax liability being incurred that is not remitted
      to the government. This is most likely to occur at the retailer or distributor level. Simple
September 1, 2006, the EPA began phasing in Ultra Low Sulfur Diesel Fuel requirements, requiring that sulfur content
not exceed 15 ppm. By 2010 all diesel sold for on-highway use met this standard. Non-road diesel was required to
move to 500 ppm in 2007, and the 15 ppm standard is currently being phased in.
  11
     According to data from the Energy Information Administration, in 2004, 59.6 percent of distillate sales to end
users were retail sales for on-highway use.
  12
     Beginning in October 1993, terminals were required to add red dye to diesel fuel sold for untaxed off-highway
use. This allowed for a simple visual inspection to verify that taxes had been paid on a particular gallon – a truck
with red diesel in its gas tank was evading taxes. In the month the dye program began, reported sales of diesel for
use on-highway rose by 25-30 percent, with a corresponding decline in reported sales for untaxed uses. Although
the dye program was initially highly successful at curtailing this form of evasion, several new techniques have been
employed by evaders to skirt the dyeing regulations. In particular, evaders have been found offloading fuel without
injecting dye, removing dye from the fuel, and/or masking the dye’s color. Also, misreporting the fuel’s intended use
may still be an issue in some circumstances, as states allow for refunds of the tax remitted if the user later claims
the fuel was used for untaxed purchases. This is often true in agriculture uses.


                                                         16
underreporting is one possible issue. Another classic example is the “daisy chain,” which is
sometimes observed when the distributor is responsible for remitting the tax. Under this scheme
a gallon of diesel is sold by the prime supplier to the wholesale distributor, who then sells it
to other dummy distributors in a series of (likely paper-only) transactions. At some point the
gallon is sold to a retail station, and the party responsible for remitting the tax “disappears.”
     Moving the point of taxation up the supply chain reduces the number of parties with a tax
liability. According to the Internal Revenue Service, there are 1,343 active bulk fuel terminals in
the United States, compared with around 855,915 retail gasoline station establishments reported
in the County Business Patterns. Monitoring and identifying underpayment of tax liabilities
is therefore thought by tax enforcement authorities to be substantially easier when the tax is
remitted by parties higher in the supply chain, simply by virtue of there being fewer parties to
monitor. (Baluch, 1996)
     A third type of evasion exploits differential rates of taxation across different jurisdictions.
Bootlegging is one example, where purchases are made by a distributor in a low-tax state, and
then sold to retailers in a neighboring high-tax state at a higher price that reflects the tax rate
in place. A second example involves a distributor that purchases fuel from a supplier claiming
it is intended for export to another state and thereby not subject to the state tax. Rather than
exporting, the firm then sells it to a within-state retail station.
     Trucking companies pay state diesel taxes based on miles driven in each state. An interstate
trucker submits a tax return to the International Fuel Tax Agreement (IFTA) that states the
miles driven by state and is then credited or taxed based on the difference between the tax owed
and tax already paid. This creates an incentive to understate total miles driven, and also to
overstate miles driven in high tax states.
     Interjurisdictional evasion also arises through Native American reservations in a variety of
ways. Due to the sovereignty of the reservations, foreign imports to a reservation are not tracked
by the federal government or state governments. Imported gallons can then be diverted to retail
stations outside the reservation.
     Finally, it is also possible to illicitly import untaxed fuel from abroad, subsequently selling
the fuel to retail stations. With the exception of IFTA evasion by truckers, most forms of
interjurisdictional methods for evasion are curtailed by placing the responsibility of remittance
at the retail level, which makes the state of sale more easily verified.
     In the context of diesel taxation, the theoretical model and institutional details suggest
that tax pass-through should be greater when the remitting party is upstream rather than
downstream. Especially since the dyeing regime was instituted, most of the opportunities for
evasion exist downstream of the wholesale terminal, at either the distributor or retailer level.
Moreover, wholesalers are typically major oil brands with operations in many states, while
distributors and retail stations are smaller, more numerous and ownership is less concentrated.
If detection of illegal activity is easier or close scrutiny less costly, evasion opportunities at the
wholesale terminal may be further curtailed. Finally, opportunities for entry likely differ. Entry
and exit are relatively easy at the distributor and retail level relative to at the terminal level,
where entry may face constraints related to permitting and siting, which means that rents from
evasion are less likely to be competed away at the prime supplier level. All three would tend
to increase pass-through of a tax remitted by terminal owners relative to a tax remitted further
downstream.



                                                 17
       5     Data and Methodology
       To this point we have argued that the pass-through rate of a tax to the retail price can, in a
       setting where evasion is important, depend on the location of tax remittance responsibility. We
       now proceed to examine the evidence for this hypothesis in the diesel fuel market.


       5.1    Data
       We collected data on the point of tax collection from successive annual issues of “Highway
       Taxes and Fees: How They Are Collected and Distributed,” published by the Federal Highway
       Adminstration. For each state and year, the Federal Highway Administration contacts state tax
       authorities and collects data on the point of collection for diesel and gasoline taxes.
           In Figure 5, we display the variation in the point of taxation over time. In the mid-eighties,
       the majority of states collected taxes from distributors. At the beginning of our sample in 1986,
       distributors were responsible for remittance in 37 states, with the balance of states collecting
       from retailers. The early nineties saw a trend toward collecting taxes from higher points in the
       supply chain, in particular from the prime supplier. In January 1993, Michigan became the
       first state to do so, and by the end of 2006 twenty states collected taxes from prime suppliers.
       While a plurality of states still collect from wholesale distributors, the practice of collecting from
       retailers has been almost entirely phased out, with only New Jersey and Oregon collecting tax
       from retailers at the end of our sample in 2006.13

                                        Figure 5: Tax remittance liability over time

                            Number of
                              states
                            45



                            40



                            35



                            30
                                                                Prime supplier
                                                                Distributor
                            25                                  Retailer



                            20



                            15



                            10



                             5



                             0
                                 1986   1987   1988   1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006




           In Figure 6, we present maps of the variation in the point of tax collection across states
       for 1990, 1997, and 2004.14 In 1990, the entire eastern section of the U.S. collected taxes from
       the distributor. The collection of taxes at the retail level was concentrated in Midwestern and
       Western states. Panels B and C describe the geographic characteristics of the transition to taxing
  13
     Oregon is a special case. There, diesel used for trucking is not taxed directly, and instead a levy on weight-miles
driven within the state is collected. Given the importance of trucking in the diesel market, we will in general exclude
Oregon from the analysis.
  14
     Darker shading corresponds to further upstream tax collection. The lightest shade corresponds to states that
collect from retailers. The darkest states collect taxes from the wholesale terminal operators.



                                                                                                   18
at higher levels of the supply chain. During this time, the West, Midwest, and mid-Atlantic
transitioned largely toward collecting diesel taxes from terminal operators. Collection at the
distributor level was concentrated in the northeast, south, and mountain states. An interesting
observation from this figure is that the point-of-collection policy seems to be spatially correlated,
which suggests that there are spillovers of some kind across states in tax collection.

                               Figure 6: Tax Collection By State




        (a) Year 1990                       (b) Year 1997                       (c) Year 2004


    In Table 1, we further describe the nature of the variation in tax collection by showing the
matrix of changes in point of collection. We observe 29 changes in the point of tax collection,
of which 28 move the point of collection upstream. Eight of these are changes from retailer
collection to distributor collection, five are retailer to supplier shifts, and fifteen are distributor
to supplier shifts. Only one state, New Jersey, moves the point of collection downstream, from
the distributor level to retail outlets.
    Several monthly diesel price series are available at the state level from the Energy Information
Administration (EIA). The EIA collects diesel prices for select states, mostly comprising states
in the Northeast, Mid-Atlantic, Upper Midwest and a handful of Northwestern states with
relatively high use of home heating oil. Beginning in 1983, the EIA reports an average price
of No. 2 distillate, which includes taxed diesel fuel, untaxed diesel fuel, and heating oil. It
distinguishes between diesel sold through retail outlets and that sold for resale. However, the
resale price can include sales by prime suppliers to local distributors, or from local distributors
to retail stations, which will pose a disadvantage in assessing how tax collection affects how
retail stations share the tax burden with distributors, or distributors with prime suppliers‘.
Furthermore, prior to 1994, the resale price of No. 2 distillate also included untaxed sales of
diesel.
    From 1994 on, the EIA also reports the average retail and resale prices specifically of No.
2 diesel. This distinction is irrelevant for sales through retail outlets, as only diesel fuel is sold
through retail outlets. During the period of time where the series overlap (from 1994 on), the
retail prices for No. 2 distillate and diesel fuel are identical. On the other hand, resale of No. 2
distillate can include transactions for on-highway diesel, heating oil, or other uses of distillate.
Therefore, the series describing the resale prices of No. 2 distillate and No. 2 diesel are not
perfect substitutes. The two series move in lock-step (ρ = 0.994), but the resale price for No. 2
distillate averages 1.4 cpg less than the resale price for diesel fuel. For these reasons, we focus
our attention in this paper on the retail price of No. 2 diesel.
    We have argued that how remittance affects incidence depends on its effect on tax evasion
opportunities. To measure how tax remittance may affect tax collection and evasion opportu-


                                                  19
       nities, we obtain data on diesel tax collections from two separate sources. The most accurate
       measure comes from the Federal Highway Administration which reports the annual quantity
       by state of special fuels on which taxes were collected in Table MF-2 of the Highway Statistics
       Annual. Taxed special fuels are almost entirely diesel fuel. Beginning in 1983, the EIA also
       reports monthly data from a survey of prime suppliers, who distinguish sales of No. 2 diesel
       and heating oil by state. What level of the supply chain the EIA treats as the prime supplier
       for the purposes of reporting depends on whether the fuel is imported from another jurisdiction.
       For fuel distilled in the state of eventual sale to the end user, the prime supplier is the bulk
       terminal. For distilled fuel imported from another state or country, the prime supplier is con-
       sidered to be the first distributor within the state who receives the fuel. We obtain information
       about the federal and state on-road diesel tax rates from 1981 to 2006 from the Federal Highway
       Administration Annual Highway Statistics.
           We also collect data on state-level covariates. Population, per capita income and mean family
       size are obtained from the Census Bureau. Urbanization and educational attainment are taken
       from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Information about drivers, vehicle registration, and
       vehicle usage are from successive issues of Highway Statistics produced by the Federal Highway
       Adminstration.
           We recognize that it is unlikely that the choice of the point of taxation is chosen randomly.
       To investigate this issue, in Table 2 we present the mean differences of a variety of demographic
       characteristics between retailer, distributor, and supplier- remitting states. Each column in
       a particular panel shows a regression of the stated variable on distributor and supplier-remit
       dummies, as well as year fixed effects.15 The results shown in Table 2 suggest that the point
       of taxation is correlated with few of the covariates. Compared with retailer-remitting states,
       those that tax at the supplier level tend to have a less-educated adult population and are
       less conservative politically. Those taxing at the distributor level also have a somewhat less
       educated population than retailer-remitting states, and have a smaller budget surplus, and both
       the upper and lower state houses have a have slightly higher portion of Democrats. Income,
       unemployment, population, urbanization, family size, and vehicle miles traveled per capita are
       all similar between the three collection regimes.
           We also conduct two other exercises examining the potential endogeneity of remittance policy.
       First, in Table 3 we examine whether states that change the point of collection at some point in
       the sample are different than those who leave the point of collection unchanged. Only a state’s
       mining share of Gross State Product and the conservative-values score of the state house of
       representatives are significant at the 10 percent level.
           Second, we wish to consider which covariates may be contemporaneously correlated with
       changes in either the point of tax collection or the diesel tax. In four separate specifications, we
       regress the change in the distributor-remit, retailer-remit, and supplier-remit dummy variables,
       and the change in the state diesel tax, on a set of covariates. The results are presented in Table
       4. As with the results shown in Table 2, few variables are correlated with changes in the tax
       regime. Population is positively related with a change in supplier remittance, though negatively
       correlated with a change in distributor remittance. An increase in the fraction of adults with a
       college degree is associated with less likelihood of moving the point of collection to the supplier
  15
    Many of the variables in this table are not included in the set of covariates in the regression specifications later,
as variables such as population, average family size, percent of population that are BA graduates will be slow-moving,
and most of their variation will be captured by state fixed effects.


                                                           20
level. A greater share of high school graduates is associated with a lower likelihood of taxing at
the distributor and a greater likelihood of moving the point of collection to the prime supplier.
Increases in gross state product are associated with relative declines in the state diesel tax. Also,
average family size and the fraction of adults with a high school degree are negatively associated
with the tax rate. All in all, we find no evidence of systematic determinants of changes in tax
regimes, but of course we cannot rule out decisively that there are unmeasured determinants.


5.2     Methodology
5.2.1    Point of taxation and incidence
We examine the degree to which diesel taxes are passed through to retail prices using variation
across states and over time in state diesel tax rates and the point of tax collection. Ideally, we
would observe the price charged by bulk terminals to wholesale distributors, and by wholesale
distributors to retail stations; this would allow for a direct evaluation of the burden of taxation
across different levels of the supply chain. Unfortunately, data limitations preclude this level of
analysis, and so we must rely on an analysis of retail prices, which we argue reflects changes in
incidence higher up the supply chain. For instance, if changing the point of tax collection raises
the price that wholesalers charge retailers, then this higher cost for retailers will be reflected in
the price they charge to consumers.
    To be specific, we estimate a specification of monthly real tax-exclusive retail diesel prices,
deflated using the consumer price index.

                  pit = β0 + β1 τit + β2 regimeit + β3 τit ∗ regimeit + BXit + ǫit              (13)

where regimeit represents the indicator variables for the point-of-collection regime employed by
state i in month t, τit is the diesel tax rate and Xit is a vector of covariates including state
economic conditions, state and year*month effects, the minimum of the tax rates in neighboring
states, and the portion of households who use fuel oil for home heating, interacted with heating
degree days.
    One extension to the primary specification given by (13) we pursue is to allow for the
coefficients in the model to vary over time. It is possible that the elasticity of demand for
diesel fuel changes over time in an unobservable way, which would alter the predicted degree of
pass-through. Because the point of collection has on average moved up the supply chain over
time, this could lead us to mistakenly attribute changes in incidence to the point of taxation
that are actually due to shifts in demand elasticity. Similarly, changes in regulations or refinery
capacity over time could alter the supply elasticity in a manner correlated with trends in the
point of taxation. To correct for this, we will also estimate a version of (13) that allows for a
time varying value of β1 by controlling for a full set of year-tax interactions.


5.2.2    Remittance, evasion, and tax collections
We next use the data on taxed quantities from the FHWA to evaluate the impact of point of
tax collection on tax evasion. If changing the point of tax collection affects evasion, then ceteris
paribus tax collections should change as more or less taxable gallons are reported.




                                                 21
   We examine the contemporaneous correlation between regime changes and the change in
taxed gallons. In particular, we estimate an equation of the form

    ∆ln(qit ) = α0 + α1 ∆ln(pit ) + α2 ∆ln(1 + τit /pit ) + α2 ∆regimeit + A∆Xit + ρt + ǫit .    (14)

where regimeit again represents the point-of-collection regime employed by state i. We model
the log of taxed gallons as a function of the log of the tax inclusive price, ln(p+ t). To separately
identify the response of taxed gallons to the tax rate from the response to the price, we factor
out the price from this expression. As stressed by Slemrod (2001), the parameter α2 need not
equal α1 . Kopczuk (2005) and Slemrod and Kopczuk (2002) point out that the size of the tax
base as well as the degree of enforcement can both influence the elasticity of tax collections
to the tax rate. As in the price specification, the vector of covariates in Xit includes state
economic conditions, the tax rate in neighboring states, and the weather and its interaction
with household use of fuel oil for home heating. The variable ρt represents common year effects.
   To examine pre-existing differences between the different tax regimes, and to verify that any
changes in tax collections correspond to the regime change, we will also examine graphically the
              k
coefficients βt−j from the following regression:

                                           2
                                         X X
                                                   k
                       ln(qit ) = β0 +            βt−j I(dki,t−j ) + φt + ρi + ǫit .             (15)
                                         k j=−2


where k indexes the three types of transitions witnessed in the data: retailer-to-distributor
collection, retailer-to-supplier, and distributor-to-supplier. I(dki,t−j ) is an indicator for whether
the type of transition k occurred in year t − j. This exercise will yield the average residual tax
collections in the periods before and after each type of regime transition that we observe in the
data.


6     Results
6.1     Tax Incidence Results
In this section, we present estimates of the effect of the point of tax collection on retail diesel
prices. In Table 5, we show the results of estimating equation (13), where the dependent
variable is the real retail price, excluding taxes. In column 1 of this table, we show the results
of including only the diesel tax and control variables, and excluding any information about the
party responsible for tax collection. The coefficient on the diesel tax variable suggests that
the net-of-tax retail price falls 0.86 cents for every ten cent-increase in the diesel tax. The
interpretation of this coefficient is that nearly all (91.4 percent) of the tax burden is born by
consumers, and the amount suppliers received per gallon from consumers falls little as taxes rise.
Other coefficients are similar to those found in Marion and Muehlegger (2011). Prices rise as the
tax rate in neighboring states increase, and prices are higher in cold months where households
tend to use diesel for home heating. Lastly, economic activity is correlated with prices, as the
unemployment rate has a negative association with prices, likely due to reduced demand.
    The specification shown in column 2 includes indicators for whether the state collects at the
distributor level or at the bulk terminal. The excluded category are states collecting the diesel


                                                   22
tax from retail outlets. Compared to states collecting at the retail level, states in which the
party responsible for remitting the tax is the prime supplier have a retail price that is 2.88 cents
higher, and those taxing the wholesale distributor have a retail price that is 1.38 cents higher.
Both of these coefficients are consistent with the hypothesis that retail stations are difficult for
tax authorities to monitor and that the relatively small number of bulk terminals make evasion
more costly for these firms.
    In column 3 of Table 5, we show the results of estimating a specification including interactions
between the remittance regime dummy variables and the tax rate, which allows the pass-through
rate of diesel taxes to prices to depend on the point of collection. The coefficients on the
interaction between diesel taxes and the collect from the distributor and terminal indicators
are 0.10 and 0.21, respectively; both are statistically different from zero, although the former is
only marginally so (p-value=0.073). This suggests that the pass-through rate rises as the tax
collection point is moved up the supply chain. Furthermore, the pass-through rate is highest
when collecting from the bulk terminal, as the coefficient on the interaction between the tax
rate and the supplier collection dummy is higher than the coefficient on the similar interaction
with the distributor collection dummy (p-value=0.081). This result is also consistent with the
observation that the prime supplier is the easiest point in the supply chain to monitor.
    It is worth noting that the sum of the main effect and the interaction in the case of taxing the
bulk terminal leads to an estimated pass-through rate of greater than 100 percent. The estimates
suggest that the tax-inclusive retail price rises by 1.089 cents for each 1-cent increase in the diesel
tax. However, this is not statistically distinguishable from full pass-through (p=0.14), which is
a reasonable baseline, as it is the upper bound of the pass-through rate in a competitive model
without differential evasion opportunities.
    Finally, the specification displayed in column 4 includes a full set of year by diesel tax
interactions, which allows the rate of tax pass-through to vary over time. This is plausible due
to the time trend in the point of taxation, and that factors that may influence the elasticity
of supply and demand, such as environmental regulations and the demand for untaxed uses
of diesel, may have shifted over time. It turns out, however, that allowing for time-varying
pass-through rates has little effect on the estimated parameters of interest. The direct effect of
the point of tax collection is small and indistinguishable from zero, and the interaction terms
between the diesel tax and the indicators for the collection point being the terminal and the
distributor are 0.16 and 0.14, respectively, very little changed from the primary specification.


6.1.1    Accounting for trends in pass-through
The above approach compares the pass-through rate in a state after a change in the point of
collection with the pass-through rate prior to the shift. Therefore, unobserved characteristics
affecting pass-through in a state that are fixed over time will not affect our results. However, our
estimates will be biased if unobserved variables that alter rates of tax pass-through are moving
over time in a way that is correlated with the change in tax collection regime. For instance, if
the number of bulk terminals changes over time in a state, the tax authorities may find it more
desirable to collect the tax from the prime supplier owing to the number of taxable agents. Such
a change may also alter the rate of tax pass-through by changing the elasticity of supply with




                                                  23
      respect to price.16
          To address this concern, we exploit the timing of the change in remitting party. We account
      for trends in pass-through relative to the date of the regime change, examining whether pass-
      through changed discontinuously at the date of the regime change. This is conceptually similar
      to a parametric regression discontinuity design, where the running variable is time, and the
      threshold is the date of the policy change.
          We consider states that undertook a particular regime change, either shifting from retailer to
      distributor collection or from distributor to prime supplier.17 We center the data such that the
      date of the state i’s regime shift is t0i . We then estimate our standard pass-through specification,
      adding an interaction term τit ∗(t−t0i ) as well as the direct effect t−ti0 . This allows the estimated
      pass-through rate to differ in a linear fashion over time, and we can therefore examine the post-
      regime difference in pass-through relative to this trend.
          We present the results in Table 7. Columns 1 and 2 contain estimates from estimating the
      pass-through equation for states moving the point of collection from the wholesale distributor to
      the prime supplier. Pass-through is greater after the move to the supplier level, as seen in column
      1. Furthermore, the results in column 2 indicate that there is no trend in pass-through relative
      to the date of the regime change nor does including this interaction term alter the coefficient on
      the variable of interest. A similar story emerges when we examine retailer-to-distributor regime
      changes, as shown in columns 3 and 4. The pass-through rate is higher when the state requires
      the tax to be remitted by the distributor compared to when it requires the tax to be remitted
      by the retailer. Furthermore, this set of states do not experience a trend in incidence relative to
      the date of the regime change, nor does allowing for such a trend alter the primary coefficient
      of interest.


      6.1.2     Price for resale
      In this section we describe estimates of the effect of the point of collection on the wholesale price
      of diesel, and we examine how taxes work through to retail prices via the wholesale price when
      the tax is collected from the prime supplier. In column (1) of Table 6, we present estimates of
      our base incidence specification, with the real resale price as the dependent variable. We see
      that the price for resale is around two cents higher when the tax is collected from the prime
      supplier, and 0.7 cents higher when collected from the distributor level, compared to when the
      tax is collected at the retail level. On average, the tax has virtually no effect on the net of tax
      resale price. In the specification shown in column (2), we include the interaction between the
      tax and indicators for collecting from the distributor and the prime supplier. When the tax is
      collected from the prime supplier, an increase in the tax leads to an increase in the wholesale
      resale price. A ten cent per gallon tax increase leads to a 2.4 cent increase in the resale price
      in supplier remitting states relative to retailer remitting states. Conversely, tax changes have
      virtually no effect on the resale price in distributor remitting states or retailer remitting states.
  16
     Another potential omitted variable is the extent of market power in this industry. We investigate controlling
for wholesale market concentration in the Appendix and find that it does not affect our results. Alternatively, this
exercise may interpreted as testing heterogeneity of the pass through effects with respect to the market power and
we find no evidence of it.
  17
     The other upstream transitions witnessed in the data are retailer-to-supplier, of which there have been five during
our sample. We are unable to specifically use these in this exercise because we observe price for only two of these
transitions.



                                                          24
This will be true if sales by prime suppliers make up the bulk of the sales used to calculate the
price of diesel for resale.
    We are able to show what implications this has for retail price incidence. In column (3) of
Table 6, we restate the results of column (3) of Table 5, which shows that a ten cent tax increases
the retail price by 2.1 cents in a supplier remitting state relative to a similar tax change in a
retailer remitting state. In column (4), we show the results of estimating a similar specification,
where we also include as control variables the concurrent and lagged price of diesel for resale.
Controlling for resale price, the coefficient on the tax*supplier remittor interaction is now small
and statistically insignificant. This suggests that the differential effect of tax on retail prices in
supplier remitting states is entirely explained by the effect on the wholesale price, just as one
would expect if our results are valid.
    This narrows down the set of alternative explanations for our results. For the relationship
between pass-through and tax collection regime to be explained by changes in unobserved vari-
ables, they must be ones that affect the resale price alone and have no independent effect on
the retail price of diesel.


6.2    Tax Collection Results
We now examine how the level of taxed gallons responds to the point of taxation. As the state
adjusts the point of tax collection, we interpret corresponding observed changes in tax collections
as evidence of a change in tax compliance. This will provide a link between the empirical results
discussed in section 6.1 and the theoretical predictions in Sections 2 and 3.
    In Table 8, we present estimates of equation (14), which relates changes in taxed gallons to
specific changes in the point of tax collection. The specification shown in column (1) includes
only the regime dummy variables. Upstream shifts in the point of collection are associated with
a higher reported tax base. A change in the point of taxation from the retailer to the distributor
is associated with similar improvements in collections as retailer to supplier changes, with the
former yielding a 6.7 percent improvement in collections while the latter yields a 8.2 percent
improvement. When the point of remittance is moved from the distributor to the prime supplier,
the estimated effect is not statistically distinguishable from zero.
    Column 2 presents the results of a specification that includes the log tax rate and interactions
of the log tax rate with the remittance regime. The coefficient on log tax rate is statistically
indistinguishable from zero. The coefficient on the interactions of log tax rate with supplier
and retailer remittance is negative and weakly significant - taxed gallons tend to change more
with taxes in supplier-remitting and distributor-remitting states than retailer-remitting states.
Recall that we argued in our theoretical section that there is no inherent contradiction in having
inframarginal firms in the low tax evasion sector being more responsive on the evasion margin
despite having lower levels of evasion overall.
    In Column 3, we display results of a specification with additional covariates, including state
macroeconomic conditions as captured by log GSP and unemployment, weather, and and home
heating use. The estimated effects of the three types of tax collection regime changes are
virtually unchanged, which is not surprising in light of the fact that none of these variables
are correlated, at least contemporaneously, with states’ decisions regarding where in the supply
chain to collect the tax.
    Finally, the specification shown in column (4) includes a control for the lagged dependent


                                                 25
variable. The lagged change in taxed gallons is significantly negatively correlated with the cur-
rent change in taxed gallons. The data suggest that this is likely to be a reporting phenomenon,
as states will at times have unusually high (low) reported tax collections in one year, followed
by unusually low (high) reported tax collections the next year. Regardless, the coefficients of
interest are unaltered by the inclusion of this variable.
    Because they are estimated in first-differences, the regression results capture the contempo-
raneous response of tax collections to changes in the point of tax collection. We can further
explore the timing of the response of tax collections to the change in the collection regime, as
well as consider any pre- or post-change trends in tax collections. In Figure 7, we plot the
average residual taxed gallons, taking out year and state effects, in each year from two years
before the change in the collection regime to two years after.

                    Figure 7: Collection regime shifts and taxed gallons


                    7.88




                    7.86




                    7.84




                    7.82




                                                                                                                                                RetailertoDistributor
                     7.8
                                                                                                                                                RetailertoSupplier

                                                                                                                                                DistributortoSupplier


                    7.78




                    7.76
                                        tͲ2                             tͲ1                            t=0                                t+1                          t+2
                      Averagelogtaxed gallonsofdieselbyyearrelativetocollectionregimechange.Yearandstateeffectsremoved.




    Compared to states that move the point of collection from the distributor to the supplier,
and hence are already collecting the tax above the retail level, tax collections are initially lower
in states who move the point of collection away from the retail level. This is true regardless
of whether the state will ultimately move the collection point to the distributor or the prime
supplier. As suggested by the regression results presented in Table 8, states moving the point
of collection away from the retailer experience a jump in collections in the year of the policy
change. Importantly, average tax collections were similar in all three cases after the change in
collection regime. Despite the fact that states that initially collected from the distributor had
tax collections around 3 percent higher, the average of the post-reform coefficients for each of
the three types of regime changes are within 0.7 percent of one another.


7    Conclusion
The independence between equilibrium tax-inclusive prices and the side of the market taxed
is a widely accepted “law” of tax incidence and is a key principle a student of public finance
learns in the study of tax theory. This paper presents the first estimates of how prices may in
fact respond to the identity of the tax remitter and provides evidence that the source of this

                                                                                                  26
result is variation in the ability to evade taxes between the two sides of a market. This result
has potentially important implications in understanding the distributional impact of taxation
in markets where evasion is prevalent.
    Our results are directly applicable to the current debate on whether carbon taxes should be
levied on upstream energy producers or downstream energy users. The current literature weights
the administrative, political and distribution advantages and disadvantages of each, but largely
ignores tax incidence, effectively assuming that the incidence of a carbon tax levied on energy
producers and energy users would be identical. Although it is impossible to assess opportunities
for outright evasion of a hypothetical carbon tax, a major part of the debate focuses on the
ability of firms to avoid a carbon tax by increasing production in unregulated jurisdictions. If
those opportunities differ substantially for energy producers and energy users, incidence may be
affected by the point of remittance in a very similar way to the context we examine.


References

 [1] Agostini, Claudio A. and Claudia Martinez A. (2012), “Tax Credits Response to Tax
     Enforcement: Evidence from a Quasi-Experiment in Chile,” working paper, Universidad
     Adolfo Ibanez and Universidad da Chile.
 [2] Aldy, Joseph, Eduardo Ley and Ian Parry. (2008) “A Tax-Based Approach to Slowing
     Global Climate Change,” National Tax Journal 61: 493-517.
 [3] Alm, James, Edward Sennoga, and Mark Skidmore. (2009) “Perfect competition, urbanic-
     ity, and tax incidence in the retail gasoline market,” Economic Inquiry 47:1, p.118-134.
 [4] Balke, Nathan S. and Grant W. Gardner. (1991) “Tax Collection Costs and the Size of
     Government,” working paper, Southern Methodist University.
 [5] Baluch, Stephen (1996) “Revenue Enhancement Through Increased Motor Fuel Tax En-
     forcement,” Transportation Research Record 1558.
 [6] Barnett, Paul G., Theodore E. Keeler, and Teh-wei Hu. (1995) “Oligopoly structure and
     the incidence of cigarette excise taxes,” Journal of Public Economics 57:3, p. 457-470.
 [7] Besley, T. (1989) “Commodity taxation and imperfect competition: A note on the effects
     of entry,” Journal of Public Economics 40, p. 359-367.
 [8] Besley, Timothy J. and Harvey S. Rosen. (1999) “Sales taxes and prices: an empirical
     analysis,” National Tax Journal 52, 157-178.
 [9] Brownlee, Oswald and George Perry. (1967) “The Effects of the 1965 Federal Excise Tax
     Reduction on Prices,” National Tax Journal 20:3, p. 235-49.
[10] Chernick H. and A. Reschovsky. (1997) “Who pays the gasoline tax?” National Tax Journal
     50, 157-178.
[11] Chouinard, Hayley and Jeffrey M. Perloff. (2004) “Incidence of federal and state gasoline
     taxes,” Economics Letters 83, p. 55-60.
[12] ——– (2007) “Gasoline Price Differences: Taxes, Pollution, Regulations, Mergers, Market
     Power, and Market Conditions,” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 7:1
     (Contributions).
[13] de Paula, Aureo and Jose A. Scheinkman. (2010) “Value-Added Taxes, Chain Effects, and
     Informality,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2:4, p. 195-221.
[14] Delipalla S, O’Donnell O. (2001) “Estimating tax incidence, market power and market con-
     duct: The European cigarette industry,” International Journal of Industrial Organisation
     19, p. 885-908.

                                              27
[15] Doyle, Joe J. and Krislert Samphantharak. (2008) “$2.00 Gas! Studying the effects of a
     gas tax moratorium,” Journal of Public Economics 92, p. 869-884.
[16] Due, John F. (1954) “The Effect of the 1954 Reduction in Federal Excise Taxes on the List
     Prices of Electrical Appliances,” National Tax Journal 7:3, p. 222-6.
[17] Fischer, Carolyn, Suzi Kerr and Michael Toman.(1998) “Using Emissions Trading to Reg-
     ulate U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions: An Overview of Policy Design and Implementation
     Issues,” National Tax Journal 51 : p. 453-464.
[18] Fullerton, Don and Gilbert E. Metcalf, “Tax Incidence,” in Alan J. Auerbach and Martin
     S. Feldstein, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, volume 4, New York: North-Holland,
     2002, p. 1787-1872.
[19] Kau, James B. and Paul H. Rubin. (1981) “The Size of Government,” Public Choice 37:2,
     p. 261-274.
[20] Kopczuk, Wojciech. (2005) “Tax bases, tax rates and the elasticity of reported income,”
     Journal of Public Economics 89, p. 2093-2119.
[21] Marion, Justin and Erich Muehlegger. (2008) “Measuring Illegal Activity and the Effects
     of Regulatory Innovation: Tax Evasion and the Dyeing of Untaxed Diesel,” Journal of
     Political Economy 116:4, p.633-666.
[22] —– (2011) “Fuel Tax Incidence and Supply Conditions,” Journal of Public Economics
     95:9-10, p. 1202-1212.
[23] Metcalf, Gilbert (2009) “Designing a Carbon Tax to Reduce U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emis-
     sions,” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 3:1, p. 63–83.
[24] Musgrave, Richard A. Fiscal Systems. New Haven and London: Yale University Press,
     1969.
[25] Niemeier, Debbie A., Gregory Gould, Alex Karner, Mark Hixson, Brooke Bachman, Carrie
     Okma, Ziv Lang, and David Heres Del Valle. (2008) “Rethinking downstream regulation:
     California’s opportunity to engage households in reducing greenhouse gases,”Energy Policy
     36, p. 3436–3447.
[26] Pomeranz, Dina. (2011) “No Taxation without Information:           Deterrence and Self-
     Enforcement in the Value Added Tax,” working paper.
[27] Poterba, James M. (1996) “Retail Price Reactions to Changes in State and Local Sales
     Taxes,” National Tax Journal 49:2, p. 165-76.
[28] Rothstein, Jesse. (2010) “Is the EITC as Good as an NIT? Conditional Cash Transfers and
     Tax Incidence,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2:1, p. 177-208.
[29] Saez, Emmanuel, Manos Matsaganis, Panos Tsakloglou. (2012) “Earnings Determination
     and Taxes: Evidence from a Cohort-Based Payroll Tax Reform in Greece,” The Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 127, p. 493-533.
[30] Sidhu, Nancy D. (1971) “The Effects of Changes in Sales Tax Rates on Retail Prices,”
     Proceedings of the Sixty-Fourth Annual Conference on Taxation p. 720-33.
[31] Slemrod, Joel. (2001) “A General Model of the Behavioral Response to Taxation,” Inter-
     national Tax and Public Finance 8:2, p. 119-128.
[32] Slemrod, Joel. (2008) “Does It Matter Who Writes the Check to the Government? The
     Economics of Tax Remittance,” National Tax Journal 61:2, p.251-275.
[33] Semrod, Joel and Wojciech Kopczuk. (2002) “The optimal elasticity of taxable income,”
     Journal of Public Economics 84, p. 91-112.
[34] Slemrod, Joel and Shlomo Yitzhaki. (2000) “Tax Avoidance, Evasion, and Administration,”
     in A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics Volume 3, North-
     Holland, p. 1423-1470.



                                             28
[35] Sorensen, Peter Birch. (1994) “From the Global Income Tax to the Dual Income Tax:
     Recent Tax Reforms in the Nordic Countries,” International Tax and Public Finance 1:1,
     p. 57-79.
[36] Tanzi, Vito. (1992) “Theory and Policy: A Comment on Dixit and on Current Theory,”
     International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 39:4, p. 957-966.
[37] Woodard, F.O. and Harvey Siegelman. (1967) “Effects of the 1965 Excise Tax Reduction
     Upon the Prices of Automotive Replacement Parts,” National Tax Journal 20:3, p. 250-8.




                                            29
                            Table 1: Transitions in the point of tax collection


                                                                                To:

                                                            Retailer     Distributor       Supplier

                                           Retailer            -                 8            5

                               From:       Distributor         1                 -           15

                                           Supplier            0                 0            -




                               Table 2: Demographics and the Point of Tax Collection

                                                                                     Panel A
                      Tax-Exclusive          State Diesel           GSP per            Unemployment    Manufacturing          Mining
                    Diesel Price ($/gal)      Tax (cpg)            capita ($)             Rate (%)     GSP Fraction         GSP Fraction

Distributor Remit         2.965*                -0.829                -871.0               0.523           0.0111               0.0105
                          (1.722)              (1.254)              (1170.7)              (0.369)         (0.0193)             (0.0103)
Supplier Remit             -1.612               -1.641               -1432.5               0.314          0.0398*               0.0138
                          (2.469)              (1.705)              (1515.1)              (0.393)         (0.0219)             (0.0193)
Constant                 133.3***             20.16***             30337.2***            4.889***         0.144***            0.0154**
                          (1.596)              (1.138)              (1064.5)              (0.310)         (0.0166)            (0.00632)

Observations               6090                 13536                13248                 13536           13536               13536
R-Squared                  0.990                0.207                0.709                 0.311           0.198               0.0165

                                                                                     Panel B
                          Adult              Urban Pop              Average              Percentage      Percentage         Vehicle Miles
                        Population           % of Total            Family Size         BA graduates     HS graduates         Per Capita

Distributor Remit          -0.940              -0.0347               -0.0994               -0.796         -4.086***           0.000430
                          (1.843)             (0.0549)              (0.0735)              (1.006)          (1.181)           (0.000436)
Supplier Remit             0.486               -0.0291                -0.107             -3.522***        -4.056***            0.00124
                          (1.413)             (0.0697)              (0.0848)              (0.884)          (1.432)           (0.000805)
Constant                 4.686***             0.750***              3.257***             23.56***         83.07***           0.0128***
                          (1.718)             (0.0485)              (0.0723)              (0.741)          (0.866)           (0.000394)

Observations              13248                 13248                13248                 13248           13248               13248
R-Squared                 0.0205               0.00524               0.138                 0.333           0.462               0.196

                                                                                     Panel C
                       State Budget           Senator         Representative             Democrat     Democrat Fraction   Democrat Fraction
                          Surplus            LCV Score         LCV Score                  Governor      State Senate        State House

Distributor Remit        -0.0284*               -5.872                -1.142              0.0316          0.100***            0.0804**
                         (0.0147)              (7.455)               (5.586)              (0.126)         (0.0343)            (0.0334)
Supplier Remit            -0.0112               -8.150               -12.78*               0.191           0.0339              0.0190
                         (0.0215)              (10.13)               (7.592)              (0.162)         (0.0392)            (0.0356)
Constant                 0.113***             52.56***              48.23***             0.414***         0.476***            0.492***
                         (0.0120)              (6.595)               (4.892)              (0.112)         (0.0258)            (0.0222)

Observations               12672               13248                 13248                13440            13020               12984
R-Squared                  0.475               0.0201                0.120                0.0539           0.132               0.105


 Retailer-remittance is the omitted category. All regressions include year fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by
 state.




                                                               30
              Table 3: Summary Statistics By Change in Point of Diesel Tax Collection

                                           Full Sample   States Not Changing POT   States Changing POT   Difference

Tax-Exclusive Diesel Price                    95.97               97.88                   93.20           -4.67*
                                             (43.77)             (44.22)                 (42.97)

State Diesel Tax                              19.12               19.24                   19.03            -0.21
                                             (5.026)             (5.278)                 (4.828)

GSP per capita                              28153.9             28392.8                  27983.3          -409.5
                                            (8784.1)            (9560.0)                 (8181.5)

Unemployment Rate (%)                         5.307               5.255                   5.346            0.091
                                             (1.555)             (1.487)                 (1.602)

Manufacturing Share of GSP                    0.162               0.166                    0.158          -0.008
                                            (0.0677)            (0.0640)                 (0.0702)

Mining Share of GSP                          0.0235              0.0103                   0.0333           0.23*
                                            (0.0499)            (0.0241)                 (0.0607)

Population (millions)                         4.135               3.179                   4.817            1.638
                                             (4.377)             (2.776)                 (5.120)

Urban Population Share                        0.722               0.719                   0.725            0.006
                                             (0.188)             (0.194)                 (0.183)

Family Size                                   3.184               3.143                   3.213            0.071
                                             (0.194)             (0.151)                 (0.214)

Percent of Adults with BA                     22.09               22.92                   21.50            -1.42
                                             (4.755)             (5.483)                 (4.055)

Percent of Adults Graduating HS               79.30               79.12                   79.44            0.31
                                             (6.127)             (6.470)                 (5.866)

Vehicle Miles Traveled Per Capita (000s)      13.2                12.9                     13.4             0.5
                                             (2.33)              (2.22)                   (2.38)

Percent State Budget Surplus                 0.0953                0.09                    0.10            0.01
                                             (0.109)             (0.105)                 (0.112)

Senator LCV Score                             46.96               51.87                   43.45            -8.41
                                             (31.03)             (33.23)                 (28.86)

Rep LCV Score                                 44.58               53.15                   38.47          -14.68**
                                             (24.61)             (26.38)                 (21.25)

Democrat Governor                             0.457               0.484                   0.437           -0.046
                                             (0.497)             (0.499)                 (0.495)

Democrat Fraction of State Senate             0.546               0.576                   0.522           -0.054
                                             (0.168)             (0.183)                 (0.152)

Democrat Fraction of State House              0.546               0.568                   0.528           -0.040
                                             (0.162)             (0.192)                 (0.132)


 Standard errors for difference column clustered by state.




                                                         31
                     Table 4: Predictors of Tax Changes and Changes in Point of Taxation


                                                              Dependent Variable:
                                ∆ Distributor Remit    ∆ Retailer Remit ∆ Supplier Remit       ∆ State Diesel Tax

Retail Gasoline Price                -0.000729              -0.00316            0.00389             -0.00587
                                     (0.00221)             (0.00223)           (0.00298)            (0.0139)
GSP per capita                        -0.00474              -0.00788            0.0126              -0.147**
                                     (0.00666)             (0.00605)           (0.00909)            (0.0555)
State Unemployment Rate               0.0159                -0.0101             -0.00578              0.0861
                                     (0.0132)              (0.00859)           (0.00958)             (0.0713)
Manufacturing Fraction GSP             0.307                 -0.162              -0.145               3.722
                                      (0.577)               (0.410)             (0.627)              (3.047)
Mining Fraction GSP                   -0.996*                0.422               0.574                8.393
                                      (0.533)               (0.377)             (0.715)              (6.457)
Population                            -0.146*               -0.0137             0.160*                -0.548
                                     (0.0778)              (0.0768)            (0.0815)              (0.607)
Urban Fraction of Pop                  5.901                 -2.108              -3.793               -19.55
                                      (3.451)               (1.933)             (3.970)              (22.14)
Average Family Size                   0.121*                0.0270              -0.148*             -0.973**
                                     (0.0652)              (0.0397)            (0.0800)              (0.416)
Fraction of Adults with BA            0.0644                0.0273             -0.0917**              -0.328
                                     (0.0412)              (0.0260)             (0.0370)             (0.480)
Fraction of Adults                   -0.0594**             0.0268*             0.0325**             -0.449**
 Graduating HS                        (0.0231)             (0.0137)            (0.0148)              (0.212)
Vehicle Miles                         0.00245               0.00219             -0.00464              0.435
per Capita                           (0.00642)             (0.00523)           (0.00626)             (0.349)
Percent Budget Surplus                0.0458                0.0169              -0.0627              -0.0331
                                     (0.0430)              (0.0237)            (0.0499)              (0.504)
Senate LCV Score                    -0.0000403            -0.0000276          0.0000679              -0.00271
                                    (0.000366)            (0.000127)          (0.000376)            (0.00292)
House LCV Score                      0.000148              -0.000259           0.000111              0.00311
                                    (0.000337)            (0.000235)          (0.000289)            (0.00280)
Democrat Governor                     -0.00216             -0.00846             0.0106               0.0839
                                     (0.00572)             (0.0108)            (0.00944)             (0.223)
Fraction Democrat                     0.0978                -0.0818             -0.0160               -0.225
 State Senate                        (0.0914)              (0.0867)            (0.0603)              (0.579)
Fraction Democrat                     -0.0149               -0.0855              0.100                -0.433
State House                           (0.129)              (0.0725)             (0.131)              (1.196)

Observations                           831                   831                 831                   831
R-Squared                             0.0525                0.0712              0.0782                0.110

  Standard errors clustered by year are in parentheses. *,**,*** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
  respectively. All dependent and independent variables are first-differenced. All specifications include year fixed
  effects.



                                                  32
                     Table 5: Point of Tax Collection and Incidence

                                         (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)

 Real diesel tax                         -0.086         -0.025       -0.120        -0.098
                                         (0.021)***     (0.022)      (0.055)**     (0.071)
 Collect tax from supplier                              2.875        0.445         0.824
                                                        (0.268)***   (0.604)       (0.658)
 Collect tax from distributor                           1.378        0.192         -0.308
                                                        (0.188)***   (0.626)       (0.656)
 Real tax * Collect from supplier                                    0.209         0.162
                                                                     (0.052)***    (0.057)***
 Real tax * Collect from distributor                                 0.100         0.139
                                                                     (0.056)*      (0.057)**
 Real neighbor’s tax                     0.080          0.275        0.276         0.249
                                         (0.046)*       (0.051)***   (0.050)***    (0.051)***
 Degree days                             0.087          0.094        0.095         0.078
                                         (0.066)        (0.063)      (0.062)       (0.061)
 Degree days * HH Fuel oil frac          0.468          0.460        0.460         0.459
                                         (0.085)***     (0.080)***   (0.079)***    (0.078)***
 Unemp. Rate                             -0.064         -0.128       -0.135        -0.132
                                         (0.061)        (0.062)**    (0.063)**     (0.062)**
 Real diesel tax * year dummies                                                    X
 Observations                            5435           5435         5435          5435
 R-squared                               0.98           0.98         0.98          0.98
     Standard errors clustered by year*month are in parentheses. *,**,*** denote significance
     at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. The dependent variable is the real tax
     exclusive retail price of number 2 diesel. Each specification includes state fixed effects
     and year*month effects.


                  Table 6: Point of Tax Collection and Wholesale Prices

                                                           Dependent variable:
                                                Resale price                Retail price

                                        (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)
Real diesel tax                         -0.002         -0.024         -0.120        -0.098
                                        (0.017)        (0.038)        (0.055)**     (0.092)
Collect tax from supplier               1.959          -0.803         0.445         0.987
                                        (0.259)***     (0.404)**      (0.604)       (1.785)
Collect tax from distributor            0.686          0.575          0.192         -0.296
                                        (0.163)***     (0.408)        (0.626)       (1.323)
Real Tax * Collect from supplier                       0.240          0.209         0.028
                                                       (0.037)***     (0.052)***    (0.164)
Real tax * Collect from distributor                    0.001          0.100         0.099
                                                       (0.039)        (0.056)*      (0.153)
Real Price for Resale                                                               0.535
                                                                                    (0.057)***
Lag Real Price for Resale                                                           0.240
                                                                                    (0.033)***
R2                                      0.99           0.99           0.98          0.99
N                                       5,427          5,427          5,435         5,349
  Standard errors clustered by year-month are in parentheses. *,**,*** denote significance at
  the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. The price for resale is a measure of the wholesale
  price, as it is the price charged for diesel that will be resold to another party. The other
  included controls correspond to those in the specification shown in column (4) of Table 5.


                                                33
                  Table 7: Point of Tax Collection and Incidence
                                               States shifting point of taxation from:
                                      Distributor to supplier       Retailer to distributor
                                      (1)         (2)               (3)           (4)
Real Diesel Tax                       -0.149        -0.150          -0.319        -0.315
                                      (0.100)       (0.140)         (0.089)***    (0.085)***
Real tax * Post reform                0.227         0.229           0.677         0.677
                                      (0.090)**     (0.151)         (0.087)***    (0.088)***
Post reform                           -1.555        -1.583          -5.363        -5.400
                                      (0.986)       (1.765)         (0.943)***    (1.003)***
Real tax*months relative to change                  -0.00002                      0.0001
                                                    (0.001)                       (0.001)
Months relative to regime change                    0.070                         0.161
                                                    (0.010)***                    (0.012)***
R2                                    0.98          0.98            0.99          0.99
N                                     1,004         1,004           751           751
 Standard errors are in parentheses. *,**,*** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
 level, respectively. The dependent variable is the real tax exclusive retail price of number
 2 diesel. The other covariates are identical to those included in the specification shown in
 Column (3) of Table 4. Months relative to regime change is a variable equal to the number
 of months prior to or after the stated regime change. Specifications (1) and (2) include
 all observations from states that experienced a shift in the point of collection from the
 wholesale distributor level to the prime supplier level. Specifications (3) and (4) likewise
 include all observations from states that experienced a shift in the point of collection from
 the retail level to the wholesale distributor level.




                                              34
             Table 8: Point of Tax Collection and Taxed Gallons

                                                  (1)     (2)         (3)          (4)

Collect from supplier                        0.0817**   0.229**     0.201*      0.234**
                                             (0.0331)   (0.0983)    (0.105)     (0.0873)

Collect from distributor                     0.0671**    0.188*       0.152     0.179**
                                             (0.0328)   (0.0954)    (0.0955)    (0.0809)

Log(1+tax rate)                                         0.0618      0.0970       0.0604
                                                        (0.274)     (0.304)      (0.324)

Log(1+tax rate) * Collect from supplier                 -0.323*      -0.283     -0.361**
                                                        (0.189)     (0.199)      (0.157)

Log(1+tax rate) * Collect from distributor               -0.267      -0.192      -0.249*
                                                        (0.184)     (0.172)      (0.142)

Log Minimum neighbor tax                                             -0.110*    -0.120**
                                                                    (0.0565)    (0.0594)

Log GSP                                                            0.443***     0.561***
                                                                    (0.147)      (0.158)

Unem. Rate                                                         -0.00986**   -0.0136**
                                                                    (0.00484)   (0.00507)

Log degree days                                                      -0.0257     -0.0130
                                                                    (0.0381)    (0.0299)

Log degree days X HH Oil Use                                         0.0349      0.0379
                                                                    (0.0795)    (0.0858)

Lagged change in collections                                                    -0.374***
                                                                                 (0.0378)

Observations                                   980       980          940          893
R-Squared                                     0.0657    0.0674       0.133        0.266


 Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses. *,**,*** denote signifi-
 cance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.The dependent variable is the
 change in the log of the number of gallons of special fuel on which state taxes
 were collected. The log tax rate is defined as ln(1 + t/p). The other indepen-
 dent variables are all first-differenced. Each specification includes year effects.
 If a regime change occurred mid-year, the regime change dummy is apportioned
 into the year of the reform and the year after the reform. For instance, shifting
 to taxing the supplier from the retailer in July of 2005 would cause the variable
 “Retailer to supplier” to take on a value of 0.5 in 2005 and 0.5 in 2006.




                                             35
A      Details of calculations
The independence result also holds with imperfect competition: For example, maxi-
mization of profits given by ppr ·Q(ppr +t, X)−C(Q(ppr +t, X)) where C(·) is the cost function and
X is the vector of characteristics influencing a particular firm’s demand (including, potentially,
prices set by competitors) is equivalent to maximizing profits given by (pr − t) · Q(pr , X) −
C(Q(pr , X)) with the solutions again linked as ppr + tr = pr . As the result, ceteris paribus,
decisions of a standard firm with market power are not affected by where statutory incidence
lies and, when this is so for all firms, the original equilibrium outcome remains an equilibrium
when the statutory incidence shifts.
    Supply is increasing in price: Taking the derivative of the supply curve with respect to
the price yields

               ∂S   ∂H 2                ∂S p  ∂H    p  q′
                  =    q + Hq ′ ⇒ εpS =   · =    q·   + p = εpN + εpq ,
               ∂p    c
                    ∂M                  ∂p S   c H
                                              ∂M       q

where εpS is the price elasticity of aggregate supply, εpN is the price elasticity of the number of
firms in the industry and εpq is the price elasticity of output per firm. All terms are non-negative
so that the supply curve is (weakly) upward sloping. Under our assumptions, the price elasticity
of output per firm is independent of tax considerations. The price elasticity of the number of
firms depends on the distribution of underlying characteristics and the value of the tax rate that
determines which firms are marginal.
    Supply is increasing in the tax rate: The effect of the tax on aggregate supply is given
by
                    ∂S     ∂H                                         c
                        =       qr = E[e|Mc, tr ] · ∂H qr = εp · E[e|M , tr ] · Hqr
                                                     c       N
                    ∂tr    ∂tr                      ∂M                qr         p
so that it depends on how elastic is entry in response to price (εpN ), but the strength of this
effect depends on the extent of tax evasion on the margin. As long as there is at least some tax
evasion (which also implies that tr > 0), supply (weakly) increases as tr increases.
    Wholesale price response to retail tax change: More specifically, substituting back in
equation 8 yields

               dppw          εpD εpS                 εpN εpD             c, tr ]
                                                                     E[e|M
                    = p p     p p     P  p −  p p      p p    P  p ·                                (16)
               dtr   εS εW − εD εS − εD εW   εS εW − εD εS − εD εW       qr
                                                              εp  p
                                                               D εS
    This expression can be simplified by denoting εpY ≡      εp −ε p .   The formula can be written as
                                                              S    D


                         dppw    εp      εp       εP       c, tr ]
                                                       E[e|M
                              = p Y p − p N p p D p ·              .                                (17)
                         dtr   εW − εY εW − εY εS − εD     qr
   Response of margins to incidence shift: For completeness, recall the decisions made in
each sector are determined by the margins ppr − ppw − tw (for the retail sector) and ppw (for the
wholesale sector). Having derived the effect on ppr , the full characterization of the margins re-
                                                                                                    dpp
quires evaluating the effect on ppw as well. This follows simply from formulae (16) and (10) for dtww
                                                               p                                 
     dpp          dpp         dpp             εp (εp −εp
                                                       D)
                                                                          c w]
                                                               εW N E[ew |M,t       εp       c r]
                                                                                         E[e|M,t
and dtwr so that dtwr ∆tr − dtww ∆tr = εp εp D−εpSεp −ε  P εp   ε p
                                                                        q w
                                                                               − εp
                                                                                     N
                                                                                    −ε p
                                                                                             qr
                                                                                                    ∆tr ,
                                           S W    D S    D W      D               S    D
again highlighting that it is evasion on the margin in the two sectors (interacted with the stan-
dard demand and supply elasticities) that determines the effect on all prices.



                                                   36
       B      Market Power (For Online Publication)
       As a check that unobserved differences in market concentration do not drive our main results, we in-
       clude a specification that conditions on wholesale market concentration in each state.18 We construct
       Herfindahl indices for each state using firm-level microdata collected by the Energy Information Ad-
       ministration (EIA).19 Every month, any firm with domestic refinery operations reports operational data
       to the EIA, including wholesale volumes in each state. From these, we calculate the HHI and 4-firm
       concentration ratio based on the wholesale volumes sold by each firm. For reference, the mean HHI in
       our sample is .22. On average, the top four firms in each market account for 74 percent of wholesale
       volumes.
           Wholesale market concentration varies substantially over time and across states. Over the past
       two decades, industry consolidation increased concentration in the wholesale market approximately 20
       percent, from a mean of .20 in 1994 to a mean of .24 in 2008. The most concentrated wholesale markets
       tend to be in the northeast - wholesale sales are most concentrated in Delaware (0.60), Vermont (0.54)
       and New Hampshire(0.46). Wholesale sales tend to be more concentrated in distributor-remitting states
       and less concentrated in supplier-remitting states (Table A1), but changes in regime and changes in diesel
       taxes are not strongly correlated with lagged, contemporaneous or leading changes in concentration
       (Table A2).
           Table A3 introduces market concentration into our main specification. For reference, columns (1)
       and (2) present our baseline results from Table 5. Columns (3) and (4) use identical specifications, but
       limit the sample to the period 1994-2006 during which we can calculate wholesale market concentration.
       Over this period across all states, we cannot reject full pass-through of taxes to retail prices. As
       before, when we separate states by remittance-regime, we estimate less than full-passthough in retailer-
       remitting states and find that pass-through rates are signficantly higher in states that require taxes be
       remitted by wholesale terminal operators. In columns (5) and (6), we further condition on wholesale
       market concentration, first identically across regimes and then allowing for regime-specific relationships
       between concentration and pass-through rates. In both cases, we do not find that pass-through is
       strongly correlated with concentration. Moreover, our main results on pass-through and the identity of
       the remitting party remain unchanged.




  18
     We focus on wholesale concentration rather than retail market concentration for two reasons. First, most retail
stations are franchisee-owned - determining historical ownership and operational control is difficult. Second, retail
stations tend to compete very locally. State-level statistics are an imperfect proxy for retail competition.
  19
     We aggregate restricted EIA Form 782 and covers the universe of firms with refinery operations which cover the
majority of domestic wholesale terminal sales. Our access to the data begins in 1994 and continues to the end of our
sample.


                                                          37
                      Table A1: Market Power and Point of Taxation

                                                    (1)                    (2)
                                               Wholesale HHI       Wholesale 4-firm CR

                     Distributor Remittance      0.0726**               0.00763
                                                 (0.0300)               (0.0347)

                     Supplier Remittance        -0.0423***              -0.105***
                                                 (0.0124)                (0.0334)

                     Constant                    0.188***               0.764***
                                                 (0.00668)              (0.0242)

                     Observations                  7951                   7951
                     R-Squared                     0.103                  0.138

                      Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses.
                      *,**,*** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
                      level, respectively. Specifications include year fixed ef-
                      fects.



               Table A2: Market Power and Changes in Point of Taxation

                               (1)                       (2)                       (3)              (4)
                     ∆Distributor Remittance    ∆Retailer Remittance      ∆Supplier Remittance   ∆Tax Rate

∆ Wholesale HHIt−1               0.287                   -0.0927                     -0.194        0.591
                                (0.189)                 (0.0673)                    (0.185)       (1.016)

∆ Wholesale HHIt                 -0.163                  0.0351                      0.128         -1.543
                                (0.251)                 (0.0849)                    (0.237)       (1.329)

∆ Wholesale HHIt+1              0.0823                   0.0680                      -0.150        0.396
                                (0.170)                 (0.0784)                    (0.167)       (1.071)


Observations                     576                      576                        576            576
R-Squared                       0.345                   0.0344                      0.272         0.0281

 Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses.
 *,**,*** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Specifications include year
 fixed effects. For reference, one standard deviation changes in ∆ WholesaleHHIt is 0.033.




                                                   38
      Table A3: Retail Prices, Wholesale Concentration and Point of Taxation

                                   (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)

Diesel Tax                      -0.0856***   -0.120**    -0.0160     -0.353     -0.445*     -0.406
                                 (0.0211)    (0.0550)   (0.0363)    (0.216)     (0.242)    (0.251)

Supp Remit * Diesel Tax                      0.209***              0.638***    0.712***    0.524**
                                             (0.0524)               (0.177)     (0.199)    (0.213)

Dist Remit * Diesel Tax                      0.1000*                 0.308       0.375      0.340
                                             (0.0556)               (0.210)     (0.229)    (0.244)

Supplier Remittance                           0.445                -7.557***   -8.547***    -4.556
                                             (0.604)                (2.316)     (2.605)    (2.880)

Distributor Remittance                        0.192                  -4.321     -5.213*     -3.392
                                             (0.626)                (2.719)     (2.975)    (3.226)

Demeaned HHI                                                                     -3.968     25.12
                                                                                (2.716)    (23.26)

Supp Remit * HHI                                                                            21.35
                                                                                           (26.54)

Dist Remit * HHI                                                                            -29.46
                                                                                           (23.42)

Diesel Tax * HHI                                                                 0.330      -3.429
                                                                                (0.208)    (2.809)

Supp Remit * Diesel Tax * HHI                                                               -0.930
                                                                                           (3.064)

Dist Remit * Diesel Tax * HHI                                                               3.805
                                                                                           (2.819)

Min. Neighboring Tax             0.0803*     0.276***    -0.134     -0.115      -0.0976    -0.0822
                                 (0.0457)    (0.0501)   (0.100)    (0.1000)     (0.103)    (0.105)

Degree Days                       0.0868      0.0948     0.0591     0.0585      0.0620      0.0679
                                 (0.0662)    (0.0623)   (0.0773)   (0.0767)    (0.0773)    (0.0773)

Degree Days * HH Oil Frac       0.468***     0.460***   0.571***   0.568***    0.570***    0.559***
                                (0.0851)     (0.0791)   (0.0912)   (0.0914)    (0.0916)    (0.0901)

Unemployment Rate                 -0.0636    -0.135**   0.164**    0.263***    0.268***    0.191**
                                 (0.0612)    (0.0633)   (0.0760)   (0.0726)    (0.0732)    (0.0776)

Observations                      5435        5435       3350       3350        3346        3346
R-Squared                         0.981       0.982      0.990      0.990       0.990       0.990

 *,**,*** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. For reference, the
 mean and standard deviation of HHI are .22 and .16. Specifications include state and time
 fixed effects.




                                               39
