NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVESTMENT INCENTIVES
AND THE DISCOUNTING OF
DEPRECIATION ALLOWANCES

Lawrence H. Summers

Working Paper No. 1941

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1986

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation and projects in Government Budgets and Taxation and
Capital Format-ion. Any op-in-ions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1941
June 1986

Investment Incentives and the Discounting of Depreciation Allowances

ABSTRACT

This paper examines the discounting of depreciation allowances both

theoretically and empirically. Economic theory suggests that depreciation tax
shields should be discounted at the after tax riskless rates. However, a
survey of 200 major corporations indicates that they employ much higher

discount rates to depreciation allowances. Typical discount rates are in the
15 percent range. This finding suggests that "frontloaded" incentives like
the ITC provide maximal stimulus to corporate investment.

Lawrence Summers
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

The importance of depreciation and investment tax credit provisions in
determining the level and composition of investment is widely recognized.
Economists have long understood that the present value of depreciation tax
shields along with the investment tax credit determines the effective purchase
price of new capital goods, which in turn determines the cost of capital.
Measures of the cost of capital are widely used in evaluating the likely
effect of proposed tax reforms on the total level of investment and in
assessing the distortions across capital goods caused by tax rules.
The cost of capital depends on the present value of depreciation

allowances permitted by the tax system. This raises the question of what
discount rate should be used in calculating this present value and
the cost of capital.

determining

The choice of a discount rate is of considerable

importance in assessing investment incentives. For example, the much
discussed adverse effect of inflation in conjunction with historic cost

depreciation on investment results from the increased discount rate that must

be applied to future nominal depreciation allowances. At a zero discount rate
all depreciation schedules which permitted assets to be fully depreciated

would be equivalent. It is only because of discounting that depreciation
schedules affect investment decisions, and their effects depend critically on
the assumed discount rate.

Tax reform proposals often change the extent to which depreciation tax

benefits are "backloaded". For example, the proposal of Auerbach and
Jorgenson (1981) would have given firms all of their depreciation benefits in

the year that invest——ts were made. On the other hand, the recent p":rosal

—2-

of the President (1985) stretches out the tax benefits associated with
investment outlays by indexing depreciation allowances and abolishing the

investment tax credit. A comparison of either of these proposals with
current law will depend critically on the discount rate applied to future tax
benefits in computing the cost of capital.

Despite its importance, the choice of an appropriate discount rate for
depreciation allowances has received relatively little attention from tax

analysts. This paper examines both theoretically and empirically the
discounting of depreciation allowances and its implications for tax policy.
conclude that economic theory suggests that a very low and possibly negative
real discount rate is appropriate for calculating the present value of future

tax benefits. But empirical evidence from a survey of 200 major corporations
suggests that most companies in fact use very high real discount rates for

prospective depreciation allowances. This conflict makes the analysis of
alternative tax policies difficult. It surely suggests that there is little
basis for confidence in tax policy assessments based on specific assumed
discount rates which are constant across companies.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 argues that given the risk
characteristic of depreciation tax shields, a very low or negative real

discount rate should be applied. Section 2 reports survey results on the
actual capital budgeting practice of firms and discusses possible reasons for
the apparent conflict between the recommendation of theory and firms' reported

behavior. Section 3 concludes the paper by discussing the implications of the
analysis for the assessment of alternative tax policies.

-3—

I.

HOW SHOULD DEPRECIATION ALLOWANCES BE DISCOUNTED?

This paper begins by reviewing the theory of capital budgetting and its

application to the discounting of depreciation allowances. The theory has
clear implications. Because prospective depreciation allowances are very
nearly riskiess, they are more valuable than other prospective sources of cash

flow. The appropriate discount rate for safe cash flows like the stream of
future depreciation deductions is lower than the rates applied to risky

physical investments. An argument is made that the appropriate discount rate
for depreciation deductions is the same rate applied to the after-tax coupon

payments on a safe bond. The present value of depreciation deductions so
computed can then be used in assessing potential investment projects. At
current levels of inflation and interest rates, it appears that only a
negligible real interest rate is appropriate for assessing alternative tax
policies.

In theory (and in practice as demonstrated below), firms decide whether

or not to undertake investments by computing the present value of the net cash
flows they generate, using a discount rate corresponding to their cost of

funds.1 In a frictionless world of certainty, this process is completely
straightforward. There is only one available rate of return and firms invest
to the point where the marginal project earns just this rate of return. Or put
more precisely, the net present value of the marginal project evaluated at the
required rate of return is zero.

Once the possibility that a project is risky is recognized the problem of
capital budgeting becomes much more difficult.

The theoretically

appropriate procedure is to find the certainty equivalent of each period's

-4—

cash flow and then to discount the certainty equivalents at the return pa-id

by riskiess assets. In reality it is difficult to assess certainty
equivalents because the certainty equivalent of the cash flow payable in a

given period generally depends on the distribution of cash flows in
preceding and subsequent periods. Hence the normal procedure is to use a
"risk adjusted discount rate" appropriate to the project under consideration.

This rate in general will depend on the covariance of its returns with

aggregate returns in the economy. In the special case where a given
project's returns will mirror the returns of the entire firm, it is often
suggested that the appropriate discount rate be inferred from the firm's stock
market beta.

A fundamental principle in finance is that of superposition. The
valuation of a stream of cash flows is the same regardless of how it is broken

up into components. This insight makes it clear how depreciation allowances
should be treated at least to a first approximation. Consider an arbitrary
investment project. The project will after an initial outlay generate a
stream of uncertain future operating profits which will then be taxed. It
will also generate a stream of future depreciation deductions which can be

subtracted from the firm's income to reduce its tax liabilities. These two
streams can be valued separately for analytic purposes. The valuation of the
profit stream is difficult absent a satisfactory way to gauge its riskiness.

But the valuation of future depreciation tax shields is much easier since they

are close to being riskless.2 They therefore should be evaluated by
discounting at a riskiess rate. Since depreciation tax shields represent
after tax cash flows, they should be discounted at an after tax rate of

—5—

return. Their present value can then be added to the present value of the
profit stream evaluated at an appropriate risk adjusted discount rate to
evaluate the total return on an asset.

The same conclusion may be reached using an arbitrage argument as in

Ruback (1985). Consider a set of prospective depreciation deductions which a
firm is entitled to utilize. Imagine that the firm instead possesses a
portfolio of treasury bills designed so that the after tax coupon payments in

each period equal exactly the value of the tax deductions. It should be
obvious that the firm has an equally valuable asset in either case. It
follows that the appropriate discount rate for valuing depreciation deductions
is the same as that for the treasury bill portfolio --

the after tax nominal

interest rate on safe assets. Note that the after-tax nominal interest rate
is likely to be much lower than the appropriate discount rate for a project's
operating cash flows.

At present nominal interest rates on safe assets are less than ten

percent. With a forty six percent corporate tax rate, it follows that
the appropriate discount rate for future depreciation allowances is no more

than a five percent nominal rate. This means a real rate very close to zero,
contrary to the four percent real rate assumed in many calculations of the
effects of tax incentives.

The assumption that prospective depreciation deductions represent a
riskiess asset has been maintained so far.

In fact future depreciation

deductions are subject to some risks. Depreciation deductions will be useless
for firms that make losses and become nontaxabie and are unable to make use of

carryback and carryforward provisions. The results of Auerbach and Poterba

-6-

(1986) suggest that this is not an important factor for most large firms.

There is also the possibility of changes in tax rules. Since depreciation
deductions represent a hedge against changes in tax rates, this source of
uncertainty may drive the appropriate discount rate down rather than up.
Finally there is always the possibility that the, depreciation rules will be

changed with respect to assets already in place. This has never occurred in
the United States. On balance, it seems fair to conclude that depreciation
tax shields represent an essentially riskless asset.
The arguments made so far indicate that firms should separately discount

at different rates expected operating profits and depreciation deductions. It
might be thought that firms could use a common discount rate for all the

components of cash flow on a given project that reflected their average degree

of riskiness in some way. But this is not correct because there is no way to
know how much weight to give each component of cash flow until its value is

determined which in turn requires the choice of a discount rate. Even if an
appropriate rate could be found, it would vary across projects depending on

the value of prospective depreciation deductions. Moreover, a weighted
average rate is unlikely to be varied when tax rules changes and alter the
share of a project's value represented by depreciation tax shields.

Before turning to an examination of tax policies, the next section reports

evidence on firms' actual capital budgeting practices. They do not in
general conform to those recommended in this section.

—7—

II. HOW ARE DEPRECIATION DEDUCTIONS DISCOUNTED?

In order to learn how depreciation deductions are discounted by actual

major corporations in making their investment decisions, a brief questionnaire
was sent to the chief financial officers of the top 200 corporation5 in the

Fortune 500. A copy of the questionnaire and covering letter a-e provided as
an appendix to this paper. Usable replies were received f'om 95 corporations.
No effort was made to raise the response rate by following up on the initial
mailing but there is little reason to suspect systematic differences in
capital budgeting procedures between responding and nonresponding firms.
The questionnaire was designed to find out whether capital budgeting

procedures embodied the principles suggested in the preceding section and to
find out what discount rates firms actually apply to depreciation deductions.

The survey results are reported in Table 1. As the table indicates, the
vast majority of corporate respondents stated that they had capital budgeting
procedures and that these procedures were of "considerable" but not

"overriding" importance in corporate investment decisions. Only 7 percent of
the companies responding indicated that they discounted different components
of cash flow on a given project at different rates, and even several of these
companies did not distinguish operating profits and depreciation allowances.
Many of the responding companies indicated that they dealt with risk issues by
discounting projects emanating from different divisions or locations at

different rates, but that they discounted all the cash flows from a given

project at the same rate. It is clear that the practice of separately
discounting safe and unsafe componet.. of a project's return as suggested by

TABLE 1

SURVEY RESULTS ON THE DISCOUNTING OF DEPRECIATION ALLOWANCES

1.

Capital budgeting procedure is of:
6%

overriding importance
considerable importance
little importance

II.

III.

Cash flow components discounted
at different rates:

Discount rate applied to depreciation
allowances:

91%
3%

Yes
No

< 12%

1315%
16-18%
19-21%
22%+

6%

94%

13%
48%
16%
13%
10%

-8-

theory is a rarity in American industry.

The lower part of the table indicates the distribution of the rates used

by companies to discount depreciation allowances. In most cases the figure
refers to the common nominal discount rate applied to all cash flows. The
reported discount rates for depreciation allowances were surprisingly high
with a median of 15 percent and a mean of seventeen percent --

far

in excess

of the after tax nominal interest rate. Given that depreciation tax shields
have very similar risk characteristics across firms, it is also noteworthy

that the rate at which they are discounted varies widely. The discount rates
reported by firms varied from 8 to 30 percent. This variability is almost
certainly the result of firms applying a common discount rate to all cash
flows.

It is not easy to account for the level and variability of depreciation

discount rates. One possibility is that managers do not understand the
financial theory outlined in the preceding section or find it too complex to

implement. Another possibility is that shareowners represent the locus of
irrationality. If they apply a common discount rate to all components of cash
flow, value-maximizing managers will do so as well. It is also conceivable
that some of the variations in discount rates across firms result from
different conceptual definitions of the required rate of return.
Before turning in the next section to the implications of these results
for tax policy, there is an important methodological question to be

addressed.3 Economists continue to assume that consumers maximize utility
even though it is clear that they never actually solve explicit optimization
problems and indeed would reject the idea that they are maximizing anything.

-.9-

Firms rarely admit to knowing their marginal costs yet economists frequently

assume they equate price to marginal cost. The reason is the power of "as if"
modeling. There is a great deal of evidence that firms and consumers behave
"as if" they were maximizing profits or utility functions, even if they do not

do so consciously. Can a similar point be made with respect to evidence that
firms use inappropriate discount rates in making investment decisions?
In a case like the discounting of depreciation allowances,the usual

arguments for "as if" reasoning do not seem compelling. Evolutionary
pressures against firms who do not optimize are likely to be weak. And the
linkages between what managers say they are doing and what they actually do

seem reasonably straightforward. Capital budgeting is a tool developed to
help managers make more rational investment decisions than their unaided

intuitions would permit. When it yields the "wrong" answer it seems
excessively Panglossian to assert that managers are unconsciously doing what

is right anyway. The next section therefore focuses on the implications of
these survey results for tax reform.

III. TAX POLICY IMPLICATIONS

This section treats two aspects of the relationship between the

discounting of depreciation allowances and tax policy. First, I illustrate
the sensitivity of judgments about the effects of alternative tax policies on
incentives to the discount rate applied to future depreciation allowances.

Second, I argue that the high and variable depreciation discount rates used by

firms may themselv- reate important distortions, which the tax st. ture may

—10-

either mitigate or exacerbate.
Table 2 presents estimates of the sum of the present value of

depreciation allowances and the deduction value of the investment tax credit
under current tax law, the President's proposal of May 1985 and the House of
Representatives' 1985 tax bill using alternative discount rates for

depreciation. The possibility of churning assets discussed by Gordon, Hines
and Summers (1986) is ignored.

Calculations indicate that the effects of alternative tax rules are quite

sensitive to the assumed discount rate for depreciation allowances. At the
theoretically appropriate zero real discount rate only the House bill is less

generous than a policy of immediate expensing of investment outlays. Current
law provides a substantial subsidy to the purchase of new equipment because of

the availability of the investment tax credit. On the other hand, with a 10
percent real discount rate applied to depreciation allowance as the survey
results suggest all three tax laws provide benefits significantly less

generous than expensing. Especially for long lived equipment in asset class
IV, both the Treasury bill and the House proposal would lead to a substantial

increase in the effective purchase price. It is interesting to notice that
while the President's proposal is more generous at a zero discount rate, it
appears less generous at a 10 percent discount rate.

The choice of a discount rate is especially important in evaluating the

incentives provided for long lived structures investments. At a zero discount
rate the President's proposal provides far more incentives to structures

investment than does current law. On the other hand, at a 10 percent rate
current law is much more generous than the President's proposal. In both

TABLE 2

EFFECTS OF ALTERNATIVE DISCOUNT RATES ON THE PRESENT VALUE OF
DEPRECIATION DEDUCTIONS UNDER ALTERNATIVE pROPOSALSa

ACRS Asset Class

I

II

III

IV

V

VI

d=O
Current Law

1.06

1.08

1.08

1.08

President's proposal

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

.939

1.0
.79

.736

1.0
.67

.951

.916

.916

.916

Current Law

.972

.938

.938

.938

President's proposal

.891

.862

.820

.759

.694

.351

House Bill

.874

.802

.799

.792

.566

.430

House Bill

d=1
.487
.('709

alhe present value of depreciation includes the value of the investment tax

credit. A value of 1.0 corresponds to expensing. All calculations assume a
5 percent inflation rate. The discount rate is denoted by d.

—11—

cases the House bill is intermediate between current law and the President's
proposal.

The fact that firms use very high discount rates in evaluating projects
suggests that the investment tax credit is likely to be a very potent tax

incentive per dollar of government revenue foregone. The government will
presumably want to trade off tax revenue at present and in the future using
its borrowing rate.

If firms discount future tax benefits a rate higher than

the government borrowing rate, tax incentives can be enhanced with no increase
in the government's permanent cost by restructuring tax incentives to move the
benefits forward, without changing the present value of the revenue foregone.

The investment tax credit is frontloaded in this way. Still greater
frontloading of tax incentives is possible through accelerating depreciation
allowances, since this policy keeps the sum of the deductions that can be

taken on an investment constant while increasing their present value. On the
other hand, indexation of depreciation allowances tends to increase the
duration of tax benefits.

The fact that firms use widely varying and inappropriate discount rates
f or depreciation allowances suggests that patterns of investment may be very

substantially distorted in ways not considered in standard analyses of the

effects of tax incentives. Certainly the returns demanded on marginal
projects vary by much more across firms than do conventional measures of the
cost of capital.

The reasons for these patterns are a potential subject for future

research. One possible clue is that corporations and individuals seem to
apply very different discount rates to depreciation allowances. The frequency

—12—

with which individuals churn structures suggest that they apply a much lower

(and more appropriate) discount rate than do corporations. This raises the
possibility that agency' issues may help to explain observed patterns of

corporate capital budgetting. If so they may have an important bearing on the
linkage between tax policies and investment decisions.

—13-

Footnotes

*This paper was prepared for the NBER Conference on Capital Taxation in Palm

Beach, Florida, February 14-15, 1986. Deborah Mankiw helped in the design and
dissemination of the survey reported in this paper as well as providing

valuable comments. Jim Hines, Jim Poterba, and Andrei Shleifer provided
helpful comments.

1.

For a general discussion of capital budgetting principles, see Brealey

and Myers (1984).
2.

The risk characteristics of depreciation tax shields are considered

below.
3.

I am grateful to Greg Mankiw for impressing on me the possible importance

of this issue.

—14—

References

Auerbach, Alan and James Poterba, this volume, "Tax Loss Carryforwards and
Corporate Tax Incentives."
Brealey, Richard and Stewart Myers, 1984, Principles of Corporate Finance.

New York: McGraw Hill.
Gordon Roger, James Hines, and Lawrence Summers, this volume, "Notes on the
Tax Treatment of Structures."
Jorgenson, Dale and Robert Hall, June 1967, "Tax Policy and Investment
Behavior," American Economic Review.

Ruback, Richard S., 1986, "Calculating the Market Value of Riskiess Cash
Flows," Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

The President's Tax Proposals to the Congress for Fairness, Growth and
Simplicity, 1985.

—15-

APPENDIX

September 20, 1985

Dear _______

As part of its ongoing program of research on the economics of capital
formation, the National Bureau of Economic Research is studying the effects of
proposed reforms in the investment tax credit and tax depreciation schedules.
The effects of alternative proposals depend critically on how taxes are

factored into companies' capital budgeting procedures. I am therefore
attempting to systematically gather information on major corporations' capital
budgeting techniques.

I would be very grateful if you could fill in the enclosed questionnaire
regarding your company's capital budgeting procedure, and return it in the

enclosed envelope. Information identifying individual companies will not be
presented in any of our research reports.

I will of course furnish you with

the results of the study when it is completed.

Thank you for your consideration.
Sincerely,

Lawrence H. Summers
Professor of Economics

Harvard University
LHS/mh

Enclosure

—16—

Questionnaire

1) Does your company use a capital budgeting procedure based on evaluations of
the discounted cash flows from proposed projects?

no

yes

2) If yes, would you say that the present value of the cash flows from proposed
projects is of _____overriding importance

_____considerable importance
_____some consequence

_____little consequence
in determining whether they are undertaken?

3) What is the hurdle rate of return you apply to new projects?

Specifically

in your capital budgeting procedure, what discount rate do you apply to the
after tax nominal cash generated by the typical project?
(Alternatively, please provide the real discount rate which you use and the
expected inflation rate which enters your calculations.)

4) In evaluating projects some companies discount different components of cash
flow at different rates because of their different risk characteristics.

For example, some companies discount prospective depreciation tax shields at
a low rate because there is not much uncertainty associated with them.
Does your company treat different components of cash flow differently?

______yes

no.

—17—

5) If so, what discount rate do you apply to each of the following types of cash
flow: ________operating profits
scrap value
________depreciation tax benefits
________investment tax credits

________rental income

Comments:

