                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE IMPACT OF THE INTERNET ON ADVERTISING MARKETS FOR NEWS
                                 MEDIA

                                             Susan Athey
                                            Emilio Calvano
                                             Joshua Gans

                                        Working Paper 19419
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19419


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2013




Financial support from the Toulouse Network on Information Technology is gratefully acknowledged.
Part of this research was conducted at Microsoft Research, Cambridge MA. Both Athey and Gans
have consulting relationships with Microsoft that has an interest in the efficiency of online advertising
markets but does not have direct interests in the news media industry. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Susan Athey, Emilio Calvano, and Joshua Gans. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of the Internet on Advertising Markets for News Media
Susan Athey, Emilio Calvano, and Joshua Gans
NBER Working Paper No. 19419
September 2013
JEL No. L11,L13,L82

                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper, we explore the hypothesis that an important force behind the collapse in advertising revenue
experienced by newspapers over the past decade is the greater consumer switching facilitated by online
consumption of news. We introduce a model of the market for advertising on news media outlets whereby
news outlets are modeled as competing two-sided platforms bringing together heterogeneous, partially
multi-homing consumers with advertisers with heterogeneous valuations for reaching consumers. A
key feature of our model is that the multi-homing behavior of the advertisers is determined endogenously.
The presence of switching consumers means that, in the absence of perfect technologies for tracking
the ads seen by consumers, advertisers purchase wasted impressions: they reach the same consumer
too many times. This has subtle effects on the equilibrium outcomes in the advertising market. One
consequence is that multi-homing on the part of advertisers is heterogeneous: high-value advertisers
multi-home, while low- value advertisers single-home. We characterize the impact of greater consumer
switching on outlet profits as well as the impact of technologies that track consumers both within and
across outlets on those profits. Somewhat surprisingly, superior tracking technologies may not always
increase outlet profits, even when they increase efficiency. In extensions to the baseline model, we
show that when outlets that show few or ineffective ads (e.g. blogs) attract readers from traditional
outlets, the losses are at least partially offset by an increase in ad prices. Introducing a paywall does
not just diminish readership, but it furthermore reduce advertising prices (and leads to increases in
advertising prices on competing outlets).


Susan Athey                                          Joshua Gans
Graduate School of Business                          Rotman School of Management
Stanford University                                  University of Toronto
655 Knight Way                                       105 St. George Street
Stanford, CA 94305                                   Toronto ON M5S 3E6
and NBER                                             and NBER
athey@stanford.edu                                   joshua.gans@gmail.com

Emilio Calvano
Bocconi University
Via Rontgen, 1
20136, Milan
Italy
emilio.calvano@gmail.com
                                                                                                         2


1       Introduction

        A recent report of the Federal Communication Commission found that U.S.
Newspaper advertising revenues dropped 47% from 2005 to 2009. 1 The ad revenue
decline is pronounced even when controlling for obvious explanatory factors such as
circulation, decline in revenues from classified ads and the business cycle.2 From a public
policy perspective, the likely reduction in investigative, enterprise and beat reporting
represents a serious source of concern. The average newsroom shrunk by a quarter with
more than 50% due to heavy cuts of editorial costs. The report concludes that “in very
real ways, the dramatic newspaper industry cutbacks appear to have caused genuine harm
to American citizens.”
        The decline in advertising revenue has been almost unanimously attributed to the
rise of the Internet. However, the adverse impact of the web represents an economic
puzzle because, in many respects, the forces influencing supply and demand appear to be
as favorable for the industry, if not more so, than before. Online consumption of news
media created new and improved advertising products and services that should be, in
principle, more valuable to advertisers (e.g. enhanced ads, targeting capabilities, and
improved measurement).3 Moreover, the Internet dramatically increased the accessibility
of many outlets for a wider audience.
        A variety of theories have been proposed to explain the drop in advertising
revenue. A common theme is that there is a glut in the supply of advertising space (Rice,
2010). However, this argument fails to account for the fact that while there may be space
for every advertiser on the web, those ads must be still viewed by actual consumers:


1
  The Information Needs of Communities (2011), available at: http://www.fcc.gov/info-needs-communities.
2
  According to the Newspaper Association of America (www.naa.org), since 2000 total advertising revenue
earned by its member US newspapers declined by 57% in real terms to be around $27 billion in 2009.
Much of this decline was in revenue from classifieds but total display advertising revenue fell around 40%.
In contrast, circulation over the same period declined by 18%. Ad revenue as a share of GDP also declined
by 60%. According to ComScore, total US display advertising revenue online was around $10 billion in
2010 which includes all sites and not just newspapers.
3
  The Internet has also created new types of opportunities such as “search ads.” However, many observers
and regulators have noted that these new forms of advertising are complements rather than substitutes for
the kind of advertising typically used by the news media; see Evans (2008, 2009). Chandra and Kaiser
(2011) demonstrate that magazines who are better able to tailor content to specific consumer groups can
continue to command a premium in ad rates and that this premium is associated with a consumer base with
higher Internet use.
                                                                                            3

human attention is naturally scarce which limits the amount of advertising that can be
supplied. Another theme is that online or digital ads are far less effective than ads that are
on paper. However, the evidence is not consistent with that hypothesis (see Dreze and
Hussherr, 2003; Lewis and Reiley, 2009; Goldfarb and Tucker, 2011b).
           From an economics perspective, the industry-wide decline in advertising revenue
remains a puzzle. A distinctive feature of the benchmark model in media economics
pioneered by Anderson and Coate (2005) is that news outlets are the gatekeepers of their
readers’ attention; that is, consumers are assumed to single home with their attention
concentrated on one outlet.4 Thus, advertising revenues at the outlet and, hence, at the
industry level reflect monopoly prices for access to those consumers. In particular, if the
advertising space per outlet is constant, prices are independent of the number of outlets.
Outlets compete for consumers by reducing advertising output. In this benchmark model,
the comparative statics associated with changes in economic primitives are not consistent
with the hypothesis that the rise of the internet reduced aggregate ad revenue. For
instance, increased competition for consumers due to lower search costs or increased
entry by new outlets would lead to higher advertising prices, as those outlets scale back
levels of annoying advertising to attract consumers, and then charge monopoly prices to
advertisers for the reduced advertising space. In contrast to these predictions, there is
evidence that competition is associated with falling prices (Anderson, Foros and Kind,
2011).
           This aim of this paper is to consider seriously the impact of increased consumer
switching that many have observed is an essential distinguishing feature of on-line news
consumption (Fahri, 2009; Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2011 and Varian, 2010). Switching
refers to the proneness of online consumers to satisfy their content needs on multiple
outlets as opposed to buy only one print newspaper. Web browsers, search engines,
aggregators and social network make it easy for consumers to move between outlets and
increase consumer switching among outlets (Athey and Mobius, 2012), while free access
removes other constraints.
           The paper revolves around a simple yet very powerful observation. Absent a
technology that can track consumers as they move across outlets, switching makes

4
    For a general treatment for two-sided markets see Armstrong and Wright (2007).
                                                                                            4

advertising a relatively more daunting task. By placing ads on additional outlets, the
advertisers take the risk of reaching same consumers multiple times. Switching thus
degrades the market value of an outlet’s advertising inventory. As we shall see, this has
important welfare implications as, in equilibrium, it leads to inefficient depletion
(duplication) and use (mismatches) of a scarce resource: the consumers’ attention.
       To address this we present a theory of advertising that has readers spreading their
attention across multiple outlets. However, we do not assume that all consumers visit all
outlets; instead, they switch outlets stochastically, that is, they multi-home but not fully
(unlike the most of the existing literature on two-sided markets where agents either fully
multi-home or single-home). We deploy an equilibrium model featuring a set of
heterogeneous advertisers who profit from informing readers about their products, a mass
of identical (from the advertisers’ perspective) consumers with a fixed endowment of
attention, and a finite number of outlets. Outlets use their consumers’ attention as an
input to produce advertising inventory; the fixed number of ads that can be shown to a
consumer (capacity) and advertisers purchase ads to reach them. Given the stochastic
nature of consumer switching, an additional ad has uncertain benefits from the
perspective of an advertiser. The ad either reaches already informed consumers (and,
hence, wastes some of their attention) or informs a new ones. The probability of success
depends, among other things, on the outlets’ “tracking technology.” These technologies
allow outlets to enhance the allocation of the ads and, hence, reduce wasteful duplication.
We postulate that, as a baseline description of reality today, outlets have a superior ability
to track the behavior of consumers within their outlets rather than between them (see, for
example, Edelman, 2010). Finally ad prices are determined via a market clearing
condition.
       A key feature of our model is that the multi-homing behavior of advertisers is
determined endogenously. With no consumer switching and a single market-clearing
price for advertising, advertisers should place ads on all outlets. Consumer switching
together with imperfect tracking of consumers across outlets creates inefficiencies in
duplicated impressions. Switching by consumers is, thus, a source of diminishing returns
to buying ad space on additional outlets (multi-homing). Consequently, in equilibrium,
higher value advertisers choose to multi-home, as they have a higher opportunity cost of
                                                                                              5

not informing readers, while lower-value advertisers single home, avoiding wasted
impressions. As a result of the subtle effects of the mixed homing behavior on market
prices, ad prices do not necessarily fall with switching. We show that the marginal return
from an additional ad is a convex combination of marginal returns on switching
consumers and loyal readers. Increased switching decreases marginal returns for multi-
homing advertisers. We show that whether switching reduces profits depends on the total
available ad capacity per unit of attention. With low or moderate ad capacity, fewer
advertisers multi-home, and a greater range of advertiser values is served, leading to
lower advertising prices. However, with high ad capacity, increased switching induces
high value advertisers to purchase multiple impressions on each outlet, leading to a
higher-value set of advertisers being served and higher advertising prices. Indeed, profits
may exceed levels that can be achieved when either switching or imperfect tracking is not
a problem. Interestingly, this implies that outlets can have suboptimal incentives to invest
in technology.
       Next, we consider several applications of the theory. We show that it offers a
natural solution to a number of long-standing puzzles in media economics. First, there is
evidence that larger outlets command a premium, and that advertisers are willing to pay
for “reach” which refers to the number of users who can be impressed through an outlet.5
However, the benchmark model with no switching predicts that prices per viewer
equalize across outlets in equilibrium. We show that consumer switching makes larger
outlets relatively more attractive to those advertisers who cannot afford the waste that
comes with large (i.e. multi-homing) campaigns. Consequently, higher valued, single-
homing advertisers sort onto the high readership outlet first, giving larger outlets a
“positional advantage.” Second, rather than welcome regulation that requires public
media to raise revenue from ads as opposed to be subsidized, existing outlets have
typically lobbied against the lifting of advertising restrictions. 6 (Public subsidies, the
argument goes, should make state-owned media tougher competitors on the market for
readers). We demonstrate that, when some outlets cannot sell ads (as they might if they


5
  Recently, this has been referred to the “ITV Premium Puzzle.” (Competition Commission 2003).
However the relationship has been noted previously by Fisher et al (1980) and Chwe (1988).
6
  For example see Filistrucchi, Luini and Mangani (2011) for an empirical analysis of the French
advertising ban on prime-time state television.
                                                                                                         6

are regulated public broadcasters or smaller blogs), ad prices will be higher. The more
obvious effect behind that result is that when outlets capture consumer attention without
selling ads, this reduces the capacity that can be sold to advertisers in the market, raising
prices (but note, this effect is absent in traditional models). Further, because movements
to and from such outlets do not create wasted impressions, efficiency and prices typically
go up.
         We then explore strategic implications arising from our model. The positional
advantage arising from having a larger readership share can drive competition for
consumers and, indeed, may cause outlets to invest more in quality than they would under
benchmark cases or perfect tracking. This result is consistent with the stylized fact that
media outlets that provide greater “reach” command higher ad prices, all else equal.7 We
also demonstrate that an outlet can gain a positional advantage by having limited content,
but content that consumers visit reliably – something we term ‘magnet content.’ If outlets
can ensure that a high share of consumers will at some point allocate attention to them,
those outlets can command a premium in advertising markets. This suggests that outlets
may focus their efforts on producing offerings that regularly attract the attention of many
consumers rather than the focused attention of fewer consumers. Relatedly, we
demonstrate that paywalls unilaterally imposed by an outlet can have the effect of
reducing their positional advantage or giving their rivals a positional advantage in
advertising markets. As a result, we identify additional competitive costs to outlets from
introducing paywalls.
         Finally, on the policy side, our model sheds light on a number of issues that we
believe are important for antitrust policy. Specifically we discuss the impact of a merger
(in terms of better technology and stronger discrimination power) on the allocative
efficiency of consumer attention. Also, we discuss the impact of privacy regulation that
reduces the extent of tracking.
         We have focused thus far on comparing our model to the standard setup for
analyses of media markets. While most models in the media economics literature assume


7
  A countervailing effect outside our model is that with more data about consumers, outlets can sell more
targeted advertising. See Athey and Gans (2010) for an analysis of the impact of targeting technology on ad
prices. See also Bergmann and Bonatti (2011) for an analysis of the interaction between online and offline
media competition and targeted advertising.
                                                                                                          7


that consumers single-home – that is, choose to allocate attention to only one outlet –
there are a few recent papers that have considered what happens when consumers multi-
home, including Ambrus, Calvano and Reisinger (2011) as well as independent
contributions from Anderson, Foros and Kind (2011), Anderson, Foros, Kind and Peitz
(2011), and George and Hogendorn (2011) among others. There are a few important
distinctions between our model and the ones studied in the literature. First, our model
explicitly models the consumer switching process in an environment with a fixed amount
of consumer attention, allowing us to perform comparative statics with respect to the
extent of switching. The alternative, where multi-homing consumers consume more
media, are not as well suited for understanding trends in market prices for advertising,
since they implicitly assume that total consumer attention and, thus, potential ad capacity
increases with switching. Second, our model introduces a new force, which is the
(potential) inefficiency created by consumer switching in the absence of perfect tracking
technologies. We study the implications of the inefficiency for the advertising market
equilibrium, and, in particular, for advertiser strategies and willingness to pay for ad
space. In contrast, the existing literature focuses on the outlets’ choice of advertising
space and the tradeoff between the revenue gained from additional advertising space and
consumer disutility for ads. Consumer switching increases competition between outlets
and, thus, increases equilibrium ad space. Our paper treats the ad space as exogenous for
much of the analysis, endogenizing it as an extension to the model, in order to highlight
more clearly the novel forces introduced in our model. We thus view our model as
complementary to prior literature. Moreover, by modeling explicitly the allocation
process of scarce attention, we are able to identify and characterize additional outlet
reactions as well as discuss the impact of different government policies towards the news
media. 8
        We share the finding that larger outlets command a premium with the work of
Crampes, Haritchabalet and Jullien (2009) and Anderson, Foros and Kind (2011). The
former argue that by exploiting information from a large customer base, larger outlets

8
  This method of dealing with two-sided markets is itself novel. Rather than the outlet (or platform)
choosing prices in a monopolistic or oligopolistic fashion (e.g.., see the general result of Weyl, 2010), on
the advertising side, revenues to outlets are determined by market clearing prices. Thus, we can analyze
how technology and other factors impact on the efficiency of advertising market outcomes and, in turn,
how this impacts on outlet revenues.
                                                                                                       8


have superior possibilities in targeting leading to increasing returns. In Anderson, Foros
and Kind (2011), having relatively more exclusive viewers allows outlets to charge
higher prices. In contrast, we show that a “positional advantage” can obtain regardless of
the composition of one’s viewership and absent returns to scale. 9 In accord with
conventional wisdom among practitioners, large outlets command a premium because
they reach relatively more viewers while minimizing duplication. 10
        Our paper also relates to a number of price-theoretic papers on multi-sided
markets that explore the equilibrium implications of having one (or more) sides multi-
homing.11 A common theme in these works is the idea that increased multi-homing on
one side of the market, in equilibrium, reduces (and, in the limit, annihilates) the
incentives to multi-home of those on the opposite side. These latter become “competitive
bottlenecks” leading to a number of important positive and normative implications. This
paper shows a natural instance in which increased multi-homing on one side could lead to
increased multi-homing on the opposite side. Contrary to the above papers, multi-homing
readers are relatively harder to impress. This highlights a fundamental matching problem
at the heart of advertising markets that the Internet potentially has disrupted but also, in
the future, could resolve.


2       Model Set-up

2.1     Consumer Attention and advertising inventory

        There is a continuum (unit mass) of consumers and two media outlets. Each
consumer visits one outlet per period over a horizon of two periods. In each period spent
visiting outlet i, a consumer is exposed to ai ads. We refer to ai as the (period) ad capacity
of outlet i. Capacity is assumed exogenous (but, it is endogenized in an extension).
        How do consumers allocate attention to different media outlets? We assume that
whenever a consumer has an opportunity to choose, outlet i is chosen with probability xi.

9
  See Goettler (2012) for recent empirical verification of such advantages.
10
   A related recent research strand that asks how the internet is changing consumers’ choices through its
impact on their choice set (e.g. Gentzkow (2009), Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011). Building on this, we ask
we ask how this affects the advertisers’ choices and the associated revenues.
11
   A (partial) list includes Caillaud and Jullien (2003), Anderson and Coate (2005), Armstrong (2006),
Gabszewicz and Wauthy (2004), Anderson, Foros and Kind (2011) and Reisinger (2012)).
                                                                                                              9


Thus, xi is a measure of an outlet’s relative quality. 12 Between attention periods, an
opportunity for a consumer to switch outlets arrives (independently) with probability .13
Thus,         the     total     expected        amount        of     attention        going      to     i     is
xi  xi  (1   )   xi   (1  xi )  xi  2 xi . We let Dil  xi  xi (1  xi )  denote the share of

consumers who end up using the same outlet in each period (single-homers), that is, are
(ex post) loyal to i and Dijs  2  xi x j denote the share of switchers or multi-homers. Note

that when   0 , Dil  xi and D s  0 . A consumer loyal to an outlet i generates 2ai in

advertising inventory while a consumer switching between outlets generates ai  a j in

advertising inventory. This characterizes the supply-side of advertising markets. For
future reference, note that the model can accommodate n  2 outlets without difficulty.
In that case, if outlets have asymmetric capacity, different consumer “switching types”
generate different advertising inventories. Whenever outlets are assumed symmetric in
readership (that is xi  x j  12 ) then the subscript is dropped: Dil  Dlj : Dl .

2.2        Advertisers’ preferences

           There is a unit mass of advertisers. Advertisers want each consumer to see their
ad sometime over the two periods but are indifferent about precisely when. They differ as
to the value of putting an ad in front of a consumer. This value is denoted v and is
distributed on [0,V ] according to a cumulative distribution F. 14 The value does not
increase if the same consumer sees more than one ad from a given advertiser. Each time
an ad is put in front of consumer it is referred to as one “impression.” From the
perspective of an advertiser, an “impressed” consumer is a consumer who has been
exposed to at least one ad.


12
     Everything else held constant, a higher quality of outlet i increases   xi and decreases weakly x j for all
other outlets. In our baseline model these choice probabilities are exogenous, but later on we endogenize
the quality.
13
   Here we treat this probability as independent of history (i.e., outlets a consumer may have visited earlier)
or the future (i.e., outlets that they may visit later). We explore the implications of relaxing this assumption
after characterizing the equilibrium of the baseline case.
14
   For the given advertiser, v is the same for all consumers and independent of the number of distinct
consumers receiving an impression. An alternative specification might have advertisers aiming to reach a
specific number of consumers (Athey and Gans, 2010) or a specific consumer type (Athey and Gans, 2010;
Bergemann and Bonatti, 2010).
                                                                                                       10

2.3     Tracking technology

        Here, as attention is a primitive of the model, we need to specify how that
attention is matched to ads – something that is usually not explicitly considered in the
economics of advertising literature. If n1 ads are allocated to a given advertiser on outlet
1 and n2 on outlet 2 over both attention periods, then its payoff is equal to v times the
expected number of unique consumers that (n1 , n2 ) allows impressing. So, in order to

close the model, one needs specify a function  that maps (n1 , n2 ) pairs to a real number

in [0,1] that represents the fraction of the population that the advertiser expects to be
impressed. That is the “reach” of the campaign. Note that the function implicitly captures
the extent to which the outlets are able to control how single ads are matched to
individual consumers; that is, their “tracking” capabilities. For example, if a public record
of previous ad/consumer matches were available, it would in principle be possible to
match each successive ad from a given advertiser to a different consumer so no consumer
would be matched to the same ad twice. Then   n1  n2 whenever n1  n2  1 . This is

what we refer to as “perfect tracking.” Under perfect tracking, individual ads are most
valuable to advertisers since each ad is put in front of an unimpressed consumer with
probability one. At the other end of the spectrum, suppose there is no control whatsoever
over the matching process. Then it would be as if each successive ad from a given
advertiser were put in front of a consumer chosen at random (possibly an already
impressed one). This is what we refer to as “no tracking.” 15
        In reality, outlets have some, but typically not full, scope to track consumers
internally (the same consumer may arrive from different browsers and devices) but have
little (or no) scope to track which ads their customers have been matched to on other
outlets. Accordingly, in what follows we specialize to one of many formulations that
displays two desiderata:
             a) Tracking is internal: outlets cannot track consumers – and specifically, the
                 ads they see – across outlets.
             b) Internal tracking is not perfect.

15
 The (so called) “Butter’s technology,” firstly employed in Butter (1977) and then extensively in previous
works approximates precisely the outcome under no tracking with  taking an exponential form.
                                                                                          11

A simple, stylized way to capture a) and b) within our two-period model is to posit that
the outlets can perfectly track consumers within each period but cannot track consumers
across periods or across outlets. The easiest context to understand this is to imagine that
each outlet has two units of content (e.g., web pages or articles) and consumers do not
read the same content twice. Loyals get both units of content from the same outlet (one
per period), while switchers get in each period a random piece of content from each.
       From now on, as tracking is assumed perfect within periods, we adopt the
convention that the arguments of , referred to as the number of “ads,” denote the
number of impressions per period-consumer. In every period, each outlet gets a number
of unique consumers equal to xi . So increasing ni by one unit implies purchasing xi
additional impressions. If advertisers are restricted to an integer number of ads per
period-consumer, (or per “unit of content” under the above interpretation) and the outlets
are symmetric in readership, then the matching technology is fully described by the
following five cases:
       (i)     (Single-home)                   (1,0)   (0,1)  Dl  12 Ds ;

       (ii)    (Intense single-home)           (2,0)   (0, 2)  Dl  Ds ;
       (iii)   (Multi-home)                    (1,1)   (1,1)  2Dl  34 Ds ;

       (iv)    (Targeted multi-home)           (2,1)   (1, 2)  2Dl  Ds ;
       (v)     (Intense multi-home)            (2, 2)   (2, 2)  2Dl  Ds .
With just a single ad from a given advertiser (case (i)), the outlet matches the advertiser’s
ads to all its different period-consumers (or to all the readers of a given piece of content,
under the above interpretation). Thus, the expected reach associated to “one ad on i” is all
the loyals of i plus half of the switchers. By assumption there is no duplication as no
consumer is matched to a given ad twice. Of course, if an advertiser allows a second ad in
a different period (case (ii)) then all loyal consumers will be matched twice to the same
ad. This is because there is no tracking across periods. The benefit of doing so, from the
advertisers’ perspective, is to exploit internal tracking in order to reach more switchers.
On the contrary, as there is no across outlet tracking, buying a second impression on the
other outlet (case (iii)) allows the advertiser to reach all of the second outlet’s loyals at
the cost of duplicating impressions on (some) of the switchers (those consumers who
                                                                                                            12

already saw the ad on the first outlet). As all consumers are assumed to consume one
outlet in each period, strategy (iv) whereby the advertiser places two impressions on one
outlet and one on the other (and a fortiori (v)) allows full reach.
         Of course, there are many other micro-foundations that would lead to a 
function that satisfies the above desiderata; each drawing from some aspects of the
constraints faced by outlets in reality. 16 We present and discuss notable alternatives in the
online appendix. We shall remark here that our findings will hinge on a) and b) as
opposed to the actual functional form chosen in this specific illustration. In addition the
above formulation satisfies a third, simplifying, desideratum:
             c) Duplication due to imperfect tracking occurs if only if there is consumer
                  switching. 17
Indeed if D s  0 then no duplication and full reach would occur when advertisers multi-
home. So this as an additional assumption (which is an implication of our specified
functional form, ) analytically allows us to isolate the impact of consumer switching in
what follows.

2.4      Market equilibrium and outlets’ profits

         To close the model, we assume that the outlets’ inventory is allocated through a
basic price mechanism that equates the individual outlets’ demand and supply of ads. We
adopt the convention that pi is the price of a single impression. So, given a pair of prices,

the expenditure required to implement a choice (n1 , n2 ) is p1n1 x1  p2 n2 x2 . Outlet i’s

profit denoted  i is assumed equal to price times quantity of impressions: pi (2axi ) .




16
   One might wonder whether a pay-per-click model of advertising would alleviate the inefficiencies
created by switching. The answer is no: whatever the payment model, displaying one advertisement
necessarily displaces another. For this reason, most pay-per-click advertising networks charge advertisers a
price per click that is inversely proportional to the click-through rate of the ad. Thus, the overall payment of
the advertiser is “per impression”—an ad that is not clicked on often (perhaps because it is wasted, if the
advertiser multi-homes) has to pay a proportionally higher price per click to justify displacing another
advertiser.
17
   We can make an “if and only if” statement here because Ds < 1 even when  = 1. If, however, Ds can
equal 1, there is also not duplication if advertisers single-home.
                                                                                                                               13


          A market equilibrium is a tuple                       (n (v, pˆ , pˆ ), n (v, pˆ , pˆ ))
                                                                    *
                                                                    1       1   2
                                                                                      *
                                                                                      2      1    2   v[0,V ]   ,( pˆ1, pˆ 2 ) ,

where:
(i), (n1* (v, pˆ1 , pˆ 2 ), n2* (v, pˆ1 , pˆ 2 ))  arg max n1 ,n2  (n1 , n2 )v  pˆ1n1 x1  pˆ 2n2 x2 for all v and
                                                        V
(ii) for each outlet, i, pˆ i is such that xi  ni* (v, pˆ1 , pˆ 2 )dF (v)  2 xi ai .
                                                       0

The first condition says that advertisers optimize their impression choices taking prices as
given while the second condition says that the market for each outlet clears. To build
intuition, we focus, initially, on the simplest case with symmetric outlets; i.e., xi  x j  12 ,

and ai  a j : a . In this case, it can be readily seen that pˆ1  pˆ 2  pˆ .

2.5       Benchmark: perfect tracking

          The first-best allocation of consumers’ attention to advertisers is such that the
highest value advertisers are allocated with priority to scarce advertising inventory and
there is no duplication. Let vi denote the marginal advertiser allocated to consumers loyal

to outlet i and let vs denote the marginal advertiser allocated to consumers who switch
between outlets j and i. An efficient allocation of advertisers to consumers involves
allocating all advertisers with v  vi to outlet i’s loyal consumers and those with v  vs to
those who switch between i and j. Thus, the marginal advertisers are defined as the
unique solution to: 2a  1  F (vi ) and ai  a j  1  F (vs ) .

          To see how this first best might be implemented in practice, consider a scenario
where there exists a public record that keeps track of all consumer/ad matches. More
realistically, suppose that both outlets outsource their advertising to a third party, labeled
“ad-platform.” The platform acquires the outlets’ entire advertising inventory and can
keep track, say by planting “cookies” on the consumers’ web-browsers, of all previous
                                 18
consumer/ad matches.                  Moreover suppose that the platform can price discriminate
based on consumer-type (loyal or switcher).


18
   An alternative (but probably less realistic) assumption would be that the ad platform shares information
with the outlet about the consumer type, so that the outlet can set different capacities for different types.
This additional flexibility would lead to a scenario with essentially distinct markets, so that firms compete
for switchers and but have a monopoly over access to loyal users. It is a bit more complicated to think how
this would work in practice, since consumer types would only be fully determined in the second period,
                                                                                                         14

        In this scenario there would still be two markets: one market for impressions on
loyals and another one for impressions on switchers. The prices that equate demand and
supply are equal to pˆ i  vi and pˆ s  vs respectively. This as advertisers will choose to

advertise so long as their value exceeds the impression price. Note that if ai  a j , then

pˆ i  pˆ j  pˆ ij while if ai  a j , then pˆ i  pˆ ij  pˆ j . In equilibrium the outlets’ inventory is

worth  i  pˆ i 2ai Dil  pˆ s ai D s . When ai  a j  a and xi  x j  12 then   vi 2a( Dl  12 D s )

. Note in this case that profits are independent of the mix of loyal and switching
customers.


3       Equilibrium analysis

3.1     Switchers and the Demand for ads

        Given consumers’ allocation of attention and ad prices, we now proceed to
characterize the advertisers’ demand as a function of their idiosyncratic valuation. That
is, we associate to each type v the pair (n1 , n2 ) with ni {0,1, 2} which solves:

                  max n1 ,n2  (n1 , n2 )v  p1n1 x1  p2 n2 x2 .

To better understand what drives the advertisers’ choices it is useful to decompose the
advertisers’ program in two sub-programs. First how many ads shall each advertiser buy
overall? Second, given n1  n2 , how do ads on different outlets substitute for one another?

In other words what is and, most importantly, what drives the optimal allocation of these
ads across outlets?
        A key observation is that the combination of switching and imperfect tracking is a
source of diminishing returns from purchasing additional impressions. That is, 

(evaluated along the optimal allocation) decreases with n1  n2 if and only if 0  D s  1 .
                                                                                                    1
For example, with equal prices and symmetric outlets, the first ad is worth                         2   v in
                           1
revenues at a cost of      2   p . A second ad, for instance allocated to a different outlet, costs



after the consumer had already experienced a first-period ad capacity. We omit the formal analysis of this
case.
                                                                                                    15


just the same. However, it is only worth ( Dl  14 D s )v  12 v in additional revenues due to
duplicated impressions. Diminishing returns immediately implies that advertisers sort in
equilibrium with relatively higher types buying more ads overall. Let vk denote the

advertiser type indifferent between n1  n2  k and k  1 ads. The above diagram
illustrates the sorting that arises in this model. It distinguishes three cases depending on
the level of D s . The above thresholds as well as their analytical expression are marked
below each line. Above the regions delimited by the threshold we report the optimal
advertisers’ strategy (or strategies in case of indifference).
        Figure 1 highlights two important features of the solution to the advertisers’
problem. First, and foremost, sorting takes place only if there are some switchers.
Second, the threshold on D s stresses the tension that the advertisers’ face when deciding
how to allocate a second, additional ad; i.e., the tension between diversifying (by
spreading ads on different outlets) or concentrating all ads on a single outlet. When
diversifying, the advertisers trade off increased reach on switchers, due to internal
tracking, with increased reach on loyal consumers. In our formulation, diversifying pays
off if and only if D s  D s : 23 . The threshold makes type v2 simultaneously indifferent

between purchasing an additional ad on the same outlet and on the other outlet (or doing
without the additional ad altogether). It, therefore, equates two sources of
“waste/duplication.” That is, within outlet waste (due to imperfect internal tracking)
whose manifestation here is duplication on loyals and across outlet waste (due to no
tracking across outlets), which causes duplication on switchers.19




19
  In Athey, Calvano and Gans (2013) we show that this tension and in particular this threshold property
holds for very general tracking technologies satisfying a) and b) above.
                                                                                                                         16




              The aggregate demand integrates the individual demands across advertisers’
types. In case of indifference between alternate strategies we assume that the advertisers
split equally.
                                ( Dl  12 D s )  12 ( F (v2 )  F (v1 ))  1  F (v2 )  12 (1  F (v3 ))        v3  V
                                
                                          ( D  12 D )  12 ( F (v2 )  F (v1 ))  1  F (v2 ) 
       V
xi        ni (v, p, p)dF (v)  
            *                                 l           s
                                                                                                              if v2  V  v3
                                
   0

                                                        ( D  2 D ) 2 (1  F (v1 ))
                                                            l    1   s 1
                                                                                                                 v1  V  v2

In what follows, we will refer to “high,” “medium” and “low” types, all types that belong
to [v3 , ), [v2 , v3 ) and [v1 , v2 ) respectively.

3.2           The impact of switching on aggregate demand

              The arrows in Figure 1 illustrate the effect of a marginal increase in D s on the
aggregate demand of each outlet. Once more we shall distinguish between two cases
depending whether switching exceeds the threshold or not. The intuition is as follows.
Suppose Ds  Ds . As switching increases, the marginal medium types scale back on
advertising and become low types due to the increased duplication on switchers. On the
contrary the set of high types (who have a higher opportunity cost from missing out
consumers) expands as incremental returns go up for them. The overall effect is
ambiguous. As we will discuss after characterizing the equilibrium this is somewhat
                                                                                                     17

counterintuitive, as switching always degrades the value of the inventory in the sense that
it lowers the expected value of an additional impression for all types. Note that the exact
opposite intuition holds for the case Ds  Ds . In any case, as the two arrows always point
in opposite directions, the overall effect is once more ambiguous.
        The following proposition goes one step further by observing that when switching
is sufficiently low, it must be that the aggregate demand decreases as switching increases.
As D s approaches zero, eventually nobody would purchase multiple impressions on one
outlet ( v3   ). However v2  v1 for all positive values of D s . Then, increased
switching in this range has a first order negative impact on the demand of the medium
types while it has no impact on the demand of the high types. Thus, outlet demand
necessarily falls; that is, for any given price, p, fewer impressions are purchased.
Proposition 1. Outlet (and aggregate) demand is decreasing with Ds around Ds = 0.

3.3     Equilibrium

        To solve for the market equilibrium, the outlets’ respective aggregate demands
have to equal supply. For an outlet, the total supply of advertising inventory is xi 2a .
With fixed supply, the equilibrium properties are basically inherited from the properties
of the aggregate demand for ads. In particular, a lower aggregate demand implies lower
prices and profits. The following result directly follows from Proposition 1.
Proposition 2. Equilibrium prices and profits are decreasing in Ds around D s  0 .
As discussed, it is also the case that outside of this range a greater number of switchers
could reverse the result. Recall that in general an increase in Ds  Ds increases v2 while

reduces v3 . Depending upon the rate of change of these thresholds and, specifically on
the rate of change of the probability measure of the sets defined by them profits may go
up or down.20
        What can be said about the equilibrium allocation? As stressed, duplication can
cause demand and, therefore, prices to drop below the prices that would arise without
switching. This means that some low value advertisers who would not have access to

   By construction, if D  0 then the competitive equilibrium yields the first best / perfect tracking
20                      s

outcome and no duplication occurs. Furthermore consumer attention is allocated in the way that maximizes
total advertising surplus.
                                                                                                               18

consumer attention in a hypothetical first best, now would. So two sorts of “mismatches”
can occur in equilibrium. While consumer surplus is not explicitly modeled here, the
combination of inefficient depletion (due to duplication) and inefficient use of attention
(due to ad/consumer mismatches) would be necessarily suboptimal, had we spelled out a
richer model on the consumer side.
           The above observation raises the question of whether more switching is always
detrimental. (Say, from a total surplus maximizing perspective). A key insight is that so
long as Ds  Ds , all advertisers’ are worse off regardless of the direction of change of
prices and profits. This is well understood for marginal medium types, who scale back on
(less valuable) impressions as D s increases. The intuition is subtler for marginal high
types who, on the contrary, increase their advertising effort with switching. For this
group, while the gross advertising surplus falls with switching21 (much as it does for all
other types), the incremental value of buying a third impression increases. In other
words, while these high value advertisers are less enthusiastic about advertising, at the
same time they feel more compelled to advertise more as the option of doing without
looses relatively more appeal. This is due to the property a) of the tracking technology.
           On the contrary beyond D s , the intuition is, somewhat surprisingly, reversed.
Switching is beneficial as it allows increasing reach by exploiting internal tracking. So
the advertising surplus generated in the economy goes up. That is due to property b) of
the tracking technology. To see this via an extreme example, note that if D s  1 then one
can easily verify that the market equilibrium once more yields the perfect tracking
outcome. That is, all advertisers purchase 2 ads on one outlet only (it does not matter
which one), no duplication occurs and consumer attention in allocated in a way that
maximizes the total advertising surplus.
           More generally (that is abstracting away from our tracking technology) the
combination of D s  1 and perfect internal tracking always induces a first-best
equilibrium allocation despite the absence of across outlet tracking. For this reason, in the
rest of the paper we focus attention on the, arguably most relevant, case in which the
gross advertising surplus falls switching for all strategies. That is Ds  Ds .


21
     That is the payoff associated with any of the strategies available to the advertisers weakly decreases.
                                                                                               19

3.4    An illustration with uniformly distributed valuations

       In this sub-section, we further develop the model by choosing a distribution that
allows for explicit solutions. As we shall see, this allows answering a broader set of
questions while developing intuition at the same time.
       A first issue to consider is the possibility that switching increases profits and,
most importantly, whether it could do so beyond the level that would be obtained absent
switching. The conjecture is that the higher demand from the high types may eventually
more than compensate the decreased demand from the medium types. We now proceed
proving this conjecture though an example. If advertisers’ valuations are uniformly
distributed then it is possible to derive a closed form expression for the equilibrium prices
and profits (algebra in appendix). Figure 2 (a) depicts individual outlets’ profits when
a1  a2  52 , D s  12  Dˆ s and v is uniformly distributed on the unit line.


                 Figure 2 (a): Outlet Profits as a function of Ds ( a  0.4 )
                                                                                   Imperfect
                                                                                  Imperfect
  $                                                                                Tracking
                                                                                  Tracking



                                                                                   Perfect
                                                                                  Tracking




       The decreasing portion of the curve corresponds to the case in which all of the
aggregate demand variation comes from medium types ( v2  V  v3 ). The increasing

portion corresponds to the case in which high types become active v2  v3  V . It easy to
verify that that for all distributions high types are more sensitive than lower types to
marginal changes in D s . The intuition is that these latter target precisely switchers. This
                                                                                        20

fact together with the uniform distribution assumption is exploited here to show that
profits can, in general, increase. In particular, this parameterization shows that they can
increase beyond what the outlets would get in the perfect tracking benchmark. This result,
as we shall see, has important implications for the outlets’ incentives to invest and/or
coalize to allow for “better” tracking of their common consumers.
         Finally, this exercise sheds light on the subtle interaction between switching and
ad capacity. Figure 2 (b) summarizes how each outlet’s profit changes with switching for
all pairs (a, D s ).


                Figure 2 (b): Direction of Change in Outlet Profits with Ds

                Ds     Independ
                       ent of Ds                       Increasing
                                                          in Ds


                                       Decreasing
                                         in Ds




                                                                     a

         Recall that the equilibrium price and, therefore, aggregate demand is monotone
decreasing in capacity. In the region on the left hand side of the diagram, supply is so
scarce that, at the equilibrium price, no advertiser multi-homes. So switching has no
impact. In contrast, the central region corresponds to the case in which the equilibrium
price is such that v1  v2  V  v3 . So all variation in aggregate demand due to switching
comes from medium types who scale back (becoming low types) due to duplication.
Therefore, prices and profits decrease with D s . Finally, the top right region corresponds
to the case in which v1  v2  v3  V . Here, as discussed, the variation in the aggregate
demand due to switching comes from two sources. The fact that the increased demand
due to a decrease in v3 more than compensates the decreased demand due to medium
types scaling back is a particular feature of the uniform distribution assumption. As
                                                                                        21

discussed, in general, the effect is ambiguous. In addition, as shown in the Online
Appendix, if ad capacities are endogenized in a particular way and under the assumption
of uniform distribution, capacities will never be chosen in the region where profits
increase with switching. However, a full analysis of endogenous ad capacities would
incorporate other forces affecting optimal capacities (such as competition for users) and
is thus left for future work.


4       Asymmetric outlets and positional advantage

        As mentioned in the introduction, one puzzle associated with the economic theory
on media advertising is differing advertising rates across outlets. Our baseline model with
symmetric outlets involved an equilibrium outcome whereby advertising rates were the
same across outlets. Here we explore asymmetric outlets and, in particular, what types of
asymmetries may account for differing advertising rates: that is, when might outlets have
a positional advantage in advertising markets?

4.1     Asymmetric readership shares

        Here we consider what happens when a relatively higher quality allows one outlet
to generate a higher readership share than the other. That is, we assume that x1  x2

(which implies D1l  D2l ) but the outlets are otherwise symmetric.

        To build intuition, we work here through an indirect argument. Specifically, we
suppose that the market clearing unit prices are equal across outlets and conclude that
these prices cannot be part of a market equilibrium. For this purpose, consider the
advertisers’ demand. Recall that, in the baseline case, relatively low-valued advertisers
were indifferent between single-homing on either outlet. Figure 3 illustrates the sorting
                                                                                                          22




that would arise instead with equal prices, assuming that one outlet is marginally more
attractive than the other (with epsilon denoting an arbitrarily small number) and Ds  Ds .
Observe that when outlet 1 is larger, advertisers will sort on to that outlet first. The reason
is that revenues from single-homing on outlet one exceed that from single-homing on
outlet 2 for all active advertisers: ( D1l  12 Ds )(v  p)  ( D2l  12 Ds )(v  p) . Everything else
held constant, this creates upward pressure on the relative price of outlet 1’s ads to
rebalance supply and demand on both markets. On the other hand, relatively high valued
advertisers purchase a second ad on outlet 2 first since this is the most cost-efficient way
to increase reach among switchers. This creates downward pressure on relative prices.
                                                                                         1
Again, the overall effect of a marginal increase of x1 beyond                            2   is ambiguous and

depends on the local properties of the distribution function.


                Once more, if most of the variation in demand comes from medium types, then a
(small) competitive edge in quality gives a (big) positional advantage to one outlet in the
sense that its impressions command a price premium. In the special context of the
uniform distribution, that requires a and Ds to be “sufficiently” small (proof in the
appendix).

Proposition 3. Let F (v) U [0,1] , a1  a2  a and x1  x2 . Then, 1 > 2 if and only if
1
2    D16
        s
                1
                1 x1
                              1
                                  
                         4(1 x4) Ds  a ; that is, Ds and a are sufficiently small.

The fact that ‘larger’ outlets, in terms of readership share, command a premium for their
ad space is a known puzzle in traditional media economics. The reason being that in a
canonical model consumers are equally valuable regardless of the outlet they are on, yet
                                                                                                     23

in practice advertising rates are typically higher on larger outlets. Here, because ads are
tracked more effectively internally, placing ads on the larger outlet only involves less
expected waste than when you place ads on the smaller outlet or spread them across
outlets. So, the larger outlet can command a (tracking-related) premium and this fact can,
arguably, contribute to account for the observed wedge in impression prices.

4.2           Asymmetric ad capacities

              What if instead capacities differed? Suppose        a1
                                                                  a2    1 and that the outlets are

otherwise symmetric. A first observation is that whenever a market equilibrium exists
        pˆ1
then   pˆ 2    1 22 . Figure 4 illustrates this point showing the sorting that arises when

advertisers face unequal prices. While symmetry (on the consumers’ share) preserves the
incremental reach associated to buying an additional ad, the lowest priced outlet always
features an excess demand relative to its cheaper counterpart. But if this is the case then it
must be that, in equilibrium, relative prices reflect relative scarcity in the usual fashion.
That is pˆ1  pˆ 2 if and only if a1  a2 . The reason, of course, is that lower priced outlets

are more attractive to low types, as they offer a better bargain. This is also the case for
high types, whose objective is to increase penetration among the switchers. Intermediate
types instead, as in the baseline case, demand one ad each.
              More interestingly, a robust intuition that emerges from the diagram is that in any
asymmetric equilibrium of this sort, the two outlets serve two very different products




22
  The issue of existence is sidestepped here to focus on the properties of the market allocation. In the
online appendix we provide a full characterization for the case of uniformly distributed valuations.
                                                                                         24


whenever D s  0 . The “smaller” outlet, due to the endogenous higher price, serves
additional ads in equilibrium; i.e., the second impression for high valued multi-homing
adverisers. This segmentation, in part, insulates the outlets from the externalities that
their capacity choices, if endogenized, would exert on their respective market price. To
see this point, consider how the unilateral incentives to exert market power of outlet 1,
given a2 are affected by D s . Clearly, by reducing the efficiency of the matching process
and therefore the value of the inventory being sold, switching acts as a vertical demand
shifter. Everything else held constant this leads the outlet to expand capacity. The market
clearing price of a given capacity is lower. A subtler effect is that it also makes the
demand schedule flatter. That is, the extent to which a decrease in quantities increases
prices, for given demand shift is smaller. In other words more capacity has to be
sacrificed to achieve a given per impression price (or vice-versa).
       Also note that locally, in the asymmetric equilibrium, there are no strategic
externalities in the sense that a marginal change in outlet’s 1 capacity has no impact on
outlet’s two revenues. This is the sense in which advertisers’ sorting insulates the two
firms. This is perhaps contrary to expectations induced by related work (e.g., Anderson,
Foros and Kind, 2011), that switching would have been a source of externalities, the
higher switching the higher the extent of competitive pressure when it comes to
simultaneously choose the quantity of ads. This would have arisen here had the markets
for loyals and switching consumers been identified. But imperfect tracking prevents that
and so prevents impressions on switchers giving rise to competitive pressure. In an online
appendix, we discuss endogenous capacity in more detail.


5      Strategic Implications

5.1    Incentives to compete for readers

       In this section, we present an extension that endogenizes the quality of the outlets.
Specifically, we develop a sequential move game where initially the outlets may exert
effort to produce higher quality content. In turn, consumers choose which outlet to
patronize. Effort is rewarded through a higher expected probability of being patronized
whenever consumers face a choice. That is, a higher expected market share.
                                                                                              25

       That consumer switching can increase the equilibrium level of effort is quite
intuitive when the primitives are such that impression prices are higher relative to the
case where D s  0 , as discussed. In what follows we unveil an additional, subtler,
mechanism that allows the equilibrium effort to rise with switching even when switching
is detrimental to profits. That is, when switching depresses the outlets’ market clearing
prices. The key to understand the result is that switching engenders a rent. The rent is
associated to the positional advantage created by asymmetries in market shares as
demonstrated in the previous section. As we will see, this rent comes hand in hand with
competition for it, which in turn engenders effort.
       To fix ideas, we present here a very simple extension that yields the outcome
described above. Suppose that prior to consumers and advertisers making any choices,
outlets can invest an amount ei at cost c(ei )  12 ei2 which generates a probability

ei  (0,1) of being a high rather than a low quality outlet. The probabilities are

independent across outlets. Therefore, if outlets choose (e1 , e2 ) then with probability

e1 (1  e2 ) only outlet 1 has high quality while with probability e2 (1  e1 ) the reverse is

true. Finally with probability e1e2  (1  e1 )(1  e2 ) both outlets have the same quality. To
isolate the impact of the positional advantage on the incentives to invest, we assume that
in those states of nature where one outlet has relatively higher quality, it earns a
positional advantage by being marginally more attractive than the other. That is
xi  x j   where epsilon denotes, once more, an arbitrarily positive small number. The

outlets choose their effort levels simultaneously. If a quality gap realizes then the higher
quality outlet earns  H ( D s ) while the low quality outlet earns  L ( D s ) otherwise they

both earn  ( D s ) with  L     H (arguments omitted from now on) for all D s  0 . If

D s  0 then there cannot be any positional advantage and  H   L   (0) .
       The unique Nash equilibrium level of effort is (algebra in the appendix):
                                                  H 
                               e1  e2                       .                         (1)
                                           1   H   L  2
Note that, by construction, effort is positive only if D s  0 . The reason being that the
only role of effort in this model is that of increasing the chances of appropriating the
                                                                                              26

positional advantage rent. Crucially, equilibrium effort is positive for all levels of
switching. Therefore, the incentives to invest in quality are enhanced regardless on how
switching impacts the market clearing prices. Finally, as  (0) is also the level of profits
that would obtain under perfect tracking, it follows that according to this particular model
equilibrium effort (here interpreted as quality) is, somewhat surprisingly, higher with
imperfect tracking. Perfect tracking will induce lower investments.
        Note that, in a more general formulation, for instance, one that allows effort to
affect the market shares, then the opposite result could obtain. Nonetheless the
mechanism identified here would interact with the effect of switching on equilibrium
prices to amplify it or mitigate it. The following proposition takes stock (proof omitted).
Proposition 4. The equilibrium level of effort in enhancing quality is higher under
imperfect tracking than under perfect tracking.


5.2     Limited content for reach

        The analysis thus far has assumed that outlets have sufficient content to attract
attention of loyal consumers throughout the relevant attention period. Of course, on the
Internet, much content is provided on a smaller scale. For providers of that content, there
is no possibility of attracting loyal consumers. However, here we demonstrate how such
providers may still achieve a positional advantage in advertising markets; that is, what
they lose in their inability to attract frequent visits from consumers, they can make up in
terms of their reach across all consumers – acting as a “magnet” for attention in the
relevant advertising period.
        To see this, we amend the model as follows. Assume outlet 2 only has enough
content to satisfy consumers for a single period. To assist in identifying it expositionally,
we rename it outlet f. Outlet 1 is unchanged. To focus on the impact of limited content,
we will confine ourselves here to the case where   1 . In this situation, the total

expected traffic (over both periods) to outlet 1 is x1 (1  x1 )  x f and to outlet f is

x f (1  x1 ) . Thus, D1l  x1 (1  x f ) while Dlf  0 and outlet f only has consumers who are

switchers, D s  x f (1  x1 ) . Thus, while outlet 1 supplies ad capacity of D1l 2a  D s a into

the market, outlet f only supplies D s a .
                                                                                                27

        The significant change that arises here is that, in addition to targeted multi-
homing, advertisers now have an additional option to reach the entire market by
intensively single-homing on outlet 1 with 2 impressions (i.e., n1  2, n f  0 ). This yields

surplus of v  p1 which always exceeds targeted multi-homing ( n1  2, n f  1 ), which has

expected surplus to advertisers of 12 (1  D s )v  p1  12 D s p f . Thus, when xf is low, intense

single-homers on that outlet set the price for marginal advertisers in the market. The
following proposition characterizes outcomes when one outlet has limited content.
Proposition 5. Suppose F (v) U [0,1] , a1  a2  a and outlet f has limited content. The
only non-dominated advertiser choices (n1 , n f ) are (1, 2), (1, 0), (2, 0), (0, 2) . In
equilibrium, (i) for xf low, the marginal advertiser in the market chooses (0,2) and
 pˆ1  pˆ f while (ii) for xf high, the marginal advertiser in the market chooses (1,0),
pˆ1  pˆ f and there are no multi-homing advertisers. As xf approaches 1, f approaches 1.

The structure of the equilibrium is interesting. When f’s share is low ( 12 D s  D1l ) and
begins to rise, outlet 1, who was exclusively selling to single-homing advertisers (1
impression) continues to do so, but high valued advertisers also purchase 2 impressions
on outlet f. The same is true of low valued advertisers who now become the marginal
advertisers in the market at a price of pf. Consequently, p f  p1 but as x f rises, outlet 1’s

profit falls as does total profits from advertising in the industry. This changes when x f

reaches a critical level (i.e., 0.42265 so that         1
                                                        2   D s  D1l ). At that point, marginal
advertisers prefer to bid for 2 impressions on outlet f and so single-homing advertisers
with a single impression on outlet 1 become the marginal advertisers at a price of p1 .

This implies that p f  p1 . In addition, the high valued advertisers no longer choose to

multi-home and become exclusive to outlet 1 with 2 impressions. Nonetheless, as x f

rises outlet 1’s profits continue to fall. In this case, however, industry profits rise again
and indeed, when x f  1 they approach the same level as when x f  0 . In this case, the

profits are split evenly between the two outlets rather than held entirely by outlet 1.
Intuitively, at this point, all consumers are switchers and so there is no longer any
inefficiency resulting from wasted impressions.
                                                                                                    28

        An interesting observation is that at this limit, there may be negative incentives to
provide additional content. The small content outlet can earn exactly the same profits as
the other outlet. Indeed, when x f is such that      1
                                                     2   D s  D1l , outlet f earns more than half of

outlet 1’s profits. Thus, the rate of return for providing that additional content is lower for
outlet 1 than for outlet f.
        We can get a sense as to whether limited but magnet content is becoming
relatively more important by looking at the type of outlets that now attract display ad
impressions. ComScore reports that in the first quarter of 2011, Facebook (arguably a
limited content provider) attracted over 30 percent of all display ad impressions in the
US; around 350 billion impressions. In contrast, traditional, in-depth, news outlets such
as Turner International, Fox Interactive and CBS Digital Attracted between 11 and 18
billion impressions (less than 2% of impressions).

5.3     Paywalls
        In response to declining ad revenues, efforts to charge consumers for content are
taking many different forms. While most of the debate insists on the adverse impact of
paywalls on readership we contribute to the debate by assessing the impact of three of the
most common pay models on the advertisers’ incentives. Needless to say, a thorough
assessment of paywalls would require a full-fledged model of consumer behavior.
Nonetheless the model presented here allows focusing on the impact of paywalls on
switching behavior.
        Specifically, we assume that outlets are asymmetric in the probabilities that a
consumer might have an opportunity to switch away from them. We define ij as the

probability that a consumer who has visited outlet i, has an opportunity to switch from it.
Consequently, the three consumer classes are now determined by:
                                  D1l  x1  x1 (1  x1 ) 12                                 (2)

                                  D2l  x2  x2 (1  x2 ) 21                                 (3)

                                   D12s  ( 21  12 ) x1 x2                                 (4)
                                                                                             29


A higher ij may result from the consumer having a higher cost associated with

remaining with outlet i. Of course, a paywall may impact upon xi. However, for the most
part, we will hold that effect fixed and comment on the impact of such movements below.
        We begin by considering micropayments whereby outlet 1 charges consumers for
each period they visit its website. Holding the impact on x1 fixed, a micropayment makes
it less likely that visitors to outlet 1 will stay on that outlet another period (increasing 12

) while making it less likely visitors to outlet 2 will switch to outlet 1 (decreasing  21 ).

This has two impacts on advertising markets. First, D12s could rise or fall depending upon

what happens to 21  12 . If it falls, then this will put upward pressure on advertising

prices if ad capacity is relatively low. Second, recall that when readership shares were
asymmetric, an outlet commanded a positional advantage if its expected share of loyal
consumers was relatively high. However, holding x1 fixed and starting from a symmetric
position prior to the paywall, micropayments on outlet 1 will lead to more loyal users on
outlet 2 than on 1 ( D2l  D1l ). Consequently, outlet 2 will be given a positional advantage

in the advertising market so that p2  p1 . Add to that the reduction in x1 due to the
paywall, and this effect is only reinforced. Outlet 1 would have to not only make up for
lost advertising revenues as a loss in visitors but also from the loss in positional
advantage, while outlet 2 clearly benefits in both of these dimensions from the paywall.
        In contrast to a micropayment system, a subscription system will have a more
directed impact. In such a system, a visitor to outlet 1 only pays on their first visit and not
thereafter. This means that a subscriber to outlet 1 may be just as likely – should the
opportunity and desire arise – to switch to outlet 2 (i.e., 12 will not change). However, a
non-subscriber who had visited outlet 2 previously would be less likely to then subscribe
to outlet 1 for what remained of the attention period (i.e.,  21 would fall). Once again,

starting from a position of symmetry, this implies that D2l  D1l and so the paywall would
not only lead to relatively more visitors to outlet 2 but a positional advantage for it in
advertising markets. This is an interesting result since one of the claims associated with
subscription paywalls is that they will increase consumer loyalty to an outlet. While it is
true that such loyalty, if generated, would increase an outlet’s advertising revenues per
                                                                                         30

consumer, here a subscription generates increased loyalty for the rival outlet rather than
the outlet imposing the paywall. Of course, this effect could be mitigated if, say because
they are subscribers, consumers are more inclined to be loyal to outlet 1 thereby
increasing 12 . The point here is that that outcome is not straightforward.
         Finally, some outlets have proposed a limited paywall (as recently implemented
by the Financial Times and the New York Times). In this case, outlets allow access to
some content for free and then charge should a consumer wish to consume more. In the
context of the model here, such a paywall would only be imposed, say, if a consumer
chose to stay on outlet 1 for both attention periods. This type of paywall would be
unlikely to have any impact on those who had previously visited outlet 2 as they could
still freely switch to outlet 1 (i.e.,  21 would be unchanged). However, this paywall
would impose a penalty for staying on outlet 1 making consumers there more inclined to
switch (i.e., 12 would rise). It is clear again, that other things being equal, the paywall

would result in D2l  D1l .

         The analysis here demonstrates that putting in a paywall may give an outlet a
positional disadvantage in advertising markets. Of course if an outlet already has a
positional advantage, the likelihood that this occurs is lower. Nonetheless, the impact of a
paywall does confer benefits on rivals in advertising markets as well as increasing their
readership. These consequences may explain the low use of paywalls for online news
media.


6        Policy Implications

6.1      The Impact of Mergers

         The evaluation of mergers between media outlets has always posed some difficult
issues for policy-makers. On the one hand, if it is accepted that outlets have monopoly
power over access to their consumers, mergers are unlikely to reduce the extent of
competitive pressure in advertising markets. On the contrary, it is argued that a merger
may indeed increase market power enhancing ad revenues and stimulating outlet’s
incentives to attract consumers. We add to this debate by considering various cases
                                                                                                          31

depending on what the merger does with regard to inter-outlet tracking. The number of
outlets affects the equilibrium outcome only through its impact on tracking and thus the
efficiency of advertising on multiple outlets. A full analysis of mergers would in addition
need to consider the extension of our model to endogenous capacity.
        Mergers improve inter-outlet tracking. Suppose a merger reduces the number
of duplicated and missed impressions in the advertising market. For example, as noted
earlier, a move to perfect tracking generates, for a fixed ad capacity, the first best
allocation of scarce advertising inventory. While these gains could potentially provide
efficiency grounds for approval, the analysis showed that it is not clear that the outlets
have indeed incentives to facilitate tracking ex-post due as profits need not be
monotone.23
        Mergers permit coordinated sales to advertisers. Suppose that creating a single
entity can allow discrimination between single-homers and multi-homers; something that
cannot be done without joint ownership. To explore this, suppose that parameters are
such that no advertiser wants to purchase multiple impressions on any one outlet, outlet
readership quality is symmetric and that F (v) U [0,1] . Further, suppose that, on each
outlet, the monopoly owner can commit to an ad capacity allocated to multi-homers, am ,

and an ad capacity allocated to single homers, as . Price discrimination is achieved by
charging all advertisers the same price for their first impression on one of the outlets and
a different price for their second impression. The price the outlet can charge multi-
homers, pm for their second impression and single-homers, ps, for their single impression
are determined by:
                                    am  1  v2 and as  12 (v2  v1 )                              (5)

Solving for prices and substituting into the profit function, ( ps  pm )am  ps as , gives:
                         1
                         4    (1  2a
                                     s    am )(2as  am )  am 122D (1  am )
                                                                                 s
                                                                                                   (6)

Maximizing with respect to (am , as ) and subject to as  am  2a yields:

                                am      16 a  D s
                                         2(4  D s )
                                                       and as       Ds
                                                                  2(4 D s )
                                                                               (1  4a)             (7)


23
  In addition, as demonstrated above, moving to perfect tracking may not result in higher quality to readers
leading to potentially ambiguous overall welfare effects.
                                                                                                                     32

                                               64 a (2 D s )(1 2 a )  D s 2
so long as 16a  D s .24 Profits are:                  32(4  D s )
                                                                                 which are greater than profits in the

absence of price discrimination.
           Price discrimination allows the outlet to separate advertisers’ types exploiting the
usual sorting condition: higher types value attention relatively more. With differential
prices comes a different allocation of attention. Specifically, note that, for a given Ds,
with no discrimination allocative efficiency obtains; i.e., there is no way to re-allocate
attention to different advertisers to increase total surplus. What the price discrimination
analysis shows is that a monopoly will introduce a further allocative distortion. Although
characterizing this “rent-extraction / allocative efficiency of user attention” trade-off is
beyond the scope of this paper, we believe this issue is important and should be addressed
at the level of merger control.

6.2        The Impact of Blogs and Public Broadcasting

           One of the factors that traditional newspapers have argued are contributing to
their decline is the rise of user generated content (blogs) and also competition from
government-subsidized media. Both types of outlets have in common that they either do
not accept advertising or accept very little of it. Somewhat in contradiction to this
position, newspapers and television broadcasters have objected to plans to allow public
broadcasters to sell advertisements rather than rely on subsidies. This latter objection
remains a puzzle from the perspective of traditional media economics, because these
public broadcasters should in principle be tougher competitors precisely because they do
not need to carry those annoying ads. Here we use our model to explore the impact of
competition from non-advertising media outlets.
           The baseline model is modified as follows. There are three outlets: one blog and
two mainstream media. In line with the previous notation let xb be the probability that

consumers choose a blog if given a choice. Let x1  x2  12 (1  xb ) be the corresponding

(symmetric) probability for the “sponsored” outlets. This implies that:
                                      Dl  12 (1  xb ) 1  12 (1  xb )                                    (8)



24
     If this condition does not hold, the outlet would not choose to price discriminate.
                                                                                                            33


                                          D12s   12 (1  xb )2                                      (9)

                                           Dibs   xb (1  xb )                                    (10)

where Dijs denotes the fraction of consumers who switch between outlets i and j.

Proposition 6. For   0 equilibrium impression prices are increasing in the popularity
of the ad free outlet, xb .

Intuitively, an increase in xb has two effects. First, as blogs are a sink of (scarce)
attention, it decreases the effective supply of advertising capacity in the market. Second,
unlike switchers between mainstream outlets, switchers between blogs and mainstream
outlets do not contribute to the wasted impressions problem. Consequently, a greater
share of blog readers increases the share of blog-mainstream switchers as well and so
reduces duplication. This increases the demand for advertisements. 25 These two effects –
a decrease in supply and an increase in demand – combine to raise equilibrium
impression prices. It is instructive to note that, even under perfect tracking, the supply-
side effect remains and so impression prices would be expected to rise with blog
readership share in that case too.
         Nonetheless, in terms of the impact on overall outlet profits, the price effect of an
increased blog share may not outweigh the quantity effect (in terms of lost readers). If it
is the case that we are comparing a situation where one output sells advertising to one
where it does not (absent any quantity changes in readership), then it is clear that
advertising-selling outlets prefer the situation where its rival is prohibited from selling
ads.26

6.3      The Impact of Prohibiting Tracking

         In 2010, the Federal Trade Commission explored a policy that would give
consumers the right to ‘opt out’ of tracking of any kind by websites. If widely adopted,
this would eliminate tracking options for media outlets. The impact of prohibitions on
tracking depends on the incentives to adopt such tracking in the first place. The analysis

26
   A recent paper by de Corniere and Taylor (2013) develops this point. They show that if the mainstream
outlet (e.g. Google) can also “divert” attention (i.e. set xb) then they would trade-off higher ad-prices (due
to scarcer supply) with higher quantity (due to lower attractiveness). So they show that the supply-side
effect described here can be a basis for “search engine bias.”
                                                                                                                                                      34


provides some insight into this by examining what happens to outlet profits as we move
from imperfect to perfect tracking. As shown, outlet profits need not be monotone in the
extent of tracking. It follows that perfect tracking technology might not be adopted
despite their ability to generate efficient outcomes in advertising markets. 27
              The possibility that advertisers will purchase multiple impressions at a rate that
likely leads to waste is borne out by the ComScore data. For instance, they estimate that
in the first quarter of 2011, almost 1.1 trillion display ads were delivered in the US. 28 Of
these, 19.5 billion were purchased by AT&T, 16.6 billion by Experian Interactive and
11.2 billion by Scottrade. If the entire US population surfed the net daily during that time,
they would see one AT&T ad per day.
              Note that outlets do not have a unilateral incentive to adopt perfect tracking as it
has no value unless the other outlet also cooperates to share consumer information. This
fact also makes it challenging for a provider of perfect tracking services to appropriate
the rents from that activity as we would expect each outlet to have some hold-out power.


7             Conclusions and Directions for Future Research

              This paper presents a theory that may resolve long-standing puzzles in media
economics regarding the impact of competition by constructing a model where
consumers can switch between media outlets and those outlets can only imperfectly track
those consumers across outlets. This model generates a number of predictions, including:
(i) as consumer switching increases total advertising revenue falls; (ii) outlets with a
larger readership share command premiums for advertisements; (iii) greater switching
may lead advertisers to increase the frequency of impressions purchased on outlets; (iv)
an increase in attention from non-advertising sources will increase advertising prices; (v)
mergers may allow outlets to increase advertising prices by practicing price
discrimination in advertising markets; (vi) ad platforms that provide tracking services
may not increase advertising prices; (vii) investments in content quality will be associated

27
  This also highlights the importance of how ad capacities are chosen; something we analyze in the online
appendix. That analysis demonstrates that it is, in fact, an inability to commit to not selling advertisements
when ad capacity is relatively high that permits the outcome that perfect tracking may lead to lower profits
than imperfect tracking.
28
     http://www.comscore.com/Press_Events/Press_Releases/2011/5/U.S._Online_Display_Advertising_Market_Delivers_1.1_Trillion_Impressions_in_Q1_2011
                                                                                                       35

with the nature of tracking technology; (viii) outlets that supply magnet content may be
more profitable per unit of attention than outlets offering a deeper set of content. These
predictions await thoughtful empirical testing but are thusfar consistent with stylized
facts associated with the impact of the Internet on the newspaper industry. In addition, we
note that while we have qualitative results, it is an open question as to whether the effects
here are quantitatively significant; especially given the magnitude of the observed
changes. Of course, the general characteristics of the model would also apply to other
media industries including television following the introduction of cable television
channels and remote controls and also the newly emerging mobile application industry
that has so far struggled to be advertising supported.
        While the model here has a wide set of predictions, extensions could deepen our
understanding further. Firstly, the model involves two outlets usually modeled as
symmetric with a distribution of advertisers with specific qualities. Generalizing these
could assist in developing more nuanced predictions for empirical analysis; specifically,
understanding the impact of outlet heterogeneity on advertising prices, incentives to
invest in quality and incentives to invest in tracking technology.
        Related, in this paper, we focused on frequency-based tracking noting that other
forms of tracking have been part of the news industry. An open question is what the
incentives are for firms to unilaterally improve their internal tracking of consumers. As
noted throughout this paper, the adoption of more efficient matching may increase
marginal demand but reduce inframarginal demand from advertisers. When ad capacity is
scarce, it is not clear that such moves will prove profitable for outlets.
        Finally, throughout this paper we have assumed that advertisements were equally
effective on both outlets. However, in some situations, it may be that the expected value
from impressing a consumer on one outlet is higher than that from impressing consumers
on another. For instance, consider (as in Athey and Gans, 2010), a situation where all
advertisers are in a given local area. One outlet publishes in that local area only while the
other is general and publishes across local areas. 29 Absent the ability to identify
consumers based on their location, a consumer impressed on the local outlet will still

29
   Location is only one aspect upon which consumers and advertisers might sort according to common
interests. Any specialized media content can perform this function and give an outlet a matching advantage
over more general outlets.
                                                                                              36

generate an expected value of v to advertiser v whereas one impressed on the general
outlet will only generate an expected value of v with < 1. In this situation, even if
there are no switching consumers, advertisers on the general outlet will be paying for
wasted impressions.
        While this situation may be expected to generate outcomes similar to when
readership shares are asymmetric, the effects can be subtle. A general outlet may have
fewer consumers who are of value to advertisers but also may have a larger readership. 30
Also, when consumers switch between outlets, the switching behavior is information on
those hidden characteristics. Thus, switching behavior may actually increase match
efficiency. Consequently, the effects of tailored content, self-selection and incentives to
adopt targeting technologies that overcome these are not clear and likely to be an area
where future developments can be fruitful.




30
  Levin and Milgrom (2010) argue that targeting may be limited because it conflicts with goals of
achieving market thickness (see also Athey and Gans, 2010).
                                                                                                           37


8           Appendix

8.1         Market equilibrium with uniformly distributed valuations, symmetric outlets
            and D s  23

Suppose that v is uniformly distributed on [0,1]. Recall that in this case we have:
                                          2                  2
                        v1  p,    v2         p,     v3  s p.
                                        2 D s
                                                            D
Let Dˆ s  0 denote the unique solution to the equation v3  1 (provided p  0 ). Equating
aggregate supply with aggregate demand for each outlet leads to (symmetric) market
clearing impression prices:
                           pˆ   s s                        if
                                 4DD(2s (2DD)s ) (3  4a) D  Dˆ
                                                                  s      s

                                
                                 2(2 Ds ) (1  2a)            D s  Dˆ s
                                 4 D        s




where Dˆ s  0 denotes the smallest value of D s such that v3 evaluated at p  pˆ equals
one. These market clearing prices give rise to the kinked profit function plotted in figure
1(a). To rule out multiplicity note that market clearing prices in both cases above are
equal if:
               D s (2  D s )             2(2  D s )                                                 
                               (3  4a)              (1  2a)  D s  2  2(1  a)  2(1  2a)  4a 2 
                   s
             4  D (2  D )  s             4D   s                                                    

At this level of Ds, p  2(1  a)  2(1  2a)  4a 2 ; i.e., D s / 2 . So, for given ad capacities,
there is no issue of multiple equilibria.


8.2         Proof of Proposition 3

       The fact that impression prices will differ in equilibrium together with
asymmetric readership shares raises the possibility that the type indifferent between
buying one ad on 1 or nothing does not coincide with the type indifferent between buying
one ad on 2 or nothing. In fact when p1  p2 , the marginal advertiser of outlet 1 must be
indifferent between the two outlets. We therefore adopt a different notation here. vi
denotes the marginal single-homer of outlet i. That is the type just indifferent between
purchasing one ad on outlet i and either nothing or one ad on outlet j. v11 denotes the
marginal multi-homer with one ad on each outlet. v12 is the type just indifferent between
(1,1) and (1,2) (where the second ad is purchased on the smaller outlet. If p1  p2 then
       2( D2l p2  D1l p1 )  D s ( p2  p1 )
v1               2( D2l  D1l )
                                                , while the marginal single-homer on outlet 2 is indifferent
between outlet 2 and not advertising at all, so that v2  p2 . Note that given these
                                                                                                                                              38


expressions, v1  v2  (2D1l  Ds )( p2  p1 )  0 ; this confirms the price premium of outlet
1.31 The marginal multi-homing advertiser (v11) will be determined by:
                   ( D1l  D2l  43 D s )v11  ( D1l  12 D s ) p1  ( D2l  12 D s ) p2
                                                                                         (11)
                    max ( D1l  12 D s )(v11  p1 ), ( D2l  12 D s )(v11  p2 ) 
Note that if p1  p2 or there are single-homers on outlet 1, then
                                                                                                              D2l  12 D s
( D1l  12 Ds )(v11  p1 )  ( D2l  12 Ds )(v11  p2 ) implying that v11                                    D2l  14 D s
                                                                                                                             p2 . Lastly the
                                  2(2 D2l  D s )
threshold, v12               4(1 D2l  D1l ) 3 D s
                                                        p2 leaves the advertiser indifferent between (1,1) and
purchasing an additional ad on the smaller outlet. Given this, market clearing implies that
the following equations (for each outlet) be simultaneously satisfied:
                                    1  F (v1 )  2a                              (12)
                                                               Demand for 1

                   2(1  F (min{v12 ,V }))  F (min{v12 ,V })  F (v11 )  F (v1 )  F (v2 )  2a                                      (13)
                                                               Demand for 2
Thus, high-valued advertisers sort on to outlet 1, while outlet 2 attracts low-valued
advertisers who single-home, as well as a set of high valued advertisers who multi-home.
There is an intermediate interval of advertisers who do not advertise on outlet 2.
        Solving (12) and (13) for outlet prices and substituting them into outlet profits
while checking to see what allocations of advertising choices these imply allows to derive
the following lemma:
Lemma. Assume that F (v) U [0,1] , a1  a2  a and x1  x2 . Then each outlet’s
equilibrium profits are as follows:
               x1 (8 x1 )
    (i) For 88(2  x1 )     a , 1  x1 44x1 (1  2a )2a and  2  x2 4x1x1(2(2x1x1) ) (3  4a)2a ;
                     x1            x1 (8 x1 )                                                             2(2  x1 )
     (ii) For         8      a  88(2  x1 )
                                                  , 1  x1 44x1 (1  2a )2a and  2  x2                  4 x1        (1  2a)2a
     (iii) For        x1
                       8     a , 1  x1 (1  2x1a )2a and  2  x2 (1  4a)2a .
            Note that, for case (i), 2(1  a)  x1  4(3   
                                                          4 a )(1 x1 )
                                                     4 x1 (2 x1 )  x2                              x1 (2  x1 )
                                                                                                        4 x1 (2 x1 )     (3  4a)  a  12 ,
which can’t hold. Thus,  2  1 always for this case. Note that this arises when
8 x1 (8 x1 )
  8(2  x1 )       a ; which, substituting Ds for  gives the converse of the condition in the
proposition. The LHS is decreasing in  so that when both  and a are high, this
condition holds as stated in the proposition.

                                                                              2(2  x1 )
            For case (ii), x1 44x1 (1  2a)2a  x2                         4 x1       (1  2a)2a  x1 (2  12  )  x2 (2  x1 )
which always holds for x1 > ½. Thus, 1   2 for this case.

            For case (iii), it is readily apparent that x1 > ½, 1   2 for this case.



31
  Of course, in equilibrium, there may be no single-homers on outlet 2 which will alter this intuition as we
discuss below.
                                                                                                                            39


8.3    Proof of Proposition 5
       In this case, while outlet 1 supplies ad capacity of D1l 2a  D s a into the market,
outlet f only supplies D s a . The following table identifies the surplus to an advertiser with
value v from pursuing different choices.

                 (n1 , n f )                        Expected Advertiser Surplus
                  (1,0)           ( D1l  12 Ds )(v  p1 )  12 (v  p1 )
                  (2,0)           ( D1l  Ds )v  (2D1l  Ds ) p1  12 (1  Ds )v  p1
                  (0,1)           1
                                  2   D s (v  p f )
                  (0,2)           D s (v  p f )
                  (1,1)          ( D1l  34 Ds )v  ( D1l  12 Ds ) p1  12 Ds p f  ( 12  14 Ds )v  12 p1  12 D s p f


                  (1,2)           ( D1l  Ds )v  ( D1l  12 Ds ) p1  Ds p f  12 (1  D s )v  12 p1  D s p f

                  (2,1)           ( D1l  Ds )v  (2D1l  Ds ) p1  12 Ds p f  12 (1  Ds )v  p1  12 D s p f


Notice that there are now three options for an advertiser to cover the entire consumer
market – single homing on 1 with 2 impressions, and multi-homing with two impressions
on at least one outlet. It is clear that multi-homing with 2 impressions on outlet 1 is
dominated by single-homing on outlet 1 (as the former involves paying for impressions
on f without any benefit). In addition, note that any advertiser who wants to single home
on outlet f will prefer to do so with two impressions as there is no waste from the
additional impression. We can always rule out multi-homing with one impression on each
outlet. For this to be preferred to single-homing on outlet 1 (with one impression) it must
be the case that 14 D s v  12 D s p f . However, this condition also means that by moving from
multi-homing with single impressions to multi-homing on outlet f with 2 impressions is
preferable. Consequently, if an advertiser wants to capture an additional 14 D s by
purchasing an impression on outlet f, it will also want to do this by purchasing two
additional impressions on outlet f.

         This still leaves four choices that might be undertaken by advertisers. As a means
of covering the entire market, single-homing on outlet 1 with 2 impressions and multi-
homing with 2 impressions on f are substitutes. Indeed, multi-homing will only be chosen
if 12 p1  D s p f ; a condition that must hold if D s is very small. At any point in time, we
will only observe one of these strategies being chosen. In each case, it will be the highest
value advertisers who pursue them.

       For the remaining choices, advertisers single homing on f (with 2 impressions) or
on 1 (with 1 impression) are candidates to be the marginal advertiser in the market. If
2 D  D1 , higher value advertisers prefer (holding prices constant) purchasing
1  s     l
                                                                                                                                                   40

impressions on f rather than 1. Under this condition, the marginal advertiser, with value
 p1 , would earn D s ( p1  p f ) by switching to outlet f which is negative if p1  p f .
Similarly, if the marginal advertiser has value, p f , it will earn ( D1l  12 D s )( p f  p1 ) by
switching to outlet 1. This reduces its surplus if p f  p1 . Hence, the marginal advertiser
will be on the lowest priced outlet.

        We now turn to derive the equilibrium prices and profits. Case 1:                                                              1
                                                                                                                                       2   D s  D1l .
Suppose that ( D1l  12 D s ) p1  D s p f . Then consider a candidate equilibrium where high
value advertisers sort as single-homers (2 impressions) on 1, then single-homers (2
impressions) on f and finally as single-homers (1 impression) on 1. In this case,
equilibrium prices will be the solution to:
                    D1l 2a  D s a  ( D1l  12 D s )  2(1  v1 f )  (v f  p1 )   (14)
                                                           1
                                                           2       D s 2a  12 D s 2(1  v1 f )                                             (15)
                                 (2 D1l  D s ) p1  D s p f                    2 D s p f (2 D1l  D s ) p1
        where v1 f                          D1l
                                                                   and v f             D s  2 D1l
                                                                                                               . Solving this gives:
                                                                        aD1l  D s (1  2a)
                                                               p1                                                                          (16)
                                                                             D1l  D s
                                                                                                       l2
                                                          p f  1  2a  2(1  3a) DD1s                                                     (17)

(recalling that we assume that a  14 ). It is easy to demonstrate that p f  p1 and that
( D1l  12 D s ) p1  D s p f . This confirms the equilibrium.

        Is it possible that ( D1l  12 D s ) p1  D s p f ? In this case, a candidate equilibrium
would have high value advertisers sort as multi-homers (2 impressions) on f and then
single-homers (2 impressions) on f. In this case, no advertiser will choose single-homing
on 1. Thus, equilibrium prices will be the solution to:
                            D1l 2a  Ds a  ( D1l  12 Ds )(1  v1 f )                    (18)
                                                               1
                                                               2   D s 2a  12 D s 2(1  p f )                                              (19)
               ( D1l  12 D s ) p1
where v1 f           D1l
                                     . Solving this gives:
                                                                           D1l (1  2a)
                                                                      p1                                                                   (20)
                                                                           2 D1l  D s

                                                                          p f  1 a                                                        (21)
                                                                                                                                                       41


It                   is       easy                      to                 demonstrate                 that                   p f  p1    but       that
                                                                                                               1 a
( D1l  12 D s ) p1  D s p f  ( 12  a) D1l  D s (1  a)  0                                           
                                                                                                       s
                                                                                                     D
                                                                                                     D1l
                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                               1 a
                                                                                                                          which cannot hold as the
LHS is greater than 2 while the RHS is less than 2. Thus, this cannot be an equilibrium.

         Case 2: 12 D s  D1l . Suppose that ( D1l  12 D s ) p1  D s p f . Then consider a
candidate equilibrium where high value advertisers sort as multi-homers (2 impressions)
on f, then single-homers (1 impression) on 1 and finally single-homers (2 impressions) on
f. In this case, equilibrium prices will be the solution to:
                              D1l 2a  Ds a  ( D1l  12 Ds )(1  v1 )               (22)
                                                           1
                                                           2   D s 2a  12 D s 2(1  v1 f  v1  p f )                                          (23)
                                                         (2 D1l  D s ) p1  2 D s p f
where v1 f  2 p f and v1                                        2 D1l  D s
                                                                                         . Solving this gives:
                                                                                 6 D1l (1  2a)  D s
                                                                       p1                                                                      (24)
                                                                                    3(2 D1l  D s )

                                                                                    p f  23  a                                                (25)

(recalling that we assume that a  14 ). It is easy to demonstrate that p f  p1 and that
     s
 D ( 2 D )
         s
4 D ( 2 D )
             s


                 s
                     (3  4a) 
                                  2( 2  D )

                                   4 D
                                          s
                                              s

                                                  (1  2a )  D  2 2(1  a ) 
                                                                      s
                                                                                               2(1  2a)  4a
                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                             .   This   confirms      the
equilibrium.

8.4      Proof of Proposition 6
         The main difference between this case and the previous two outlet model is that
some advertisers may choose to multi-home with two impressions on each outlet so as to
impress a greater share of those switching between blogs and mainstream outlets. Since
 x1  x2 then we have that the share of loyals of either outlets and of switchers must be
equal. We can drop the outlet index: D1l  D2l : Dl and D1sb  D1sb : Dbs . Note that by
construction: 2Dl  Dbl  D12s  2Dbs  1 . The advertiser expected surplus from the
different advertising strategies are:

                                                    (n1 , n2 )                      Expected Advertiser Surplus
                                                     (1,0)                          ( Dl  12 D12s  12 Dbs )(v  p)
                                                     (2,0)                          ( Dl  D12s  Dbs )v  (2Dl  D12s  Dbs ) p
                                                     (1,1)                          (2 Dl  34 D12s  Dbs )v
                                                                                     p(2 Dl  D12s  Dbs )
                                                     (2,1)                          (2 Dl  D12s  32 Dbs )v
                                                                                    (3Dl  32 ( D12s  Dbs )) p
                                                                                          42


                         (2,2)               (1  Dbl )v
                                             (4 Dl  2 D12s  2 Dbs ) p

Note that strategy (1,1) dominates (2,0) for all values of  . Therefore type v2 is defined
as the type indifferent between (1,1) and (1,0) or (0,1). The threshold advertiser rates
become (under symmetric ad capacities and equal prices):

                        vi  p


                               D l  12 D12s  12 Dbs          4
                        v2                           p                 p
                               D  4 D12  2 Db
                                 l   1    s    1    s
                                                         4   ( xb  1)
                                                                                   (26)
                               D  12 D  12 D
                                 l       s        s
                                                       4
                        v3             12
                                               p b
                                                               p
                                 4 D12  2 Db
                                 1   s   1  s
                                                   (1  3xb )

                               D l  12 D12s  12 Dbs     2
                        v4                           p      p
                                       1
                                        2 D s
                                            b             xb



       All thresholds are ordered ( v22  v21  v11  vi ) and decreasing in xb . Note that
when xb  0 we revert to the baseline case. It follows that for all prices, advertisers’
demand is monotone increasing in xb . Clearly, as the blog is a sink of attention, the
aggregate supply decreases with xb . Therefore the (symmetric) market equilibrium prices
are necessarily strictly increasing in the blog’s market share xb .
                                                                                     43


9      References

Ambrus, A., E. Calvano and M. Reisinger. 2012. “Either or both competition: A two-
       sided theory of advertising with overlapping viewerships,” mimeo., Duke.
Anderson, S.P. and S. Coate. 2005. “Market Provision of Broadcasting: A Welfare
       Analysis.” Review of Economic Studies, 72(4): 947-972.
Anderson, S.P., O. Foros and H.J. Kind. 2011. “Competition for advertisers in media
       markets,” mimeo., Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration.
Anderson, S.P., O. Foros, H.J. Kind and M. Peitz. 2012. “Market Media Concentration,
       Advertising Levels and Ad Prices,” International Journal of Industrial
       Organization, 30: 321-325.
Armstrong, M. (2006), “Competition in Two-sided Markets”, Rand Journal of Economics
       37: 668-691.
Armstrong, M. and J. Wright (2007), “Two-Sided Markets, Competitive Bottlenecks and
       Exclusive Contracts,” Economic Theory, 32 (2), pp.353-380.
Ashlagi, I., B. Edelman and H.S. Lee. 2010. “Competing Ad Auctions: Multihoming and
       Participation Costs,” Working Paper No.10-055, Harvard Business School.
Athey, S., E. Calvano and J.S. Gans. 2013. “Consumer Tracking and Efficient Matching
       in Online Advertising Markets,” mimeo., Toronto.
Athey, S., and J.S. Gans. 2010. “The Impact of Targeting Technology on Advertising
       Markets and Media Competition” American Economic Review, 100 (2), pp.608-
       613.
Athey, S. and M. Mobius, 2012. “The Impact of News Aggregators on Internet News
       Consumption: The Case of Localization,” mimeo., Harvard University.
Bergemann, D. and A. Bonatti. 2011. “Targeting in Advertising Markets: Implications for
       Offline versus Online Media” RAND Journal of Economics, 42 (3): pp.417-443.
Butters, G.R. 1977. “Equilibrium Distributions of Sales and Advertising Prices,” Review
       of Economic Studies, 44 (3), pp.465-491.
Chandra, A. and U. Kaiser. 2011. “Targeted Advertising in Magazine Markets and the
       Advent of the Internet,” Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1653435.
Chiou, L. and C.E. Tucker. 2010. “News, Copyright and Online Aggregators,” mimeo.,
       MIT.
Chwe, M.S-Y. 1988. “Believe the Hype: Solving Coordination Problems with Television
       Advertising,” Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Competition Commission 2003. “Carlton Communications Plc and Granada Plc; A
       Report on the Proposed Merger.”
Crampes, C., C. Haritchabalet and B. Jullien (2009), “Advertising, competition and entry
       in media industries,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 57 (1), 7-31.
de Corniere, A. and G. Taylor (2013), “Integration and Search Engine Bias,” mimeo.,
       Oxford.
Dreze, X. and F-X. Hussherr, 2003. “Internet advertising: Is anybody watching?” Journal
       of Interactive Marketing, 17 (3), pp.8-23.
Edelman, B. 2010. “The Design of Online Advertising Markets,” Handbook of Market
       Design (Neeman et.al., eds.), Oxford, forthcoming.
Evans, D.S. 2008. “The Economics of the Online Advertising Industry,” Review of
       Network Economics, 7 (3).
                                                                                        44

Evans, D.S. 2009. “The Online Advertising Industry: Economics, Evolution and
        Privacy,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23 (3), pp.37-60.
Farhi, P. 2010. “Build that Pay Wall High,” American Journalism Review, June/July,
        http://ajr.org/Article.asp?id=4800 (accessed 27th October 2009).
Filistrucchi, L., L. Luini and A. Mangani 2011. “Regulating one side of a two-sided
        market: the french advertising ban on prime-time state television,” mimeo., Siena.
Fisher, F.M., J.J. Mc Gowan, and D.S. Evans. 1980. “The Audience-Revenue
        Relationship for Local Television Stations,” Bell Journal of Economics, 11,
        pp.694-708.
Gabszewicz, J.J. and X.Y. Wauthy (2004), “Two-Sided Markets and Competition with
        Multi-homing,” mimeo., CORE.
Gentzkow, M.A. (2007), “Valuing New Goods in a Model with Complementarity: Online
        Newspapers,” American Economic Review, 97(3), 713-744.
Gentzkow, M.A., and J.M. Shapiro (2011), “Ideological segregation online and offline.
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4), 1799-1839.
Ghosh, A., P. McAfee, K. Papineni and S. Vassilvitskii. 2009. “Bidding for
        Representative Allocations for Display Advertising,” Internet and Network
        Economics, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 5959, pp.208-219.
Goldfarb, A. and C.E. Tucker. 2011a. “Privacy Regulation and Online Advertising.
        Management Science,” 57(1), 57-71.
Goldfarb, A. and C.E. Tucker. 2011b. “Online Display Advertising: Targeting and
        Obtrusiveness,” Marketing Science, 30(3), 389-404.
Goettler, R. (2012), “Advertising Rates, Audience Composition and Network
        Competition in the Television Industry,” mimeo., Chicago.
Levin, J. and P. Milgrom. 2010. “Online Advertising: Heterogeneity and Conflation in
        Market Design,” American Economic Review, 100 (2), pp.603-607.
Lewis, R., and D. Reiley, 2009. “Retail Advertising Works! Measuring the Effects of
        Advertising on Sales via a Controlled Experiment on Yahoo!” Yahoo Research
        Technical Report.
Reisinger, M. 2011. “Platform competition for advertisers and users in media markets,”
        International         Journal     of       Industrial      Organization,       doi:
        10.1016/j.ijindorg.2011.10.002
Rice, A. 2010. “Putting a Price on Words,” New York Times Magazine, 16th May,
        (http://www.nytimes.com/2010/05/16/magazine/16Journalism-t.html?hpw).
Varian, H. 2010. “Newspaper economics: Online and offline,” presentation at FTC
        Workshop on “How Will Journalism Survive the Internet Age” Washington,
        March 9.
Weyl, G. 2010. “A Price Theory of Multi-Sided Platforms,” American Economic Review,
        100 (4): pp.1642-72.
                                                                                                           45


10       Online Appendix:

10.1     Note on tracking technologies

        Here we discuss alternative tracking technologies to the one used in the paper.
That one is best described as “content-based tracking,” which leads to tracking within an
outlet and period, but not across periods or across outlets. The following table illustrates
potential alternative tracking technologies and the type of offers each permits outlets to
make to advertisers.

               Table A: Alternative Tracking Technologies and Offer Types
          Technology                                          Example of Offer Type
                                    Over the two attention periods, we will impress a given set of
Perfect tracking                    consumers just once regardless of where their attention is allocated at a
                                    price of p per consumer/impression.
                                    Over the two attention periods, we will place a given number of
No tracking
                                    impressions on our outlet for a price of p per impression.
                                    Over the two attention periods, we will impress each unique consumer
Perfect internal tracking
                                    on the outlet once at a price of p per impression/consumer.
                                    We will associate an ad with a given piece of content and you will pay
Content-based tracking
                                    a price of p each time that ad is viewed
                                    Over the two attention periods, we will place at most x impressions per
Frequency-capping
                                    consumer at a price of p per impression

         We considered perfect tracking above as a possible ideal. Such offers were made
by ad platforms and were outlet independent. At the opposite extreme from perfect
tracking is no tracking that arises when neither outlets nor a common platform are unable
to internally (or externally) track impressions and to control matching between
advertisers and consumers. In the early days of the Internet (circa 2000), websites had no
ability to track consumers even within outlets, and even today with privacy settings such
tracking may not be possible. The models of Butters (1977) and, more recently,
Bergemann and Bonatti (2011) assume that advertisers choose the intensity of their
advertising on an outlet, but that advertising messages (impressions) are distributed
independently (across messages) and uniformly across consumers. This means that a
given consumer might see the same advertisement multiple times, which involves
waste.32

        The next three technologies are intermediate ones where outlets can track
impressions internally but not externally. Thus, outlets cannot offer inter-outlet
arrangements (such as different prices for different switching categories of consumer)
that would be possible under perfect tracking because they cannot track consumers across
outlets. Under perfect internal tracking, no consumer receives more than one impression
from an advertiser on a given outlet. Thus, an advertiser could purchase impressions on

32
   In such models, the expected number of unique impressions received by an advertiser with advertising
                                                                     n/ x
intensity n in a market of size x is given by x 1  (1  1x )  x(1  e ) , where 1/x is the probability that a
                                                             n



given consumer is selected for a given ad impression.
                                                                                                                         46


 Dil  D s consumers on outlet i. However, this creates a capacity management issue if the
outlet cannot distinguish loyal from switching consumers. If an outlet does not impress
all consumers in the ‘first period’ it will have to impress them in the second period.
However, unless it can distinguish between loyals and switchers in the first period, some
consumers may move to the other outlet and it will be unable to fulfill its contract.
Alternatively, it could impress all consumers in the first period and perhaps identify the
new switchers as unique consumers to impress in the second period. But, even in that
case, loyals, who remain with the same outlet through the second period, will have
additional capacity that can be sold. In principle, that capacity could be sold under a
“impress all unique consumers” contract but this would mean that the outlet would have
to offer a range of distinct products to advertisers. This is an interesting and potentially
realistic scenario, but we leave it for future work.

10.2   Market Equilibrium with asymmetric capacities and uniformly distributed
       valuations.

Proposition A1. Suppose that outlets are symmetric in readership, F (v) U [0,1] but that
a1  a2 .   Suppose      a2    2 Ds
                                  4
                                          .      Then         an      equilibrium             exists   if   and   only   if
          2  Ds
1  2a2           (1  2a1 ) . If a2           2 Ds
                                                   4
                                                          then an equilibrium exists if and only if
             2
 2Ds                2  Ds
       (1  a  )           (1  2a1 ) .
2  Ds
             2
                       2

Proof: Suppose that a1  a2 . As the aggregate demand of outlet two exceeds that of
outlet one only if pˆ1  pˆ 2 then a pair of prices is part of a market equilibrium only if
 pˆ1  pˆ 2 . We shall divide the proof in two cases depending on whether the set of high
types is empty or not. Suppose this is the case ( v3  1 ). In this case, the market clearing
condition amounts to:
                                      2a1  1  v2                                   (27)

                                          2a2  1  v2  v2  v1.                                                 (28)
as outlet 1 only sells to multi-homers while outlet 2 sells to all of the single-homers. If
equilibrium exists then the market clearing prices must be
                               pˆ  1 2a , pˆ 
                                 2                    2   1
                                                               Dl  14 D s
                                                               Dl  12 D s
                                                                             (1  2a1 )                          (29)

Such equilibrium exists if and only if
                                        Dl  14 D s         2  Ds
                    pˆ 2  1  2a2  Dl  1 Ds (1  2a1 )         (1  2a1 )  pˆ1.                              (30)
                                          2                    2
Using the identity 2Dl  Ds  1 delivers:
                                         2  Ds
                               1  2a2         (1  2a1 )
                                            2
                                                                                            47



That is if a2  a1 is large enough. Note that an equilibrium always exists if D s  0 as the
condition reduces to a1  a2 . By continuity an equilibrium also exists for D s  0 .
       This derivation assumes that v21  1 . If this was not the case and if pˆ1  pˆ 2 then
the market clearing conditions for the asymmetric equilibrium would become:
                                       2a1  1  v2                                   (31)

                                 2a2  2(1  v3 )  v3  v1                          (32)

as only outlet 2 sells additional impressions to some multi-homers. Thus, outlet 1’s price
would remain as in (29) while outlet 2’s pricing condition would satisfy (substituting v21
into (32)):
                                     pˆ 2  22DDs (1  a2 )
                                                 s
                                                                                  (33)

This would be an equilibrium so long as v21 ( p2 )  1 or a2  24D in addition to the ad
                                                                     s



capacity asymmetries as identified earlier. The condition provided in the statement is
equivalent to requiring pˆ1  pˆ 2 .

10.3   Endogenous Ad Capacities

        The results in the paper focused on comparative statics for exogenous ad
capacities. We now endogenize capacity choice, so that outlets can commit to smaller
capacity levels than could be potentially supplied, focusing on how it relates to both
readership share and the share of multi-homing consumers. Observe that the choice here
for outlets is capacity per consumer per unit of attention. We do not allow outlets to sell
different quantities of advertising to different types of consumers.

        First, however, it is useful to provide a general discussion of how the extension to
our model affects our results. Consumer switching creates competition among outlets,
and so standard Cournot-type forces operate. This analysis allows us to isolate the novel
forces introduced by consumer switching. First, consider the case of perfect tracking,
whereby switching affects outcomes by increasing competition among the outlets. Then,
with endogenous capacity, outlet profits always fall when consumer switching rise so
long as outlets are sufficiently symmetric in terms of readership share. In contrast, for
sufficiently asymmetric outlets, increased switching increases profits for the less popular
outlet and decreases profits for the more profitable outlet.

        Next, consider the more interesting case of imperfect tracking, where we focus on
symmetric readership across outlets. The analysis is complicated by the fact that for
positive but low levels of switching, there is no pure strategy equilibrium in capacity
choices. For moderate to high levels of switching, we find that, relative to no switching,
equilibrium capacity levels are higher and profits are lower. In addition, as switching
increases, outlet profits fall. Thus, the case (ii) above, whereby outlet profits increase as
switching increases, cannot occur.
                                                                                                                  48

        Finally, as discussed in the introduction, our model contrasts with the prior
literature where outlets compete for users by reducing ad capacities, where ads are
disliked by consumers. In Anderson and Coate (2005), the advertising prices are always
monopoly prices, so the level of ad capacity is determined by trading off deviations from
monopoly levels against increasing the user base. The ad capacity of other firms does not
affect advertising prices. Although we leave this extension for future work, we can say a
few things about what would happen in an extension to our model where ad capacities are
endogenous and consumers dislike ads. In our model the problem is more complex, since
opponent ad capacities do affect advertising prices directly. Nonetheless, the comparative
statics about outlet profits and asymmetric ad capacities suggest that there can be novel
incentives created by the impact of capacity on advertising prices. For example, the
advantage gained by having the larger consumer base may intensify competition for
consumers, creating a force in favor of lower equilibrium ad capacities.
10.3.1 Perfect Tracking
        We first consider the perfect tracking case. We assume that there are only two
outlets to focus on the impact of outlet asymmetry. 33 This means that an outlet will face
demands for two sets of consumers – one set that it has monopoly control over and the
other for which it competes with its rival a la Cournot. We now consider an analysis of
the comparative statics of competition in this set-up.

        We can write profits as a function of capacity, readership share and :
             i (ai , a j ; xi ,  )  P(ai  a j )ai Dijs ( xi ,1  xi ,  )  P(2ai )2ai Dil ( xi ,  )
Let MRi D (ai , aT )   ai P(aT )  P(aT )  and MRiM (ai )  2  2ai P(2ai )  P(2ai )  . The first-
order conditions for outlet i imply:
                  MRiD (ai , ai  a j ) Dijs ( xi , x j ,  )  MRiM (ai ) Dil ( xi ,  )  0.
This shows that the outlet considers the relative proportion of switchers and loyals when
choosing output, and it will select capacity so that one of the marginal revenue terms is
positive while the other is negative. Note that if ai  a j , then if P is decreasing and
concave, MRi D (ai , ai  a j )  0 implies that MRiM (ai )  0. Thus, for the outlet with the
larger equilibrium capacity, we must have MRi D (ai , ai  a j )  0 in equilibrium: capacity
is chosen lower than the Cournot best response, but higher than the monopoly level for
that outlet. The converse is not necessarily true, however; the outlet with small
equilibrium capacity may also have MRi D (ai , ai  a j )  0 (and indeed, this holds in the
case of uniformly distributed advertiser valuation).

        The impact of an increased readership share on the incentive to expand capacity
is:
                2
              ai xi    i  MRiD (ai , ai  a j ) x Dijs ( xi ,1  xi ,  )  MRiM (ai ) x Dil ( xi ,  )
                                                       i                                        i


                             MR (ai , ai  a j )2  (1  xi )  MR (ai )(1    2 xi  )
                                   i
                                    D
                                                                           i
                                                                            M




33
  All of the qualitative predictions in this subsection apply for a general F(.) assumed to be log-concave.
(Proofs available from the authors).
                                                                                                                                       49

At an equilibrium choice of capacity, the ratio of the marginal revenue terms is equal to
the ratio of switchers to loyal users, so that we will have (where aˆi is the equilibrium
capacity for i):
                                                                        s                         Dijs ( xi , x j ,  )  l            
     2
    ai xi                                   MR D
                                                     ( ˆ
                                                       a  , ˆ
                                                            a   ˆ
                                                                 a  ) 
                                                                   j  xi D   ( x  ,1  x  ,  )                         D  ( x  ,  ) 
                                                                                                     Dil ( xi ,  ) xi
              i                                   i     i    i              ij    i       i                                 i    i
                ( ai , a j )  ( aˆi , aˆ j )
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                      xi        
                        MRiD (aˆi , aˆi  aˆ j )2  (1  xi )                  
                                                                 1  (1  xi )  
Since higher readership share increases the proportion of loyal users, its direct effect on
capacity is negative if and only if MRi D (aˆi , aˆi  aˆ j )  0 . Intuitively, becoming larger
causes a firm to put more weight on loyal users, giving it the incentive to reduce output.
However, clear equilibrium comparative statics are complicated by the fact that Cournot
outputs are strategic substitutes.

           We can also consider the impact of switching on capacity choice:
               ai   i  MRi ( ai , ai  a j )  Dij ( xi ,1  xi ,  )  MRi ( ai )  Di ( xi ,  )
                2             D                      s                         M           l


                       MRiD (ai , ai  a j )2 xi (1  xi )  MRiM (ai ) xi (1  xi )
At an equilibrium capacity choice, we will have
                                                                                         1  2  (1  xi ) 
               ai   i ( a , a )  ( aˆ , aˆ )  MRi ( ai , ai  a j )2 xi (1  xi ) 
                2                                     D
                                                          ˆ ˆ ˆ             2
                                                                                                            
                             i   j        i    j
                                                                                         1   (1  xi ) 
So long as switching is not too prevalent and outlets are not too asymmetric, switching
decreases the share of loyal users, so that the direct effect of switching on capacity is
positive if and only if MRi D (aˆi , aˆi  aˆ j )(1  2  (1  xi ))  0 . Thus, the direct effect is
unambiguously positive for the outlet with the larger share.

           Using the envelope theorem, we can write the impact of  on profits as follows:
             d         *              *
                                                                  * * * s
            d   i ( ai ( xi ,  ), a j ( xi ,  ); xi ,  )  P ( ai  a j ) ai Dij ( xi ,1  xi ,  )  a j ( xi ,  )
                                                                                                            *


                           P(ai*  a*j )ai*  Dijs ( xi ,1  xi ,  )  P(2ai* )2ai*  Dil ( xi ,  )
                                      P(ai*  a*j )ai* Dijs ( xi ,1  xi ,  )  a*j ( xi ,  )
                       2 P(ai*  a*j )ai* xi (1  xi )  2 P(2ai* )ai* xi (1  xi )
Switching has an indirect effect through increasing the opponent’s output, which (if it
increases opponent capacity) lowers price and thus profits. It also has a direct effect of
increasing the proportion of switchers and decreasing the proportion of loyals. The sum
of the last two terms is negative if and only if ai*  a*j : for the lower-capacity outlet,
switchers are less profitable. The analysis for the outlet with the higher equilibrium
output appears ambiguous if its competitor’s output is increasing in , as the price effect
and the switcher/loyal effect move in opposite directions.

        Summarizing the discussion so far, we can gain some intuition about the direct
effects of parameter changes on outlet capacity choices and profits, but some additional
                                                                                                                 50

structure on demand is required to obtain unambiguous comparative statics results. To do
so, we focus on the case of linear demand (uniformly distributed advertiser valuations).
The following proposition demonstrates that the larger outlet will provide the lowest
advertising capacity.

Proposition A2. Suppose that there are two outlets and that F  v   v. Equilibrium
advertising for each outlet, aˆi are non-increasing in readership share, xi. Equilibrium
advertising     aˆi        is        non-decreasing           in           if    xi  (21  249) / 6  .87     or
  (2 / 3)(3  3)  .84 . Total ad capacity, aˆi  aˆ j , is non-decreasing in . For
sufficiently symmetric firms ( .33  xi  .67 ), profits of both firms are decreasing in ,
while for sufficiently asymmetric firms, profits are decreasing (increasing) in  for
 xi  () x j .  iPT / xi   PT
                               j  / x j when xi  x j .  iPT   jPT is decreasing in  for xi  x j .

        PROOF: Solving for the unique Nash equilibrium with the uniform distribution we
        have:
                              16 Dil Dlj  6 Dlj D s  4 Dil D s  D s 2
                        aˆi                                                    (34)
                              64 Dlj Dil  16( Dlj  Dil ) D s  3D s 2

                                    (4 Dil  D s )(16 Dil Dlj  6 Dlj D s  4Dil D s  D s 2 ) 2
                          PT
                                                                                                         (35)
                                           (64 Dlj Dil  16( Dlj  Dil ) D s  3D s 2 ) 2
                          i



        The rest of the proposition follows from manipulating these expressions.

We have already developed some intuition for these results, but the uniform distribution
gives us more definitive conclusions. Consider the comparative statics of switching on
profits. The increase in capacity of an opponent’s outlet has a negative impact on each
outlet. However, the increase in the share of switchers has a positive (resp. negative)
effect on the smaller (larger) outlet, as the share of consumers coming from the switchers
goes up. Switchers are more (less) profitable than loyals for the smaller (larger) outlet,
because the larger outlet serves less capacity than the smaller outlet. With the uniform
distribution, for the small outlet the latter effect dominates the negative effect of increase
in capacity and small outlet profits go up.

         Note that switching also affects the impact of an increase in readership share on
profits. Under the benchmark single-homing consumer case, more readers simply
improved profits in a linear fashion; that is  iPT / xi was independent of xi . With perfect
tracking, an additional reader attracted from a rival outlet not only causes an outlet to
restrict advertising capacity but for that capacity to increase elsewhere (since capacities
are strategic substitutes in our Cournot setup), decreasing impression prices for switchers.
Thus, outlets with a lower readership share have a higher incentive to attract marginal
readers.
                                                                                                  51

        It is also useful to note that if the two outlets were commonly owned, their owner
would maximize joint outlet profits by setting a1  a2  14 . In this case, realized profits in
this case will be the same as those generated when there are no switchers. Thus, under
perfect tracking with D s  0 there will be an incentive for outlets to merge.

       In the absence of common ownership, multi-homing consumers cause outlets to
compete for advertisers and a greater proportion of them increases available advertising
space and decreases overall profits. However, the question of interest is what this does to
the marginal incentive to attract an additional reader at the expense of rivals. What we
can demonstrate is that as xi  0 or xi  1 , then xi i  xi i  14 . It is useful to note that
                                                        PT        NS




if both outlets are commonly owned (i.e., in a monopoly), then profits under perfect
tracking are the same as profits earned for each outlet in the no switching case. Thus,
competition is the source of any reduction in profits as a result of switching but this
competition can, in turn, promote higher incentives to attract readership when there are
asymmetric readership shares.
10.3.2 Imperfect tracking
        We now turn to consider endogenous capacity for the case of imperfect tracking.
Our goal here is to explore the robustness of the comparative static results on Ds, with ad
capacity was exogenous; recalling our main finding that as Ds rose, impression prices and
outlet prices fell except for high a when Ds was large. As in the perfect tracking case, we
suppose that competition comprises two. In stage 1, both outlets simultaneously choose
their ad capacities. In stage 2, the market clears based on those capacities and prices and
profits are realized. It turns out that, in this situation, a pure strategy equilibrium in the
Stage 1 (Cournot) game does not exist for a non-trivial rage of Ds. Given this, we then
consider a Stackelberg Stage 1. Significantly, we demonstrate that advertising capacity,
while asymmetric in this equilibrium between the two outlets, does not reach a level
whereby an increase in Ds leads to an increase in the profits of either outlet.

        The Cournot game equilibrium outcomes are summarized by the following

Proposition A3. Suppose that outlets are symmetric in readership, F (v)  v and V = 1.
With endogenous capacity, F(v) = v and symmetric readership shares, the pure strategy
equilibrium outcomes are:
   (i) For D s  0 , ai  14 with per consumer profits of  i  14 for all i.
    (ii) For D s  94 , ai  13 with per consumer profits of  i    2(2  D s ) 2
                                                                      4 Ds 9
                                                                                     for all i.
Otherwise no pure strategy equilibrium exists.

        PROOF: Note that for D s  0 , v12  p and the asymmetric equilibrium holds for
        any (a1 , a2 )  ( 14 , 14 ) . In any asymmetric equilibrium, per consumer profits equal
        (1  2ai )2ai for each outlet; which is maximized at a capacity of ¼. Hence, by
        deviating, each would receive no greater profits than they do under the
        equilibrium as specified in (i).
                                                                                                                                               52



        To check that outcome (ii) is an equilibrium, observe that if each outlet
plays a local best response, they each choose capacity equal to 13 . Now consider a
choice a1  13 so that p(a1 , a2 )  12 D s . In this case, the highest profits outlet 1
could earn are: max a1                      D s (2 Ds )
                                           4 D s (2  D s )
                                                               (3  2(a1  13 ))2a1 which is maximized at a1  127 ;
which would create the asymmetric equilibrium. Thus, the maximum capacity 1
                                 12 (4  D )
                                  1       s
would   chose     would    be                  resulting   in  profits   of
1
36    (2  D s )(4  D s )           2(2 Ds ) 2
                                       4 Ds 9
                                                       . Now consider a choice a1  13 so that  1  0 ;
                                 4 1 Ds
specifically, a1  6(23 Ds ) . In this case, outlet 1 maximizes profits with a choice of

a1  14 earning profits of p1 2a1 
                                                                  D1l  14 D s
                                                                  D1l  12 D s
                                                                                 1  2a1  2a1  18 (2  Ds )            which is greater
            2(2  D s ) 2
than         4 Ds 9
                            for D s  94 . When D s  94 , this deviation is not profitable. Finally,
we need to check that, in fact,                                                    p(a1 , a2 )  12 D s . This implies that
     D s  2(24DDs ) 13  D s  23 (4  10) which always holds for D s  12 .
                       s
1
2

        We now turn to establish that there are no other pure strategy equilibria.
First, note when p  12 D s , it is easy to see that a1  12 is a local best response to
a2  12 . At this point, each outlet earns profits of                                          D s (2  D s )
                                                                                              4  D s (2  D s )
                                                                                                                   . Note, however, that
any deviation from these capacities generates the asymmetric equilibrium. Thus,
setting a1  12 would earn that outlet profits of 22DDs (1  a1 )2a1 which are
                                                        s



                                                        D s (2  D s )
maximized at ½ and exceed                             4  D s (2  D s )
                                                                           at this point. A reduction in capacity would
involve maximum profits at a1  14 . In this case, it is easy to establish that
    D s (2  D s )
4  D s (2  D s )
                      18 (2  D s ) and so a large reduction in ad capacity is a profitable
deviation for outlet 1. Thus, no equilibria of this type exists.

        What about an asymmetric equilibrium? Any equilibrium would involve
the outlet with the smaller capacity, say 1, choosing a1  14 while the other outlet
chooses a2  18 (2  D s ) . Note that this is consistent with v12  1 and it                                                                  is
straightforward to establish that outlet 2 would not want to choose a higher                                                                   ad
capacity to change this. In this case, outlet 2 earns per consumer profits                                                                     of
(1  2a2 )2a2 and it is easy to determine that these are decreasing in a2                                                                       at
a2  18 (2  Ds )  14 . Therefore, given 1’s choice, 2 would not find it profitable to
                                                                                                                   2(2 D s )
expand output. Contracting it would generate profits of                                                             4 Ds
                                                                                                                                (1  14  a2 )2a2 ;
maximized at 3/8 which would involve too much asymmetry to generate that
outcome. Thus, any contraction involves profits less than 161 (4  D s 2 ) . For 1,
a1  14 is a local best response, but by choosing a higher ad capacity, it may earn
                                                                                                                             53


        different profits depending upon the resulting impression price. For p  12 D s ,
                                                                              2(2 Ds )
        outlet 1 would earn per consumer profits of                            4 Ds
                                                                                          (1  18 (2  D s )  a1 )2a1 which is
        maximized at a1  161 (6  Ds ) . However at this capacity, ad capacities would be
        sufficiently asymmetric that this would not be feasible. Instead, outlet 1 is
        constrained to a capacity no more than 161 (4  4D s  D s 2 ) . Note that this results in
        a price p  2(24DDs ) (1  18 (2  D s )  161 (4  4 Ds  D s 2 ))  12 D s . It is straightforward to
                                   s




        demonstrate that this deviation is profitable for 1. A similar reasoning holds for
        the case where p  12 D s . Thus, there is no pure strategy equilibrium involving
        asymmetric capacity choices.

Intuitively, for smaller levels of Ds, each outlet would prefer to be the outlet with the
larger capacity so long as the required asymmetry is not too large. When that occurs, their
preferences switch. Consequently, there is a (downwards) discontinuity in the best
response functions of each outlet for D s  (0, 94 ) and no pure strategy equilibrium exists.

        Given the lack of a pure strategy equilibrium for a non-trivial set of parameters,
we might consider a mixed strategy equilibrium. However, given this application, it is
unclear whether mixing in its strict form is something that we would expect to see;
specifically, because ad capacity may be a design decision for web pages. 34 As an
alternative, the following proposition characterizes the Stackelberg outcome where one
outlet chooses its ad capacity prior to the other.

Proposition A4. Suppose that outlets are symmetric in readership, F (v)  v and V = 1.
In a sequential move game where outlet 1 chooses a1 before outlet 2 chooses a2 , the
unique equilibrium outcome involves a1                            2 2 Ds 2 Ds
                                                                     4 (2  D s )
                                                                                    and a2  14 with per consumer

profits of 1    2 3 D s  2 D s 3
                     2(2  D s )2
                                       and  2  18 (2  D s ) .


        PROOF: If a1             2 2 Ds 2 Ds
                                    4 (2  D s )
                                                   , then outlet 2 is indifferent between a2  14 or setting its
        capacity high enough to ensure that outlet 1 only has multi-homers; that is,
        a2  14 (2a1 (2  D s )  D s  18 (2  2D s ) . So 2 has no incentive to deviate. Outlet 1
        has no incentive to increase capacity as this lowers its asymmetric equilibrium
        profits. It could, however, decrease capacity. This would result in 2 no longer
        being indifferent between a high and low capacity and choosing a high capacity,
         4 (2a1 (2  D )  D . This would result in profits for 1 as the low capacity outlet in
        1              s      s


        the asymmetric equilibrium which are maximized at ¼ yielding                                      1
                                                                                                          8   (2  D s ) . These



34
  Frankly, we have also been unable to identify the mixed strategy equilibrium although we know the set
that contains its support and that that set converges to (¼, ¼) as Ds goes to 0.
                                                                                         54

       are less than the equilibrium profits and hence, there is no profitable deviation for
       1.

The result here is related to Proposition A1 where the low capacity outlet always had
profits of the form (1  12 Ds )(1  2a)2a and did not have any single-homing advertisers.
These profits are maximized with a capacity of ¼. Thus, if outlet 1 chooses a1 high
enough, outlet 2 will be the low capacity outlet and choose a capacity of ¼. The proof
then demonstrates that outlet 1 will prefer to be the high capacity rather than the low
capacity outlet.

       Importantly, an examination of the equilibrium profits of both outlets shows that
in each case these are decreasing in Ds. Thus, outlet 1’s ad capacity never reaches the
level whereby for high enough Ds, impression prices and its profits would fall as Ds
increases.
