                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE REAL COSTS OF DISCLOSURE

                                           Alex Edmans
                                           Mirko Heinle
                                           Chong Huang

                                       Working Paper 19420
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19420


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2013




We thank Vincent Glode, Itay Goldstein, David Hirshleifer, and seminar participants at London
Business School, Philadelphia Fed, UC Irvine, and Wharton for valuable comments. AE thanks the
Wharton Dean's Research Fund for financial support. CH thanks the CORCL Awards for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Alex Edmans, Mirko Heinle, and Chong Huang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Real Costs of Disclosure
Alex Edmans, Mirko Heinle, and Chong Huang
NBER Working Paper No. 19420
September 2013
JEL No. G18,G31

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper models the effect of disclosure on real investment. We show that, even if the act of
disclosure is costless, a high-disclosure policy can be costly. Some information ("soft") cannot be
disclosed. Increased disclosure of "hard" information augments absolute information and reduces
the cost of capital. However, by distorting the relative amounts of hard and soft information, increased
disclosure induces the manager to improve hard information at the expense of soft, e.g. by cutting
investment. Investment depends on asset pricing variables such as investors' liquidity shocks; disclosure
depends (non-monotonically) on corporate finance variables such as growth opportunities and the
manager's horizon. Even if a low disclosure policy is optimal to induce investment, the manager may
be unable to commit to it. If hard information turns out to be good, he will disclose it regardless of
the preannounced policy. Government intervention to cap disclosure can create value, in contrast
to common calls to increase disclosure.


Alex Edmans                                         Chong Huang
The Wharton School                                  University of California, Irvine
University of Pennsylvania                          The Paul Merage School of Business
2460 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall                 Building 221 Periera Drive
3620 Locust Walk                                    CA 92697-3125
Philadelphia, PA 19104                              chong.h@uci.edu
and NBER
aedmans@wharton.upenn.edu

Mirko Heinle
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1330 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
miheinle@wharton.upenn.edu
1       Introduction
This paper analyzes the e¤ect of a …rm’s disclosure policy on real investment. An
extensive literature highlights numerous bene…ts of disclosure. Diamond (1985) shows
that disclosing information reduces the need for each individual shareholder to bear
the cost of gathering it. In Diamond and Verrecchia (1991), disclosure reduces the
cost of capital by lowering the information asymmetry that shareholders su¤er if they
subsequently need to sell due to a liquidity shock. Kanodia (1980) and Fishman and
Hagerty (1989) show that disclosure increases price e¢ ciency and thus the manager’s
investment incentives.
     However, the costs of disclosure have been more di¢ cult to pin down. Standard
models (e.g. Verrecchia (1983)) typically assume an exogenous cost of disclosure, justi-
…ed by several motivations. First, the actual act of communicating information may be
costly. While such costs were likely signi…cant at the time of writing, when information
had to be mailed to shareholders, nowadays these costs are likely much smaller due to
electronic communication. Second, there may be costs of producing information. How-
ever, …rms already produce copious information for internal or tax purposes. Third, the
information may be proprietary (i.e., business sensitive) and disclosing it will bene…t
competitors (e.g., Verrecchia (1983) and Dye (1986)). However, while likely important
for some types of disclosure (e.g., the stage of a patent application), proprietary con-
siderations are unlikely to be for others (e.g., earnings).1 Perhaps motivated by the
view that, nowadays, the costs of disclosure are small relative to the bene…ts, recent
government policies have increased disclosure requirements, such as Sarbanes-Oxley,
Regulation FD, and Dodd-Frank.
     This article reaches a di¤erent conclusion. We show that, even if the actual act of
disclosure is costless, a high-disclosure policy can still be costly due to its e¤ect on real
investment. Central to our analysis is the idea that only some types of information
(“hard”, i.e., quantitative and veri…able) can be credibly disclosed, but others (“soft”,
i.e., non-veri…able) cannot be.2 For example, a …rm can credibly communicate its
earnings, but not the quality of its corporate culture. It may seem that this distinction
    1
      Fourth, Hirshleifer (1971) shows that disclosure in insurance markets may worsen risk-sharing,
e.g. if it is made public which individuals will su¤er heart attacks before they have a chance to take
out medical insurance. Kanodia and Lee (1998) apply this idea to …nancial markets and show that
disclosure of …rm fundamentals before current investors can trade will impose risk on them; if they are
more risk-averse than future investors, this in turn distorts investment decisions. However, Diamond
(1985) argues that this cost is unlikely to be signi…cant for …nancial markets, where continuous trading
is possible.
    2
      See, e.g., Stein (2002) and Petersen (2004) for the distinction between hard and soft information.


                                                   2
does not matter: even if a …rm cannot increase the amount of soft information, it
can still disclose more hard information. The absolute amount of overall information
will rise, reducing the cost of capital. However, the manager’s investment decision
depends on the relative weighting between hard and soft information. If neither type
of information is disclosed, the manager chooses the investment policy that maximizes
…rm value. In contrast, an increase in the absolute amount of hard information disclosed
also augments the amount of hard information relative to soft. This in turn distorts the
manager’s actions towards improving the hard signal at the expense of the soft signal
–for example, cutting investment in corporate culture to increase current earnings.
    Our model features a …rm initially owned and run by a manager, who must raise
funds from an outside investor. After funds are raised, the …rm turns out to be either
high or low quality, and this type is unknown to the investor. As in Diamond and
Verrecchia (1991), the investor may subsequently su¤er a liquidity shock which forces
her to trade additional shares. Also present in the market is a speculator (such as
a hedge fund) who has private information on …rm value, and a market maker. The
investor expects to lose to the speculator from her liquidity trading and thus demands
a larger stake when contributing funds, augmenting the cost of capital.
    The manager can reduce the investor’s informational disadvantage, and thus the
cost of capital, by disclosing a hard signal (such as earnings) that is partially infor-
mative about …rm value, just before the trading stage. We initially assume that the
manager can commit to a disclosure policy when raising funds, as in the literature on
mandatory disclosure. High disclosure indeed reduces the cost of capital, but has an
important cost. A high-quality …rm has the option to undertake an intangible invest-
ment that improves the …rm’s long-run value, but this value cannot be disclosed as it is
soft information. The investment also raises the probability of delivering low earnings,
which lowers the short-term stock price since low-quality …rms always generate low
earnings. Thus, a manager concerned with the stock price will underinvest. While ex-
isting literature typically assumes that …rm value is exogenous and studies the optimal
level of information to disclose about this …xed value, here …rm value is endogenous to
the disclosure policy (even absent a competitor who can use the disclosed information).
    The optimal level of disclosure is thus a trade-o¤ between the bene…ts of disclosure
(reduced cost of capital) and its costs (ine¢ cient investment). The manager chooses
either full disclosure to minimize the cost of capital, or partial disclosure to maximize
investment. Thus, the model delivers predictions on how disclosure should vary cross-
sectionally across …rms. The e¤ect of …rm characteristics on disclosure is typically


                                           3
non-monotonic. Up to a point, increases in growth opportunities reduce disclosure:
investment becomes su¢ ciently important that the …rm is willing to sacri…ce disclosure
to pursue it. For example, at the time of its IPO, Google announced that it would
not provide earnings guidance as such disclosure would induce short-termism. Their
founders’s letter stated “[w]e recognize that our duty is to advance our shareholders’
interests, and we believe that arti…cially creating short term target numbers serves
our shareholders poorly.”3 However, when investment opportunities are very strong,
the manager will exploit them fully even when disclosure is high. Thus, disclosure is
lowest for …rms with intermediate growth opportunities, and high for …rms with weak
or strong growth opportunities. For similar reasons, disclosure is high either when
information asymmetry (the di¤erence in value between high- and low-quality …rms),
shareholders’ liquidity shocks, or signal imprecision (the risk that investment leads
to a bad signal), are low, as the manager will invest fully even with high disclosure,
or when these parameters are high, as the manager will invest fully even under high
disclosure. For example, an increase in signal imprecision does not necessarily induce
less disclosure of the signal. Such an increase makes the cost of capital relatively more
important to investment, and so the manager may choose full disclosure to minimize
the cost of capital.
    More broadly, by combining investment, disclosure, informed trading, and capital
raising within a unifying framework, we generate new empirical predictions linking
investment (typically a corporate …nance topic) to informed trading and the cost of
capital (typically asset pricing topics) since both are linked through disclosure. While
researchers typically study how investment depends on Tobin’s Q or …nancial con-
straints, we show that it depends on microstructure features such as shareholders’
liquidity needs, since they in‡uence disclosure policy and thus investment. While the
cost of capital depends on microstructure features such as information asymmetry, we
show that it is also a¤ected by corporate …nance variables such growth opportunities
and the manager’s short-term concerns, since these in‡uence disclosure policy and thus
the cost of capital.
    We next consider the case in which the manager cannot commit to a disclosure
policy, as in the literature on voluntary disclosure. If investment is important, the
manager would like to announce a “low disclosure, high investment” policy. However,
if the manager invests and gets lucky, i.e., still delivers high earnings, he will renege
   3
    Similarly, Porsche was expelled from the M-DAX stock market index in August 2001, after refusing
to comply with its requirement for quarterly reporting, arguing that such disclosures would lead to
myopia.


                                                 4
on the policy and disclose the high earnings anyway. Knowing that he will always
disclose high earnings if realized, the manager will reduce investment, to maximize the
probability that he realizes high earnings. Then, if the market does not receive any
disclosure, it rationally infers that the signal must be low, else the manager would
have released it – the “unraveling” result of Grossman (1981) and Milgrom (1981).
The only dynamically consistent policy is full disclosure, and investment su¤ers as
a result. In this case, government intervention can be desirable. By capping the
feasible level of disclosure, it can allow the …rm to implement the optimal policy.
This conclusion contrasts earlier research which argues that regulation should increase
disclosure due to externalities (Foster (1979), Co¤ee (1984), Dye (1990), Admati and
P‡eiderer (2000), and Lambert, Leuz, and Verrecchia (2007)). If capping disclosure is
di¢ cult to implement, a milder implication of our model is that regulations to increase
disclosure (e.g., Sarbanes-Oxley) may have real costs.
    However, the e¤ect of government intervention on …rm value is unclear. First, even
if the government’s objective function were to maximize initial …rm value, the optimal
disclosure policy is …rm-speci…c, whereas regulation cannot be tailored to an individ-
ual …rm. Second, the government’s policy may be to maximize total surplus. This
objective function incorporates the bene…ts of investment but ignores investor losses
from liquidity shocks, since they are o¤set by trading pro…ts to the speculator. Then,
the government will choose the disclosure policy that maximizes investment, which is
ine¢ ciently low for the …rm as it leads to a high cost of capital. Third, Regulation FD
attempts to “level the playing …eld” between di¤erent investors, suggesting an objec-
tive to minimize trading losses for retail investors. In this case, the government will
maximize disclosure, at the expense of investment.
    This paper is related to a large literature on the costs and bene…ts of disclosure,
which is reviewed by Verrecchia (2001), Dye (2001), Beyer, Cohen, Lys, and Walther
(2010), and Goldstein and Sapra (2012). Our main innovation is to identify and analyze
a real cost of disclosure. Gigler, Kanodia, Sapra, and Venugopalan (2013) show that an
interim signal can induce the manager to choose a short-term project over a long-term
alternative, in a setting where both projects are ex ante unpro…table (in contrast to
our model). They compare a social planner’s payo¤ across two discrete regimes (with
and without the interim signal), assuming that commitment is possible. We study the
…rm’s optimal choice from a continuum of disclosure policies, thus delivering predic-
tions on how …rms’ disclosure decisions depend (non-monotonically) on asset pricing
and corporate …nance factors. Here, disclosure also a¤ects the cost of capital, and


                                           5
so investment variables a¤ect the cost of capital through their impact on disclosure
policy. We also consider the voluntary disclosure case where the …rm cannot commit
to a disclosure policy. In Hermalin and Weisbach (2012), disclosure a¤ects the man-
ager’s incentives to engage in manipulation. They show that the manager prefers less
disclosure ex post. Here, where disclosure is voluntary, the manager always discloses.
    Consistent with our theory, survey results by Graham, Harvey, and Rajgopal (2005)
suggest that 78% of executives would sacri…ce long-term value to meet earnings targets.
Bhojraj and Libby (2005) show experimentally that the expectation of future equity
sales induces myopia, Cheng, Subrahmanyam, and Zhang (2007) document that …rms
that issue quarterly earnings guidance invest less in R&D, and Ernstberger, Link, and
Vogler (2011) …nd that European Union …rms in countries with quarterly rather than
semi-annual reporting engage in greater short-termism.
    Other researchers have noted that regulation should sometimes constrain disclosure.
Fishman and Hagerty (1990) advocate limiting the set of signals from which the …rm
may disclose, whereas here the constraint is on the level of disclosure. In Fishman
and Hagerty (1989), traders can only acquire a signal in one …rm, and so disclosure
draws traders away from one’s rivals. Here, disclosure is excessive due to a commitment
problem, rather than a negative externality. In models where disclosure is a costly
signal with no real e¤ects (e.g., Jovanovic (1982), Verrecchia (1983)), disclosure is a
deadweight loss. Here, disclosure is costly even though the act of disclosure is costless.
    This paper also contributes to a literature on the real e¤ects of …nancial markets.
The survey of Bond, Edmans, and Goldstein (2012) identi…es two channels through
which …nancial markets (and thus disclosure) can a¤ect the real economy. Our mech-
anism operates through the contracting channel: the manager’s contract is contingent
upon the stock price, and so his incentives to take real decisions depend on the ex-
tent to which they will be incorporated in the price. The second channel is that the
manager uses information in the stock price to guide his decisions. This mechanism
allows for a quite di¤erent real cost of disclosure. Disclosing information may reduce
speculators’ incentives to acquire private information (Gao and Liang (2013)) or to
trade aggressively on private information (Bond and Goldstein (2012)). This in turn
reduces the information in prices from which the manager can learn.4
   4
     Other costs of disclosure need not operate through the real e¤ects of …nancial markets. In Morris
and Shin (2002), an agent’s optimal decision depends on his expectation of other agents’ actions
(e.g. whether to run on a bank, or whether to buy a product with network externalities). The agent
rationally over-reacts to publicly disclosed information, since he takes into account other agents’
reactions to the information, and so under-utilizes his own private information. In Pagano and Volpin
(2012) and Di Maggio and Pagano (2012), disclosed information can be understood costlessly by


                                                  6
    This literature typically concludes that …nancial e¢ ciency is desirable for real e¢ -
ciency (e.g., Kanodia (1980), Fishman and Hagerty (1989)).5 In contrast, we show that
real e¢ ciency is non-monotonic in …nancial e¢ ciency. The manager invests e¢ ciently
if neither (hard) earnings nor (soft) fundamental value are disclosed (in which case
…nancial e¢ ciency is minimized), and also if both are disclosed (in which case …nancial
e¢ ciency is maximized). When soft information cannot be disclosed, then even though
disclosure of hard information augments …nancial e¢ ciency, it reduces real e¢ ciency by
lowering investment. It may be better for prices to contain no information than partial
information. This result echoes the theory of the second best, which argues that it may
be optimal to tax all goods rather than only a subset. Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991)
show that di¢ culties in measuring one task may lead to the principal optimally o¤ering
weak incentives for all tasks. Our result also echoes Paul (1992), who shows that an
e¢ cient …nancial market weights information according to its informativeness about
asset value, but to incentivize e¢ cient real decisions, information should be weighted
according to its informativeness about the manager’s actions. While a higher hard
signal is a positive indicator of …rm type, it is a negative indicator of investment.
    This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the model. Section 3 analyzes
the case in which the …rm can commit to disclosure and solves for the optimal policy.
Section 4 considers the case of voluntary disclosure and introduces a role for regulation,
and Section 5 concludes. Appendix A contains all proofs not in the main text.


2     The Model
The model consists of four players. The manager initially owns the entire …rm and
chooses the …rm’s disclosure and investment policies. The investor contributes equity
…nancing and may subsequently su¤er a liquidity shock. The speculator has private
information on …rm value and trades on this information. The market maker clears
the market and sets prices. All players are risk-neutral and there is no discounting.
    There are …ve periods. At t = 0, the manager must raise …nancing of K, which is
injected into the …rm. He …rst commits to a disclosure policy 2 [0; 1] and then sells
a stake to the investor, which is publicly observed, and chosen so that the investor
breaks even.
speculators but not by hedgers, and so disclosure increases information asymmetry.
    5
      In these models, the price is always semi-strong-form “e¢ cient”, regardless of disclosure, in that
it equals expected …rm value conditional upon an information set. Greater disclosure means that the
price is now e¢ cient relative to a richer information set. We refer to this as greater price e¢ ciency.


                                                   7
     The …rm has two possible types, 2           fL; Hg, that occur with equal probability.
Type L (H) corresponds to a low- (high-) quality …rm. At t = 1, the …rm’s type is
realized. We will sometimes refer to a …rm of type as a “ -…rm” and its manager
as a “ -manager”. As in the myopia model of Edmans (2009), an L-manager has no
investment decision and his …rm will be worth V L = RL at t = 4, but an H-manager
chooses an investment level 2 [0; 1] and his …rm is worth RH + g at t = 4, where
g > 0 parameterizes the desirability of the investment opportunity.6 (All values are
inclusive of the K raised by the …nancing.) Since g > 0, = 1 is …rst-best. The type
and the investment level are observable to both the manager and the speculator (and
so both know the fundamental value V ), but neither are observable to the investor and
market maker.
     At t = 2, a hard (veri…able) signal y fG; B; ?g is generated. A real-life example
of such a signal is earnings, and so we will sometimes refer to the signal as “earnings”.
With probability 1       , the signal is the null signal ?, which corresponds to no disclo-
sure. With probability , a partially informative signal is disclosed. An L-…rm always
generates signal B. An H-…rm generates B with probability 2 and G with probabil-
           2
ity 1        . The variable parameterizes the extent to which investment increases the
probability of y = B; we will sometimes refer to as the noise in the signal.
     At t = 3, the investor su¤ers a liquidity shock with probability , which forces her
either to buy or sell shares with equal probability. With probability 1        , she su¤ers
no shock; she will not trade voluntarily as she is uninformed. Her trade is therefore
given by I = f ; 0; g. If y = G, the speculator has no private information and will
not trade, but if y 2 fB; ?g, the public signal is not fully informative and the speculator
will take advantage of his private information on V by trading an amount S. Similar
to Dow and Gorton (1997), the market maker observes each individual trade, but not
the identity of each trader. For example, if the vector of trades Q equals ( ; ), he
does not know which trader (speculator or investor) bought , and which trader sold
  , and so this order vector is uninformative. The market maker is competitive and sets
a price P equal to expected …rm value conditional upon the observed trades. He clears
any excess demand or supply from his own inventory.
     At t = 4, …rm value V 2 V H ; V L becomes known and payo¤s are realized. The
variable V is soft information prior to t = 4 and thus cannot be credibly communi-
   6
     The speci…cation V H = RH + g implies that the growth opportunity is independent of the
amount of …nancing raised (e.g. the funds K could be required to repay debt, rather than to fund the
growth opportunity). The model’s results remain unchanged to parameterizing g = hK, so that the
growth opportunity does depend on the amount of …nancing raised.



                                                 8
cated.7 Note that, even though it is unveri…able, soft information is still present in the
model, because the speculator has information on V and trades on it. We will brie‡y
consider a variant of the model in which V is hard information.
    The manager’s objective function is given by (1        ) (!P + (1 !) V ). After rais-
ing …nancing, the manager’s stake in the …rm is (1         ). The parameter ! represents
the weight that he puts on the t = 3 stock price P compared to the t = 4 funda-
mental value V . The concern for the short-term stock price is standard in the myopia
literature and can arise from a number of sources introduced by prior research. One
example is the manager expecting to sell a fraction ! of his remaining shares at t = 3
and hold the remaining 1 ! until t = 4, as in Stein (1989).8 Alternatively, stock
price concerns can stem from takeover threat (Stein (1988)) or concern for managerial
reputation (Narayanan (1985), Scharfstein and Stein (1990)).9
    Before solving the model, we discuss its assumptions. Investment improves funda-
mental value but potentially lowers short-term earnings, as in the classic managerial
myopia models of Stein (1988, 1989). This speci…cation captures the fact that in-
tangible investment can be costly in the short term before its bene…ts materialize.
Costs incurred in training employees are expensed; outside investors cannot distin-
guish whether high expenses are due to desirable investment (an H-…rm choosing a
high ) or low …rm quality (an L-…rm). Similarly, R&D and advertising are nearly
always expensed. Even though these items can be separated out in an income state-
ment, outside investors do not know whether high R&D or advertising is e¢ cient, or
stems from a low-quality manager wasting cash. Also as in myopia models, short-term
earnings are veri…able but long-run fundamental value is not (prior to the …nal period).
This speci…cation captures the fact that intangible investment does not pay o¤ until
the long run, and it is very di¢ cult for the manager to credibly certify the quality of
his …rm’s intangible assets (e.g., its corporate culture).
    Outside investors have no information on the …rm’s type, and the speculator has
perfect information. This seemingly stark dichotomy is purely for simplicity; we only
   7
     In Almazan, Banerji, and De Motta (2008), the signal is soft but disclosure matters because it
may induce a speculator to investigate the disclosure. Here, any disclosure of V is non-veri…able.
   8
     Under this interpretation, we assume that the market maker can observe any sales by the manager.
This simpli…es the analysis as the stock market equilibrium is not a¤ected by the manager’s trading.
An alternative assumption would be for him to sell shortly after the speculator and investor have
traded at t = 3.
   9
     Under these interpretations, it may seem that a more natural objective function is (1   )V + P
where (1     ) V is the value of the manager’s stake and P represents his short-term concerns from
these additional sources. The objective function of (1    ) (!P + (1 !) V ) is simply 1 ! times this
objective function, where = (11 !)! .


                                                 9
require the speculator to have some information advantage over outside investors. Many
shareholders (e.g., retail investors) are atomistic and lack the incentive to gather in-
formation about the …rm, or are unsophisticated and lack the expertise to do so. In
contrast, speculators such as hedge funds often closely monitor …rms that they do not
currently have a stake in to generate trading ideas.
    The liquidity-enforced selling occurs because the investor may su¤er a sudden de-
mand for funds, e.g., to pursue another investment opportunity. Liquidity-enforced
buying occurs because the investor may have a sudden in‡ow of cash. The investor
will invest a disproportionate fraction of these new funds into the …rm if she is less aware
about the existence of stocks she does not currently own (e.g., Merton (1987)).10 The
results continue to hold if the investor only faces the probability of liquidity-enforced
selling. All we require is that the investor may have to trade against a more informed
speculator, regardless of the direction of her trade, as in Diamond and Verrecchia
(1991).
    We now formally de…ne a Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium as our solution concept.

De…nition 1 The manager’s disclosure policy 2 [0; 1], the H-manager’s investment
strategy : [0; 1] ! [0; 1], the speculator’s trading strategy S : [0; 1] fG; B; ?g !
R, the market maker’s pricing strategy P : [0; 1] fG; B; ?g R2 ! R, the market
maker’s belief about = H, and the belief ^ about the H-manager’s investment level
constitute a Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium, if:

   1. given   and ^ , P causes the market maker to break even for any                2 [0; 1],
      y 2 fG; B; ?g, and Q 2 R2 ;

   2. given ^ and P , S maximizes the speculator’s payo¤ for any V ,            2 [0; 1], and
      y 2 fG; B; ?g;

   3. given S and P ,    maximizes the H-manager’s payo¤ given           2 [0; 1];

   4. given , S, and P ,     maximizes the manager’s payo¤;

   5. the belief   is consistent with the strategy pro…le; and

   6. the belief ^ = , i.e., is correct in equilibrium.
  10
   In Holmstrom and Tirole (1993), Bolton and von Thadden (1998), Kahn and Winton (1998), and
Edmans (2009), liquidity purchases also stem from existing owners.




                                             10
3     Analysis
3.1    First-Best Benchmark
As a benchmark against which to compare future results, we …rst consider the case
in which fundamental value V is hard information, i.e., the manager can commit to
disclosing it with probability V . Since V is perfectly informative about …rm value, if
V is disclosed then P = V regardless of the order ‡ow. Thus, the investor makes no
trading losses and the H-manager faces no trade-o¤ between stock price and funda-
mental value when making his investment decision. He chooses = 1 as this maximizes
P = V H = RH + g.
    Since disclosure of V both maximizes investment and minimizes the cost of capital,
the manager chooses V = 1. Thus, …nancial and real e¢ ciency are both maximized and
the …rst best is achieved. Since y is uninformative conditional upon V , the manager’s
disclosure policy for the signal y is irrelevant, and so he is indi¤erent between any
  2 [0; 1]. This result is given in Lemma 1 below.

Lemma 1 (Disclosure of fundamental value): If fundamental value V is hard infor-
mation, the manager chooses V = 1,  = 1, and any 2 [0; 1].

    We now return to the core model in which V is soft information and thus cannot
be disclosed. We solve this model by backward induction. We start by determining the
stock price at t = 3, given the market’s belief about the manager’s investment. We
then move to the manager’s t = 2 investment decision, which is a best response to the
market maker’s t = 3 pricing function. Finally, we turn to the manager’s choice of
disclosure at t = 0, which takes into account the impact on his subsequent investment
decision and the investor’s losses from liquidity shocks.


3.2    Trading Stage
The trading game at t = 3 is played by the speculator and the market maker. At this
stage, the manager’s investment decision (if = H) has been undertaken, but is
unknown to the market maker. Thus, he sets the price using his equilibrium belief ^ .
   There are three cases to consider. If y = G, all players know that = H, so the
unique equilibrium in this subgame is that the market maker sets P = V     d H = RH + ^ g.

Since the speculator values the …rm at V H (and, in equilibrium, ^ = ), he has no
                                                                                        d
motive to trade. If the investor su¤ers a liquidity shock, she trades at a price of P = V H

and breaks even.

                                            11
    When y = B, the signal is imperfectly informative for any ^ > 0: it can be generated
by both …rm types. Since the speculator observes V , and other market participants
only observe the noisy signal y, he has an information advantage. Since the investor
either buys or sells shares (or does not trade), the speculator will buy shares if
V = V H and sell shares if V = V L , to hide his information.
    Given the speculator’s equilibrium strategy, the market maker’s equilibrium pricing
function is given by Bayes’rule in Lemma 2.

Lemma 2 (Prices): Upon observing signal y and the vector of order ‡ows Q, the
prices set by the market maker are given by the following table:

   y=G                                   y=B                                                      y=?
                      Q                           P                              Q                       P
                  ( ; )                          d
                                                 VH                          ( ; )                      d
                                                                                                        VH
                  ( ; 0)                         d
                                                 V H                         ( ; 0)                     d
                                                                                                        V H
                                                                                                                 : (1)
     d
  P =V H
                                           ^2 d
                  ( ;          )                VH   +     1
                                                                VL           ( ;          )        1   d
                                                                                                       V H +VL
                                         1+ ^ 2          1+ ^ 2                                    2
                  (         ; 0)                 VL                          (         ; 0)             VL
              (         ;          )             VL                      (         ;          )         VL

    We sometimes use P (Q; y) to denote the price of a …rm for which signal y has been
disclosed and the order vector is Q. Since y is an informative signal, …nancial e¢ ciency
is greater with y = B than y = ?. This can be seen by the di¤erence in prices with an
uninformative order vector of ( ;    ). Without a signal, the price is the unconditional
expected value based on the prior probability of type H ( 12 ), but conditional on y = B,
                                               ^2
the probability is updated to the posterior ^2 +1 . Separately, it is simple to show that,
at t = 2, the expected price equals expected …rm value, i.e., E (P ) = E (V ): this is a
consequence of market e¢ ciency.
    Let Pe (yj = H) denote the expected stock price of an H-…rm for which signal y has
been disclosed, where the expectation is taken over the possible realizations of order
‡ow. We thus have:

                                                    d
                                       P (Gj = H) = V H,

                                                                      d
                                                                      V H    VL
                                                     d
                                       P~ (Bj = H) = V H                        , and
                                                                     2 1 + ^2
                                                                       d
                                                                       V H   VL
                                                     d
                                       P~ (?j = H) = V H                        ,
                                                                     2     2

                                                             12
where we suppress the tilde on P (Gj = H) as the price is independent of the order
‡ow. For any and ^ , since Vd H > V L and ^ 2  1, we have

                       P~ (Bj = H) < P~ (?j = H) < P (Gj = H) .


3.3     Investment Stage
We now move to the investment decision of the H-manager at t = 2. At this stage, the
disclosure policy is known. The manager chooses to maximize his expected payo¤:

                 max Um          ; b = (1            ) !E (P j = H) + (1                    !)V H ,            (2)

where the expected price of an H-…rm is

            E (P j = H) =             1         2
                                                     P (Gj = H) +                   2
                                                                                        P~ (Bj = H)
                               + (1       ) P~ (?j = H)
                                                                              2
                                d                   1                                       d
                               =V H                   (1        )+                          V H    VL :
                                          2         2                 1 + ^2

His …rst-order condition is given by

         @Um      ;b
                          = (1        )     !                       d
                                                                    V H       V L + (1            !)g   = 0.   (3)
             @                                       1 + ^2

Since
                 @ 2 Um        ;b
                                    =     (1          )!                      d
                                                                              V H        V L < 0,
                       @   2
                                                                1 + ^2
the manager’s objective function is strictly concave and so equation (3) is su¢ cient for
a maximum. Plugging = b into the …rst-order condition (3) yields the quadratic:

                                               1                2                       1
                               ( ; )=                                             +         ,                  (4)
                                                                          g
                       !
where we de…ne        1 !
                          as the relative weight on the stock price and       RH RL
as the di¤erence in …rm values.
    Given a , the solution to the manager’s investment decision is given in Proposition
1 below.



                                                           13
Proposition 1 (Investment): For any 2 [0; 1], there is a unique equilibrium invest-
ment level in the subgame following , which is given by:
                                 8
                                 <r ( ) ;    if     > X;
                               =
                                 :1;         if       X;

where
                                           g ( + 1)
                                   X                 ,                                 (5)
                                              ( + g)
r ( ) is the root of the quadratic ( ; ) = 0 for which 0 (r; ) < 0, and r( ) is strictly
decreasing and strictly concave. Fixing any > X, the partial investment level r ( )
is increasing in g and decreasing in !, , , and . The threshold X is increasing in
g and decreasing in !, , , and .

    The intuition behind Proposition 1 is as follows. The cost of investment (from the
manager’s perspective) is that it increases the probability of disclosing a bad signal.
This cost is increasing in disclosure . Thus, the manager engages in full investment
if and only if is su¢ ciently low: weakly below a threshold X. As is intuitive,           X
is more likely to be satis…ed (i.e., full investment is more likely to be undertaken) if !
is low (the manager is less concerned with the stock price), is low (investment only
leads to a small increase in the probability of a bad signal) and g is high (investment
is more attractive). Somewhat less obviously,          X is more likely to be satis…ed if
is low. When the investor receives fewer liquidity shocks, trading becomes dominated
by the speculator, who has information on V . The price becomes more re‡ective
of fundamental value V rather than the noisy signal y. Thus, the manager is less
concerned about emitting the bad signal. Finally, the investment is likelier if , the
baseline value di¤erence between H- and L-…rms, is low, as this reduces the incentive
to be revealed as a high-quality …rm by delivering y = G.
    When > X, disclosure is su¢ ciently high that the manager reduces investment
below the …rst-best optimum, and we have an interior solution. Additional increases
in cause investment to fall further, since r ( ) is decreasing in . Thus, while a rise
in augments …nancial e¢ ciency, it reduces real e¢ ciency.




                                            14
3.4     Disclosure Stage
We …nally turn to the manager’s disclosure decision at t = 0. He chooses           to maximize
his expected payo¤, net of the stake sold to outside investors:

                   max ( ) = (1         ( )) (!E (P ) + (1           !)E [V ])

                              = (1      ( )) E [V ] .                                        (6)

    The manager takes into account two e¤ects of . First, it a¤ects , because the
investor’s stake must be su¢ cient to compensate for her trading losses. Second, it
a¤ects and thus V H , as shown in Proposition 1. Lemma 3 addresses the …rst e¤ect.
The stake demanded by the investor will depend on her conjecture for the manager’s
investment decision, b. In equilibrium, her conjecture b will equal the actual investment
level , and so appears in Lemma 3 below.

Lemma 3 (Stake sold to investor): The stake               sold to the investor is given by

                                            2K
                                   ( )=          + ,                                         (7)
                                          V + RL
                                            H


where                                       h                                i
                                                                     2
                                                1
                                VH     RL       2
                                                    (1     )+   1+       2
                         =                  H
                                                              .
                                         V +         RL
The partial derivative of with respect to is negative, and the partial derivatives with
respect to !, , , , , and g are positive.

    Lemma 3 shows that the stake that the manager must sell comprises two compo-
nents. The “baseline” component V H2K  +RL
                                            is the stake that the investor would require
if she did not risk trading losses (e.g., if = 0). It simply ensures that the dollar
value of her stake in the …rm equals the dollar amount she is investing: it is her capital
contribution K divided by expected …rm value and independent of disclosure . The
second term, is the additional stake that the investor demands to compensate for
her expected trading losses. An increase in reduces these losses and thus : greater
disclosure reduces her information disadvantage versus the speculator. We will refer
as the “excess cost of capital”(or sometimes “cost of capital”for short). It re‡ects the
wedge between the percentage stake that the manager is selling to the investor and the
percentage contribution that he is receiving from the investor.


                                            15
    The partial derivatives for are intuitive. An increase in the noise in the public
signal raises the speculator’s information advantage and thus the expected loss from
a liquidity shock, augmenting the cost of capital. The probability and magnitude
   of a liquidity shock also increases the expected loss and thus the cost of capital.
Disclosure reduces information asymmetry and thus the cost of capital. Increases in
investment and the productivity of investment g both augment the value di¤erence
between H- and L-…rms ( + g) and thus the cost of capital.
    Plugging (7) into (6) yields
                                                                            2
                1                            1            1
        ( )=      V H + RL       K             VH   RL      (1    )+            2
                                                                                    ,
                2                            2            2            1+

where the …rst term is expected …rm value (net of the injected funds) and the second
term represents the investor’s expected trading losses.
    We now solve for the manager’s choice of disclosure policy. There are two cases to
consider. The …rst is X      1. Since 2 [0; 1],     X. Thus, from Proposition 1, the
investment level following any 2 [0; 1] is    = 1. Since there is no trade-o¤ between
disclosure and investment, the manager chooses maximum disclosure,         = 1. Thus,
full disclosure and full investment can be implemented simultaneously. This result is
stated in Proposition 2.

Proposition 2 (Full disclosure and full investment): If X 1, the model has a unique
equilibrium, in which the disclosure policy is = 1 and the investment level is = 1.

   The condition X      1 is equivalent to

                                             +g
                                                    1:                                  (8)
                                     1+      g

Thus, the manager will invest e¢ ciently even with full disclosure when g is high, and
!, , , and         are all low. The intuition is the same as in the discussion following
Proposition 1.
    The second case is X < 1. In this case, we solve for the manager’s choice of
disclosure policy in two steps. First, we solve for the optimal disclosure policy in the
set [0; X], and then in the set [X; 1]. Since r ( ) is continuous at = X (r (X) = 1), X
lies in both sets. This implies that both sets are compact and thus an optimal disclosure
policy exists in each. Second, we solve for the optimal disclosure policy overall, which
involves comparing the manager’s payo¤s under the optimal disclosure policies in [0; X]


                                             16
and [X; 1]. Put di¤erently, the …rst step solves for the optimal level of disclosure if the
manager implements full investment, and the optimal level of disclosure if the manager
implements partial investment. The second step compares the manager’s payo¤ under
the best outcome with full investment to the best outcome with partial investment, to
solve for the optimal disclosure policy overall.
    We …rst analyze the optimal disclosure policy in [0; X]. From Proposition 1, ( ) =
1 for all 2 [0; X]. Thus, for 2 [0; X], the manager’s payo¤ becomes

                  1 H                                  1                    1
           ( )=     R + g + RL               K           (   + g) (1    )     +        ,      (9)
                  2                                    2                    2   1+

which is strictly increasing in     as a higher         reduces trading losses.

Lemma 4 (Disclosure under full investment): In an equilibrium where                  2 [0; X] and
X < 1, the optimal disclosure policy is

                                                  = X,

and the equilibrium investment level is            = 1.

   Intuitively, if the manager wishes to implement = 1, he should choose the highest
possible that supports full investment, which is X.
   We next turn to the optimal disclosure policy in [X; 1]. For any 2 [X; 1], the
equilibrium in the following subgame is r ( ). Thus, the manager’s problem becomes

                                        1 H
                   max       ( )=         R + g + RL               K
                   2(X;1)               2
                                                                            2
                                    1                              1
                                         (       + g) (1       )     +          2
                                                                                            (10)
                                    2                              2   1+
                  s.t.      ( ; ) = 0.

From ( ; ) = 0, the disclosure policy that implements a given investment level
is given by:
                                     g (1 + 2 )
                                =               .                           (11)
                                         ( + g)
As shown in Proposition 1, r( ) is strictly decreasing and strictly convex. Since also
@
@
   < 0, this implies that is strictly decreasing and strictly convex in . Increased
disclosure reduces investment; however, since investment cannot fall below zero, it does
so at a decreasing rate.

                                                  17
    Equation (10) shows that there are four e¤ects of a larger on the manager’s objec-
tive function. The …rst is the “value creation e¤ect”, the positive e¤ect of investment
on …rm value, which can be seen by entering the …rst term of equation (10). The
second is the “variance” e¤ect, which is negative. A higher augments the di¤erence
in value, + g, between H- and L-…rms. This in turn increases the investor’s infor-
mation disadvantage, her trading loss, and thus her required stake . The e¤ect can be
seen by appearing in the …rst part of the second term. The third is the “disclosure
e¤ect”, which is also negative. It can be seen by appearing in the second part of
the second term. Implementing higher investment requires less disclosure (equa-
tion (11)), augmenting the cost of capital. The fourth is the “signal distortion e¤ect”,
which too is negative. Higher investment means that the signal y is less informative
about …rm type, because y = B is more likely to be generated by an H-…rm. Thus,
the investor (who observes y) su¤ers a greater information disadvantage relative to the
                                                                    2
speculator. This e¤ect can be seen by appearing in the term 2 +1 .11
    Equation (10) can be rewritten:

                                  1 H                1
                      ( ; )=        R + g + RL  K                             (   + g)
                                  2                  4
                                                                      2
                                       1          1
                                     +    ( + g)                      2
                                                                          .                        (12)
                                       4          1+

The …rst term is expected …rm value. The second term represents the investor’s losses in
the absence of disclosure (“maximum trading losses”), which also captures the variance
e¤ect if there were no disclosure. The terms in in the …rst line sum to 21 g 1 21     >
0, and so the value creation e¤ect outweighs the variance e¤ect. This is intuitive: if
investment could be chosen independently of disclosure, the manager is always better
o¤ with higher investment. The third term constitutes the reduction in expected losses
that stems from increased disclosure (“loss mitigation”). This reduction is increasing
in the initial variance in …rm value ( + g) and decreasing in due to the signal
distortion e¤ect.
    Using equation (11) to substitute for in the objective function (12) yields …rm
  11
    This term a¤ects the price set by the market maker upon seeing y = B and Q = ( ;              ) (see
Lemma 2): a rise in augments P (( ;          ) ; B) since (( ; ) ; B) is more likely to be generated by
a H-…rm. On the one hand, this higher price reduces the investor’s losses if she is forced to sell and
the speculator buys. On the other hand, it increases the investor’s losses if she is forced to buy and
the speculator sells. The second e¤ect is dominant, because when y = B, it is more likely that the
speculator sells, and so overall, a rise in augments the investor’s loss through changing the price set
by the market maker.



                                                  18
value as a function of investment alone:
                                                                 F
                                     ( )=D+E +                       ,               (13)

where
                                              1       1
                            D    RH             (1 +        )            K,          (14)
                                              2       2
                                               1       1
                            E    g 1             (1 +        )                ,      (15)
                                               2       2             4
                                     g
                            F             .                                          (16)
                                 4

The convex component in …rm value (the 1 term) comes from substituting            into the
loss mitigation term. Di¤erentiating (13) yields

                                          0                 F
                                              ( )=E          2
                                                                 ;
                                         00          2F
                                              ( )=     3
                                                           > 0:

Since ( ) is globally convex (which follows from the convexity of F ), the solution
to 0 ( ) = 0 is a minimum. The maximum value of ( ) is attained at a boundary:
we either have       = r (X) = 1 or         = r (1). The intuition behind the boundary
solution is as follows. From equation (12), the bene…ts of increasing investment to
the manager are linear in the level of investment. One of the costs, the maximum
trading losses, is also linear, but the loss mitigation term is convex, because disclosure
is convex in investment as shown by equation (11). When investment rises, disclosure
must fall to support the higher level of investment, thus reducing the loss mitigation
e¤ect – but at a decreasing rate. Intuitively, when disclosure is already low, further
decreases in disclosure are high relative to the baseline level of disclosure, and so an
increase in investment only requires a small decrease in disclosure. The convexity is
likely common to all functional forms, because disclosure and investment are necessarily
bounded below by zero. An increase in disclosure must reduce investment at a declining
rate, since investment falls towards zero asymptotically. As a result of the convexity, it
is optimal for the manager to increase disclosure by a small amount from X to X + ",
it is optimal for him to increase it all the way to 1. Thus, the manager chooses either
full investment or full disclosure. This result is given in Lemma 5 below.



                                                  19
Lemma 5 (Partial disclosure or partial investment): When 2 [X; 1], the equilibrium
investment level is either   = r (1), in which case the equilibrium disclosure policy is
   = 1, or    = 1, in which case the equilibrium disclosure policy is   = X.

    We now move to the second step. Having found the optimal disclosure policy
in [0; X] and in [X; 1], we now solve for the optimal disclosure policy overall, which
involves comparing the manager’s payo¤ across these two sets. In doing so, we formally
prove existence of an equilibrium in the model and characterize it. The equilibrium is
given by Proposition 3 below:

Proposition 3 (Trade-o¤ between disclosure and investment): If X < 1, the equilib-
rium is given as follows:

(i) If (r (1) ; 1) > (1; X), the manager chooses full disclosure (                 = 1) and partial
      investment ( = r (1) < 1).

(ii) If (r (1) ; 1) < (1; X), the manager chooses partial disclosure (                    = X) and
      full investment ( = 1).

(iii) If (r (1) ; 1) =    (1; X), both (         = r (1),           = 1) and (    = 1,    = X) are
      equilibria.

   The condition    (r (1) ; 1) >       (1; X) is equivalent to

                                                 1       r (1)
                         > e=                    h                       i > 0:                 (17)
                                    1   +g   1       1    1
                                    2   g            2
                                                                 1 + r(1)

   The threshold ~ is increasing in g, and decreasing in , , and                   . It is decreasing
in ! when ! is small and increasing when ! is large.

    When X < 1, the manager faces a trade-o¤: he must choose between either full
disclosure or full investment, as it is impossible to achieve both. He chooses the former
if and only if the liquidity shock is su¢ ciently large (above a threshold e), as this
means that cost of capital considerations dominate the trade-o¤. Importantly, the
partial investment level r (1) in the de…nition of e, which is why we use as the cut-o¤
parameter.
    The intuition behind the comparative statics for the threshold e arises because
changes in these parameters have up to three e¤ects. First, as g rises, and , ,


                                                 20
and      fall, equation (5) shows that the maximum disclosure X that implements full
investment is higher. Thus, full investment becomes more attractive to the manager,
as it can be sustained with a lower cost of capital. Second, the same changes also
augment the partial investment level r (1) that is implemented by full disclosure. Thus,
full disclosure also becomes more attractive to the manager, as it does not lead to as
much underinvestment. These two e¤ects work in opposite directions. This ambiguity
is resolved through a third e¤ect: a rise in g, and a fall in , , and , make investment
more important relative to the cost of capital. Thus, they augment the cuto¤ e, making
it more likely that full investment is optimal.
    In contrast, a fall in ! only has the …rst two e¤ects: it reduces both r (1) and X,
making both the full disclosure and full investment equilibria less attractive. Since !
a¤ects neither the value of the growth opportunity nor the cost of capital, the third
e¤ect is absent, and so the e¤ect of ! on e is ambiguous. When ! is very low, full
investment can be sustained with high disclosure and so the manager prefers the full
investment equilibrium. When ! is very high, full disclosure leads to substantial un-
derinvestment and so the manager again prefers the full investment equilibrium. The
manager chooses full disclosure for intermediate values of !, and so the derivative of e
with respect to ! is non-monotonic.
    We now combine the comparative static analysis of cases of X < 1 and X
1 to analyze how parameters globally a¤ect equilibrium disclosure and investment.
Proposition 4 gives the global comparative statics for g and .

Proposition 4 (Global comparative statics for g and      ):

(i) The equilibrium investment policy     is weakly increasing in the pro…tability of
     investment g. The equilibrium disclosure policy    is …rst weakly decreasing and
     then weakly increasing in g. Speci…cally:

     (i-a) If    exceeds a threshold, the equilibrium disclosure policy ( ) is always 1.
     (i-b) If is below this threshold,     = 1 for low levels of g. Once g rises above
          a threshold,    falls discontinuously to X, and then weakly increases with
          further increases in g.

(ii) The equilibrium investment policy   is weakly decreasing in the di¤erence in …rm
     values . The equilibrium disclosure policy     is …rst weakly increasing and then
     weakly decreasing in . Speci…cally:


                                          21
     (ii-a) If    exceeds a threshold, the equilibrium disclosure policy ( ) is always 1.
     (ii-b) If is below this threshold,       = 1 for high levels of . Once      falls
          below a threshold,    falls discontinuously to X, and then weakly increases
          with further decreases in .

    The intuition behind the global comparative statics for g are as follows. When g is
low, investment is su¢ ciently unattractive that the manager chooses partial investment.
Within this regime, increases in g augment the partial investment level, as is intuitive,
but do not a¤ect disclosure which remains …xed at 1. If is su¢ ciently low, then there
exists a threshold such that if g rises above this threshold, investment becomes su¢ -
ciently attractive that we move to the full investment equilibrium. At this threshold,
investment rises discontinuously to 1 and disclosure drops discontinuously from 1 to
X. Further increases in g augment disclosure, because the investment opportunity is
su¢ ciently attractive that the manager invests fully even with high disclosure.
    Overall, investment is weakly increasing in g. As the investment becomes more
attractive, the manager pursues it to a greater extent even with full disclosure, and
after a point it becomes so attractive that the manager switches to full investment.
The e¤ect of g on disclosure is more surprising. As is intuitive, increases in g make
investment more important and mean that the manager wishes to reduce disclosure,
to implement full investment. However, within the full investment equilibrium, further
increases in g actually increase disclosure.
    The intuition for     is exactly the opposite, because    and g appear together as
            +g                  ~
the ratio g in both X and . Intuitively, when making his investment decision, the
manager trades o¤ the bene…ts of investment g with the incentive to be revealed as a
H-…rm, . The comparative statics for g are illustrated in Figure 1 below.




                                           22
                       Figure 1: Global comparative statics for g


   Proposition 5 gives the global comparative statics for    and .

Proposition 5 (Global comparative statics for       and ):

(i) The equilibrium investment policy     is weakly decreasing in the probability of the
     liquidity shock , and the equilibrium disclosure policy  is …rst weakly decreasing
     and then weakly increasing in . Speci…cally:

                1 1+   g
     (i-a) If          +g
                            1, the equilibrium is always (   = 1;    = 1).
     (i-b) If 1 1+ g+g < 1 and     > , then for small , the equilibrium is al-
          ways ( = 1;    = 1). Once rises above a threshold, the equilibrium is
          ( = r (1) ;   = 1). Investment falls continuously; further increases in
          reduce , but   is una¤ected.
     (i-c) If 1 1+ g+g < 1 and     < ~ ( = 1), then for small , the equilibrium
          is ( = 1;    = 1). Once      rises above a threshold, the equilibrium is
          ( = 1;     = X). Disclosure falls continuously; further increases in re-
          duce , but    is una¤ected.
     (i-d) If 1 1+ g+g < 1 and 2 ~ ( = 1) ; , then for small , the equilib-
          rium is ( = 1;    = 1). Once rises above a threshold, the equilibrium
          is ( = 1;    = X). Disclosure falls continuously; further increases in

                                           23
            reduce , but      is una¤ected. Once rises above a second threshold, the
            equilibrium switches to ( = r (1) ;     = 1). Disclosure rises discontinu-
            ously and investment falls discontinuously; further increases in reduce
            but have no e¤ect on .

(ii) The equilibrium investment policy   is weakly decreasing in the noise in the signal
      , and the equilibrium disclosure policy     is …rst weakly decreasing and then
     weakly increasing in . Speci…cally:

                   1 2   g
       (ii-a) If         +g
                              1, the equilibrium is always (   = 1;   = 1).
       (ii-b) If 1 2 g+g < 1 and     > , then for small , the equilibrium is al-
            ways ( = 1;     = 1). Once rises above a threshold, the equilibrium is
            ( = r (1) ;   = 1). Investment falls continuously; further increases in
            reduce , but    is una¤ected.
       (ii-c) If 1 2 g+g < 1 and     < ~ ( = 1), then for small , the equilibrium
            is ( = 1;     = 1). Once      rises above a threshold, the equilibrium is
            ( = 1;      = X). Disclosure falls continuously; further increases in re-
            duce , but     is una¤ected.
       (ii-d) If 1 2 g+g < 1 and      2 ~ ( = 1) ; , then for small , the equilib-
            rium is ( = 1;       = 1). Once rises above a threshold, the equilibrium
            is ( = 1;     = X). Disclosure falls continuously; further increases in
            reduce , but      is una¤ected. Once rises above a second threshold, the
            equilibrium switches to ( = r (1) ;     = 1). Disclosure rises discontinu-
            ously and investment falls discontinuously; further increases in reduce
            but have no e¤ect on .

    The intuition behind the global comparative statics for are as follows. When
1 1+   g
       +g
             1, then (8) is satis…ed for all . Thus, we always have X       1 and the
( = 1;       = 1) equilibrium. The bene…ts of investment are so strong relative to
the costs that, regardless of , full investment and full disclosure can be sustained
simultaneously. Thus, there are no comparative statics with respect to . When
1 1+   g
       +g
           < 1, then for low , the ( = 1;        = 1) equilibrium is sustainable. For
high , there is a trade-o¤ between investment and disclosure, and we are in one
of three cases. In case (i-b), the magnitude of the liquidity shock is su¢ ciently
high that > e always. Within the trade-o¤ region, the manager always chooses full
disclosure and partial investment, and so investment falls below 1 when crosses above

                                              24
the threshold that makes ( = 1;          = 1) no longer sustainable; additional increases
in reduce the partial investment level further. In case (i-c), the magnitude of the
liquidity shock is su¢ ciently low that < e always. Within the trade-o¤ region,
the manager always chooses full investment and partial disclosure, and so disclosure
falls below 1 when crosses above the threshold; additional increases in reduce the
partial disclosure level further. In case (i-d), within the trade-o¤ region, for low levels
of , < e and the manager chooses full investment and partial disclosure, but for
high , > e and the manager switches to full disclosure and partial investment.
    Considering all cases together, as with g and in Proposition 4, has a monotonic
e¤ect on investment, but a non-monotonic e¤ect on disclosure. The intuition behind
the global comparative statics for is identical. The comparative statics for for the
interesting case of 1 1+ g+g < 1 are illustrated in Figure 2 below.




                       Figure 2: Global comparative statics for


   Proposition 6 gives the global comparative statics for !.

Proposition 6 (Global comparative statics for !): The equilibrium investment policy
   is weakly decreasing in the manager’s short-term concerns !, and the equilibrium
disclosure policy   is non-monotonic in !. Let denote the minimum ~ over all !
such that X 1. Speci…cally:

                                            25
(i) If < , then for low !, the equilibrium is ( = 1; = 1); once ! rises above
      a threshold, the equilibrium is ( = 1;      = X). Disclosure falls continuously;
      further increases in ! lower     but have no e¤ect on .
                   n                      o
(ii) If    > max ~ (X = 1) ; ~ (X = 0) , then for low !, the equilibrium is ( =
      1; = 1). Once ! rises above a threshold, the equilibrium is ( = r (1) ; = 1).
      Investment falls continuously; further increases in ! lower , but       is unaf-
      fected.

(iii) If ~ (X = 1) > > ~ (X = 0), then, in addition to the e¤ects in part (b), once
      ! rises above a second threshold, the equilibrium switches to ( = 1;        = X).
      Investment rises discontinuously and disclosure falls discontinuously; further in-
      creases in lower      but have no e¤ect on .

(iv) If 2      ; minf ~(X = 1); ~(X = 0)g , then for low !, the equilibrium is ( =
     1; = 1). Once ! rises above a threshold, the equilibrium is ( = 1;          = X).
     Disclosure falls continuously; further increases in ! lower      , but      is un-
     a¤ected. Once ! rises above a second threshold, the equilibrium switches to
     ( = r (1) ; = 1). Disclosure rises discontinuously and investment falls dis-
     continuously; further increases in ! lower     but have no e¤ect on . Once
     ! rises above a third threshold, the equilibrium switches to ( = 1;         = X).
     Investment rises discontinuously and disclosure falls discontinuously; further in-
     creases in lower      but have no e¤ect on .

    The intuition behind the global comparative statics for ! are as follows. When !
is low, myopia is su¢ ciently weak that the manager invests e¢ ciently even with full
disclosure. When ! is su¢ ciently high, there is a trade-o¤. In case (i), the magnitude of
the liquidity shock is su¢ ciently low that the manager always chooses full investment
and partial disclosure, and additional increases in ! reduce the partial disclosure level
further. In case (ii), the magnitude of the liquidity shock is su¢ ciently high that
the manager chooses full disclosure and partial investment, and additional increases
in ! reduce the partial investment level. Recall that e is …rst decreasing and then
increasing in !. In case (iii), if also ~ (X = 1) > > ~ (X = 0), then when ! becomes
su¢ ciently high, e crosses back above and so the manager switches to full investment
and partial disclosure. In case (iv), within the trade-o¤ region, the manager chooses
partial disclosure for low and high , and partial investment for intermediate .
    Considering all cases together, as with the other parameters, ! has a monotonic


                                           26
e¤ect on investment, but a non-monotonic e¤ect on disclosure. The comparative statics
for ! are illustrated in Figure 3 below.




                      Figure 3: Global comparative statics for !


    Overall, Propositions 4, 5, and 6 yield empirical predictions for how investment and
disclosure vary cross-sectionally across …rms. As is intuitive, and predicted by many
other models, investment depends on corporate …nance variables –it is increasing in the
pro…tability of investment opportunities and decreasing in the manager’s short-term
concerns. More unique to our framework is the predictions that investment depends
on asset pricing variables. It decreases with the frequency of liquidity shocks and the
information asymmetry su¤ered by small investors (which in turn depends on the noise
of the public signal and the baseline value di¤erence between H- and L-…rms, ).
Increases in these variables augment the cost of capital, and may induce the manager
to switch from full investment to full disclosure.
    The e¤ects of corporate …nance and asset pricing characteristics on disclosure pol-
icy are non-monotonic. Firms with intermediate growth opportunities disclose little,
because growth opportunities are su¢ ciently strong that the manager prefers the full
investment equilibrium if there is a trade-o¤, but also su¢ ciently weak that he will only
pursue them fully if disclosure is low. Firms with weak growth opportunities will have


                                           27
high disclosure, because the cost of capital dominates the trade-o¤ and so the man-
ager implements the full-disclosure, partial-investment equilibrium. Firms with strong
growth opportunities will have high disclosure for a di¤erent reason. Even though
investment is more important than disclosure, the growth opportunity is su¢ ciently
attractive that the …rm will pursue it even with high disclosure. For similar reasons,
…rms with moderate information asymmetry , moderate size and frequency of
liquidity shocks, and moderate noise in the signal will have a low level of disclosure,
but …rms with either high or low levels of these variables will feature high disclosure.
For example, it may seem that, when information asymmetry              rises, the manager
will always disclose more to counteract the rise in information asymmetry. However, if
it remains optimal to implement full investment, the manager must reduce disclosure
to do so. Similarly, it may seem that, when rises, the manager should disclose less
as the signal is noisier. However, a rise in makes the cost of capital relatively more
important, and so the manager may now wish to implement full disclosure. As Beyer
et al.’s (2010) survey paper emphasizes, “it is necessary to consider multiple aspects of
the corporate information environment in order to conclude whether it becomes more
or less informative in response to an exogenous change.” The e¤ect of the manager’s
short-term concerns is more complex and depends on which of the three cases we are
in, but in all cases, disclosure is highest when short-term concerns are low, because the
manager can disclose fully without su¤ering underinvestment.
    The non-monotonic e¤ects of …rm characteristics on disclosure policy contrast with
prior theories. Baiman and Verrecchia (1996) predict that an increase in the size of the
liquidity shock monotonically reduces the optimal level of disclosure. Gao and Liang
(2013) predict that …rms with higher growth opportunities disclose less, because disclos-
ing information about assets in place crowds out the acquisition of private information
about the growth option. More generally, the model points to variables (both from
corporate …nance and asset pricing) that empiricists should control for when studying
the e¤ect of a di¤erent variable (not in our model) on disclosure. In addition, it em-
phasizes that disclosure, investment, and the cost of capital are all simultaneously and
endogenously determined by underlying parameters, rather than a¤ecting each other.
As Beyer et al. (2010) note: “ ‘equilibrium’concepts for the market for information
defy a simpli…ed view of cause and e¤ect”.
    Lemma 3 derived monotonic partial derivatives for the excess cost of capital with
respect to underlying parameters. However, the excess cost of capital depends also
on , which depends non-monotonically on the same parameters. Thus, due to the


                                           28
endogenous response of disclosure policy, the overall e¤ects of these parameters on
the cost of capital is unclear. In contrast, Diamond and Verrecchia (1991) predict
that the cost of capital is monotonically decreasing in information asymmetry and the
magnitude of liquidity shocks.


4     Voluntary Disclosure
The analysis of Section 3 shows that, if the manager is able to commit to a disclosure
policy, he may commit to partial disclosure even though this raises his cost of capital.
    This section considers the case of voluntary disclosure, where the manager is unable
to commit to a disclosure policy. We now assume that the manager always possesses the
signal y, and chooses whether to disclose it. Thus, while the manager may announce
a disclosure policy at t = 0, he may renege on it at t = 2. Speci…cally, consider the
manager announcing a disclosure policy . Theoretically, the manager could implement
the policy by using a private randomization device, e.g., spinning a wheel that has a
fraction of “disclose”outcomes and 1           of “non-disclose”outcomes, and disclosing
the signal if and only if the wheel lands on “disclose”. However, he may renege on the
policy: even if the device lands on “non-disclose”, he may disclose anyway. In keeping
with the literature on voluntary disclosure, the manager can never falsify the signal
(e.g., release y = G if the signal was y = B), and only has discretion on whether or
not to disclose it.
    Since P (G) > Pe (?), the manager will choose to disclose the signal if it turns out
to be good. Thus, the absence of a disclosure means that the signal must be y = B.
No disclosure is tantamount to the disclosure of a bad signal, and so the manager is
indi¤erent between them. The manager cannot choose not to disclose and claim that
he is doing so to follow his pre-announced low-disclosure policy, because the market
knows that he would have reneged on the policy and chosen to disclose if the signal
were good. No news is bad news – the “unraveling” result of Grossman (1981) and
Milgrom (1981).
    The manager knows that he will always disclose the signal y at t = 2, either literally,
by disclosing y = G, or implicitly, by not disclosing and the market inferring that y = B.
Therefore, he will make his t = 1 investment decision assuming that = 1, i.e., choose
    = r (1) irrespective of the preannounced policy. Since the only disclosure policy
that the manager can commit to is = 1, the voluntary disclosure model is equivalent
to the mandatory disclosure model with = 1. Even if (1; X) > (r(1); 1), and so


                                            29
the manager would like to commit to low disclosure, he is unable to do so. This result
is stated in Proposition 7 below.

Proposition 7 (Voluntary Disclosure): Consider the case in which the manager al-
ways possesses the signal y and has discretion over whether to disclose it at t = 3. The
only Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium involves     = r (1) and    = 1.

    Proposition 7 implies a potential role for government intervention. We now allow
for the government to set a regulatory policy at t = 0. At t = 2, with probability
1      , the manager either cannot or chooses not to disclose due to the government’s
policy. For example, the government could ban disclosure (e.g., prohibit the disclosure
of earnings more frequently than a certain periodicity).12 Similarly, the government
could limit what type of information can be reported in o¢ cial (e.g., SEC) …lings,
which reduces disclosure under the assumption that investors view o¢ cial …lings as
more truthful than information disseminated through, for example, company press
releases. Alternatively, the government could audit disclosures with su¢ cient intensity
that the manager chooses not to disclose: even if disclosure is always truthful, so there
is no cost of a lawsuit, responding to an audit is costly.
    Now, when making his t = 1 investment decision, he knows that he will disclose at
t = 2 only with probability .13 He will thus choose an investment level           = ( ).
Therefore, if the government’s goal is to maximize …rm value to existing shareholders
(i.e., the manager’s payo¤), it will choose a disclosure policy = X, thus implement-
ing the ( = 1; = X) equilibrium. Thus, the government implements a lower level
of disclosure than the one that managers will voluntarily choose themselves. This con-
clusion contrasts some existing models (e.g., Foster (1979), Co¤ee (1984), Dye (1990),
Admati and P‡eiderer (2000), Lambert, Leuz, and Verrecchia (2007)) which advocate
that regulators should set a ‡oor for disclosure, because …rms have insu¢ cient incen-
tives to release information. It also contrasts recent increases in disclosure regulation,
such as Sarbanes-Oxley, and is consistent with concerns that such regulation may re-
duce investment. If caps on disclosure are di¢ cult to implement, a milder implication
of our model is that government regulations to increase disclosure may have real costs.
    However, government regulation may not maximize …rm value. First, the policy that
maximizes the manager’s payo¤ varies from …rm to …rm. Even if all managers wish
  12
     This is similar in spirit to the “quiet period”that precedes an initial public o¤ering, which limits
a …rm’s ability to disclose information.
  13
     An alternative way to regulate may be to a¤ect directly. For example, if the government allows
greater discretion in accounting policies, managers have greater latitude for earnings management,
and so earnings are a less informative signal.

                                                   30
                                                                   g(1+ )
to implement full investment, the disclosure policy = X              ( +g)
                                                                           depends on …rm
characteristics. Regulation is typically economy-wide, rather than at the individual …rm
level. A policy of will induce suboptimally low disclosure in a …rm for which X > :
disclosure only needs to be as low as X to implement full investment, and < X leads to
an excessively high cost of capital. In contrast, a policy of will not constrain disclosure
enough in a …rm for which X < . The manager will invest only r ( ) < 1, although
this is still higher than the benchmark of no regulation. Moreover, some managers will
not wish to implement the full-investment policy if (1; X) < (r (1) ; 1) for their
…rm. Thus, a regulation aimed at inducing full investment will be ine¢ cient.
    Second, the government’s goal may not be to maximize …rm value, but total surplus.
The manager takes into account both the bene…ts of disclosure (lower cost of capital)
and its costs (lower investment). However, only the latter a¤ects total surplus. The
former comes at the expense of the speculator, as disclosure reduces his trading pro…ts.
Put di¤erently, the speculator earns trading pro…ts o¤ the investor, which are passed
onto the manager in the form of a higher cost of capital. Increased disclosure causes a
transfer from the speculator to the manager, but no change in aggregate wealth. Thus,
if the government’s goal is to maximize total surplus, it will choose any 2 [0; X] to
implement        = 1. Such a policy will be suboptimal for the manager if (1; X) <
   (r (1) ; 1).
    Third, the government may have distributional considerations and aim to minimize
informed trading pro…ts and losses. One example is the SEC’s focus on “leveling the
playing …eld” between investors. Under this objective function, it will minimize the
investor’s trading losses14 and ignore investment, which is achieved with = 1. Thus
will reduce …rm value if (1; X) > (r(1); 1).
    These results are stated in Proposition 8 below.

Proposition 8 (Regulation): If the government wishes to maximize …rm value, it will
set a policy of = X if (1; X) > (r (1) ; 1) and = 0 otherwise. If the government
wishes to maximize total surplus, it will choose any 2 [0; X], which will implement
    = 1. If the government wishes to minimize the investor’s trading losses, it will
choose = 1, which will implement       = r (1).
  14
    Note that minimizing the investor’s trading losses is not the same as maximizing her objective
function. The investor breaks even in all scenarios, since the initial stake that she requires takes into
account her trading losses.




                                                   31
5    Conclusion
This paper has shown that, even if the actual act of disclosing information is cost-
less, a high-disclosure policy may be costly. While increasing the disclosure of hard
information augments the total amount of information available to investors, and thus
reduces the cost of capital, it also increases the amount of hard information disclosed
relative to soft information. This change causes the manager to distort his real deci-
sions in favor of those that produce favorable hard information, even at the expense
of soft information, such as cutting investment. Thus, real e¢ ciency is non-monotonic
in …nancial e¢ ciency: investment is e¢ cient with full disclosure of hard and soft infor-
mation, or with no disclosure of either, and least e¢ cient with full disclosure of only
hard information.
    If the manager can commit to a disclosure policy, his optimal policy will vary accord-
ing to the importance of growth opportunities versus the cost of capital. Investment
depends not only on traditional corporate …nance variables (such as the pro…tability
of growth opportunities and the manager’s horizon) but also asset pricing variables
such as shareholders’liquidity needs and information disadvantage. The e¤ect of …rm
characteristics on disclosure policies is subtle. As predicted by other models, the op-
timal disclosure policy depends on asset pricing variables such as the level of infor-
mation asymmetry faced by investors. However, here, the e¤ect of such variables is
non-monotonic. When information asymmetry is moderate, or investors su¤er mod-
erately frequent liquidity shocks, investment is more important than disclosure and
so the manager reduces disclosure to pursue investment. When these parameters are
high, disclosure dominates the trade-o¤ and so the manager maximizes it; when these
parameters are low, the manager is able to increase disclosure without su¤ering under-
investment. In addition, disclosure also depends on corporate …nance variables such
as the manager’s short-term concerns and the pro…tability of growth opportunities. In
a similar vein, the model delivers predictions on how the cost of capital depends not
only on traditional microstructure factors such as information asymmetry, but also on
the above corporate …nance variables.
    If the manager cannot commit to a disclosure policy, then even if a “high-investment,
low-disclosure” policy is optimal, he may be unable to implement it as he will oppor-
tunistically disclose a good signal, regardless of the preannounced policy. Thus, there
may be a role for government regulation to reduce disclosure.
    The model suggests a number of avenues for future research. On the theory side, the
paper has endogenized investment and disclosure, and studied how these decisions in-

                                           32
terplay with the manager’s short-term concerns and the need to raise capital, which are
taken as given. A potential extension would be to endogenize the manager’s contract
and the amount of capital raised, to study how these are a¤ected by the same factors
that drive investment and disclosure. In a similar vein, while the …rm raises capital
only by equity …nancing in our model, disclosure reduces the information asymmetry of
equity more than for risky debt, and thus may have implications for a …rm’s choice of
capital structure. Future studies could also relax the assumption that investors know
the growth opportunities of a high-quality …rm, in which case disclosure may have a
role in signaling such opportunities.15 On the empirical side, it delivers a number of
new predictions on the real e¤ects of disclosure on investment, on how investment de-
pends on asset pricing variables, and on how the cost of capital and disclosure depend
on corporate …nance variables. In addition, while previous papers derived predictions
on how the cost of capital and disclosure depend on asset pricing variables, our model
predicts non-monotonic e¤ects.




  15
     In the current model, where only …rm type is unknown, allowing for signaling (e.g. for managers
to learn their type before setting disclosure policy) will simply lead to pooling equilibria as L-managers
will mimic H-managers.


                                                   33
References
 [1] Admati, Anat R. and Paul P‡eiderer (2000): “Forcing Firms to Talk: Financial
     Disclosure Regulation and Externalities”. Review of Financial Studies 13, 479–
     519.

 [2] Almazan, Andres, Sanjay Banerji and Adolfo de Motta (2008): “Attracting Atten-
     tion: Cheap Managerial Talk and Costly Market Monitoring”. Journal of Finance
     63, 1399–1436.

 [3] Baiman, Stanley and Robert E. Verrecchia (1996): “The Relation among Capital
     Markets, Financial Disclosure Production E¢ ciency, and Insider Trading”. Journal
     of Accounting Research 34, 1-22.

 [4] Beyer, Anne, Daniel A. Cohen, Thomas Z. Lys, and Beverly R. Walther (2010):
     “The Financial Reporting Environment: Review of the Recent Literature”. Jour-
     nal of Accounting and Economics 50, 296–343.

 [5] Bhojraj, Sanjeev and Robert Libby (2005): “Capital Market Pressure, Disclosure
     Frequency-Induced Earnings/Cash Flow Con‡ict, and Managerial Myopia”. The
     Accounting Review 80, 1–20.

 [6] Bolton, Patrick, and Ernst-Ludwig von Thadden (1998): “Blocks, Liquidity, and
     Corporate Control”. Journal of Finance 53, 1–25.

 [7] Bond, Philip, Alex Edmans, and Itay Goldstein (2012): “The Real E¤ects of
     Financial Markets”. Annual Review of Financial Economics 4, 339–60.

 [8] Bond, Philip and Itay Goldstein (2012): “Government Intervention and Informa-
     tion Aggregation by Prices.”Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.

 [9] Cheng, Mei, K. R. Subrahmanyam, and Yuan Zhang (2007): “Earnings Guidance
     and Managerial Myopia.”Working Paper, University of Arizona.

[10] Co¤ee, John (1984): “Market Failure and the Economic Case for a Mandatory
     Disclosure System”. Virginia Law Review 70, 717–753.

[11] Diamond, Douglas W. (1985): “Optimal Release of Information By Firms”. Jour-
     nal of Finance 40, 1071–1094.



                                         34
[12] Diamond, Douglas W. and Robert E. Verrecchia (1991): “Disclosure, Liquidity,
     and the Cost of Capital”. Journal of Finance 46, 1325–1359.

[13] Di Maggio, Marco and Marco Pagano (2012): “Financial Disclosure and Mar-
     ket Transparency with Costly Information Processing.”Working Paper, Columbia
     University.

[14] Dow, James and Gary Gorton (1997): “Noise Trading, Delegated Portfolio Man-
     agement, and Economic Welfare.”Journal of Political Economy 105, 1024–1050.

[15] Dye, Ronald A. (1986): “Proprietary and Nonproprietary Disclosures”. Journal
     of Business 59, 331–366.

[16] Dye, Ronald A. (1990): “Mandatory versus Voluntary Disclosures: The Cases of
     Financial and Real Externalities”. The Accounting Review 65, 1–24.

[17] Dye, Ronald A. (2001): “An Evaluation of “Essays on Disclosure”and the Disclo-
     sure Literature in Accounting”. Journal of Accounting and Economics 32, 181–235.

[18] Edmans, Alex (2009): “Blockholder Trading, Market E¢ ciency, and Managerial
     Myopia”. Journal of Finance 64, 2481–2513.

[19] Ernstberger, Jurgen, Benedikt Link, and Oliver Vogler (2011): “The Real Business
     E¤ects of Quarterly Reporting”. Working Paper, Ruhr-University Bochum.

[20] Fishman, Michael J. and Kathleen Hagerty (1989): “Disclosure Decisions by Firms
     and the Competition for Price E¢ ciency”. Journal of Finance 44, 633–646.

[21] Fishman, Michael J. and Kathleen Hagerty (1990): “The Optimal Amount of
     Discretion to Allow in Disclosure”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 105, 427–444.

[22] Foster, George (1979): “Externalities and Financial Reporting”. Journal of Fi-
     nance 35, 521–533.

[23] Gao, Pingyang and Pierre Jinghong Liang (2013): “Informational Feedback E¤ect,
     Adverse Selection, and the Optimal Disclosure Policy.” Journal of Accounting
     Research, forthcoming

[24] Gigler, Frank, Chandra Kanodia, Haresh Sapra, and Raghu Venugopalan (2013):
     “How Frequent Financial Reporting Causes Managerial Short-Termism: An
     Analysis of the Costs and Bene…ts of Reporting Frequency”. Working Paper, Uni-
     versity of Minnesota.

                                         35
[25] Goldstein, Itay and Haresh Sapra (2012): “Should Banks’Stress Test Results Be
     Disclosed? An Analysis of the Costs and Bene…ts.”Working Paper, University of
     Pennsylvania

[26] Graham, John R., Campbell R. Harvey, and Shivaram Rajgopal (2005): “The
     Economic Implications of Corporate Financial Reporting”. Journal of Accounting
     and Economics 40, 3–73.

[27] Grossman, Sanford J. (1981): “The Role of Warranties and Private Disclosure
     About Product Quality.”Journal of Law and Economics 24, 461–483.

[28] Hermalin, Benjamin E. and Michael S. Weisbach (2012): “Information Disclosure
     and Corporate Governance”. Journal of Finance 67, 195–233.

[29] Hirshleifer, Jack (1971): “The Private and Social Value of Information and the
     Reward to Inventive Activity.”American Economic Review 61, 561–574.

[30] Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom (1991): “Multitask Principal-Agent Analy-
     ses: Incentive Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design”Journal of Law, Eco-
     nomics, and Organization 7, 24–52.

[31] Holmstrom, Bengt and Jean Tirole (1993): “Market Liquidity and Performance
     Monitoring”. Journal of Political Economy 101, 678–709.

[32] Jovanovic, Boyan (1982): “Truthful Disclosure of Information”. Bell Journal of
     Economics 13, 36–44.

[33] Kahn, Charles, and Andrew Winton (1998): “Ownership Structure, Speculation,
     and Shareholder Intervention”. Journal of Finance 53, 99–129.

[34] Kanodia, Chandra (1980): “E¤ects of Shareholder Information on Corporate De-
     cisions and Capital Market Equilibrium.”Econometrica 48, 923–953.

[35] Kanodia, Chandra and Deokheon Lee (1998): “Investment and Disclosure: The
     Disciplinary Role of Periodic Performance.” Journal of Acconting Research 36,
     33–55.

[36] Lambert, Richard, Christian Leuz, and Robert E. Verrecchia (2007): “Accounting
     Information, Disclosure, and the Cost of Capital”. Journal of Accounting Research
     45, 385–420.


                                         36
[37] Merton, Robert (1987): “A Simple Model of Capital Market Equilibrium with
     Incomplete Information”. Journal of Finance 42, 483–510.

[38] Milgrom, Paul (1981): “Good News and Bad News: Representation Theorems
     and Applications.”Bell Journal of Economics 12, 380–391.

[39] Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin (2002): “The Social Value of Public Infor-
     mation.”American Economic Review 92, 1521–1534.

[40] Narayanan, M. P. (1985): “Managerial Incentives for Short-term Results”. Journal
     of Finance 40, 1469–1484.

[41] Pagano, Marco and Paolo Volpin (2012): “Securitization, Transparency, and Liq-
     uidity.”Review of Financial Studies 25, 2417–2453.

[42] Petersen, Mitchell A. (2004): “Information: Hard and Soft.” Working Paper,
     Northwestern University.

[43] Paul, Jonathan (1992): “On the E¢ ciency of Stock-Based Compensation.”Review
     of Financial Studies 5, 471–502.

[44] Scharfstein, David and Jeremy Stein (1990): “Herd Behavior and Investment”.
     American Economic Review 80, 465–479.

[45] Stein, Jeremy C. (1988): “Takeover Threats and Managerial Myopia”. Journal of
     Political Economy 46, 61–80.

[46] Stein, Jeremy C. (1989): “E¢ cient Capital Markets, Ine¢ cient Firms: A Model
     of Myopic Corporate Behavior”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 655–669.

[47] Stein, Jeremy C. (2002): “Information Production and Capital Allocation: De-
     centralized versus Hierarchical Firms.”Journal of Finance 57, 1891–1921.

[48] Verrecchia, Robert E. (1983): “Discretionary Disclosure”. Journal of Accounting
     and Economics 5, 365–380.

[49] Verrecchia, Robert E. (2001): “Essays on Disclosure”. Journal of Accounting and
     Economics 32, 97–180.




                                         37
A     Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1
   Fix any 2 [0; 1]. The quadratic                 ( ; ) has real roots if and only if the discrimi-
nant is non-negative, i.e.,
                                           2
                                   2           2          1                        1
                       z( )                          4                                         0:      (18)
                                       g2

The quadratic z ( ) is a strictly convex function of                       with two roots. Since and z (0) <
0, it has one positive root which is given by:
                                       "           s                                   #
                                   2                           2
                               g               2                                   2
                          Z        2
                                                       1+                                  :
                                                              g2

Since 2 [0; 1], for z ( )          0 (i.e., (18) to hold), must be weakly larger than the
positive root Z. Thus,           Z is necessary and su¢ cient for to have real roots.
                        1
   Since (0; ) =          > 0 and 0 (0; ) < 0, may have up to two positive roots. One
root, r, is such that 0 (r; ) < 0. The second root, r0 , is such that 0 (r0 ; ) 0. This
second root, r0 , lies in [0; 1] if and only if 0 (1; ) 0, i.e.,:

                                                        2g
                                                                       :                               (19)
                                                      (2g +        )

However, further algebra shows that

                                                            2g
                                X>Z>                                           :                       (20)
                                                          (2g +            )

Thus, if roots exist (     Z), (19) is violated and so the second root r0 cannot lie in
[0; 1]. Therefore, the quadratic form of ( ; ) implies that there is at most one interior
solution to the equation ( ; ) = 0 for any 2 [0; 1].
     First, consider      X. Then (1; )        0 by de…nition of X. Suppose there is
r0 2 (0; 1) such that (r0 ; ) = 0. The quadratic form of ( ; ) and (0; ) > 0
implies that 0 (1; ) > 0, which contradicts equation (20). Therefore, when            X,
   ( ; ) 0 (with equality only when = 1 and = X). Thus, the manager always
wants to increase the investment level, and the unique equilibrium investment level is
    = 1.
     Second, consider > X, in which case (1; ) < 0. Then, when the market maker


                                                     38
conjectures b = 1, the manager has an incentive to deviate to a lower investment
level. As a result, = 1 cannot be an equilibrium. Since (0; ) > 0 and ( ; ) is
continuous in , ( ; ) = 0 has a solution r 2 [0; 1]. As argued previously, we must
have 0 (r; ) < 0.
    We now prove that r ( ) is strictly decreasing and strictly concave. Recall that

                                                  1                       2                        1
                             ( ; )=                                                           +        ;
                                                                                          g

and so we can calculate

                             @                        1
                                      =2                                      r               <0
                             @   r                                                        g
                             @
                                      =                   r2 +            r        < 0:
                             @   r                                    g

Thus, the Implicit Function Theorem yields:

                                         dr                @ =@
                                            =                                     < 0;
                                         d                 @ =@

i.e., r ( ) is strictly decreasing.
     To prove strict concavity, note that

       @ 2r      1                @2 @   @2                                   @           @       @2       @    @2
            =                          +                                              +                      +       :
       @  2
              (@ =@ )2           @ @ @   @                         2          @           @       @    2   @   @ @

                                         dr               @ =@
Since @ 2 =@   2
                   = 0, plugging in      d
                                                  =       @ =@
                                                                       yields:

                   d2 r
                         >0
                   d 2
                        @2   @ =@                          @2
                   ,       2
                                                      2                >0
                        @    @ =@                         @ @

                         1                            r2 +        g
                                                                      r
                    ,                         1
                                                                                      + 2r +                > 0:
                                     2                        r                   g
                                                                                                       g

                                                          1
There are two cases to consider. First, if                                        0, the above inequality automatically




                                                              39
                    1
holds. Second, if                < 0, we have


         1                          r2 +       g
                                                   r
                            1
                                                           + 2r +                       >0
                        2                  r           g
                                                                               g
               1                                                   1
       ,                            r2 +           r + 2                               r              2r +       <0
                                               g                                              g              g
                                                                                                      2
              1                 2          1
       ,3                       r +                            r           2           r                  < 0:
                                                           g                       g              g

The last equation holds because all terms on the left-hand side are negative. Therefore,
r( ) is strictly convex.
    Now assume X < 1, and …x > X. We wish to show that r ( ) is increasing in
g, and decreasing in !, , , and . Since > X implies 0 (r; ) < 0, the Implicit
Function Theorem gives us that the signs of partial derivatives @r=@g, @r=@!, @r=@ ,
@r=@ , and @r=@ are the same as those of @ =@g, @ =@!, @ =@ , @ =@ , and
@ =@ , respectively. By taking partial derivatives of (evaluated at r ( )), we have

                                       @
                                          =                r > 0;
                                       @g               g2
                                       @               r2 + 1
                                          =                   < 0;
                                       @!                !2
                                       @
                                          =                 r2 +               r       < 0;
                                       @                                   g
                                       @               1       ! 1
                                          =                            2
                                                                           < 0:
                                       @                   !

Therefore,
                                @r      @r      @r          @r
                                   > 0;    < 0;    < 0; and    < 0:
                                @g      @!      @           @
    Finally, analyzing equation (5) easily shows that X is increasing in g, and decreasing
in !, , , and .

    Proof of Proposition 3
    When choosing the disclosure policy, the manager compares the payo¤s from = 1
(in which case = r (1)) and = X (in which case = 1). Thus, the equilibrium is
( = r (1) ; = 1) if (r (1) ; 1) > (1; X), and ( = 1; = X) otherwise.




                                                               40
   The manager chooses (               = 1;         = X) if                (1; X)           (r; 1) > 0, i.e.,

             1     1         1 1 !   1 !    11 !                                                1                ( )
   (1   r)                         +      +      r                                                   r               > 0;
             2     4         4  !     ! 4   4 !                                                 4               4g

where we write r rather than r (1) to economize on notation. Here, r can be solved
from (r; 1) = 0, and 0 (r; 1) < 0. Since is not a function of , the above inequality
is equivalent to

                                       1        +g         1         ! 1               1
                   1    r>                                                                  1 +r         :
                                       2        g                  !   2

   The term multiplied by              on the right-hand side is

                         1      +g 1 ! 1 1
                                                  1 +r
                         2      g      !    2
                         1      +g       +g      1 1
                       >                               1 +r
                         2      g        g    +1 2
                              +g
                       =              [1 r]
                              g    +1
                       >0:

The …rst inequality is due to the condition X < 1. As a result,

                             e=                        1           r
                                                           h                               i > 0:
                                   1       +g       1 !        1       1
                                   2       g         !         2
                                                                               1 +r

Since the denominator of e is strictly greater than 1 !! X1 (1 r), we have e <                                         !
                                                                                                                      1 !
                                                                                                                          X.
Thus, the manager strictly prefers ( = 1; = X) if and only if < e.
   When X < 1, to derive the comparative statics of ~, we …rst de…ne

                                                1     +g                   1       !       11
                 ( ) = (1     r)                                                                1 +r         :
                                                2     g                        !           2

It is clear that  e = 0 and 0 e < 0. Thus, the signs of @ e=@g, @ e=@ , @ e=@ ,
and @ e=@! are the same as those of @ =@g, @ =@ , @ =@ , and @ =@! (evaluated at
e).




                                                           41
   First, we show that @ =@g > 0, so @ e=@g > 0.

                                               1 !                         @r 1 e
                                @ =@g = e                           1        +      >0
                                                !                          @g 2 g 2
                                    h        i
                                1 !    1                            +g
                                 !    2
                                         + 12 r 12                  g
                                                                       r         1
                         ,                        1 !
                                                                             +     (1    r) > 0
                                        g
                                              2    !
                                                                    r            2
                         , (r           1)2 > 0:

The last inequality is automatic, because r < 1 when X < 1.
  Second, we also show @ =@ < 0, so @ e=@ < 0.

                @ =@ < 0

             ,      e1          !
                                        1
                                             @r   1e +g
                                                         <0
                            !                @    2   g
                            1       !             1 !1
             ,                                 r+           +r
                                !                   !     g
                                             1 !         1 !11
                                                      r+                                           +1             < 0:
                                              !           !    r                              g

The …nal inequality is true because all of the following inequalities hold:

                1       !                    1!11      1 !                                                1       !1
                                        r+        >                                           r+                       ;
                    !                       !   r       !                                                     !
                1       !                  1 !11                                         0
                                        r+        > 0 (because                               (r; 1) < 0), and
                    !                       !   r
                                                       +1>              + r:
                                                   g                g

   Then, we show @ =@ < 0, so @ e=@ < 0.

                            @ =@ =                e1       !
                                                                1
                                                                         @r        e1        ! 1
                                                                                                      :
                                                       !                 @              2!        2


Hence,

                                            @ =@ < 0
                                                  1       !
                                    ,                                   (1       r)2 < 0:
                                                      !


                                                               42
   Finally, we show that @ =@! depends on !, so the sign of @ e=@! depends on !.

                @ =@! =      e1       !
                                               1
                                                       @r      e1 1        1
                                                                               1 +r :
                                  !                    @!       !2 2

When ! is small, so that X is close to 1, we have e 1 !! 1 ! 0 and r ! 1. Thus,
@ =@! < 0. When ! ! 1, r ! 0 (from equation (4)). Then,

                          @ =@! > 0
                            1 !    1           1           1   +g
                             !    2
                                          +    2
                                                       +   2   g           1
                       ,                                            r2 +
                                      g
                                               2 1 !! r
                                                           1   1
                                          (1       r)               1 + r > 0:
                                                           2
                                   1 g             1
The left-hand side converges to   2
                                               +   2
                                                       > 0.

    Proof of Proposition 4
    We start with part (i), the global comparative statics with respect to g; the e¤ect
of    in part (ii) is exactly the opposite since   and g appear together as the ratio
  +g
  g
     in both X and ~. From Proposition 3, ~ = 0 when g = 0, and then e is strictly
increasing in g for X < 1. Since X is also strictly increasing in g, there are two cases
to consider. The …rst is 1 1 1+      1, in which case (8) is violated for any g and so
we always have X < 1. If > lim ~, then we always have > ~ for any g, and so
                                      g!1
the partial investment equilibrium ( = r (1) ,       = 1) is always implemented. As g
increases, the investment level r (1) rises, while the level of disclosure remains …xed
at 1. If    2    0; lim ~    then when g is small,                    > ~, and so the equilibrium is
                   g!1
( = r (1) ,         = 1). As g increases, the equilibrium remains ( = r (1) ,       = 1) but
the investment level r (1) is increasing. When g hits the point at which = , the ~
equilibrium jumps to ( = 1,            = X), so investment rises and disclosure falls. As g
continues to increase,        is constant at 1, while   increases but remains strictly below
1: since X < 1, we can never have full disclosure alongside full investment.
      The second case is 1 1 1+ > 1. In this case, there exists a threshold g 0 such that,
when g        g 0 , (8) is satis…ed and we have X        1. Note that X = 1 , ~ = .
If         , then we always have > ~ and full disclosure. When g < g 0 , the equi-
librium is ( = r (1) ,          = 1). As g rises,     = r (1) rises. When g crosses above
g 0 , we now have full investment as well as full disclosure: the equilibrium becomes


                                                        43
( = 1,       = 1). If 2 (0; ), then for low g, we have the partial investment equi-
librium ( = r (1) ,      = 1). As g rises,        remains constant at 1 and the partial
investment level r (1) rises, until ~ crosses above and we move to the full partial
disclosure equilibrium ( = 1,         = X). Note this crossing point for g is below g 0 ,
because < . As g continues to increase,             is constant at 1 and  rises. When g
                0                                                  1 1 1+
crosses above g , we have X 1 so         rises to 1. Unlike in the        1 case, we can
have full disclosure alongside full investment.

    Proof of Proposition 5
    We start with part (i). When 1 1+ g+g        1, (8) is satis…ed for all . Thus, we
always have X 1, which yields the equilibrium ( = 1;            = 1). When 1 1+ g+g <
1, there are several cases to consider. If      , then       ~ always and so we always
have the partial investment equilibrium. If       ~ ( = 1), then        ~ always and so
we always have the partial disclosure equilibrium. When 2         ; ~ ( = 1) , for small
 , we have X       1, so the equilibrium is ( = 1; = 1). When rises so that X
crosses below 1, then ~ crosses above and so we have < ~, which yields the partial
disclosure equilibrium. After reaches a threshold, then ~ falls below and so we
move to the partial investment equilibrium.
    The proof of part (ii) is very similar, except that the cases of 1 1+ g+g 7 1 are
replaced by 1 2 g+g 7 1, and ~ ( = 1) is replaced by ~ ( = 1).

   Proof of Proposition 6
   When ! is su¢ ciently small that X        1, the equilibrium is ( = 1;      = 1).
When ! is su¢ ciently large, X < 1. The remainder of this proof will focus on which
equilibrium is chosen when X < 1.
   Proposition 3 shows that when ! is small so that X is close to 1 (while remaining
below 1), ~ is decreasing in !. When ! is large, ~ is increasing in !. If denotes the
                                                       n                    o
           ~
minimum over all ! such that X 1, then < min             ~           ~
                                                           (X = 1) ; (X = 0) .
    For part (a), when         , then      ~. Thus, when X < 1, we always have the
partial disclosure equilibrium of n
                                  ( = 1; = X).           o
    For part (b), when       max ~ (X = 1) ; ~ (X = 0) ,         ~. Thus, when X < 1,
we always have the partial investment
                                 n      equilibrium of (o = r (1) ; = 1).
    For part (c), when > min       ~ (X = 1) ; ~ (X = 0) , then when ! rises su¢ ciently
for X to cross below 1, > ~ and so we have the partial investment equilibrium of
( = r (1) ; = 1). If we also have ~ (X = 1) > > ~ (X = 0), then once ! crosses
a second threshold, then ~ crosses below and so we move to the partial disclosure

                                           44
equilibrium of ( = 1;      = X).
   For part (d), when      2    ; minf ~(X = 1); ~(X = 0)g , then when ! rises suf-
…ciently for X to cross below 1, then < ~ and so we have the partial disclosure
equilibrium of ( = 1,     = X). Since ~ is decreasing in ! for low !, When ! crosses
a second threshold, then ~ crosses below and so we move to the partial disclosure
equilibrium. Since ~ is increasing in ! for high !, when ! crosses a third threshold,
then ~ crosses back above and so we move to the partial investment equilibrium.




                                         45
