                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             LIMITED MANAGERIAL ATTENTION AND CORPORATE AGING

                                          Claudio Loderer
                                            René Stulz
                                           Urs Waelchli

                                        Working Paper 19428
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19428


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2013




Financial support from the Swiss Finance Institute to Loderer and Waelchli is gratefully acknowledged.
We thank Bryan Baugh for research assistance. This paper incorporates earlier results contained in
Loderer and Waelchli (2010). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Claudio Loderer, René Stulz, and Urs Waelchli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Limited Managerial Attention and Corporate Aging
Claudio Loderer, René Stulz, and Urs Waelchli
NBER Working Paper No. 19428
September 2013
JEL No. G30,L20

                                              ABSTRACT

As firms have more assets in place, more of management’s limited attention is focused on managing
assets in place rather than developing new growth options. Consequently, as firms grow older, they
have fewer growth options and a lower ability to generate new growth options. This simple theory
predicts that Tobin’s q falls with age. Further, competition in the product market is expected to slow
down the decrease in Tobin’s q because it forces firms to look for alternative sources of rents. Similarly,
greater competition in the labor market reduces the decrease in Tobin’s q with age because old firms
are in a better position to hire employees that can help with innovation. In contrast, competition in
the market for corporate control should accelerate the decline because it forces management to focus
more on managing assets in place whose performance is more directly observable than on developing
growth options where results may not be observable for some time. We find strong support for these
predictions in tests using exogenous variation in competition.


Claudio Loderer                                      Urs Waelchli
Universität Bern                                     Universität Bern
Engehaldenstrasse 4                                  Engehaldenstrasse 4
CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland                            CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland
claudio.loderer@ifm.unibe.ch                         urs.waelchli@ifm.unibe.ch

René Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu
    Why is it that older firms are worth less? Existing theories emphasize the fact that firms use up

their growth opportunities and that their prospects become less uncertain (Pastor and Veronesi (2003)).

However, these theories do not explain why firms cannot keep acquiring new growth opportunities and

renew themselves. They also apply most forcefully to firms that went recently public. Yet, as we

show, firm valuations measured by Tobin’s q (estimated as the ratio of the market value of the firm’s

assets divided by their book value) fall by roughly 1% per year for firms that are older than five years

since the IPO. In this paper, we develop and test a simple theory that explains why firms become less

good at creating growth opportunities as they age and, therefore, helps us to better understand the

effect of age on firm investment policies and valuation.

    With our theory, management cannot devote as much attention to developing growth opportunities

as the firm ages. Management has a finite amount of time to devote to managing a firm. At the top of

the firm, the CEO’s time is a binding constraint on his ability to pay attention and to manage different

areas within the firm he leads. Before a firm goes public, management dedicates much of its time to

developing growth options as the firm has few assets in place, and its ability to go public will

generally depend on its prospects rather than on its assets in place. Firms go public to monetize these

growth options and to raise funds to exercise them. Once a firm becomes public, management

optimally spends more time managing its assets in place as the firm exercises its growth options and

has to meet investors’ expectations. The greater focus on assets in place means that less attention is

devoted to developing new growth options. Therefore, as a firm ages, it has fewer growth options and

becomes poorer at developing such options.

    Any theory of Tobin’s q that endows the firm with growth options that it exercises optimally over

time concludes that Tobin’s q falls as these growth options are exercised. However, such a theory

cannot explain why firms do not replace these growth options. As assets in place increase, the firm has

to develop more valuable growth options just to stay in place in terms of its Tobin’s q. Hence, for the

firm to keep developing growth options that allow its Tobin’s q to stay constant, the CEO would have

to give more attention to growth options, which is not possible as assets in place increasingly require

her attention. As a result, a firm is very unlikely to ever replace the growth options that it had in its

youth. We find strong support for this prediction. More specifically, adjusting q for calendar-year and

                                                     1
industry effects, only 30% of the sample firms ever exceed the maximum q they reach during the first

four years after listing. These findings could, in principle, reflect an IPO effect. Jain and Kini (1994),

for example, find that operating performance deteriorates after the IPO. Moreover, Loughran and

Ritter (1995), among others, document that the stock of newly listed firms underperforms significantly

in the years after the IPO (see, however, Fama (1998)). Yet the same results obtain when we exclude

firms younger than 10 years, and when we measure age relative to the date of incorporation rather than

to that of listing. Hence, the evidence is distinct from a pure IPO effect.

    Competition in the market for corporate control means that management has to focus on managing

well assets in place since poor performance of assets in place is readily observable while the

performance of management in generating growth opportunities that have yet to manifest themselves

is much harder to assess. Therefore, we would expect firms to age more quickly, i.e., to have fewer

growth options, and hence a lower Tobin’s q, if there is more competition in the market for corporate

control. This prediction can be tested using exogenous changes in the degree of competition in the

market for corporate control. Using the state adoption of business combination laws that restrict

competition in the market for corporate control, we show in a difference-in-differences setting that

Tobin’s q falls more slowly with age for firms incorporated in states where such laws are put in place.

    Product market competition lowers the value of the firm’s assets in place. Escaping competition

and regaining rents is a major motivation for firms to focus on innovation. This “escape competition”

motive for innovation has been formalized in Aghion, Harris, Howitt, and Vickers’ (2001) endogenous

growth model, among others. It is also consistent with recent studies that find that competition spurs

growth (Asker, Farre-Mensa, and Ljungqvist (2013); Fogel, Morck, and Yeung (2008)) and innovation

(Bernstein (2012)). If product market competition makes the assets in place less valuable, we would

expect the CEO to spend more time on creating new growth opportunities for the firm’s core

competences and less time on managing assets in place. Therefore, older firms in a competitive

industry should be relatively better at creating new growth opportunities than their peers in non-

competitive industries. To test this prediction, we use the industry concentration index suggested by

Hoberg and Phillips (2011) to identify firms that operate in a more competitive environment.

Consistent with our prediction, we find that the age effect is lower for firms in competitive industries.

                                                      2
The result is not driven by the fact that firms in non-competitive industries start with higher q ratios

and therefore experience a sharper decline over time.

    One possible concern with this result is that the degree of competition could be endogenously

determined. Firms with abnormally high q ratios tend to attract competitors, particularly in industries

with low barriers to entry. This could reduce q ratios over time as well. To address this endogeneity

issue, we look at industries that experienced exogenous competitive shocks, namely large reductions in

import tariffs, during the sample period. Lower tariffs should intensify product market competition.

The data are from Frésard and Valta (2012). Tariff reductions should be exogenous to corporate

policies (see also Guadalupe and Wulf (2010)). Consistent with the notion that firms age less quickly

in a competitive environment, the age effect shrinks significantly after tariff reductions.

    Exogenous variation in labor markets provides another way to test the implications of our theory.

Young firms are firms with growth options. They face the risk that employees will defect and take

knowledge with them that is relevant to these growth options. In contrast, old firms that have focused

on assets in place will lack employees that could help them innovate. We would therefore expect laws

that restrict employee mobility to be valuable for young firms but hurt old firms. Hence, we would

expect firms to age more quickly in states where non-competition agreements are more strongly

enforced. We find that this is the case.

    It is much easier to evaluate whether management is doing well at managing assets in place than at

developing new growth options. Firms disclose data that enable investors to compute a wide range of

metrics to assess management’s performance at managing assets in place. Most simply, investors can

estimate the profitability of these assets. Management’s efforts at developing new growth options

typically involve R&D investments, which are notoriously difficult to evaluate from outside the firm

(Edmans, Heinle, and Huang (2013)). Further, it is often the case that management cannot disclose the

progress made through these investments because doing so it would provide valuable proprietary

information to competitors (Verrecchia (1983)). Financial analysts, shareholders, and media

monitoring the firm will find it more difficult to assess management’s performance in generating

growth options than in assessing its performance managing assets in place. Hence, outside monitoring

will focus management’s attention more on assets in place than on generating growth options (see also

                                                      3
Edmans, Heinle, and Huang (2013)). Management will also be more focused on preventing bad

surprises from assets in place, which will lead it to develop mechanisms within the firm that control

the performance of assets in place more tightly. In particular, rules are adopted to economize on

managerial attention. While such mechanisms are helpful for the performance of assets in place, they

make innovation within the firm more difficult as they reduce the discretion of employees within the

firm.

    Our arguments are related to those advanced by Holmstrom (1989). When firms go public to fund

the exercise of growth options, they become larger, more complex organizations. In larger firms,

according to Holmstrom, it is difficult to provide incentives for such different activities as

production/marketing and innovation. To reap the financial rewards from their growth opportunities,

listed firms therefore rationally rely more on rigid rules as a substitute for incentives. This

compromises the willingness to experiment and innovate, and screens out innovative personalities. In

addition, listed firms are more dependent on the capital markets and are therefore more concerned

about their reputation. Concern about funding, according to Holmstrom, has a tendency to make larger

firms myopic in their behavior and therefore less concerned about innovation. If they do invest, one

could argue, insiders have an incentive to pursue incremental innovation projects because they have a

higher probability of early success and are more easily understood by investors (Ferreira, Manso, and

Silva (2012)). Incremental projects are tied to the lifecycle of the firm’s products and therefore

represent sources of growth opportunities that are limited in time.

    At older firms, assets in place receive more attention than at younger firms. We therefore expect

assets in place to be well-managed at such firms. The older firm becomes much more focused on being

the best at what it does instead of being focused on developing new activities. However, this focus

means that the firm will be less likely to innovate successfully. As its ability to innovate falls, it

becomes less advantageous for the firm to try to innovate. Hence, we expect older firms to invest less

in R&D and to become less likely to try to develop new businesses. These older firms will

increasingly pay out their excess cash flows because they lack positive net present value projects. Our

evidence supports these predictions. We find that the firms that become older do not become less

efficient or more poorly managed. However, they spend less on R&D, invest less in capital

                                                     4
expenditures, and pay out more. Well-known specific older firms in our sample seem to be firms that

fit our theory. For instance, in 2009, these firms include Alcoa, Coca Cola, Dow Chemical, General

Dynamics, Hershey, McDonald’s, Pepsi, and Procter & Gamble. These firms are older and focused,

and have comparatively lower growth opportunities.

    There are several potential alternative explanations for the fact that old firms have lower Tobin’s q

ratios. The first one is that young firms are credit constrained. For a credit constrained firm, marginal q

will be high. As the firm becomes less credit constrained, its marginal q falls. If marginal q is a

declining function of the level of total past capital expenditures, we expect average q to exceed

marginal q and to also decline. Hence, old firms that are not constrained will have a lower Tobin’s q.

To minimize the importance of this problem, most of our empirical work considers only firms that are

at least five-years old. More importantly, we show that credit constraints cannot explain why firms that

pay out cash to their shareholders (dividends or share buybacks) experience the same decline in

Tobin’s q ratios over time as other firms.

    Another possible explanation is provided by agency theory. In a narrow sense, the explanation is

that management is more likely to be entrenched in older firms so that for the same assets shareholders

expect lower cash flows for older firms than for newer firms. With this explanation, management

consumes more private benefits in older firms. Even though executive stock ownership is lower in

older firms, and boards are larger, we find little evidence to support this implication. Management

does not have more abnormal compensation in older firms. Further, older firms have greater payouts

on average. Finally, the agency explanation of the decline in Tobin’s q ratios over time cannot explain

why firms that face less competition in the market for corporate control see their q ratios fall less

quickly.

    A broader version of the agency explanation is that entrenchment grows at many levels of the

corporation and is not attached to individuals but to business units of the corporation. With this view,

business units protect their turf, so that they prevent units with valuable growth opportunities from

taking advantage of them (e.g., Scharfstein and Stein (2000); Rajan, Servaes, and Zingales (2000)). In

other words, internal capital markets become less efficient as firms become older. This broader agency

theory is not completely distinct from our theory of managerial attention. As the firm becomes more

                                                      5
established, managers have to cater more to established units within the firm. However, this theory is

hard to reconcile with our evidence that firms do not generally become less efficient in their core

activities. Rather, this theory explains more why firms fail in renewing themselves through

acquisitions because existing units may make it difficult to integrate the acquired unit.

    Lastly, one might argue that lifecycle theories of the firm make predictions similar to some of

those we test (Fama and French (2001); Grullon, Michaely, and Swaminathan (2002); DeAngelo,

DeAngelo, and Stulz (2006)). In particular, these theories also predict that older firms pay out more.

However, the critical difference between our paper and papers inspired by these theories is that we

develop a specific mechanism that leads older firms to differ from young ones and test this specific

mechanism. The key tests of our mechanism exploit exogenous variation in competition. These tests

have no counterpart in the literature inspired by lifecycle theories.

    The paper proceeds as follows. In the first section, we expand the presentation of our theory and

derive more precisely its testable hypotheses. In Section II, we discuss the data. In Section III, we

show that Tobin’s q falls with age across industries, and firms are unlikely to ever again achieve the

Tobin’s q of their youth. We investigate the role of competition in the decrease in Tobin’s q in Section

IV. In Section V, we show that old firms are more efficient, invest less, pay out more, and are more

focused. In Section VI, we investigate whether the predictions of alternative theories of aging are

supported by the evidence. We conclude in Section VII.



I. Theoretical considerations

    In this section, we present in greater detail our theory of managerial attention and show how it

leads to the hypotheses we test in the paper. We take the view that the essence of the CEO’s job is to

make choices for the firm. If he makes the right choices, the firm is more likely to do well. Otherwise,

it is more likely to struggle.

    To make our ideas more concrete, we consider the simple case of a CEO who has to allocate his

time between two activities. Once he has allocated his time, these activities generate a payoff. The

payoff of an activity is positive if the CEO makes the right decisions in that activity and zero

otherwise. To make decisions, the CEO has to become informed about their consequences. The more

                                                       6
time he allocates to an activity, the more likely she is to make the right decisions. The CEO lives for

only one period. Compensation contracts that make the CEO’s compensation dependent on future

periods are assumed not to be possible.

    The activities are a and b. If she makes the right choices, the firm has a payoff of A with activity a

and of B with activity b. If the CEO makes the wrong choices in an activity, the payoff of the activity

is zero. There is no way for the CEO to know for sure whether she is making the right decisions, but

the probability of making the right decisions in an activity is an increasing concave function of the

time spent on the activity. Consequently, if the time spent is e, the probability of making the right

decisions in activity a is p(e), with p'(e) > 0 and p''(e) < 0. The probability of making the right

decisions with activity b is q(e). This probability is also an increasing concave function of the time

allocated to that activity. We assume that the CEO allocates all her time, so that our model is not a

model about how hard the CEO works. The CEO has total time of L, so that she allocates L – e to

activity b. The time allocation of the CEO is not observable, so that pay cannot be a function of e.

    We assume that the CEO is risk neutral and that his utility is equal to her expected income. For

simplicity, we assume that the CEO’s compensation is simply a fraction s of the firm’s payoff. With

these assumptions, the expected utility of the CEO is:

                                        U = s*[p(e)*A + q(L – e)*B]

Solving for the CEO’s allocation of her time, the first-order condition of time allocation is:

                                          p’(e)*A – q’(L–e)*B = 0

This optimality condition can be represented in the following figure. The vertical axis of the figure is

the marginal utility of the CEO’s effort. The intersection of the marginal utility schedules from

investing time in activity A and B yields the optimal allocation of time e* and (L – e*), respectively.

If the two activities are symmetric, the CEO splits her time in half between the two activities.

Everything else equal, the amount of time spent on an activity increases with the payoff of the activity.

Moreover, if the CEO’s time becomes more productive in an activity, say b, in that spending more

time in b increases the probability of a payoff more than if she spends that time in activity a, the CEO

allocates more time to activity b.



                                                      7
    Suppose now that activity a is working on growth options and activity b is working on assets in

place. Growth options are operations that require new future investments. Their value is not reflected

in the value of assets in place. If the firm goes public to finance the exercise of its growth options, we

expect A to decline and B to increase. Hence, as the firm goes public, the CEO of the public firm

spends more time on activity B than the CEO of the private firm. However, this means that the firm

will dedicate less time to developing growth opportunities than it did when it was private. Note that

this impact of listing is not driven by the disclosure requirements and the increased investment

relations activities of public firms, nor is it caused by increased size per se. What causes the change in

CEO attention is the higher marginal benefit from the time dedicated to assets in place. This effect is

conceivably compounded by incentives for short-termist behavior brought about by a capital market

that reacts quickly to good news (Ferreira, Manso, and Silva (2012)) and by evidence of managerial

myopia (Asker, Farre-Mensa, and Ljungqvist (2013)).

    As the CEO devotes less attention to developing growth opportunities, the firm will become less

successful at developing such growth opportunities, particularly in areas outside its core, and

employees focused on such activities will have less status in the firm. This endogenous “rigidity” is

compounded by a series of organizational measures, rules of conduct, and best practice the CEO

implements to take full advantage of assets in place. This evolution will also make the firm a less

attractive place of employment for individuals who work on developing growth opportunities, which

will decrease the payoff, A, of activity a. As A falls, the CEO spends even less time on activity a.
                                                      8
    With this simple model, the firm becomes less successful at developing growth opportunities after

it becomes public. Growth opportunities become a smaller part of its valuation and its Tobin’s q falls.

Over time, as the payoffs of growth options fall, the firm will increasingly attract CEOs who are good

at managing assets in place rather than creating growth options. It follows that the firm will become

increasingly efficient in its management of assets in place but innovation will play less of a role for the

firm both because it will be optimal for its CEO to focus more assets in place and because it will not

attract CEOs focused on innovation.

    A number of factors can accelerate or slow down the phenomenon we describe. To start with,

consider the impact of competition in the market for the goods the firm produces. With greater

competition, the value of B falls. In reaction, the CEO will optimally reallocate her attention and

dedicate more time to the development of growth opportunities. It follows that an increase in the

competition in the market for the goods the firm produces will slow down the decrease of Tobin’s q

with age as the firm will develop more growth opportunities.

    Competition in the market for corporate control can also affect how the CEO allocates her

attention. Increased competition would seem to force the CEO to allocate her time to activities that

make a successful takeover less likely. Poor performance with assets in place is much easier to assess

than poor performance in generating growth opportunities. It is widely accepted that growth options

involve greater information asymmetries than assets in place. Further, there are costs for the firm to

disclose the current state of its efforts at generating growth opportunities. For instance, through early

disclosure, it might make it easier for other firms to imitate its efforts. Hence, it will be much easier

for the CEO to demonstrate ability by showing good performance for assets in place than through

efforts to create growth opportunities. Pressure from the market for corporate control will therefore

make it optimal for the CEO to devote more attention to assets in place than to creating growth

opportunities. Hence, such pressure will accelerate the decrease of Tobin’s q as the firm ages.

    Yet another factor that should affect the allocation of the CEO’s time is labor market competition.

Young firms have the employees that enabled them to acquire growth opportunities that justified going

public. Over time, however, these employees will leave or will become less productive. If the firm is

limited in its ability to hire employees that generate growth opportunities but not employees that

                                                      9
exploit assets in place, the CEO will have fewer incentives to devote attention to that activity, so that a

firm will see its innovative activities fall more as it ages. Laws that limit labor market competition will

make it harder to hire employees with the potential to have a large impact on a firm’s growth

opportunities because the current employer of such employees will better be able to prevent them from

working for another firm. It seems reasonable to assume that employees that help the CEO exploit

assets in place will generally be easier to hire than employees who generate growth opportunities.

Hence, one would expect restrictions on labor market competition to accelerate the fall of Tobin’s q as

the firm ages.



II. Data

A. Sample Description

    The sample consists of all listed firms with data on CRSP, COMPUSTAT, and COMPUSTAT

Industry Segment between 1978 and 2009. We exclude utilities as well as firms with business

segments in the financial sector (SIC 6000–6999). Similarly, we ignore firms with: (a) negative total

assets or sales; (b) missing data to compute the market capitalization of equity, or with negative

capitalization; (c) missing data on COMPUSTAT Segments; (d) cumulative sales on the

COMPUSTAT Segment tapes which deviate by more than 1% from the total sales reported on the

COMPUSTAT tapes. Since very young firms might drive the results (Fama and French (2004)), we

generally omit all firms under five. This omission, however, does not change our conclusions. The

final sample consists of 10,219 firms and 83,790 firm-years.

    We start with 2,324 firms in 1978 and end with 1,738 firms in 2009. Turnover is remarkably high:

7,934 firms enter and 6,438 firms leave between 1978 and 2009. Some of the firms that drop from the

exchanges in going-private transactions may list again years later, for example in a reverse LBO. Cao

and Lerner (2009) identify 526 such transactions between 1981 and 2003. Firms that relist are

typically treated as separate firms in the literature, but this practice could bias our results. We use

Compustat’s unique identifier (gvkey) to track companies over time in spite of name or ticker changes.




                                                      10
B. Firm Age

    We follow Fama and French (2001) and Pastor and Veronesi (2003) and assume that firms are

“born” in the year of their first appearance on the CRSP tapes. Consequently, firm age is the number

of years (plus one) elapsed since the year of the company’s IPO. 1 Most studies that look at firm age

use the same definition. We refer to this variable as the firm’s listing age. Shumway (2001) argues that

listing age is the economically most meaningful measure of firm age, since listing is a defining

moment in a company’s life – it affects ownership and capital structure, multiplies growth

opportunities, increases media exposure, and demands different corporate governance structures

(Loderer and Waelchli (2010)). Since CRSP goes back to 1925, the oldest a firm can be at the

beginning of our sample period in 1976 is 51 years, compared with 84 years at its end, in 2009.

Alternatively, we also compute the number of years (plus one) elapsed since the year of incorporation

and denote this variable as the firm’s incorporation age. The information is hand-collected from

Mergent Webreports as well as from Jay Ritter’s website. Throughout the investigation, Age refers to

a company’s listing age and Ageinc indicates the firm’s incorporation age.

    On average, listing age is 17 years; the median is 13 (Table I). The distribution of firm age

remains fairly stable over the sample period. Incorporation age has an average value of 34 and a

median value of 25.



C. Profitability Measures and Control Variables

    Table I reports descriptive statistics for all the variables in the analysis. To reduce the influence of

outliers, we winsorize all variables at the 1st and the 99th percentile of their pooled distribution. The

results, however, do not depend on this winsorization. Ownership structure and corporate-governance

data are available for only a limited subsample of firms. All definitions are in the Appendix. To assess

financial constraints (KZ index), we follow Lamont, Polk, and Saá-Requejo (2001), among others, and

estimate the Kaplan and Zingales (1997) index. The results do not change when we replace that index


1
      More precisely, we approximate a firm’s year of birth with the earliest of: (a) the year in which the firm
      appears on CRSP; (b) the year in which the firm is included in COMPUSTAT; and (c) the year for which
      we find a link between CRSP and COMPUSTAT (based on COMPUSTAT data item LINKDT). If, for
      example, a firm enters CRSP or COMPUSTAT in 1996, its age is one year at the end of 1996 (1+1996-
      1996) and five years at the end of 2000 (1+2000-1996).
                                                        11
with alternative measures, such as a binary variable that identifies dividend payers. Except for the

correlation between listing and incorporation age, which equals 0.56, most pairwise correlation

coefficients between regressors are fairly low (not tabulated), so that there is no concern about

collinearity.



III. Firm Age and Growth Opportunities

    The managerial attention hypothesis predicts that, since managers of listed firms have to dedicate

a significant amount of their time to current operations and assets in place to generate the earnings that

investors expect, their ability to innovate and create new growth opportunities is limited. Since, at the

same time, the growth opportunities available at the time of listing will be used up over time, the stock

of growth opportunities is expected to decrease as the firm ages. We test this prediction in this section.

Pastor and Veronesi (2003) show that the market-to-book ratio of a firm falls with age and falls more

rapidly early on. Our theory applies more directly to Tobin’s q and we are more concerned about firms

that have been public for a number of years. Our sample is larger than theirs because we do not have to

require a positive book value of equity as they do.



A. Decline in Tobin’s q Ratios over Time

    Figure 1 shows the relation between the Tobin’s q ratio and company age implied by estimating

local polynomial regressions of the Tobin’s q ratio on firm age using an Epanechnikov kernel function

with a “rule-of-thumb” bandwidth estimator and local-mean smoothing. The advantage of this

approach is that we do not impose a functional form for how Tobin’s q changes with a firm’s age.

Figures (a) and (b) show the unconditional relation. Consistent with the hypothesis, the relation is

negative regardless of whether we measure company age from the date of listing or from that of

incorporation. We explore next whether the relation between Tobin’s q and age holds if we control for

firm characteristics. We first estimate an OLS regression with industry-year fixed-effects of Tobin’s q

on Capex, R&D, Focus, KZ-index, Leverage, Size, Volatility, and ROA. We define industries at the

three-digit SIC level. Then, we regress these residuals on incorporation age and listing age,

respectively. The resulting conditional relation between company age and Tobin’s q is negative as

                                                      12
well, no matter how we measure company age. Figures (c) and (d) show results when we control for

firm characteristics.

    For a formal test of the relation between age and Tobin’s q, we estimate OLS panel regressions

with industry-year fixed-effects and firm-clustered standard errors. 2 This approach enables us to

distinguish between cohort and age effects, even though the results are qualitatively the same when we

run separate cross-sectional regressions for each year as in Pastor and Veronesi (2003) (not

tabulated). 3

    The results are reported in Panel A of Table II. Regressions 1 and 2 relate to the full sample.

Consistent with the hypothesis, the coefficient of the natural logarithm of listing age is negative and

significant. So is the coefficient of the binary variable Old dummy, which identifies firms older than

the sample median in any given year. The same results obtain when we ignore firms younger than 5

years (regressions 3 and 4). Since young firms dominate the full sample, the following analysis omits,

as we already mentioned, firms younger than 5 years in terms of listing age—the exceptions will be

mentioned explicitly.

    Note that, since we are controlling for firm size, our findings do not reflect declining returns to

scale. Older firms do not have lower q ratios because they are larger. The age coefficient remains

negative and significant, and essentially unchanged, when we estimate separate regressions for large

and small firms (not tabulated). 4

    If listing demands increased attention to assets in place over time, the age effect we document

should be distinct from a possible age effect the company might have experienced before listing. To

test this proposition, we extend regression 3 with a variable that measures incorporation age at the time

of listing (ln(Ageinc at listing)). Previous work shows that incorporation age at listing varies

substantially over time (Jovanovic and Rousseau (2001); Fink et al. (2010)). Regression 5 shows the



2
       We do not add firm fixed-effects to our standard regression because Age would be collinear with year
       fixed effects (Age grows by 1 each year). In untabulated robustness tests, we replace Age with Old
       dummy. In that regression, the coefficient of Old dummy remains negative and significant if we include
       firm fixed-effects.
3
       As a further control for cohort effects, we tried excluding all firms born before the start of the sample
       period in 1978. That exclusion does not affect the results either (not tabulated).
4
       In untabulated regressions, we also used alternative measures of size, including sales and the number of
       employees, as well as different functional forms for the relation between size and Tobin’s q. These
       choices do not affect the age effect we find.
                                                        13
results. ln(Ageinc at listing) is negative and significant, indicating that firms that list at a later stage of

their life cycle have fewer growth opportunities. More importantly, however, ln(Age) maintains its

negative and significant coefficient. We conclude that, consistent with our attention hypothesis, the

listing age effect is a phenomenon which differs from or is incremental to that associated with the

firm’s age prior to listing.

    The coefficients of the control variables are mostly in line with the extant literature across

regression specifications. Capital expenditures, R&D outlays, focus, and volatility are associated with

larger Tobin’s q ratios (the latter result is consistent, in particular, with Pastor and Veronesi (2003)).

Firm size, however, has a positive coefficient and financial frictions, as measured with the KZ-Index,

seem to be immaterial. We also find that ROA has a negative coefficient, possibly because a high

ROA increases the opportunity costs of looking for growth opportunities. Financial leverage has a

negative coefficient.

    Panel B uses the estimates of the regressions 1 (full sample) and 3 (subsample of firms older than

4) to assess the economic significance of the relation between age on Tobin’s q. Firms in the 25th

percentile of the full sample of listing age (year 4), for example, are predicted to have a q of 2.07,

compared with 1.82 if they are in the 75th percentile (year 17). Hence, a time lapse of 13 years brings

about a decline of 12 percent, or a steady annual decrease of almost 1 percent. Note that, if age is a

noisy measure of the limited managerial attention problem, these estimates will be affected by

attenuation bias.



B. Decline in Tobin’s q Ratios across Industries

    It is well-known that there is an industry lifecycle (Bernstein (2012)). A concern with our results is

that they might just reflect that lifecycle. A simple approach to separate the industry lifecycle from the

firm lifecycle is to estimate our regressions within industries. We use the 48 industries identified by

Fama and French (2001) to perform this analysis. We estimate separate regressions for each of the 48

industries for which there is a sufficient number of observations (Table III). The regression

specification is the same as that in column 3 of Table II, except that, since we work with industry-

specific subsamples, the only fixed effects we include are year-fixed effects. Standard errors are

                                                        14
clustered at the firm level. For simplicity, we report only the coefficient of ln(Age). We use that

coefficient to compute the impact on Tobin’s q of a change in listing age from the 25th to the 75th

percentile of the pooled distribution of age in the industry. This effect is measured relative to the

average q in the industry, and is shown for statistically significant age coefficients.

    The relation between age and Tobin’s q is negative and significant at least at the 5% level for 24

out of the 38 industries we report, and it is negative and significant at the 1% level in 22 out of these

38 cases. The marginal impact of age is similar across industries, and it goes from about 5% (Office

Supplies) to 17% (Printing and Publishing). We obtain very similar results when measuring age since

incorporation. Only two industries have a positive and significant coefficient: Candy and Soda, and

Textiles. Note, however, that there are only 44 candy and soda producers and 77 textile companies in

the sample.



C. Inability to Revert to the Initial Success

    The puzzling aspect of the relation between age and Tobin’s q is the fact that firms are unable to

renew their success, in spite of the fact that they can learn and that they can buy into new technologies

and markets. Table IV documents this phenomenon from a slightly different perspective. Panel A

performs an unconditional analysis of the 8,079 firms with the necessary number of observations by

comparing the maximum Tobin’s q ratios observed during the first four years after listing (denoted

with q*) with the maximum ratios observed thereafter. Consistent with the inability to renew growth

opportunities, these maximum ratios average 3.6 in younger firms compared with 3.0 in older firms.

The corresponding median values are 2.3 and 2.1, respectively. Both differences are statistically

significant with confidence at the 99% confidence level.

    Following a similar logic, Figure 2 asks how likely it is that a firm will be able to exceed q* as a

function of age. To filter out common effects, we measure q as the residual from a pooled OLS

regression of Tobin’s q on industry and year fixed-effects. The figure shows that very few firms

manage to exceed their q* after year four. At age 5, for example, only 12.2% of the sample firms have

a q larger than q*. This fraction more or less gradually declines to 8.3% at age 25. Moreover, we find

that only 30% of the firms ever beat their q* (not tabulated).

                                                       15
    Panel B of Table IV conducts an analysis of the ability to exceed q* with conditional logit

regressions and industry-year fixed-effects and robust standard errors. The binary dependent variable

equals 1 if the Tobin’s q of the firm in question increases beyond q* in any given year, and it equals 0

otherwise. We test whether the probability of that event, among firms that are below the maximum,

declines with age. The evidence is consistent with this prediction. The coefficient of our two measures

of age, ln(Age) and Old dummy, is negative and significant. Interestingly, there is no evidence that

research and development activities are able to slow down the decay in growth opportunities. The

coefficient of an interaction term between Old dummy and R&D is statistically zero.

    These findings could be affected by survivorship bias, although that would induce a gentler

decline in average q ratios and therefore go against our hypothesis. Most firms disappear because of

takeover (Baker and Kennedy (2002)), and firms with high growth opportunities are less likely to be

taken over (Loderer and Waelchli (2013)). Hence, the best firms tend to remain, which should raise

the observed Tobin’s q ratios above the level we would measure without the exclusion of the firms that

merged or were taken over.



IV. Managerial Attention, Competition, and the Corporate Aging

    The limited managerial attention hypothesis predicts that the relation between age and Tobin’s q

should be more negative when competition forces management to devote more attention to assets in

place and flatter when it makes it more advantageous for management to devote more attention to

generating growth opportunities. In particular, as discussed in Section II, greater competition in the

goods market increases the value to management from paying more attention to generating growth

opportunities, so that it makes the relation between age and Tobin’s q flatter. Similarly, management

has to pay more attention to assets in place when there is more competition in the market for corporate

control, so that the slope of the relation between Tobin’s q and age is more negative. Finally, if the

firm can more easily hire people who can generate growth opportunities, the expected gain to

management from paying attention to generating growth opportunities is higher, so that the relation

between age and Tobin’s q is less negative. We test these predictions in this section.



                                                     16
A. Product Market Competition

    Table V reports tests of the hypothesis that the relation between age and Tobin’s q is less negative

when product market competition is more intense.

    We first measure competition with the firm-specific concentration index suggested by Hoberg and

Phillips (2011). The data cover the years 1996 to 2008. During that period, we find matching

information for 33,891 firm-years. We identify firms in a competitive environment if their

concentration index is below the sample median concentration index in any given year (High

competition dummy). In regression 1 of Table V, we add High competition dummy (lagged by 1 year)

and an interaction term with ln(Age) to our standard regression. The evidence shows that the

coefficient of age is still negative and significant. Consistent with the managerial attention hypothesis,

the interaction term is positive and significant, indicating that Tobin’s q falls more slowly with age in

a more competitive environment.

    The problem is that Tobin’s q is higher for firms with more monopolistic rents (Salinger (1984)).

If so, if we assume that Tobin’s q ratios eventually converge towards one, the decline in Tobin’s q

could be more moderate in competitive environments simply because competitive environments have

lower q ratios to begin with. Consistent with this argument, the coefficient of High competition dummy

is negative and significant. To address this issue, we re-estimate the regressions with standardized

Tobin’s q as the dependent variable so that Tobin’s q is adjusted for rents earned by firms in the

subsample. Standardization means that we demean the q of a given firm by the q observed for its

subsample of firms (grouped into high vs. low competition in any given year) and divide by the

subsample standard deviation of q. We include the subsample’s average q as an additional control

variable. The results, however, do not change (regression 2).

    An alternative approach to control for endogeneity is to look for exogenous competitive shocks.

Guadalupe and Wulf (2010) and Frésard and Valta (2012), among others, argue that import tariff

changes constitute shocks in product market competition. Tariff reductions, in particular, should

increase competition. We can therefore use exogenous reductions in tariffs to test for whether the

relation between a firm’s Tobin’s q and its age depends on competition. We use the industry-specific

import tariff reductions identified by Frésard and Valta (2012). For the affected industries (at the SIC

                                                     17
4-digit level), we define a binary variable, Lower tariff dummy, that identifies industry-years after the

tariff reduction. We add this variable to the standard regression and interact it with firm age. The

results are shown in regression 3 of Table V. While stronger competition reduces the industry’s overall

level of growth opportunities, it slows down the age-related decay in Tobin’s q. The same results

obtain when we use standardized q ratios (grouped into pre vs. post tariff reduction cohorts in any

given calendar year) as the dependent variable (regression 4). The same result also obtains when we

use the binary measure of age, Old dummy, instead of ln(Age) in regression 4 (not tabulated).



B. Competition in the Market for Corporate Control

    As discussed in Section 2, we expect the relation between Tobin’s q and age to be more negative if

competition in the market for corporate control is stronger. We test this prediction using the

introduction of business combination laws as a source of exogenous variation in external corporate

control regimes.

    Business combination laws deter corporate control transactions by imposing a moratorium on

transactions, such as mergers, between a large shareholder and the firm incorporated in a particular

state as soon as the shareholder’s stake exceeds a given size. Delaware, for example, enacted these

statutes during the 1980s to deter hostile leveraged corporate takeovers. These laws take some of the

pressure off management to make an efficient use of their assets to avoid a takeover (Bertrand and

Mullainathan (2003)). Under these laws, we would therefore expect management to be able to dedicate

more time to generate growth opportunities, which would imply a less significant decline in Tobin’s q

over time.

    Table VI shows that older firms incorporated in states that passed business combination statutes

during the sample period experience the predicted less rapid decline in Tobin’s q ratios over time.

Specifically, in column 1, we estimate our standard regression specification with the addition of BC, a

binary variable equal to 1 if the firm is incorporated in a state that passed a business combination

statute in a particular year, and equal to 0 otherwise. We also include an interaction term that combines

listing age and BC. The numbers show that the coefficient of company age, ln(Age), remains negative

and significant. Moreover, the existence of a business combination law per se contributes to a lower

                                                     18
Tobin’s q. However, the interaction of age and business combination statutes appears to slow down the

decline of Tobin’s q over time. Hence, as predicted, business combination laws seem to protect firms

and give their managers more time to tend to growth opportunities. We obtain similar results when

measuring firm age with the binary variable Old dummy (column 2). Since Delaware is the state of

incorporation of choice, it is possible that the results reflect a Delaware-specific effect. Columns 3 and

4 therefore replicate the estimation while omitting firms incorporated in Delaware. The results,

however, remain the same. Business combination laws delay the decay in Tobin’s q.



C. Labor Market Competition

    Cross-sectional variation in the competitive structure of labor markets should have an effect on the

relation between company age and growth opportunities as well. Non-compete clauses (NCC) in

employment contracts limit the ability of employees to pursue own ventures or join firms in activities

related to those of their employers. These clauses are not enforced uniformly across states in the U.S.

Vigorous enforcement will help young firms because they prevent employees from leaving their

employer to cash in on their knowledge and ideas. In contrast, they make it difficult for older firms to

find creative employees. Hence, companies located in states that allow and enforce non-compete

clauses in employment agreements should experience a quicker decline in Tobin’s q ratios over time.

    We test this prediction in Table VII. The proxy for the enforcement of noncompetition agreements

is the noncompetition enforcement index from Garmaise (2011), which is based on data provided by

Malsberger (2004). The index aggregates the answers to 12 questions about the enforcement of

specific dimensions of noncompetition law in the state where the firm is headquartered. A high index

value measures stricter enforcement. Regression 1 adds the non-competition index to our standard

specification. Age maintains a negative and significant coefficient whereas the index is unrelated to

Tobin’s q. In regression 2, we add an interaction term between the index and the binary measure of

firm age. The interaction term has the predicted negative coefficient. Consequently, firms

headquartered in states where NCCs are enforced more rigorously appear to run out of growth

opportunities more quickly. The results are qualitatively the same when we use ln(Age) instead of the



                                                     19
binary age measure. In what follows, for reading convenience and to preserve space, we only report

interaction terms with the binary age measure.



V. Managerial Attention and Strategic Focus in Older Firms

    With our theory of managerial attention, as a firm gets older, it loses the ability to regenerate itself

through the development of new growth opportunities. Management cannot expect that the firm will

perform better because of exercising growth options. As a result, it has to focus more and more on the

activities where it has its greatest comparative advantage. Therefore, we expect older firms to become

more focused, to have less uncertainty, and to be more efficient in managing assets in place. Having

paid less attention to the generation of growth opportunities early on, older firms should also

increasingly lose the skills to generate such opportunities. Barring agency problems, older companies

should therefore reduce their investment outlays, especially for R&D. We test these predictions in this

section.



A. Increased Focus

    Panel A of Table VIII reports coefficients from conditional logit regressions of the likelihood of

asset sales against our usual control variables and firm age. In regression 1, the binary dependent

variable identifies firms that engage in an asset sale (Asset sale dummy). In this regression, the

coefficient of the binary measure of listing age, Old dummy, is positive and significant. As predicted,

older firms are more likely to dispose of assets.

    Regression 2 identifies firms that sell core assets (Core asset sale dummy). A sale is core if the

target and the acquiring company have the same 3-digit SIC codes. In contrast to that, regression 3

focuses on sales of non-core assets (Non-core asset sale dummy), which occur when the target and the

acquiring company have different 3-digit SIC codes. According to the results, the probability that

older firms dispose of non-core assets is significantly higher than that of unwinding core assets.

Hence, strategic focus does increase over time. Finally, regression 4 replicates regression 3 conditional

on the subsample of firms that actually engage in asset sales. The results confirm that older firms are

more likely to dispose of non-core assets.

                                                      20
    Though a common view of diversification is that firms diversify to replace exhausted growth

opportunities, Arikan and Stulz (2012) show that more mature firms are not more likely to make

diversifying acquisitions than younger firms. If firms do not diversify more but sell more unrelated

activities as they mature, we should find that the number of reported industrial segments fall as firms

become older. We therefore estimate conditional logit regressions of the likelihood of a reduction in

the number of reported segments with the same regression specification as that used in Panel A.

According to the results, older firms are indeed significantly more likely to reduce the number of

reported segments. An important caveat with this result is that firms can assign business units to

segments strategically and that, during our sample period, there were changes in the rules that firms

have to follow in assigning business units to segments.



B. Decline in Uncertainty

      Table IX investigates the relation between firm age and investor uncertainty with OLS

regressions with industry-year fixed-effects and firm-clustered standard errors. Investor uncertainty is

approximated with asset volatility, namely a weighted average of equity and debt volatility (see

Bharath and Shumway (2008)). The estimation shows that investor uncertainty does decline over time

(see also Pastor and Veronesi (2003)), regardless of how we measure listing age. This finding is

consistent with the hypothesis that firms focus and thereby reduce the perceived complexity of what

they do.



C. Increased Technical Efficiency

      We argue that firms focus to exploit their earnings potential, to make their products and services

more attractive, and to lower costs. Table X tests whether the focusing effort pays off and allows older

firms to become technically more efficient. We examine three different measures of technical

efficiency, namely a sales/book-value-of-assets ratio, a sales/assets-in-place ratio, and the ratio of cost

of goods sold (COGS) per number of employees. The analysis takes the usual form of OLS

regressions with industry-year fixed effects and firm-clustered standard errors. The evidence is in line

with the predicted increase in technical efficiency in older firms. Keeping everything else the same,

                                                      21
older firms generate significantly more sales per dollar of assets invested, regardless of whether we

use a book measure of those assets or Richardson’s (2006) measure of assets in place. Companies also

achieve significantly lower COGS per employee over time.



D. Age and Current Profitability

    We would expect older firms to also experience better profitability, at least initially, as they

improve their technical efficiency. Eventually, as a result of competition and the inability to innovate,

profitability should decline. To investigate this prediction, we estimate nonparametric regressions

similar to those shown for Tobin’s q in Figure 1. The results in Figure 3 reveal that ROA indeed

increases initially until about year 12 after the IPO. Thereafter it falls relative to the industry average.

In untabulated regressions, we find that the eventual decline in ROA is not compensated by bigger

volume. Older firms grow more slowly and their market share actually shrinks over time. We also find

that the sales growth of older firms is more likely to be negative than in other firms.

    The question is whether the profitability decline continues and ultimately turns into a financial

loss, or whether it simply reflects the “strong presumption in economics that profitability is mean

reverting” to the industry-wide level (see Rajan, Servaes, and Zingales (2000)). Consistent with the

latter prediction, we find that the probability that a firm will have a year with negative ROA falls with

age (not tabulated).



E. Age and Investment Policy

    We argued that, as firms aim at being the best in their current operations, they have less time to

dedicate to developing activities outside their core business and their ability to innovate will fall. If so,

they will be less likely to innovate. Hence, barring agency problems, we expect older firms to invest

less to generate new growth opportunities. Their capital expenditures should be comparatively lower

and they should engage less actively in R&D activities.

    Table XI investigates different measures of investment outlays and tests whether they grow with

company age. We consider capital expenditures and R&D expenditures. These investment measures

are standardized with sales and regressed on listing age and the usual set of control variables using

                                                       22
OLS with industry-year fixed-effects and firm-clustered standard errors. The coefficients on our age

measure are all negative and significant regardless of whether we measure age with the natural

logarithm of age or with the binary variable that identifies older firms.



VI. Alternative Hypotheses

    As predicted by our managerial attention hypothesis, we find a negative relation between company

age and growth opportunities. The relation is highly significant and quite robust with respect to

different estimation techniques, regression specifications, and the way we measure firm age. In this

section, we investigate three competing explanations of the negative relation between age and Tobin’s.

According to these explanations examined in turn, the negative age relation between age and Tobin’s q

could be the result of the relaxation of financial constraints over time, of increased managerial agency

problems in older firms, and of firm management age.



A. Aging and Financial Constraints

    Over time, investors learn more about firms and their business models and not surprisingly

investor uncertainty declines. This loosens the financial constraints of firms over time and improves

their access to capital markets. Consistent with these predictions, Hadlock and Pierce (2010) find that

company age is a particularly useful predictor of financial constraints. Neoclassical theory predicts

that firms with limited capital and a given set of investment opportunities undertake the most

profitable investments first (Cooley and Quadrini (2001)). If so, it is not surprising to observe that

older firms have lower Tobin’s q ratios—although the puzzling observation of their inability to

regenerate their investment opportunity set remains. Table XII tests whether financial constraints are

indeed responsible for at least part of the aging effect we uncover.

    To investigate, we use the payouts to shareholders as a proxy for financial constraints. We then

test whether firms that are financially constrained experience a stronger decline of Tobin’s q over

time—firms that are financially unconstrained are able to fund the investment opportunities they want,

hence, in their case, their average Tobin’s q will be lower and less negatively declining (the



                                                      23
assumption is that q ratios converge monotonically to 1). Whereas Panel A focuses on dividend

payouts, Panel B looks at total cash payouts (dividends plus share repurchases).

    In regression 1 of Panel A of Table XII, we expand the standard regression specification with a

binary variable that distinguishes dividend payers from non-payers in any given year (Dividend

dummy). In addition, we interact this variable with the binary measure of age (Old dummy). In this

specification, firm age has, as before, a negative and significant coefficient. Neither the coefficient of

Dividend dummy nor that of the interaction term is statistically significant at conventional levels of

significance. Hence, there is no evidence that financial constraints are responsible for the age effect we

find. We reach the same conclusion when we re-estimate the regression 1 but look back at listing age 5

(Dividend 5 dummy) to distinguish between dividend payers and non-payers (regression 2). Under this

specification, Dividend 5 dummy is negative and significant, indicating that financially unconstrained

firms do indeed have lower qs. However, the variable Old dummy maintains a negative and significant

coefficient and the interaction term remains statistically zero.

    To examine this latter result more closely, we split the sample by whether firms paid dividends at

listing age 5 and estimate our regression equation for the two subsamples separately. This allows for

different regression coefficients for all arguments. There is no difference, however, in the age

coefficients in the two subsamples. We therefore conclude that financial constraints cannot be

responsible for the decline in Tobin’s q ratios over time.

    Our conclusions do not change in Panel B, which repeats the analysis of Panel A, except for

including share buybacks in the cash payouts to shareholders, as defined in Skinner (2008). The age

coefficient remains negative and significant across all regression specifications. Moreover, the

interaction term between financial constraints and company age has never a statistically significant

coefficient. Note that financial constraints per se are related with Tobin’s q only when we look at the

contemporaneous payouts (as opposed to those at age 5).



B. Agency Problems in Older Firms

      The decrease in Tobin’s q with firm age could reflect agency problems between managers and

firm owners that intensify as time goes by. Managers could have a preference for a quiet life and

                                                      24
therefore decide to work less, steer away from risky investment and R&D projects, and simply milk

the available lines of business. This quiet life hypothesis (Hicks (1935); Bertrand and Mullainathan

(2003); Giroud and Mueller (2010)) could explain some of the observations we make, such as the

decline in Tobin’s q, the decline in asset volatility, the reduction in investment and R&D activities,

and the impact of competition. Yet it cannot explain why technical efficiency increases over time. A

quiet life, however, is only one possible manifestation of managerial conflicts of interest. We therefore

test whether older firms are more likely to have principal-agent problems, and whether that explains

the impact of company age on Tobin’s q. Moreover, since older firms invest less, we want to see

whether we find any evidence of cash redistribution or dissipation. We investigate whether the

compensation of CEOs at older firms is higher and whether older firms return cash to shareholders.

We also ask whether they end up accumulating larger cash balances.



B.1. Age, Corporate Governance, and Tobin’s q

    Table XIII examines whether older firms are more prone to experience managerial agency

problems. In Panel A, we therefore sort firms into old and young, and compare the values of various

governance indices that have been suggested in the literature, namely the GIM index developed by

Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003), the delay index (Delay index) suggested by Kadyrzhanova and

Rhodes-Kropf (2011), and the alternative takeover protection index (AT index) proposed by Cremers

and Nair (2005). We also compare Board size and Executive ownership. According to this univariate

analysis, older firms rank significantly higher on the indices of managerial entrenchment. They also

have significantly larger boards and lower managerial stockholdings. Older firms could therefore be

affected by more serious agency problems.

    In Panel B, we test whether these apparent problems could be responsible for the fewer growth

opportunities generated by older firms. We therefore extend the standard regression of Tobin’s q with

the proxies for management entrenchment. If the negative age coefficient is the consequence of agency

problems, it should lose its statistical significance in this regression specification. The entrenchment

variables are available only for relatively large and mature firms, as evidenced by the fact that the

median listing age in this group of firms is 21, as opposed to 13 in the full sample. The binary measure

                                                     25
of company age is therefore redefined to denote firms older than 21 years of listing age. Moreover,

since the sample of firms with the necessary data yields only 3,631 firm-years in 1,072 possible

industry-year combinations, we drop industry-year fixed-effects from the regression specification and

replace them with separate industry (138) and year (12) fixed-effects. For simplicity, we do not report

the coefficients of the standard control variables and focus only on age and governance. Under the new

specification, the age coefficient remains negative and significant, regardless of whether age is

measured with the natural logarithm of the number of years since listing or with the new binary

variable. This finding rejects the hypothesis that conflicts of interest are responsible for the decline of

Tobin’s q ratios over time.

    Panel C provides an alternative test of the corporate governance hypothesis. Instead of including

all the governance indices in the regression specification, we include them one at a time. We also

include interaction terms of governance and company age. Even under this specification, however, the

coefficient of company age remains generally negative and significant. The exception is in the case of

the GIM index, in which neither company age nor governance index have significant coefficients.

Note that no interaction term has a significant coefficient in any of the regressions. There is,

consequently, no evidence that agency problems are responsible for the comparatively low growth

opportunities in older firms.



B.2. Age and CEO Compensation, Cash Payouts, and Cash Holdings

    We also find little evidence of greater wealth redistribution and wealth dissipation as firms age.

Specifically, we use the model of Core, Guay, and Larcker (2008) to see whether CEO pay is higher in

older firms (Panel A of Table XIV). The dependent variable in these regressions is the log of the

CEO’s total compensation (ln(CEO total pay)). Regression 1 replicates the model of Core, Guay, and

Larcker (2008). Regressions 2 and 3 add firm age as an additional control. Contrary to the prediction

of wealth redistribution, however, CEO pay does not increase with the firm’s age. In fact, the opposite

is true. CEOs make less money in older firms, possibly because they are less productive. Hence, if

there are more serious agency problems in older firms, they manifest themselves in ways other than

higher CEO pay. The fact that the CEOs of old firms make less money suggests that the negative age

                                                      26
effect on q could be driven by CEO talent. Yet, when we control for CEO compensation (the implied

proxy for talent), the relation between age and q is still negative and significant.

    Since older firms seem to be unable to generate new growth opportunities, we want to know what

they do with their excess cash. Poor governance would imply cash retention. We therefore test the null

hypothesis of whether older firms are less likely to be dividend payers. The test is implemented as a

conditional logit regression with industry-year fixed effects and robust standard errors. The results

reject the null (not tabulated). In a second step, we use OLS regressions with industry-year fixed

effects and firm-clustered standard errors to test whether older firms have lower payout ratios. The

evidence in the first two columns of Panel B rejects that prediction as well. Older firms have actually

higher payout ratios. Since dividends are not the only form of payout to shareholders, we also test

whether older firms have comparatively lower total payout ratios, where total payouts are dividends

plus share repurchases. The evidence rejects this prediction, too (columns 3 and 4 of the table). Older

firms make higher payouts to shareholders. Finally, we inquire into whether older firms hold higher

cash balances, yet the evidence shows that the opposite is true (columns 5 and 6 of the table).

    Overall, older firms do not give their CEOs a higher pay. If anything, they grant them a lower

compensation. At the same time, they return cash to their shareholders and hold lower cash balances.

There is therefore no evidence of wealth redistribution in the form of higher CEO compensation or of

wealth dissipation.



C. Company Age versus Management Age in Older Firms

    Company age could be a proxy for management age or tenure. Consistent with that possibility,

Table XV shows that both CEO age and tenure are significantly higher in older firms. Directors are

older and have longer tenure, too. The differences, however, are not very large. The directors of old

firms, for example, are 64.5 years of age on average; in young firms, they are 61. The corresponding

tenure numbers are 10.5 versus 8.3. A multivariate analysis in which we estimate our standard panel

regression with CEO age as the dependent variable confirms that CEO age is positively correlated with

company age even conditionally (not tabulated). However, management age or tenure cannot explain



                                                       27
the negative relation between company age and Tobin’s q. A look back at Panel B of Table XIII shows

that adding CEO and director age and tenure does not erase that negative relation.



VII.    Conclusions

    This paper develops and tests a managerial attention theory which predicts that Tobin’s q falls

with age and that factors that increase (decrease) management’s attention to assets in place as opposed

to generating growth options accelerate (slow down) the fall of Tobin’s q with age. We predict that

increased competition in the goods market forces management to devote more attention to generating

growth options because the assets in place become less valuable. Using exogenous changes in

competition brought about by tariff reductions, we find that increases in competition do reduce the

negativity of the relation between Tobin’s q and firm age. In contrast, increased competition in the

market for corporate control leads management to pay more attention to assets in place. As predicted,

exogenous changes that decrease competition in the market for corporate control make the relation

between Tobin’s q and age flatter. Finally, greater competition in the labor market makes it easier for

firms to hire individuals who can help with generating growth opportunities. As a result, management

devotes more attention to generating growth opportunities and the relation between Tobin’s q and age

is flatter. This paper contributes to our understanding of how firms age, how they invest, how they are

valued, and how they are affected by agency problems.

    It follows from the managerial attention theory that firms increasingly focus on their core activities

over time and in the process invest less, are less active in R&D, and are more likely to divest assets.

We find strong evidence supporting these predictions as well. Even though older firms might have

more significant agency problems between shareholders and managers (they have larger boards and

lower executive stock ownership), older firms return cash to shareholders and do not grant their CEOs

compensation that is larger than usual. Moreover, there is no evidence that agency costs are

responsible for the decay in growth opportunities over time. Finally, we find that our findings are not

due to older firms having managers with longer tenure.




                                                     28
                                         Appendix. Variable Definitions

Variable                  Definition
                                               Panel A: Firm age
Age                       Listing age, computed as one plus the difference between the year under
                          investigation and the firm’s birth year. The birth year is computed as the minimum
                          value of: (a) the first year the firm appears on the CRSP tapes; (b) the first year the
                          firm appears on the COMPUSTAT tapes; and (c) the first year for which we find a
                          link between the CRSP and the COMPUSTAT tapes;
Ageinc                    We also compute age as the number of years (plus one) since incorporation. This
                          information is from Jay Ritter’s Website as well as from Mergent Webreports;
Ageinc at listing         The firm’s incorporation age (Ageinc) at the time of listing;
Old dummy                 Binary variable equal to 1 if the firm in question is older (in terms of listing age)
                          than the sample median in any given year, and equal to 0 otherwise;

                        Panel B: Profitability, productivity, and growth opportunities
COGS/Employee            The firm’s COGS (cogs) divided by the number of employees (emp);
ROA                      Return on assets is the ratio of the firm’s operating income before depreciation
                         (oibdp) divided by the lagged book value of total assets (at). The data are from
                         COMPUSTAT;
Sales/Assets             The firm’s sales (sale) divided by the book value of assets at the beginning of the
                         year (at);
Sales/VAIP               The firm’s sales (sale) divided by the value of the assets in place. VAIP is the value
                         of the assets in place, as defined in Richardson (2006):
                                   VAIP = (1-ar)BV+a(1+r)X-ard,
                         Where BV is the book value of common equity (ceq), X is earnings (oiadp), d is
                         dividends (dvc), r is the discount rate (12%), and a is w/(1+r-w). w is a fixed
                         persistence parameter with a value of 0.62, as reported in Scharfstein and Stein
                         (2000).
Tobin’s q                Tobin’s q, computed as the market value of the firm’s assets (Size) divided by their
                         book value (at). The data are from COMPUSTAT;

                                     Panel C: Other firm-specific variables
Asset sale dummy          Binary variable that identifies firms that engage in an asset sale. The data is from
                          SDC platinum;
Asset volatility          Asset volatility is the weighted average of equity volatility and debt volatility. Debt
                          volatility is assumed be 5% + 0.25*Volatility. The weights are the ratio of book
                          equity and book debt in the firm’s capital structure (defined as sum of book value of
                          debt and equity). See Bharath and Shumway (2008);
Analyst uncertainty       The standard deviation of the 2-year EPS analyst forecasts, divided by the book
                          value of equity (per share);
BC dummy                  Binary variable equal to 1 if the firm is incorporated in a state that has passed a
                          business combination law.
Capex                     The ratio of capital expenses (capx) net of depreciation and amortization charges
                          (dp) to sales (sale). The data are from COMPUSTAT;
Cash holdings             The firm’s cash balance (che) divided by the book value of assets;
Core asset sale dummy     Binary variable that identifies sales of core assets. Such a sale is assumed if the
                          target and the acquiring company have the same 3-digit SIC codes;
Dividend dummy            Binary variable that identifies firms that pay dividends;
Dividend 5 dummy          Binary variable that identifies firms that paid dividends at age 5;
Focus                     The Herfindahl index, HE, captures the degree of specialization based on the sales
                          in the firm’s different segments, as reported on the COMPUSTAT Segment tapes:
                          H E = ∑ i =1 pi2
                                    N

                                      ,
                       where N is the number of segments, the subscript i identifies the segments, and pi is
                       the fraction of the firm’s total sales in the segment in question;
High competition dummy Binary variable that identifies firms in industries with low concentration (Sales-
                       weighted HH-index) < median industry concentration in any given year;
KZ-index               The Kaplan and Zingales (1997) index that measures a firm’s level of financial
                                                        29
                        constraints. We follow Lamont, Polk, and Saá-Requejo (2001, p. 552) and compute
                        the KZ index as: –1.001909[(ib+dp)/ppentt-1] + 0.2826389[(Size)/at] +
                        3.139193[(dltt+dlc)/(dltt+dlc+seq)]        –     39.3678[(dvc+dvp)/ppentt-1]        –
                        1.314759[che/ att-1]. The data are from COMPUSTAT;
Leverage                Leverage is the firm’s long- and short-term debt (dltt+dlc) divided by the market
                        value of assets (Size). The data are from COMPUSTAT;
Lower tariff dummy      A binary variable that identifies industry-years after a reduction in import tariffs.
                        The data are from Frésard and Valta (2012).
MTB-equity              The market-to-book ratio is the ratio of the firm’s market value of equity
                        (cshoprcc_f) divided by the book value of common equity (ceq). The data are
                        from COMPUSTAT;
Non-core asset sale     Binary variable that identifies sales of non-core assets. Such a sale is assumed if the
dummy                   target and the acquiring company have different 3-digit SIC codes;
Noncompetition index    The noncompetition enforcement index from Garmaise (2011), which is based on
                        the data provided by Malsberger (2004). The index aggregates the answers to 12
                        questions about the enforcement of specific dimensions of noncompetition law in
                        the state where the firm is headquartered. The data start in 1992.
Payout                  The firm’s payout ratio is the ratio of total dividend payments (dvp+dvc) divided by
                        the firm’s operating income before depreciation (oibdp). The data are from
                        COMPUSTAT;
Payout dummy            Binary variable that identifies firms that pay dividends or repurchase shares. Share
                        repurchases are defined as in Skinner (2008);
Payout 5 dummy          Binary variable that identifies firms with Payout dummy = 1 at age 5;
Reduction in reported   Binary variable that identifies firms that reduce the number of reported segments on
segments dummy          Compustat;
sp500 dummy             Binary variable that identifies S&P500 firms;
R&D                     The firm’s R&D expenses (xrd) divided by its sales (sale). The data are from
                        COMPUSTAT;
Size                    Size, the log of market value of the assets at the beginning of the year, is
                        approximated by the book value of assets (at) minus the book value of common
                        equity (ceq) plus the market value of common equity (cshoprcc_f) minus deferred
                        taxes (txtb). The data are from COMPUSTAT;
Stock return            The firm’s annual stock return, computed as (prcc_f+dvpsx)/l.prcc_f - 1. The data
                        are from COMPUSTAT;
Total payout            The firm’s total payout to shareholders divided by operating income (oibdp). Total
                        payout is the sum of dividend payment (dvp + dvc) as well as share repurchases, as
                        defined in Skinner (2008);
Volatility              The volatility of the firm’s monthly stock return. We calculate the volatility over a
                        five-year window and include all firm-years with at least 24 monthly returns. The
                        data are from the monthly CRSP tapes;


                                      Panel D: Management team
Board size              The number of directors who serve on the firm’s board. The data are from IRRC;
CEO age                 The age of the firm’s CEO, measured in years. The information is from
                        ExecuComp;
CEO tenure              The tenure of the firm’s CEO, measured in years. The information is from
                        ExecuComp;
CEO total pay           The CEO’s total compensation, expressed in thousands of 2009 USD. The data are
                        from ExecuComp;
Director age            The average age of the firm’s directors, measured in years. The information is from
                        Risk Metrics;
Director tenure         The average tenure of the firm’s directors, measured in years. The information is
                        from Risk Metrics;
Executive ownership     The cumulative fraction of shares controlled by the firm’s officers. The data are
                        from ExecuComp;




                                                      30
                                        Panel E: Governance provisions
Alternative takeover index The alternative takeover protection index, as suggested by Cremers and Nair (2005);
Delay index                An index of the four delay provisions in the GIM index (Kadyrzhanova and Rhodes-
                           Kropf (2011));
GIM index                  The firm’s score on the governance index from Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003).
                           The index is provided on a bi- or triannual basis. To increase sample size, we
                           interpolate the index for missing sample years. The data are from RiskMetrics.




                                                       31
References

Aghion, Philippe, Christopher Harris, Peter Howitt, and John Vickers, 2001, Competition, imitation
       and growth with step-by-step innovation, Review of Economic Studies 68, 467-492.

Arikan, Asli M., and René M. Stulz, 2012, Corporate acquisitions, diversification, and the firm's
        lifecycle, Working paper (Ohio State University).

Asker, John, Joan Farre-Mensa, and Alexander Ljungqvist, 2013, Comparing the investment behavior
        of public and private firms, Working paper (NYU).

Baker, George P., and Robert E. Kennedy, 2002, Survivorship and the economic grim reaper, Journal
       of Law, Economics, and Organization 18, 324-361.

Bernstein, Shai, 2012, Does going public affect innovation?, Working paper (Stanford University).

Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2003, Enjoying the quiet life? Corporate governance
        and managerial preferences, Journal of Political Economy 111, 1043-1075.

Bharath, Sreedhar T., and Tyler Shumway, 2008, Forecasting default with the Merton distance to
       default model, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1339-1369.

Cao, Jerry X., and Josh Lerner, 2009, The performance of reverse leveraged buyouts, Journal of
       Financial Economics 91, 139-157.

Cooley, Thomas F., and Vincenzo Quadrini, 2001, Financial markets and firm dynamics, American
       Economic Review 91, 1286-1310.

Core, John, Wayne Guay, and David F. Larcker, 2008, The power of the pen and executive
       compensation, Journal of Financial Economics 88, 1-25.

Cremers, K.J. Martijn, and Vinay B. Nair, 2005, Corporate governance and equity prices, Journal of
       Finance 60, 2859-2894.

DeAngelo, Harry, Linda DeAngelo, and René M. Stulz, 2006, Dividend policy and the
      earned/contributed capital mix: A test of the life-cycle theory?, Journal of Financial
      Economics 81, 227-254.

Edmans, Alex, Mirko Heinle, and Chong Huang, 2013, The real costs of disclosure, Working paper
      (LBS, Wharton, and UC Irvine).

Fama, Eugene F., 1998, Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioral finance, Journal of
       Financial Economics 49, 283-306.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2001, Disappearing dividends: Changing firm
      characteristics or lower propensity to pay?, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 3-43.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2004, New lists: Fundamentals and survival rates, Journal
       of Financial Economics 73, 229-269.

Ferreira, Daniel, Gustavo Manso, and Andre C. Silva, 2012, Incentives to innovate and the decision to
        go public or private, Review of Financial Studies forthcoming.

Fink, Jason, Kerstin E. Fink, Gustavo Grullon, and James P. Weston, 2010, What drove the increase in
        idiosyncratic volatility during the internet boom?, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
        Analysis 45, 1253-1278.

                                                   32
Fogel, Kathy, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung, 2008, Big business stability and economic growth:
        Is what's good for General Motors good for America?, Journal of Financial Economics 89,
        83-108.

Frésard, Laurent, and Philip Valta, 2012, Competitive pressure and corporate policies, Working paper
        (University of Maryland and HEC Paris).

Garmaise, Mark J., 2011, Ties that truly bind: Noncompetition agreements, executive compensation,
       and firm investment, Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 27, 376-425.

Giroud, Xavier, and Holger M. Mueller, 2010, Does corporate governance matter in competitive
       industries?, Journal of Financial Economics 95, 312-331.

Gompers, Paul, Joy Ishii, and Andrew Metrick, 2003, Corporate governance and equity prices, The
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 107-155.

Grullon, Gustavo, Roni Michaely, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, 2002, Are dividend changes a sign of
        firm maturity?, Journal of Business 75, 387-424.

Guadalupe, Maria, and Julie Wulf, 2010, The flattening firm and product market competition: The
       effect of trade liberalization on corporate hierarchies, American Economic Journal: Applied
       Economics 2, 105-127.

Hadlock, Charles J., and Joshua R. Pierce, 2010, New evidence on measuring financial constraints:
       Moving beyond the KZ index, Review of Financial Studies 23, 1909-1940.

Hicks, John R., 1935, Annual survey of economic theory: The theory of monopoly, Econometrica 3,
        1-20.

Hoberg, Gerard, and Gordon Phillips, 2011, Text-Based Network Industries and Endogenous Product
       Differentiation, Working paper (University of Maryland).

Holmstrom, Bengt, 1989, Agency costs and innovation, Journal of Economic Behavior and
       Organization 12, 305-327.

Jain, Bharat A., and Omesh Kini, 1994, The post-issue operating performance of IPO firms, Journal of
        Finance 49, 1699-1726.

Jovanovic, Boyan, and Peter L. Rousseau, 2001, Why wait? A century of life before IPO, AEA Papers
       and Proceedings 91, 336-341.

Kadyrzhanova, Dalida, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2011, Concentrating on governance, Journal of
       Finance 66, 1649-1685.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Luigi Zingales, 1997, Do financing constraints explain why investment is
       correlated with cash flow?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 168-216.

Lamont, Owen, Christopher Polk, and Jesús Saá-Requejo, 2001, Financial constraints and stock
       returns, Review of Financial Studies 14, 529-554.

Loderer, Claudio, and Urs Waelchli, 2010, Firm age and performance, Working paper (University of
       Bern).

Loderer, Claudio, and Urs Waelchli, 2010, Protecting minority shareholders: Listed versus unlisted
       firms, Financial Management 39, 33-57.


                                                  33
Loderer, Claudio, and Urs Waelchli, 2013, The end of the corporate life cycle, Working paper
       (University of Bern).

Loughran, Tim, and Jay Ritter, 1995, The new issues puzzle, Journal of Finance 50, 23-51.

Malsberger, Brian M., 2004, Covenants Not to Compete: A State-by-State Survey (BNA Books,
       Washington, DC).

Pastor, Lubos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2003, Stock valuation and learning about profitability, Journal of
        Finance 58, 1749-1789.

Rajan, Raghuram G., Henri Servaes, and Luigi Zingales, 2000, The cost of diversity: The
       diversification discount and inefficient investment, Journal of Finance 55, 35-80.

Richardson, Scott A., 2006, Over-investment of free cash flow, Review of Accounting Studies 11, 159-
       189.

Salinger, Michael A., 1984, Tobin's q, unionization, and the concentration-profits relationship, Rand
        Journal of Economics 15, 159-170.

Scharfstein, David, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2000, The dark side of internal capital markets: Divisional
        rent-seeking and inefficient investment, Journal of Finance 55, 2537-2564.

Shumway, Tyler, 2001, Forecasting bankruptcy more accurately: A simple hazard model, Journal of
      Business 74, 101-124.

Skinner, Douglas J., 2008, The evolving relation between earnings, dividends, and stock repurchases,
        Journal of Financial Economics 87, 582-609.

Verrecchia, Robert E., 1983, Discretionary disclosure, Journal of Accounting and Economics 5, 365-
       380.




                                                   34
                                                                                                              Figure 1

                                                                                                       Firm Age and Tobin’s q

The figure shows the relation between Tobin’s q ratios and company age implied by nonparametric regressions.
The solid lines in the figures are obtained from local polynomial regressions of Tobin’s q ratios on firm age
using an Epanechnikov kernel function with a “rule-of-thumb” bandwidth estimator and local-mean smoothing.
The shaded area shows the 90% confidence interval. Figures (a) and (b) show the unconditional relation and
measure age since listing and incorporation, respectively. To obtain Figures (c) and (d), we first estimate an OLS
regression with industry-year fixed-effects of Tobin’s q on Capex, R&D, Focus, KZ-index, Leverage, Size,
Volatility, and ROA. We then regress these residuals on listing and incorporation age, respectively. Listing age
is restricted to between 1 and 30 years, incorporation age is restricted between 2 and 70 years. The sample period
is 1978 – 2009.



                                                         Local polynomial smooth                                                                                           Local polynomial smooth




                                                                                                                                 3
                3
  q, Winsorized fraction .01




                                                                                                                   q, Winsorized fraction .01
                                                                                                                                        2.5
                   2.5




                                                                                                                               2
        2




                                                                                                                    1.5
                1.5




                                                                                                                                 1




                               0                             10                       20                     30                                 0                     20                40                  60          80
                                                             age, Winsorized fraction .01                                                                                  age_inc, Winsorized fraction .01

                                                               90% CI                   lpoly smooth                                                                            90% CI                   lpoly smooth
                               kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .84, pwidth = 1.26                                                kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = 2.49, pwidth = 3.74




                               (a) Unconditional (Listing age; Full sample)                                        (b) Unconditional (Incorporation age; Full sample)

                                                         Local polynomial smooth                                                                                           Local polynomial smooth
                .2




                                                                                                                                 .2
                                                                                                                                 .1
                .1
  Residuals




                                                                                                                   Residuals
                                                                                                                        0
     0




                                                                                                                                 -.1
                -.1




                                                                                                                                 -.2
                -.2




                               0                             10                       20                     30                                 0                     20                40                  60          80
                                                             age, Winsorized fraction .01                                                                                  age_inc, Winsorized fraction .01

                                                               90% CI                   lpoly smooth                                                                            90% CI                   lpoly smooth
                               kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = 1.71, pwidth = 2.57                                               kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = 3.35, pwidth = 5.03




                                (c) Conditional (Listing age; Full sample)                                                   (d) Conditional (Incorporation age; Full sample)




                                                                                                                  35
                                                      Figure 2

                    Probability of Regenerating Growth Opportunities in Early Years

The following figure shows the fraction of firms with q > q*, sorted by age cohort. q* is the maximum ratio
observed during the years 1 to 4 after listing. To adjust for common effects, the q ratios we use are the residuals
from a pooled OLS regression of q on industry and year fixed-effects. The sample period is 1978 – 2009.




                                                          36
                                                                                                   Figure 3

                                                                                            Firm Age and ROA

The figure shows the relation between ROA and company age implied by nonparametric regressions. The solid
lines in the figures are obtained from local polynomial regressions of residual ROA on firm age using an
Epanechnikov kernel function with a “rule-of-thumb” bandwidth estimator and local-mean smoothing. The
shaded area shows the 90% confidence interval. Residual ROA is obtained from an OLS regression with
industry-year fixed-effects of ROA on Capex, R&D, Focus, KZ-index, Leverage, Size, Volatility, and Market-to-
Book. The sample period is 1978 – 2009.



                                             Local polynomial smooth                                                                                 Local polynomial smooth




                                                                                                                  2
          1




                                                                                                                  1
          .5
      Residuals




                                                                                                              Residuals
                                                                                                                     0
          0




                                                                                                              -1
          -.5




                                                                                                                  -2
          -1




                                                                                                                  -3
                  0                     10                 20                          30     40                          0                     20                40                  60          80
                                               age, Winsorized fraction .01                                                                          age_inc, Winsorized fraction .01

                                                  90% CI                   lpoly smooth                                                                   90% CI                   lpoly smooth
                  kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = 1.46, pwidth = 2.19                                      kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = 2.56, pwidth = 3.84




                                ROA and listing age                                                                            ROA and incorporation age




                                                                                                     37
                                                       Table I

                                                Summary Statistics

This table presents summary statistics. Variable definitions are in the Appendix. The summary statistics omit
firms with listing age < 5, as most of the empirical investigation will also exclude these firms. The sample period
is 1978 – 2009.

Variable                         Mean         Median            SD          Min           Max       Observations
                                                       Age
Listing age                      17.45         13.00           13.91        5.00          85.00         83,790
Incorporation age                34.44         25.00           26.01        5.00         193.00         69,982

                                     Growth opportunities and profitability
Tobin’s q                        1.785       1.301          1.455         0.559           9.599         83,790
ROA                              9.757      12.526         20.222        –83.277         53.554         83,102

                                              Productive efficiency
Sales/Assets                     1.422         1.251         0.981         0.033          5.462         83,205
Sales/VAIP                       2.626         2.029         5.717        –23.712        32.418         82,915
COGS/Employee                    189.4         120.8         228.3          13.1         1,531.8        81,709

                                                   Asset sales
Asset sale dummy                 0.093         0.000         0.290         0.000          1.000         72,310
Core asset sale dummy            0.039         0.000         0.193         0.000          1.000         72,310
Non-core asset sale dummy        0.063         0.000         0.244         0.000          1.000         72,310

                                                   Investments
R&D/Sales                        0.312         0.033        1.429           0.000        12.131         49,927
Capex/Sales                      0.027         0.003        0.166          –0.479         1.115         82,736

                                                  Payout policy
Dividend                         0.055         0.000         1.624         –207.9         188.0         83,606
Dividend dummy                   0.412         0.000         0.492          0.000         1.000         83,606
Total payout                     0.014         0.000        31.510        –8,088.6        758.1         67,279
Total payout dummy               0.561         1.000         0.496          0.000         1.000         67,375

                                                  Agency costs
CEO pay                         4,574.6       2,493.7     5,957.0          268.6        36,468.4        15,473
Cash holdings                    0.153         0.074       0.187           0.000         0.840          83,787

                                           Additional control variables
Focus                            0.836        1.000          0.241          0.245         1.000         83,790
KZ-Index                        –1.142        0.240          8.472        –58.455        20.455         82,558
Leverage                         0.192        0.147          0.184          0.000         0.727         83,532
MTB-equity                       2.475        1.627          3.736         –9.006        24.042         83,787
Size                            2,076.5       236.1         6,101.4          4.5        44,174.3        83,790
Volatility                       0.152        0.140          0.066          0.050         0.362         81,874




                                                          38
                                                      Table II

                                             Firm Age and Tobin’s q

The table investigates the relation between company age and Tobin’s q. Panel A estimates OLS panel
regressions with industry-year fixed-effects and firm-clustered standard errors. Regressions 1 and 2 relate to the
full sample of firms. Regressions 3, 4, and 5 exclude firms with listing age younger than 5. Variable definitions
are in the Appendix. The symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance in two-sided tests with
confidence 0.99, 0.95, and 0.90, respectively. Panel B uses the estimates of the regressions 1 and 3 to compute
the impact of company age on Tobin’s q. The sample period is 1978 – 2009.

Panel A: OLS panel regressions

                                                       Dependent variable: Tobin’s q
                                       Full sample                      Subsample with listing age >4
                                   (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)
ln(Age)                        –0.177***                        –0.168***                         –0.152***
                                (0.014)                           (0.018)                           (0.021)
Old dummy                                       –0.173***                        –0.145***
                                                  (0.019)                          (0.018)
ln(Ageinc at listing)                                                                             –0.080***
                                                                                                    (0.011)
ROA                            –0.010***        –0.010***       –0.004***        –0.004***        –0.003***
                                 (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.001)          (0.001)
Capex                          0.113***         0.125***         0.268***         0.279***         0.294***
                                 (0.037)          (0.037)         (0.070)          (0.070)         (0.0081)
R&D                            0.071***         0.072***         0.136***         0.136***         0.126***
                                 (0.011)          (0.011)         (0.021)          (0.021)          (0.022)
Focus                          0.432***         0.499***         0.376***         0.414***         0.354***
                                 (0.039)          (0.039)         (0.038)          (0.038)          (0.044)
KZ-index                          0.001            0.002          –0.003           –0.003         –0.001***
                                 (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.002)
Leverage                       –2.787***        –2.799***       –2.379***        –2.383***        –2.454***
                                 (0.055)          (0.055)         (0.056)          (0.056)          (0.064)
Size                           0.187***         0.177***         0.173***         0.165***         0.183***
                                 (0.006)          (0.006)         (0.006)          (0.006)          (0.007)
Volatility                     4.086***         4.320***         4.528***         4.656***         4.314***
                                 (0.205)          (0.203)         (0.212)          (0.210)          (0.244)
Constant                       0.854***         0.484***         0.698***         0.312***         0.838***
                                 (0.077)          (0.069)         (0.084)          (0.067)          (0.104)
Industry-year FE                Included         Included        Included         Included         Included

Observations                     87,437           87,437           68,611            68,611           55,893
Adjusted R2                       0.299            0.296            0.319             0.318            0.316




                                                           39
Panel B: The impact of company age

                                                           Age percentile
                               5th           25th            Median         75th    95th
                                             Full sample
Listing age                    1               4                 9           17      41
Implied q                    2.318           2.072             1.929        1.817   1.661


                                     Subsample with Listing age > 4
Listing age                    5               8                13           22      50
Implied q                    1.937          1.858             1.777         1.687   1.551




                                                    40
                                                     Table III

                              Age and Tobin’s q: Industry-Specific Regressions

We estimate separate regressions for each of the 48 industries identified by Fama and French (2001). We
exclude industries, such as agriculture, with an insufficient number of observations. The regression specification
is the same as that in column (3) of Table II, except we only have year-fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm level. The column labeled “marginal impact” computes the change in q if listing age goes
from the 25th to the 75th percentile of the pooled age distribution in the industry. The impact is measured
relative to the average q in the industry, and is shown only for statistically significant age coefficients. The
symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance in two-sided tests with confidence 0.99, 0.95, and 0.90,
respectively. The sample period is 1978 – 2009.

                                   Firm          Age                q
                                   years       (Average)        (Average)   Coefficient of    Marginal Impact
                                                                              Ln(Age)
Food Products                      1,118          19.5            1.54          0.021                 —
Candy & Soda                        419           29.6            2.05       0.603***               54.2%
Beer & Liquor                       173           18.2            1.19          0.039                 —
Recreation                         1,033          17.7            1.45         –0.022                 —
Entertainment                      2,035          15.0            1.62       –0.139***              –8.6%
Printing and Publishing             336           15.4            1.63       –0.293***             –17.4%
Consumer Goods                     2,143          21.8            1.54       –0.157***              –9.7%
Apparel                            1,086          19.0            1.33       –0.186***             –13.1%
Healthcare                         1,722          12.6            1.84         –0.108                 —
Medical Equipment                  3,514          15.4            2.65       –0.262***              –8.6%
Pharmaceutical Products            3,767          13.0            3.62          0.107                 —
Chemicals                          1,467          23.1            1.86       –0.191***             –11.6%
Rubber and Plastic Products         881           17.6            1.39         –0.027                 —
Textiles                            487           20.3            1.07       0.181***               15.5%
Construction Materials             1,737          21.5            1.26       –0.123***              –9.6%
Construction                        644           16.1            1.22         –0.019                 —
Steel Works Etc.                   1,076          24.6            1.17         –0.027                 —
Fabricated Products                 459           19.4            1.21       –0.206***             –15.5%
Machinery                          4,238          19.8            1.51       –0.160***             –10.8%
Electrical Equipment               1,521          19.0            1.71       –0.168***             –10.0%
Automobiles and Trucks             1,742          23.9            1.34       –0.083***              –7.0%
Aircraft                            614           26.6            1.39         –0.063                 —
Shipbuilding, Railroad Eq.          213           32.8            1.20         –0.108                 —
Defense                             235           34.4            1.33         –0.085                 —
Precious Metals                     386           14.9            2.21          0.062                 —
Petroleum and Natural Gas          3,649          14.8            1.60       –0.119***              –7.4%
Communication                      1,853          15.0            1.72       –0.117***              –6.4%
Personal Services                   893           16.0            1.70       –0.248**              –13.4%
Business Services                 12,031          14.7            2.05       –0.212***              –9.8%
Computers                          4,603          13.6            2.06       –0.236***             –10.2%
Electronic Equipment               6,388          16.1            1.87       –0.180***              –9.3%
Measuring and Control Eq.          3,258          18.0            1.74       –0.307***             –16.5%
Business Supplies                  1,025          20.6            1.40       –0.093**               –5.4%
Shipping Containers                 186           23.7            1.02       –0.092***             –10.6%
Transportation                     2,225          19.4            1.31       –0.209***             –15.7%
Wholesale                          5,174          19.1            1.33       –0.096***              –7.3%
Retail                             5,977          18.7            1.45       –0.162***             –10.5%
Restaurants, Hotels, Motels        2,212          17.2            1.45       –0.117***              –7.4%




                                                           41
                                                      Table IV

                                Firms’ Ability to Return to the Initial Success

This table investigates whether mature firms are able to replicate their initial growth opportunities. For the 8,079
firms with sufficient data in our dataset, Panel A reports descriptive statistics for the maximum value of Tobin’s
q before and after listing age 5, respectively. Panel B asks whether the firms’ probability of exceeding the
maximum initial q measured during the first 4 years of listing age is a function of age. The dependent variable is
a binary variable that identifies firms that switch from below the maximum initial q to above the maximum
initial q. The subsample of firms we analyze are those with a Tobin’s q below the maximum initial q. We
estimate conditional logit regressions with industry-year fixed-effects and robust standard errors. All control
variables are lagged by one year. Variable definitions are in the Appendix. The symbols ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance in two-sided tests with confidence 0.99, 0.95, and 0.90, respectively. The sample period is
1978 – 2009.

Panel A: Univariate analysis

                                                                Maximum Tobin’s q
                                         Listing age 1 to 4                      Listing age 5 and older
mean                                             3.6                                       3.0
p50                                              2.7                                       2.1
min                                              0.5                                       0.6
max                                             47.1                                       9.6
sd                                               4.5                                       2.4
N                                              8,079                                      8,079
Mean comparison t-test                                              14.386***

Panel B: Switching probability from below to above the maximum initial q

                                           Dependent variable: Dummy for firms that switch from
                                                  below to above the maximum initial q
                                       (1)                          (2)                          (3)
ln(Age)                            –0.308***
                                     (0.048)
Old dummy                                                       –0.334***                    –0.325***
                                                                  (0.045)                      (0.045)
Old dummy × R&D                                                                                –0.052
                                                                                               (0.057)
ROA                                0.011***                     0.011***                     0.011***
                                     (0.001)                      (0.001)                      (0.001)
Capex                                 0.074                        0.074                        0.077
                                     (0.117)                      (0.117)                      (0.117)
R&D                                0.047***                     0.046***                     0.050***
                                     (0.017)                      (0.017)                      (0.019)
Focus                              –0.295***                    –0.292***                    –0.289***
                                     (0.105)                      (0.105)                      (0.105)
KZ-index                           0.010***                     0.010***                     0.010***
                                     (0.003)                      (0.003)                      (0.003)
Leverage                           –2.296***                    –2.306***                    –2.306***
                                     (0.147)                      (0.147)                      (0.147)
Size                                  0.007                        0.008                        0.008
                                     (0.014)                      (0.014)                      (0.014)
Volatility                         3.801***                     3.873***                     3.887***
                                     (0.436)                      (0.433)                      (0.432)
Industry-year FE                    Included                     Included                     Included

Observations                         26'475                         26'475                       26'475
Adjusted R2                          0.033                          0.034                        0.034
                                                           42
                                                      Table V

                                Firm Aging and Product Market Competition

The table investigates how the relation between company age and Tobin’s q is affected by industry competition.
We use concentration data from Hoberg and Phillips (2011) and, alternatively, industry-specific reductions in
import tariffs from Frésard and Valta (2012). High competition dummy means concentration below the sample
median concentration in any given year. Lower tariff dummy identifies industry-years after a reduction in import
tariffs. Industries with no significant changes in import tariffs are omitted from regressions 3 and 4. The sample
excludes firms younger than 5 in terms of listing age. Variable definitions are in the Appendix. The symbols ***,
**, and * indicate statistical significance in two-sided tests with confidence 0.99, 0.95, and 0.90, respectively.
The sample period is 1986 – 2008 in regressions 1 and 2 and 1978 – 2009 in regressions 3 and 4.

                                               Tobin’s q        Standardized q   Tobin’s q      Standardized q
                                                   (1)                (2)            (3)              (4)
ln(Age)                                        –0.160***          –0.140***      –0.328***        –0.323***
                                                 (0.034)            (0.021)       (0.054)           (0.042)
High competition dummy (lagged)                 –0.280**          –0.265***
                                                 (0.116)            (0.072)
ln(Age)×High competition dummy (lagged)          0.068*             0.047*
                                                 (0.038)            (0.024)
Lower tariff dummy                                                               –0.710***        –1.014***
                                                                                  (0.178)           (0.133)
ln(Age)×Lower tariff dummy                                                       0.254***          0.256***
                                                                                  (0.060)           (0.044)
Average q                                                         –0.140***                       –0.095***
                                                                   (0.020)                          (0.024)
ROA                                            –0.006***          –0.005***      –0.009***        –0.006***
                                                 (0.002)           (0.001)         (0.002)          (0.001)
Capex                                           0.314***          0.137***          0.337           0.352**
                                                 (0.100)           (0.049)         (0.229)          (0.166)
R&D                                             0.101***          0.106***       0.121***          0.108***
                                                 (0.022)           (0.013)         (0.027)          (0.018)
Focus                                           0.490***          0.341***       0.347***          0.263***
                                                 (0.062)           (0.037)         (0.082)          (0.056)
KZ-index                                       –0.006***          –0.004***         0.001            0.000
                                                 (0.002)           (0.001)         (0.003)          (0.002)
Leverage                                       –2.682***          –1.780***      –3.036***        –2.200***
                                                 (0.083)           (0.049)         (0.127)          (0.094)
Size                                            0.202***          0.115***       0.234***          0.142***
                                                 (0.010)           (0.006)         (0.014)          (0.009)
Volatility                                      3.298***          1.581***       5.489***          2.966***
                                                 (0.302)           (0.152)         (0.478)          (0.292)
Constant                                        0.746***          –0.244**       0.941***            0.268*
                                                 (0.150)           (0.101)         (0.212)          (0.157)
Industry-year fixed-effects                     Included          Excluded        Included        Excluded

Number of observations                           27'423            27'423         16'586            16'586
Adjusted R2                                      0.298             0.229          0.340             0.249




                                                           43
                                                      Table VI

                    Firm Aging and Competition in the Market for Corporate Control

The table investigates how the existence of business combination laws in the state of incorporation affects the
relation between listing age and Tobin’s q. The states passed these laws during the sample period. Regressions 1
to 4 are estimated for the full sample of firms with listing age > 4. Regressions 5 and 6 exclude firms
incorporated in Delaware. Variable definitions are in the Appendix. The symbols ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance in two-sided tests with confidence 0.99, 0.95, and 0.90, respectively. The sample period is
1978 – 2009.

                                                       Dependent variable: Tobin’s q
                                            Full Sample                  Sample w/o Delaware companies
                                      (1)                  (2)                 (3)               (4)
ln(Age)                           –0.333***                                –0.360***
                                    (0.025)                                  (0.039)
Old dummy                                             –0.283***                             –0.244***
                                                         (0.028)                              (0.038)
BC dummy                          –0.607***           –0.135***            –0.518***           –0.094
                                    (0.093)              (0.043)             (0.148)          (0.062)
ln(Age) × BC dummy                 0.209***                                 0.178***
                                    (0.029)                                  (0.046)
Old dummy × BC dummy                                   0.184***                               0.109**
                                                         (0.036)                              (0.055)
ROA                               –0.004***           –0.004***               0.003            0.003
                                    (0.001)              (0.001)             (0.002)          (0.002)
Capex                              0.346***            0.360***              0.334*           0.354**
                                    (0.083)              (0.083)             (0.178)          (0.177)
R&D                                0.124***            0.125***             0.215***         0.219***
                                    (0.023)              (0.023)             (0.050)          (0.051)
Focus                              0.378***            0.417***             0.332***         0.388***
                                    (0.043)              (0.043)             (0.068)          (0.069)
KZ-index                            –0.004*             –0.004*              –0.004            –0.003
                                    (0.002)              (0.002)             (0.003)          (0.003)
Leverage                          –2.461***           –2.462***            –2.150***        –2.162***
                                    (0.064)              (0.065)             (0.107)          (0.108)
Size                               0.175***            0.165***             0.184***         0.169***
                                    (0.007)              (0.007)             (0.012)          (0.012)
Volatility                         4.488***            4.606***             4.932***         5.149***
                                    (0.239)              (0.238)             (0.400)          (0.395)
Constant                           1.201***            0.446***             1.029***           0.168
                                    (0.103)              (0.081)             (0.158)          (0.122)
Industry-year FE                   Included             Included            Included         Included

Number of observations              56,332                56,332               21,632                21,632
Adjusted R2                         0.316                  0.314               0.305                 0.300




                                                           44
                                                    Table VII

                                Firm Aging and Labor Market Competition

The table investigates the impact of state employment laws on the relation between company age and Tobin’s q.
The proxy for the enforcement of noncompetition agreements at the state level is the noncompetition
enforcement index from Garmaise (2011), which is based on the data provided by Malsberger (2004). The index
aggregates the answers to 12 questions about the enforcement of specific dimensions of noncompetition law in
the state where the firm is headquartered. The data start in 1992. Variable definitions are in the Appendix. The
symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance in two-sided tests with confidence 0.99, 0.95, and 0.90,
respectively. The sample period is 1992 – 2009.

                                                                Dependent variable: Tobin’s q
Old dummy                                                –0.114***                          0.034
                                                           (0.026)                         (0.052)
Noncompetition index                                        0.003                          0.021**
                                                           (0.007)                         (0.009)
Old dummy × Noncompetition index                                                         –0.039***
                                                                                           (0.011)
ROA                                                      –0.006***                       –0.006***
                                                           (0.001)                         (0.001)
Capex                                                     0.339***                        0.340***
                                                           (0.093)                         (0.093)
R&D                                                       0.108***                        0.108***
                                                           (0.022)                         (0.022)
Focus                                                     0.495***                        0.496***
                                                           (0.053)                         (0.053)
KZ-index                                                  –0.004**                        –0.004**
                                                           (0.002)                         (0.002)
Leverage                                                 –2.800***                       –2.807***
                                                           (0.074)                         (0.075)
Size                                                      0.192***                        0.193***
                                                           (0.008)                         (0.008)
Volatility                                                4.266***                        4.261***
                                                           (0.260)                         (0.260)
Constant                                                  0.265***                         0.195**
                                                           (0.096)                         (0.099)
Industry-year FE                                          Included                        Included

Number of observations                                     39,814                           39,814
Adjusted R2                                                0.297                            0.298




                                                         45
                                                      Table VIII

                                      Firm Age and the Focus on the Core

The table investigates whether firms are more likely to focus on core activities as they get older. It reports
coefficients are from conditional logit regressions with industry-year fixed-effects and clustered standard errors.
Panel A looks at the likelihood of asset sales. Asset sale data are from SDC Platinum. In regression 1, the
dependent variable is a binary variable that identifies firms that engage in an asset sale (Asset sale dummy).
Regression 2 identifies firms that sell core assets (Core asset sale dummy). Such a sale is assumed if the target
and the acquiring company have the same 3-digit SIC codes. Regression 3 focuses on sales of non-core assets
(Non-core asset sale dummy). Such a sale is assumed if the target and the acquiring company have different 3-
digit SIC codes. Finally, regression 4 replicates regression 3 for the subsample of firms that actually engage in
asset sales (Asset sale dummy = 1). Panel B investigates whether old firms are more likely to reduce the number
of reported segments on Compustat. Variable definitions are in the Appendix. The symbols ***, **, and *
indicate statistical significance in two-sided tests with confidence 0.99, 0.95, and 0.90, respectively. The sample
period is 1978 – 2009.

Panel A: Firm age and asset sales

                   Asset Sale       Core Asset Sale    Non-core Asset         Non-core Asset Sale Dummy
                    Dummy              Dummy            Sale Dummy        conditional on Asset Sale Dummy = 1
                       (1)                 (2)               (3)                            (4)
Old dummy          0.318***             0.113**          0.435***                       0.318***
                     (0.038)            (0.050)            (0.049)                        (0.071)
ROA                –0.012***          –0.010***          –0.014***                      –0.007***
                     (0.001)            (0.002)            (0.001)                        (0.003)
Capex                –0.208              0.294           –0.958***                      –1.161***
                     (0.207)            (0.266)            (0.220)                        (0.253)
R&D                –0.108***          –0.117***          –0.113**                          0.012
                     (0.040)            (0.033)            (0.050)                        (0.052)
Focus              –1.550***          –0.472***          –2.022***                      –1.795***
                     (0.078)            (0.098)            (0.082)                        (0.119)
KZ-index              0.002              0.001              0.000                         –0.007
                     (0.002)            (0.003)            (0.004)                        (0.008)
Leverage           1.042***            1.104***          0.940***                         –0.030
                     (0.096)            (0.122)            (0.104)                        (0.173)
Size               0.416***            0.405***          0.434***                       0.078***
                     (0.013)            (0.016)            (0.016)                        (0.023)
Volatility           –0.437            1.291***          –1.556***                      –3.046***
                     (0.272)            (0.375)            (0.335)                        (0.616)
MTB-equity           –0.007              0.001             –0.010                         –0.013
                     (0.005)            (0.007)            (0.007)                        (0.011)
Year FE             Included           Included           Included                       Included
N                    60,515              60,515            60,515                          5,783
Pseudo R2             0.153              0.084              0.189                          0.085




                                                          46
Panel B: Reduction in the number of segments reported on Compustat

                                                   Reduction in reported segments dummy
ln(Age)                                      0.454***
                                               (0.041)
Old dummy                                                                           0.410***
                                                                                      (0.046)
ROA                                          –0.010***                              –0.011***
                                               (0.002)                                (0.002)
Tobin’s q                                    –0.056***                              –0.068***
                                               (0.022)                                (0.022)
Capex                                         –0.373*                                –0.413*
                                               (0.219)                                (0.218)
R&D                                          –0.433**                               –0.460**
                                               (0.188)                                (0.205)
KZ-index                                      0.007**                                0.006**
                                               (0.003)                                (0.003)
Leverage                                     1.152***                               1.147***
                                               (0.133)                                (0.133)
Size                                         0.114***                               0.149***
                                               (0.014)                                (0.013)
Volatility                                   2.372***                               1.991***
                                               (0.501)                                (0.505)
Industry-year FE                              Included                               Included
N                                              35,371                                 35,371
Adjusted R2                                     0.038                                  0.034




                                                      47
                                                     Table IX

                             Firm Age and Uncertainty about Business Models

The table asks whether investors’ uncertainty declines as firms get older. We study the relation between firm age
and asset volatility with OLS regressions with industry-year fixed-effects and firm-clustered standard errors.
Variable definitions are in the Appendix. The symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance in two-
sided tests with confidence 0.99, 0.95, and 0.90, respectively. The sample period is 1978 – 2009.


                                                       Dependent variable: Asset volatility
ln(Age)                                         –0.048***
                                                  (0.005)
Old dummy                                                                             –0.049***
                                                                                         (0.006)
ROA                                             –0.002***                             –0.001***
                                                  (0.000)                                (0.000)
Analyst uncertainty                              0.224***                              0.225***
                                                  (0.039)                                (0.039)
Capex                                             –0.014                                 –0.011
                                                  (0.017)                                (0.018)
R&D                                                0.003                                  0.003
                                                  (0.003)                                (0.003)
Focus                                            0.030***                              0.046***
                                                  (0.011)                                (0.011)
KZ-index                                           0.000                                  0.000
                                                  (0.000)                                (0.000)
Size                                            –0.034***                             –0.038***
                                                  (0.002)                                (0.002)
MTB-equity                                       0.004***                              0.004***
                                                  (0.001)                                (0.001)
Constant                                         0.774***                              0.680***
                                                  (0.020)                                (0.019)
Industry-year FE                                 Included                               Included
Observations                                      13,513                                 13,513
Adjusted R2                                        0.602                                  0.597




                                                         48
                                                      Table X

                                      Firm Age and Technical Efficiency

The table studies the relation between firm age and technical efficiency. We estimate OLS regressions with
industry-year fixed effects and firm-clustered standard errors. In regression 1, the dependent variable is
Sales/Asset. Regression 2 standardizes sales with the value of the assets in place (VAIP) instead of book assets.
Following Richardson (2006), VAIP is: VAIP = (1-ar)BV+a(1+r)X-ard. BV is the book value of common equity
(ceq), X is earnings (oiadp), d is dividends (dvc), r is the discount rate (12%), and a is w/(1+r-w). w is a fixed
persistence parameter with a value of 0.62, as reported in Scharfstein and Stein (2000). Finally, regression 3
looks at the firm’s COGS per employee (COGS/Employee). Variable definitions are in the Appendix. The
symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance in two-sided tests with confidence 0.99, 0.95, and 0.90,
respectively. The sample period is 1978 – 2009.

                                   Sales/Assets                 Sales/ VAIP               COGS/Employee
                                        (1)                          (2)                         (3)
ln(Age)                              0.047***                    0.172***                   –13.128***
                                      (0.012)                      (0.057)                     (3.255)
Capex                               –0.116***                    –0.366***                  –48.720***
                                      (0.023)                      (0.118)                    (11.174)
R&D                                 –0.018***                    –0.062***                   17.013***
                                      (0.004)                      (0.017)                     (1.985)
Focus                                  0.008                       –0.093                    30.323***
                                      (0.029)                      (0.132)                     (7.091)
KZ-index                              –0.001                     0.011***                    –1.629***
                                      (0.001)                      (0.003)                     (0.296)
Leverage                            –0.370***                    3.140***                    26.806***
                                      (0.037)                      (0.230)                    (10.202)
MTB-equity                           0.010***                    0.052***                    –1.332***
                                      (0.001)                      (0.011)                     (0.345)
Size                                –0.095***                    –0.229***                   11.488***
                                      (0.005)                      (0.019)                     (1.182)
Volatility                           0.993***                    –1.691**                   166.406***
                                      (0.133)                      (0.704)                    (35.474)
ROA                                  0.016***                    0.020***                    –0.465***
                                      (0.000)                      (0.002)                     (0.092)
Constant                             1.563***                    2.923***                   107.112***
                                      (0.058)                      (0.282)                    (15.001)
Industry-year FE                     Included                     Included                    Included

Number of observations               68,609                       67,861                       67,138
Adjusted/Pseudo R2                   0.530                         0.082                        0.359




                                                         49
                                                     Table XI

                                     Firm Age and Investment Activities

The table studies firms’ investment policy. It shows the results of OLS regressions with industry-year fixed-
effects and firm-clustered standard errors. We consider capital expenses (regressions 1 and 2) and R&D
expenses (regressions 3 and 4). All investment measures are standardized with sales. Variable definitions are in
the Appendix. The symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance in two-sided tests with confidence
0.99, 0.95, and 0.90, respectively. The sample period is 1978 – 2009.

                                            Capex                                       R&D
                                    (1)                  (2)                  (3)                   (4)
ln(Age)                         –0.011***                                 –0.067***
                                 (0.002)                                   (0.011)
Old dummy                                            –0.009***                                  –0.087***
                                                      (0.002)                                    (0.013)
Capex                                                                        0.014                0.015
                                                                            (0.125)              (0.125)
R&D                                0.000                0.000
                                  (0.003)              (0.003)
Focus                            0.009***            0.012***             0.121***               0.126***
                                  (0.003)              (0.003)              (0.022)               (0.021)
KZ-index                         0.000***            0.000***              0.003**                0.003**
                                  (0.000)              (0.000)              (0.001)               (0.001)
Leverage                           –0.003              –0.003             –0.413***             –0.413***
                                  (0.007)              (0.007)              (0.037)               (0.037)
Size                             0.005***            0.005***             0.045***               0.043***
                                  (0.001)              (0.001)              (0.004)               (0.004)
Volatility                      –0.083***            –0.074***               0.214                 0.213
                                  (0.020)              (0.020)              (0.150)               (0.149)
ROA                               0.000**             0.000**             –0.020***             –0.020***
                                  (0.000)              (0.000)              (0.001)               (0.001)
MTB-equity                       0.001***            0.001***             0.009***               0.009***
                                  (0.000)              (0.000)              (0.003)               (0.003)
Constant                         0.026***               0.000             0.225***                0.095**
                                  (0.007)              (0.006)              (0.051)               (0.041)
Ind-year FE                      Included             Included             Included              Included

N                                 68,609               68,609               68,609                68,609
Adjusted R2                       0.184                 0.183                0.293                0.294




                                                        50
                                                      Table XII

                                        Firm Age and Credit Constraints

The table asks whether the negative relation between firm age and Tobin’s q is the result of looser credit
constraints in older firms. We test whether the age effect is different for dividend payers and non-payers. Panel
A looks at actual dividend payments, Panel B studies total payouts (dividends plus share repurchases). In each
panel, the first row shows the coefficients from our standard regression when we add a binary variable for
contemporaneous payouts. In the second regression, we measure financial constraints at the time firms enter our
sample. Therefore, the binary variable equals 1 if the firm paid dividends (repurchased shares) at age 5.
Otherwise, the variable is equal to 0. Finally, the third and fourth regressions in both panels split the sample into
payers and non-payers at age 5. Variable definitions are in the Appendix. The symbols ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance in two-sided tests with confidence 0.99, 0.95, and 0.90, respectively. The sample period is
1978 – 2009.

Panel A: Dividend payments

                                                            Dependent variable: Tobin’s q
                                                Full sample               No dividends              Dividends
                                                                             at age 5                at age 5
                                            (1)               (2)               (3)                     (4)
Old dummy                               –0.123***         –0.113***        –0.092***                –0.068***
                                         (0.024)           (0.027)           (0.029)                 (0.020)
Dividend dummy                           –0.028
                                         (0.026)
Old dummy × Dividend dummy               –0.045
                                         (0.031)
Dividend 5 dummy                                          –0.102***
                                                           (0.027)
Old dummy × Dividend 5 dummy                               –0.018
                                                           (0.034)

Additional controls                      Included          Included            Included              Included
Industry-year FE                         Included          Included            Included              Included

Number of observations                    68'609             55'788             35'833                19'955
Adjusted R2                               0.318              0.317              0.293                 0.485


Panel B: Total payout

                                                           Dependent variable: Tobin’s q
                                               Full sample                 No payouts                 Payouts
                                                                             at age 5                 at age 5
                                            (1)               (2)               (3)                      (4)
Old dummy                              -0.110***          -0.095***         -0.076**                 -0.082**
                                         (0.033)            (0.033)          (0.037)                  (0.034)
Payout dummy                           -0.120***
                                         (0.026)
Old dummy × Payout dummy                  -0.036
                                         (0.036)
Payout 5 dummy                                                -0.046
                                                             (0.033)
Old dummy × Payout 5 dummy                                    -0.009
                                                             (0.044)

Additional controls                     Included           Included            Included              Included
Industry-year FE                        Included           Included            Included              Included
                                                           51
Number of observations   48,110   32,765   21,546   11,219
Adjusted R2              0.302     0.282    0.281    0.244




                                  52
                                                     Table XIII

                                Company Age and Managerial Entrenchment

The table tests whether the existence of managerial agency problems in older firms can explain the aging effect
documented above. The proxies for management entrenchment we consider are Board size, Executive ownership,
the GIM index (Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick, 2003), the delay index (Delay index) suggested by Kadyrzhanova
and Rhodes-Kropf (2011), as well as the alternative takeover protection index (AT index) suggested by Cremers
and Nair (2005). Panel A shows mean comparison tests between old and young firms. Panel B extends the
standard regression from Table II with the proxies for management entrenchment. To preserve space, we report
only a subset of the regression coefficients. Since entrenchment index data are available mostly for large and
mature firms, the median listing age for that subsample of firms is 21 (compared to 13 in the full sample).
Therefore, the new binary age variable is defined as follows: Age >21 dummy = 1 if listing age > 21, otherwise
Age >21 dummy = 0. Moreover, since the number of firm years in that subsample is 3,631 firm-years spread
across 1,072 industry-year combinations, we use separate industry and year fixed effects, as opposed to industry-
year fixed effects. Panel C performs similar regressions with the addition of interaction terms of corporate
governance indices and company age. Variable definitions are in the Appendix. The symbols ***, **, and *
indicate statistical significance in two-sided tests with confidence 0.99, 0.95, and 0.90, respectively. The sample
period is 1996 – 2009.

Panel A: Mean comparison tests

                                     Age >21 dummy = 0          Age >21 dummy = 1                 t-Test
Board size                                 7.701                      9.313                    31.262***
Executive ownership                        0.054                      0.036                    –14.452***
GIM index                                  7.889                      9.352                    30.876***
Delay index                                5.651                      7.343                    39.789***
Alternative takeover index                 2.053                      1.954                     6.354***

Panel B: Firm age and the impact of governance

                                                                        Dependent variable: Tobin’s q
ln(Age)                                                              –0.104**
                                                                      (0.051)
Age > 21 dummy                                                                                –0.171***
                                                                                                (0.061)
Analyst uncertainty                                                  1.946***                  1.971***
                                                                      (0.454)                   (0.453)
GIM-index                                                              0.008                     0.009
                                                                      (0.012)                   (0.012)
Boardsize                                                           –0.068***                 –0.067***
                                                                      (0.014)                   (0.014)
Executive stock ownership                                              0.371                     0.350
                                                                      (0.561)                   (0.555)
CEO age                                                                –0.001                    –0.001
                                                                      (0.004)                   (0.004)
CEO tenure                                                             0.000                     –0.000
                                                                      (0.004)                   (0.004)
Director age                                                           –0.010                    –0.009
                                                                      (0.008)                   (0.008)
Director tenure                                                       0.017**                   0.016**
                                                                      (0.008)                   (0.008)

Other controls                                                       Included                    Included
Industry FE                                                          Included                    Included
Year FE                                                              Included                    Included
Number of observations                                                 3,631                       3,631
Adjusted R2                                                            0.601                       0.602
                                                          53
Panel C: Interaction of firm age and governance indices

                                                            Dependent variable: Tobin’s q
Age >21 dummy                      –0.216***      –0.107      –0.216*** –0.313** –0.214***          –0.399**
                                    (0.064)       (0.231)       (0.060)      (0.123)      (0.059)    (0.159)
GIM index                            0.001         0.007
                                    (0.012)       (0.020)
Age >21 dummy × GIM index                         –0.012
                                                  (0.024)
Delay index                                                     –0.020      –0.041
                                                                (0.023)     (0.036)
Age >21 dummy × Delay index                                                  0.042
                                                                            (0.044)
AT index                                                                                –0.030      –0.073
                                                                                        (0.035)     (0.057)
Age >21 dummy × AT index                                                                             0.088
                                                                                                    (0.068)

Other controls                      Included     Included      Included     Included    Included    Included
Industry-year FE                    Included     Included      Included     Included    Included    Included




                                                          54
                                                     Table XIV

                          Firm Age, CEO pay, Cash Payouts, and Cash Holdings

The table asks whether old firms engage in excessive CEO compensation and whether they are more likely to
return their cash to shareholders. In Panel A, we use the Model of Core, Guay, and Larcker (2008) to see
whether CEO pay is related to firm age. We estimate OLS regressions with industry-year fixed effects and firm-
clustered standard errors. The dependent variable is the log of the CEO’s total compensation (ln(CEO total
pay)). Regression 1 replicates the model of Core, Guay, and Larcker (2008). Regressions 2 and 3 add the two
measures of firm age as additional controls. Panel B examines payout policies and cash holdings. In regressions
1 and 2, the dependent variable is the firm’s dividend payout ratio (Payout). Regressions 3 and 4 look at total
payout (dividends plus share repurchases). Regressions 5 and 6 study cash holdings. All regressions are OLS
with industry-year fixed effects and firm-clustered standard errors. Variable definitions are in the Appendix. The
symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance in two-sided tests with confidence 0.99, 0.95, and 0.90,
respectively. The sample period is 1978 – 2009.

Panel A: Firm age and CEO pay

                                                                 ln(CEO total pay)
                                              (1)                       (2)                        (3)
ln(Age)                                                              –0.026*
                                                                      (0.014)
Old dummy                                                                                      –0.058***
                                                                                                 (0.018)
ln(CEO tenure)                            –0.031***                  –0.031***                 –0.030***
                                            (0.009)                    (0.009)                   (0.009)
sp500 dummy                               0.126***                   0.132***                   0.133***
                                            (0.026)                    (0.026)                   (0.026)
Tobin’s qt-1                              0.056***                   0.055***                   0.054***
                                            (0.009)                    (0.009)                   (0.009)
Stock return                              0.134***                   0.134***                   0.133***
                                            (0.017)                    (0.017)                   (0.017)
Stock returnt-1                           0.116***                   0.117***                   0.117***
                                            (0.017)                    (0.017)                   (0.017)
ROA                                       0.006***                   0.006***                   0.006***
                                            (0.001)                    (0.001)                   (0.001)
ROAt-1                                    –0.006***                  –0.006***                 –0.006***
                                            (0.001)                    (0.001)                   (0.001)
ln(CEO total pay)t-1                      0.486***                   0.485***                   0.484***
                                            (0.018)                    (0.018)                   (0.018)
ln(Sales)t-1                              0.206***                   0.210***                   0.211***
                                            (0.012)                    (0.013)                   (0.012)
Constant                                  2.512***                   2.563***                   2.529***
                                            (0.104)                    (0.106)                   (0.103)
Industry-year FE                           Included                   Included                  Included

Number of observations                      11'786                     11'786                    11'786
Adjusted R2                                 0.570                      0.570                     0.570




                                                         55
Panel B: Firm age and cash payouts

                                Payout                   Total Payout              Cash Holdings
                          (1)            (2)          (3)             (4)        (5)            (6)
Ln(Age)               0.019***                    0.017***                   –0.022***
                        (0.002)                    (0.004)                     (0.002)
Old dummy                            0.014***                     0.013***                 –0.018***
                                       (0.002)                     (0.004)                   (0.002)
ROA                     –0.000         –0.000     0.001***        0.001***   –0.001***     –0.001***
                        (0.000)        (0.000)     (0.000)         (0.000)     (0.000)       (0.000)
Capex                 –0.026***      –0.027***   –0.049***       –0.050***    0.014**        0.016**
                        (0.006)        (0.006)     (0.011)         (0.011)     (0.007)       (0.007)
R&D                   0.002***       0.002***       0.002*          0.002    0.028***       0.028***
                        (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)         (0.001)     (0.002)       (0.002)
Focus                 –0.018***      –0.023***    –0.021**       –0.025***   0.055***       0.060***
                        (0.004)        (0.004)     (0.009)         (0.009)     (0.005)       (0.005)
KZ-index              –0.005***      –0.005***   –0.005***       –0.005***   –0.003***     –0.003***
                        (0.000)        (0.000)     (0.001)         (0.001)     (0.000)       (0.000)
Leverage              –0.022***      –0.022***   –0.065***       –0.065***   –0.317***     –0.317***
                        (0.005)        (0.005)     (0.011)         (0.011)     (0.007)       (0.007)
Size                  0.005***       0.006***     0.015***        0.015***      0.001         –0.000
                        (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)         (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)
Volatility            –0.412***      –0.431***   –0.792***       –0.808***   0.194***       0.213***
                        (0.022)        (0.022)     (0.045)         (0.044)     (0.027)       (0.027)
MTB-equity               0.000          0.000      0.001**         0.001**   0.001***       0.001***
                        (0.000)        (0.000)     (0.000)         (0.000)     (0.000)       (0.000)
Constant              0.056***       0.102***     0.137***        0.178***   0.190***       0.137***
                        (0.009)        (0.007)     (0.019)         (0.016)     (0.011)       (0.010)
Industry-year FE       Included       Included    Included        Included    Included      Included

Observations            68'607        68'607      55'673         55'673       68'609        68'609
Adj./Pseudo R2          0.247         0.244       0.100          0.099        0.434         0.432




                                                    56
                                                   Table XV

                                    Company Age and Management Age

The table investigates the relation between company age and the age of management and directors. The measures
of management and director age are CEO age, CEO tenure, Director age, and Director tenure, respectively.
Variable definitions are in the Appendix. The symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance in two-
sided tests with confidence 0.99, 0.95, and 0.90, respectively. The sample period is 1978 – 2009.

                                      Old dummy = 0             Old dummy = 1                  t-Test
CEO age                                   61.136                    64.516                  22.244***
CEO tenure                                 8.391                     8.738                   2.620***
Director age                              57.794                    60.219                  27.402***
Director tenure                            8.262                    10.541                  26.182***




                                                       57
