NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PLAYING FAVORITES:
HOW FIRMS PREVENT THE REVELATION OF BAD NEWS
Lauren Cohen
Dong Lou
Christopher Malloy
Working Paper 19429
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19429
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013
We would like to thank Javed Ahmed, Malcolm Baker, Lucian Bebchuk, Bo Becker, Dan
Bradley, Zhi Da, Kent Daniel, Alex Edmans, Ben Esty, Andrea Frazzini, Oliver Hart, Campbell
Harvey, David Hirshleifer, Louis Kaplow, Scott Kominers, S.P. Kothari, Christian Leuz, Ulrike
Malmendier, Bill Mayew, Scott Mayfield, Atif Mian, Roni Michaely, Maureen O’Hara, Daniel
Paravisini, Thomas Philippon, Doug Skinner, Jose Scheinkman, David Solomon, Kelly Shue,
Siew-Hong Teoh, David Thesmar, Han Xia, Luigi Zingales, Eric Zitzewitz, and seminar
participants at University of California Berkeley, University of California Irvine, Case Western
Reserve University, University of Chicago, China Europe International Business School, Cornell
University, George Washington University, University of Georgia, Georgia State University,
Harvard Business School, Harvard Law School, HEC Paris, University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, University of Illinois, Indiana University, INSEAD,
London Business School, London School of Economics, University of Miami, MIT Sloan,
University of Notre Dame, University of North Carolina, NYU Stern, Pontifica Universidad
Catholica De Chile, Princeton University, University of Washington, UPenn Wharton, University
of York, 2014 AFA Philadelphia Meeting, 2013 NBER Behavioral Economics Meeting, 2013
University of Miami Behavioral Finance Conference, 2013 Helsinki Finance Summit, 2013 Yale
Doctoral Summer Program in Behavioral Finance, 2013 European Finance Association Annual
Meeting, 2013 Borsa Istanbul Finance & Economics Conference, Acadian Asset Management,
AQR Capital, PanAgora Asset Management, and SAC Capital for helpful comments and
discussions. We thank Alok Kumar and Kelvin Law for generously providing data on analyst
brokerage house affiliation. In addition, we are grateful to James Boggie, Huaizhi Chen,
Manuel Daj, David DiCenso, Barbara Esty, Laura Glass, Beth Hall, David Kim, Christine
Rivera, Elizabeth Sampson, Pablo Torroella, Shannette Washington, and James Zeitler for
providing excellent research assistance. We are grateful for funding from the National
Science Foundation and the Paul Woolley Center at the London School of Economics.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2013 by Lauren Cohen, Dong Lou, and Christopher Malloy. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Playing Favorites: How Firms Prevent the Revelation of Bad News
Lauren Cohen, Dong Lou, and Christopher Malloy
NBER Working Paper No. 19429
September 2013, Revised October 2016
JEL No. G0,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
We explore a subtle but important mechanism through which firms can control information flow to
the markets. We find that firms that “cast” their conference calls by disproportionately calling on bullish
analysts tend to underperform in the future. Firms that call on more favorable analysts experience
more negative future earnings surprises and more future earnings restatements. A long-short portfolio
that exploits this differential firm behavior earns abnormal returns of up to 149 basis points per month,
or almost 18 percent per year. We find similar evidence in an international sample of earnings call
transcripts from the UK, Canada, France, and Japan. Firms with higher discretionary accruals, firms
that barely meet/exceed earnings expectations, and firms (and their executives) that are about to issue
equity, sell shares, and exercise options, are all significantly more likely to cast their earnings calls.

Lauren Cohen
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 273
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lcohen@hbs.edu
Dong Lou
Department of Finance
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London, WC2A 2AE
UK
d.lou@lse.ac.uk

Christopher Malloy
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 277
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
cmalloy@hbs.edu

Regardless of the extent of disclosure regulations, there exists private information which
managers can release at their discretion. Given the current regulatory environment in the
US of level playing-field information laws, firms can only communicate information in
public information exchanges. However, even in these highly regulated venues, there are
subtle choices that firms can make that reveal differential amounts of information to the
market.
In this paper we explore a subtle, but economically important way in which firms
shape their information environments, namely through their specific organization and
choreographing of earnings conference calls. Our analysis rests on a simple premise: firms
have an information advantage, and they understand this and have the ability to be
strategic in its release.
Our empirical strategy is to examine firms’ decisions to “cast” their earnings
conference calls in a particular way, specifically, how and who they call on to participate
in these calls. We focus on the firms that call specifically on analysts that have given them
the highest recommendations (as proxied by the average recommendation over the past
year), 1 under the hypothesis that firms that cast their conference calls in this way may be
preventing the revelation of negative information to the market. We then analyze the
future behavior and outcomes associated with these firms.
To better understand our approach, consider the case of Sealed Air Corp., a firm
found in our sample. Sealed Air produces a variety of packaging materials, the most wellknown of which is Bubble Wrap. Sealed Air held their Q1 earnings conference call in April
2007. While Sealed Air was covered by 11 analysts, on this particular call, it only allowed
a select few to participate in the conference call: those analysts that had particularly high
recommendations on the firm in advance of the call. These analysts largely complimented
the firm on the quarter, but did not push them on the upcoming quarter. Figure 1 shows
excerpts from the conference call: Panels A-C show several cases in which the analysts can
be seen joking and laughing with the CEO, with one analyst specifically complimenting the

See Mayew (2008) and Mayew, Sharp, and Venkatachalam (2011) for evidence on the implications of
differential analyst participation during conference calls for analyst accuracy.

1

Playing Favorites – Page 3

CEO on cash strategy. Throughout all of the exchanges there is a notable lack of difficult
(or even substantive) questions posed by the analysts.
Three months later, at the Q2 earnings call following the April call where analysts
with particularly positive recommendations were called upon, Sealed Air missed
expectations, had their first negative free cash flow quarter (following 20 consecutive
positive ones), and dropped 7% on the announcement. In this paper we show that this
pattern--of firms appearing to choreograph information exchanges directly prior to the
revelation of negative news--is systematic across the universe of publicly traded firms. 2
More generally, our key finding is that firms that manipulate their conference calls
in this way appear to be hiding bad news, which ultimately leaks out in the future.
Specifically, we find that casting firms experience consistently predictable negative future
returns. These negative future returns are concentrated around future earnings calls where
they stop their casting behavior, and hence allow negative information to ultimately be
revealed to the market. A long-short portfolio that goes long the non-casting firms and
short the casting firms around their subsequent call earns abnormal returns ranging from
129 basis points (t=2.59) to 149 basis points (t=2.64) per month; which translates to
annualized abnormal returns of roughly 15 to 18 percent per year.
Using a hand-collected dataset of international earnings transcripts, we then show
that the core evidence in this paper extends beyond the U.S., to an international sample
including the United Kingdom, Canada, France, and Japan. Specifically, we again find
that an analyst’s prior recommendation level is a strong predictor of the likelihood of asking
a question on an earnings call in each of these 4 additional countries. We then show that
casting on an international earnings call predicts negative future announcement returns on
the subsequent earnings event, consistent with our U.S. evidence. Collectively, our evidence
spans 5 countries, 13 years, 4101 firms, and 7125 analysts, covering 91,878 conference calls
in total, making our dataset the largest and most extensive of any project analyzing
Another example that occurred in April 2013 was that of the earnings call of Amazon.com, when bearish
analyst Colin Gillis was locked-out of the quarterly earnings call, and leaked this to The Seattle Times.
“Amazon analyst frozen out on company Q&A calls: Analyst skeptical about Amazon wonders why he’s not
getting a chance to ask questions during the e-commerce giant’s quarterly conference calls,” The Seattle
Times, May 1, 2013. At their subsequent earnings announcement (July 2013), Amazon missed analysts’
expectations on EPS, missed analysts’ expectations on revenues, and guided downward for future earnings.
2

Playing Favorites – Page 4

corporate earnings calls.
In terms of the magnitude and incidence of casting across the population of firms,
we find that more “extreme” examples of casting—where the average gap in
recommendation levels between the analysts who are called upon in a call and those who
do not speak is largest (which we term RecIn-RecOut)—are associated with the most
negative future returns, suggesting that the tails of this gap distribution do capture true
casting behavior by firms. A one-standard deviation move above the zero recommendationgap benchmark implies that between 17-22% of firms in a given quarter engage in this type
of opportunistic behavior. In the time-series we find that RecIn-RecOut is (on average)
significantly higher in 2008 than in other years, consistent with the idea that casting
behavior was more prevalent during the financial crisis.
Importantly, we show that the return predictability that we document is not driven
by well-known predictors of future returns such as analyst forecast dispersion, analyst
recommendation dispersion, discretionary accruals, affiliation status, or issuance behavior.
Further, we observe no sign of any return reversal in the future, suggesting that the
negative information that is hidden is information important for fundamental firm value.
If firms are deliberately choosing to call on more favorable analysts, we might expect
them to do so when it is especially valuable. For instance, firms that engage in more
earnings management (discretionary accruals), may be especially wary of calling on analysts
that will probe into these accruals. Additionally, firms that barely meet or exceed earnings
expectations (meeting at 0, or beating by 1 penny), have been shown in prior literature to
be far more likely to have manipulated earnings in order to do so, and so may be less likely
to want to be aggressively questioned. Lastly, firms planning to do SEOs (or managers
planning to sell their shares, or exercise their options) in the near future may be interested
in keeping share price high to maximize proceeds, and so may prefer to call on friendly
analysts. We find evidence on all three of these paths: firms with higher discretionary
accruals, firms that barely meet/exceed earnings expectations, and firms (and their
executives) about to issue equity, sell shares, and exercise stock options are all significantly
more likely to call on analysts with more optimistic views of the firm.
By contrast, our evidence is less consistent with a view that the patterns we
Playing Favorites – Page 5

document are driven solely from the analyst side, i.e., that optimistic analysts are the only
analysts who choose to speak on an earnings call, and that firms are merely passive actors
in this process. First, the evidence on the timing of the behaviors above is hard to reconcile
with this alternate view, since the analysts would have to choose to show up and speak
only on the calls that exactly coincide with the firm- and manager-level opportunistic
behaviors listed above, which seems implausible.
In order to further explore this alternative story, however, we also parsed our entire
dataset and manually examined each conference call transcript in order to identify all the
calls where phrases such as “There are no more questions in the queue” are spoken by
management or by a moderator at the very end of the call. For these calls, it appears that
management was not casting the call, since for these calls management actively opened up
the call to the entire audience, and determined that there were no other call participants
willing to ask a question. There may have been (negative) analysts who did not want to
ask questions, but we can at least rule out the possibility that management was actively
disallowing additional questions that the audience wished to ask. We show that these calls
are not accompanied by significantly negative returns in the future (the combined effect of
the “No More Questions” interaction term plus the basic “RecIn-RecOut” coefficient is
insignificant for these calls); meanwhile the negative future returns described earlier are
concentrated only on the calls where this phrase does not occur, suggesting that only the
casted calls drive our key results.
To further explore the mechanism behind our findings, we also investigate the order
of the questions asked on the earnings calls. In particular, we examine the impact of an
analyst’s recommendation level, All-Star status, affiliation status, and broker prestige
status (along with interactions of the recommendation level with these status variables) on
the order in which analysts are called on. We find that bullish analysts, All-Star analysts,
affiliated analysts, and analysts from prestigious brokerage firms are called on earlier in a
call. Further, the interaction terms between the recommendation level and the status
variables are all significant, suggesting that bullish analysts with status are particularly
likely to be called on earlier in a call.
Lastly, we attempt to get a measure of the aggressiveness of the questions asked by

Playing Favorites – Page 6

favorable vs. non-favorable analysts. While this is a difficult task, we use a simple measure
of how positive the tone of the question is (the number of positive vs. negative words). We
find suggestive evidence that favorable analysts—i.e., those with higher outstanding
recommendations—tend to ask more positive questions.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I provides a brief
background and literature review. Section II describes the data we use, while Section III
explores firm behavior in casting earnings conference calls. Section IV examines the impact
of casting on firms; Section V presents international evidence; and Section VI explores the
mechanism in more detail. Section VII concludes.

I. Background and Literature Review
Our paper adds to a large literature examining firms’ attempts to manage their
information environments, the manner in which firms disclose information to the markets,
and the impact of different forms of disclosure on various stakeholder groups (e.g., investors,
customers, regulators, media, etc.). A series of recent papers, for example, studies the
impact of Regulation Fair Disclosure (“RegFD”), which was designed to combat selective
disclosure by firms.

Effective October 23, 2000, companies must reveal any material

information to all investors and analysts simultaneously in the case of intentional
disclosures, or within 24 hours in the case of unintentional disclosures. According to SEC
Proposed Rule S7-31-99, regulators believed that allowing selective disclosure was "not in
the best interests of investors or the securities markets generally." Several recent papers
examining the impact of Regulation FD on the behavior of equity analysts conclude that
the law has in fact been effective in curtailing selective disclosure to analysts (see, for
example, Mohanram and Sunder (2006), Groysberg, Healy, Chapman, Shanthikumar and
Gui (2007), Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy (2010), Agrawal, Chadha, and Chen (2006), and
Gintschel and Markov (2004)). Our paper is unique in that we take as given the “level
playing field” imposed by Regulation Fair Disclosure (RegFD), and explore the subtle
choices firms can make even within this seemingly strict information disclosure
environment, choices that can (as we document) have large implications for market prices
and firm outcomes.
Playing Favorites – Page 7

Since the laboratory we exploit is that of quarterly earnings conference calls, our
paper is also relevant to a large literature studying the relationship between firms and
analysts, as well as studies of the information content of earnings announcements and
earnings conference calls specifically. 3

For example, a recent strand of the literature

examines management communication during conference calls and its association with
information content (Hollander, Pronk and Roelofsen (2010), Matsumoto, Pronk and
Roelofsen (2011)), information asymmetry (Chen, Hollander, and Law (2014)), future
performance (Mayew and Venkatachalam (2012)) and financial fraud and misreporting
(Larcker and Zakolyukina (2011), and Hobson, Mayew and Venkatachalam (2012)). In
addition, Zhou (2014) uses textual analysis to analyze when corporate executives blame
poor performance on external factors such as the industry or the broader economy. Chen
and Matsumoto (2006) also find that in the pre-Reg FD period that analysts with access
to management deliver more accurate earnings forecasts.

Lastly, Mayew (2008) and

Mayew, Sharp, and Venkatachalam (2013) also document and explore differential analyst
participation on conference calls, but focus on its implications for analyst accuracy; our
focus is on the firms engaging in this type of behavior, and the signal that this behavior
conveys for future firm outcomes.

II. Data and Summary Statistics
We draw from a variety of data sources to construct the sample we use in this
paper. A critical input to our study is the earnings conference call transcript data. We
obtain these transcripts from Thomson Reuters, specifically from the StreetEvents data
feed. We collect the complete transcripts of all US conference calls for the period of 2003
to 2015. We also obtain, from the same source, all available conference calls in Canada,
UK, France, and Japan for the period of 2003 to 2014. We isolate the name of the firm
conducting the call, along with the name and affiliation of all analysts covering the firm
conducting the call. In practice, firms know the identities of all listeners to the call, as
For instance, Hirshleifer et al. (2009), DellaVigna and Pollet (2009), and Neissner (2013) all give evidence
that managers attempt to time disclosures around times of low perceived investor attention. There is also
an accompanying literature examining the release of negative news (see, for example Kothari et al. (2009),
Bergman and Roychowdhury (2008), and Westphal and Deephouse (2011)).
3

Playing Favorites – Page 8

each person must dial in through a conference call-in service that requires them to sign in
at the outset of each call; the company then filters who can ask questions, and also
determines the queue. 4 In the Thomson data, we see only the names of analysts who were
called on to ask a question during the call; we assume that all other analysts covering the
stock were listening to the call, but were not called on. 5
To construct our dataset, we first hand-match the StreetEvents analyst names for
each call back to the brokerage house and analyst last name and first initial available on
IBES, using a conservative matching procedure. This allows us to match the data to IBES,
so that we can obtain data on past forecast accuracy and past recommendation levels. For
some of our additional tests, we also examine the text of each question in order to assess
the difficulty of the question.
In addition to analysts’ past forecasts and recommendations, we also obtain analyst
data on length of career, Institutional Investor All Star status, and other selected analyst
biographical items (such as past employment) from ZoomInfo. We also collect additional
firm-level data, such as firm restatements over our sample period from the Audit Analytics
database, as well as monthly stock returns, shares outstanding, volume, and market
capitalization from CRSP, and a variety of firm-specific accounting variables from
Compustat. For our international sample, we obtain their daily stock returns from

With regard to the call mechanics, we have contacted, and had a number of discussions with, the company
InterCall (a subsidiary of West Corporation), which administers over 85% of all quarterly conference calls for
the Fortune 100. Many employ the industry-standard product called Leader-View, which allows a firm’s
“call-team” – which from InterCall has a modal constituency of the CEO/CFO, head of Investor Relations,
Legal Counsel, and two to three other company executives - to see a computer screen with everyone that has
entered the call. This “call-team” then has a private line to the operator at InterCall who is orchestrating
the call. What the firm sees on Leader-View is a list of participants in the call, along with affiliation of each
participant, and a flag for whether the participant has indicated interest in asking a question during the
Q&A. Through their private communication line, the firm’s call-team indicates to the operator who it would
like to call on, and at what point during the call it would like to call on that participant. The operator then
introduces the questioner chosen by the firm - this is why conference call transcripts are filled with lines such
as: “Operator: Next up we’ll hear from Colin Gillis from BGC Partners.” At the firm’s discretion, the Q&A
portion of the call comes to a close. We attempted to obtain the full participant list from both InterCall and
the underlying firms, but neither would provide the full set of participants (nor the set of participants that
“indicated” they wanted to ask a question, but were not able to).
5
In Appendix Table A7 we show that analysts who are able to ask questions during the call have significant
increases in their future forecast accuracy following the call. Anecdotally, we also contacted a number of
analysts directly, and in those conversations the analysts commented that it was a “job-requirement” to callin (and if possible to ask questions) during the conference calls. One recounted an instance where a leadanalyst at his firm had not called in, and it being mentioned at the lead analyst’s performance review.
4

Playing Favorites – Page 9

Datastream. In sum, our evidence spans 5 countries, 13 years, 4101 firms, and 7125
analysts, covering 91,878 conference calls.
Table I presents summary statistics from our final dataset. Panel A reports statistics
for our U.S. dataset, and Panel B reports numbers for our pooled international dataset,
consisting of observations from the UK, Canada, France, and Japan. Each analyst covering
a given stock is designated as “in” for a particular conference call if she was called on
during that call, and “out” if she was not called on during that call. An analyst is said to
be “covering” a stock if she has produced a stock recommendation for a given stock in the
IBES database in the past year. Table I shows that an average of 3.73 unique analysts
(out of an average of 9.93 analysts covering a stock) are called on during a typical quarterly
earnings call. In a preview of some of our results, Table I also shows that analysts who are
called tend to issue more optimistic recommendations in the year prior to the call (an
average of 3.75 on a 1-5 scale, where 1=Strong Sell, 2=Sell, 3=Hold, 4=Buy, 5=Strong
Buy) relative to other analysts covering the stock (=3.61). The average level difference in
analyst recommendations between the two groups (equal to 0.15) is statistically significant
and of the same magnitude as the optimism effect associated with “affiliation” (i.e., when
a firm has an underwriting relationship with the analyst’s brokerage house), which is the
subject of a vast analyst literature (see, for example, Lin and McNichols (1998), Lin et al.
(2005), Michaely and Womack (1999), Hong and Kubik (2003)). Panel B shows a similar,
although somewhat smaller, unconditional difference between the average recommendation
levels of the two analyst groups (RecIn-RecOut=0.08) in the international data. Note that
Appendix Table A1 reports some additional firm-level summary statistics; relative to the
average firm on CRSP, our sample is tilted towards stocks that are larger, have lower bookto-market ratios (i.e., are more “growth-like” in nature), and have higher institutional
ownership.

III. Firm Behavior on Earnings Conference Calls

A. Analyst Recommendations and Conference Call Participation
We begin by examining the likelihood of an analyst being called upon in a quarterly
earnings conference call.

Specifically, we run panel regressions where the dependent
Playing Favorites – Page 10

variable (IN) is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the analyst was called on during a call,
and 0 if the analyst was not; the main independent variable of interest is the analyst’s
recommendation level prior to the conference call. We focus on the average recommendation
in the year prior to the call rather than the most recent recommendation of each analyst;
this is because firm managers may not be immediately aware of the most recent
recommendation updates by individual analysts, and thus have to rely on the historical
average to identify “friendly” vs. “unfriendly” analysts. Using lagged recommendations also
helps alleviate the concern that our results are driven by the information content of recent
recommendation changes.
We also control for a variety of other determinants of call participation, including
several analyst-level variables (such as the number of years the analyst has worked in the
industry, the number of years the analyst has covered the firm in question, the number of
stocks currently covered by the analyst, the number of stocks currently covered by the
analyst’s brokerage firm, a dummy if the analyst was named an Institutional Investor AllStar analyst within the past year, and a dummy indicating whether the analyst is affiliated
with a brokerage house that underwrites for the firm in question 6), and numerous firmlevel measures (such as size, book-to-market ratio, past year returns, share turnover, and
idiosyncratic volatility). We then test the hypothesis that firms choose to call on or “cast”
their earnings calls with analysts who were more favorable in their past recommendations
on these firms.
Table II, using data on all US publicly traded firms from 2003-2015, confirms the
finding in Mayew (2008) that firms do indeed call on analysts who issue more favorable
recommendations in the year leading up to a conference call. Further, Table II shows that
this effect persists even after controlling for a host of analyst- and firm-level variables
known to correlate with analyst recommendations, and after including firm-quarter fixed
effects (in Columns 1-2, thus comparing in and out analysts covering the same firm in the
same quarter), and after including analyst-time fixed effects (in Columns 3-4, thus
comparing in and out stocks covered by the same analyst in the same quarter). 7 The
We thank Alok Kumar and Kelvin Law for providing data on affiliation of all analysts and brokerage houses
in our sample. See Kumar (2010) for more details.

6

7

Appendix Table A2 shows that controlling directly for the number of times the analyst has been called on
Playing Favorites – Page 11

estimates in Columns 1-4 imply that for a one-notch increase in analyst recommendation
level (roughly a one-standard deviation move), the likelihood of being called on increases
by about 6%, relative to an unconditional probability of 38% (so a 16% increase in the
likelihood).

In Columns 5 and 6, we run the same regressions but now using a logit

specification, again using being “called on” as the 0/1 dependent variable, and the average
prior recommendation level (minus the average recommendation level for that firm prior
to the call) as the independent variable of interest; these tests again reveal a positive and
significant effect of prior recommendation level on the likelihood of being called on during
an earnings conference call. In terms of economic magnitude, the marginal effect of a onestandard-deviation increase in recommendation is associated with a 5.7%-6.9% increase in
the likelihood of being called.

B. Types of Firms that Call on Bullish Analysts, and Incidence of Casting
Next we examine the behavior and characteristics of firms that tend to call
specifically on analysts with higher past recommendations. Our first test explores the
determinants of firms’ casting decisions. Our key measure of casting, RecIn-RecOut, equals
the difference in average recommendation level by “in” analysts (i.e., those analysts called
upon during the conference call) versus “out” analysts (i.e., those analysts not called upon,
but who cover the firm in the given quarter), measured in the one year prior to the
conference call. We then run panel regressions with this firm-level (RecIn-RecOut) variable
on the left-hand side of the regression, and present the results in Table III. 8
For our explanatory variables, we start by analyzing two measures that plausibly
capture a firm’s incentive to call on more favorable analysts.

First, we examine

discretionary accruals, as firms with higher accruals may have an incentive to call on bullish
analysts to avoid a potentially unfavorable discussion of the specific composition of their
earnings. We also create a dummy variable equal to one if a firm’s earnings surprise in the
in the past (PASTCALL), has no effect on these results from Table II. Also note that including firm-analyst
fixed effects in these Table II regressions has no effect on the results either.
We find nearly identical results using an alternate measure of casting, termed RecIn>RecOut, which is a
dummy variable equal to 1 if the average recommendation of analysts speaking on the call is higher than the
average recommendation of those who do not speak on the call.

8

Playing Favorites – Page 12

quarter in question is exactly 0 or 1 cent, since firms that just meet (or barely exceed)
consensus forecasts may want to avoid any difficult questions about the precise manner in
which they hit their forecasts so narrowly.
We also control for the same firm-level variables defined in Table II, and run the
tests as panel regressions with firm and time (quarter) fixed effects and standard errors
double-clustered at both the firm and quarter level. In addition, we include controls for:
analyst forecast dispersion (measured as the standard deviation of analysts’ outstanding
quarterly EPS forecasts); and analyst recommendation dispersion (measured as the
standard deviation of analysts’ outstanding recommendations); analyst coverage (the
number of unique analyst estimates made in the 12 months leading up to the call);
institutional ownership (the proportion of the firm that is held by institutional investors);
and the idiosyncratic volatility of the firm (measured as the standard deviation of the fourfactor adjusted monthly return over the past 12 months).
Columns 1-3 of Table III show that discretionary accruals (ACCRUAL) and the
dummy for meeting or barely exceeding consensus earnings forecasts (SUE(0)) are both
positive and significant predictors of RecIn-RecOut, consistent with the idea that firms
with the largest incentive to call on favorable analysts are exactly the firms that do so. In
terms of magnitude, a one-standard deviation move in accruals leads to a 6.5% increase in
RecIn-RecOut. In addition, firms that meet or barely exceed forecasts have a 20% higher
value of RecIn-RecOut. 9
In Columns 4-7 of Table III we explore the future behavior of firms after they engage
in casting behavior. Specifically, we run logit regressions in order to examine the predictive
power of casting on a given call for several firm (and executive) behaviors during the
following quarter. Our first dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to one if the
firm in question issues a secondary equity offering (SEO) in quarter t+1, as firms issuing
equity in the near future may want to avoid the release of any potential bad news that
could decrease their issuance proceeds. Second, we create a dummy variable equal to one
if the insiders of the firm conducting the call on aggregate engage in net-selling of their

Controlling for the magnitude of the SUE (standardized unexpected earnings) itself in all of the regressions
in Table III has no effect on these results.

9

Playing Favorites – Page 13

insider owned shares – the idea being that firms may want to prop up their stock price
(delay the release of bad news) if they plan to engage in sales of their shares, as they would
like to sell the shares at the highest price possible. Third, we create a dummy variable
equal to one if a firm’s top executives exercise their stock options in the following quarter,
and zero otherwise; again the idea is that executives ideally would like to exercise their
options at the highest share-price possible. And finally, we create a dummy variable equal
to one if a firm’s top executives receive an option grant in the following quarter, and zero
otherwise; here the idea is the opposite of the exercise variable, since in this case an
executive hopes to receive a grant at the lowest price possible.
Columns 4-7 show that casting behavior (RecIn-RecOut) is indeed a positive and
significant predictor of future equity issuance (SEO), future insider selling (INSIDER), and
future option exercise by management (OPTIONEXCS), and a negative and significant
predictor of option grants (GRANT).

In terms of marginal impact, a one-standard

deviation move in RecIn-RecOut leads to a 6% increase in the likelihood of SEO issuance,
a 3% increase in the likelihood of insider selling, a 2% increase in the likelihood of option
exercise by management, and a 5% decrease in the likelihood of option grants given to
management (all as a fraction of their corresponding unconditional probabilities).
One important question is the extent to which we are capturing the information
staging activities of a few firms that engage in this frequently throughout our sample, or
whether this is a more systematic activity engaged in by a large universe of firms at
precisely those times when it is most valuable for any given firm to withhold negative
information. However, note that Columns 1-3 of Table III include both firm and quarter
fixed effects. 10 If it were simply a subset of firms always casting their calls, the firm fixed
effect would capture this, and these independent variables would be insignificant upon the
inclusion of the fixed effects. In contrast, Table III shows that even controlling for firm
fixed effects, all of the results on motivators for potentially wanting to cast a call (e.g.,
earnings management) are highly significant.
One persistent firm-level variable worth mentioning is the corporate governance G-

10
Note that if we re-run Columns 4-7 using OLS with firm and quarter fixed effects, instead of logit
regressions, the results are similar to those presented here.

Playing Favorites – Page 14

index measure of Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003). This measure is highly persistent at
the firm level, so one would expect that firm fixed effects would largely capture this
measure, and we confirm this in our data. Without firm fixed effects, the coefficient on
the G-Index is 0.0037 (t=2.37), suggesting that casting behavior is positively related to
poor governance, but this result is no longer significant once firm fixed effects are included.
In Figure 2 we graph the histogram of frequency of quarters that each firm casting
episode in our sample lasts. In theory, once a firm begins to “cast” their conference call
(RecIn>RecOut), they could continue this behavior indefinitely. As we have 36 quarters
in our sample, if the firm is present throughout the entire sample, the maximum casting
length could be 36 quarters, with the minimum 1 (as we are conditioning on it being a
casting episode). What we see from Figure 2 is that the most common length for a casting
episode is one quarter. Also note that in Appendix Figure A1, we compute two “placebo”
figures, one of which represents a histogram of casting spells under the assumption that
firms calls on firms randomly, and another which is a histogram of spells of non-casting
episodes (where RecIn<RecOut); the casting distribution depicted in Figure 2 is noticeably
more fat-tailed relative to these two placebos, and also statistically different from both in
a Chi-Squared test.
These histograms, along with the firm fixed effects not impacting the results in
Table III, suggests that casting is something a wide range of firms engage in selectively at
precisely those times they have strong incentives to do so, and we are not identifying a
behavior solely driven by a few firms that continuously cast their calls.
To further explore the magnitude and incidence of casting across time and across
the population of firms in our sample, Table IV plots the distribution of casting (RecInRecOut) by year, both according to percentiles of the distribution (in Panel A), and using
fixed thresholds (in Panel B). As we show later in Table VI, exploring the tails of the
casting distribution (i.e., firms where RecIn-RecOut is particularly high, e.g., greater than
the 90% percentile) results in even stronger results than our baseline findings, suggesting
that these higher thresholds capture “extreme” casting more cleanly. Panel A of Table IV
shows that RecIn-RecOut is (on average) significantly higher in 2008 than in other years,
consistent with the idea that casting behavior was more prevalent during the financial

Playing Favorites – Page 15

crisis. Panel B indicates that the percentage of firms with RecIn-RecOut>0 is roughly 60%
across the sample. At the threshold of 0.6 (a one-standard deviation move above the RecInRecout=0 benchmark), we find between 17-22% of firms in a given quarter fall into this
category; this number represents a possible estimate of the general incidence of casting in
the population of firms.
Collectively, the results in this section indicate that during our full 2003-2015 sample
of the universe of quarterly earnings calls, firms are more likely to call on analysts who
have issued more favorable recommendations on these firms leading up to the call.
Moreover, this type of behavior is most pronounced among firms with the strongest
incentives to manage the flow of information to the market, such as firms with higher
discretionary accruals, firms that barely meet/exceed earnings expectations, and firms (or
executives) about to issue equity, sell shares, or exercise their stock options in the near
future.

IV. The Impact of Casting on Firms
In this section we explore what happens to the firms that call on more favorable
analysts during earnings conference calls.

We exploit cross-sectional and time series

variation in the extent to which firms engage in this type of behavior, and importantly

when they choose to cast their calls. We explore the impact of casting on a host of future
firm-specific outcomes, such as future stock returns, future earnings surprises, and future
earnings restatements.

A. Future Earnings Announcement Returns and Future Earnings Surprises
If firms calling on favorable analysts are doing so in order to portray the most
positive view to the market and potentially hide any negative information from coming to
light, our hypothesis is that firms engaging in this type of behavior are more likely to
experience negative future outcomes, such as negative future earnings surprises, as this
news will ultimately be revealed to the market (it likely cannot be hidden forever). We
test this idea by running forecasting regressions of future earnings announcement returns
Playing Favorites – Page 16

and future earnings surprises on the lagged spread between average recommendation levels
(in the prior year) of analysts called on vs. those not called on (RecIn-RecOut) during the
last earnings call, plus a host of additional control variables. We measure announcement
returns using cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) around the earnings date, and earnings
surprises using SUEs, and control for the same firm-level variables used in Table III. Again,
since these CARs and earnings surprises are measured around the subsequent earnings
announcement relative to the one-quarter lagged casting measure, these regressions are
strictly predictive in nature. We conduct quarterly Fama-MacBeth regressions for both
CARs and SUEs, controlling for the following lagged firm-level variables: market
capitalization; book-to-market ratio; prior year returns; share turnover over the past 12
months; analysts’ recommendation dispersion; idiosyncratic volatility, institutional
holdings, and analyst coverage.
Columns 1-3 of Table V show that firms that call more on favorable analysts (i.e.,
those with higher values of RecIn-RecOut) experience more negative future announcement
returns (CARs). For example, the coefficient of -0.259 in Column 3 implies that for a onestandard deviation move in (RecIn-RecOut) this period, CARs are 39% lower at the next
announcement (computed relative to the sample mean CAR of 40 basis points). Controlling
for additional known predictors of future earnings returns, such as net insider selling
behavior, discretionary accruals (Sloan (1996), Hirshleifer, Hou, and Teoh (2012), etc.),
analyst forecast dispersion (Diether et al. (2002)), etc., have no effect on this return
predictability. 11 Columns 4-6 of Table V show a similar effect for future earnings surprises.
In terms of the magnitude of this effect, a one-standard deviation move in (RecIn-RecOut)
this period implies a lower earnings surprise by over 20% of the interquartile range for the
next announcement, so an economically large impact.

B. Isolating Cases Where Management Left No Questions Unanswered
Our evidence so far is less consistent with a view that the patterns we document are

11
Also if we run these regressions on the set of firms who do not issue SEOs, to ensure that our results are
not driven by post-SEO underperformance, we find that the coefficient on RecIn-RecOut in predicting future
CARs is -0.229 (t=2.38), which is very similar to the figure reported in Column 3 of Table V.

Playing Favorites – Page 17

driven solely from the analyst side, i.e., that optimistic analysts are the only analysts who
choose to speak on an earnings call, and that firms are merely passive actors in this process.
In particular, the timing of the firm-level behaviors documented in Section III.B is hard to
reconcile with this alternate view, since the analysts would have to choose to show up and
speak only on the calls that exactly coincide with these behaviors, which seems implausible.
That said, we cannot “prove” that management denied access to particular analysts
on a given call, since we do not have data on the “operator lists” that flag all those wishing
to ask questions. 12 In order to further explore this alternative story, however, we also went
through and parsed our entire dataset and manually examined each conference call
transcript in order to identify all the calls where phrases such as “There are no more
questions in the queue” are spoken by management or by a moderator at the very end of
the call. For these calls, it appears that management was not casting the call, since for
these calls management actively entertained and took all questions from the call
participants, ostensibly ending the conference call only when there were no further
questions. Therefore, for these calls we can plausibly assume that management was at least
not “refusing” to allow any additional questions from certain analysts in the audience.
There may have been (negative) analysts who did not want to ask questions, but we can
at least rule out the possibility that management was actively disallowing additional
questions that the audience wished to ask.
We take this set of calls and create a dummy variable called “NoMoreQuestion”
which is set equal to one for all the calls where phrases such as (“There are no more
questions in the queue”) are used to close the call. We find that these types of phrases are
used in 25-30% of the calls. In Panel B of Table V, we then interact this dummy variable
with our indicator for a casted call (RecIn-RecOut), and re-run the basic future earnings
CAR test from Table V. The idea is that for these calls in which (presumably) all questions
have been allowed to be asked, the firm is not then casting the call. Thus, any variation
in (RecIn-RecOut) we observe in these calls should essentially be random noise, such that
(RecIn-RecOut) will mean something different for these non-casted calls. In particular,

As mentioned above, we attempted numerous times (and methods) of obtaining the full participant list
from both InterCall and the underlying firms, but neither would provide the full set of participants (nor the
set of participants that “indicated” they wanted to ask a question, but were not able to).

12

Playing Favorites – Page 18

(RecIn-RecOut) now being random, it should have no predictive power for future firm
earnings events, returns, etc., in contrast to what we see for choreographed earnings calls.
The results are shown in the new Table V, Panel B. The interaction term of (RecInRecOut) and NoMoreQuestion is significantly positive. Further, combining this with the
main effect on (RecIn-RecOut) gives an estimated impact of (RecIn-RecOut) in calls where
all questions are allowed to be asked that is statistically equal to zero for both future
earnings surprises and returns around those future earnings events. Meanwhile, the negative
returns are concentrated on the calls where this phrase does *not* occur, which in our view
are much more likely to be the strategically cast calls that drive our key results.
Collectively, our results appear consistent with a view that firms are - at the very
least - active partner participants in this process, in terms of being opportunistic with
information release, and as such are taking an active role in casting these calls.

C. “Extreme” Cases of Casting
In Table VI we explore the ability of the extreme tails of the distribution of casting
(RecIn-RecOut) to predict future CARs. We do this in order to examine if the return
predictability we document in Table V increases monotonically as the extent of casting
increases, as our thesis would suggest if casting is driving the future return relationship we
have documented. Specifically, Table VI replicates the approach in Table V but employs
a dummy variable construction for the variable of interest (RecIn-RecOut), and explores
the impact of casting above certain thresholds. For instance, Column 6 of Table VI shows
that the coefficient on casting “greater than 90%” (meaning that the value of RecIn-RecOut
for that firm is above the 90th percentile across all firms in a given quarter) is -0.430
(t=2.77), which is larger than the coefficient on casting above the 75% threshold (=-0.327,

t=2.17). 13

13
We have also broken out earnings announcements associated with firms’ fiscal year-ends, to examine if the
results are stronger at these times, but the coefficient on RecIn-RecOut in predicting future CARs is not
significantly different from the coefficient reported in Table V for the full sample.

Playing Favorites – Page 19

D. Portfolio Returns
Next we employ a portfolio approach to examine if the CAR returns documented
above show up in calendar-time portfolios. To do so, each day we sort all stocks into
quintiles based on RecIn-RecOut in the prior quarter. Then during the five days around
their next earnings announcement, we long the stocks whose RecIn-RecOut in the previous
quarter is in the bottom quintile (i.e., the firms exhibiting the least amount of casting),
and short the stocks whose RecIn-RecOut in the previous quarter is in the highest quintile
(i.e., the firms exhibiting the most amount of casting). The reason we choose the next
announcement is that (as shown in Figure 2) the one quarter horizon is by far the most
common length of casting by firms. To construct these portfolios, if on any given day there
are less than or equal to five stocks on either the long or short side, we hold the 30-day
Treasury bill instead. The portfolios are rebalanced daily, and aggregated up to monthly
figures that are reported in Table VII. Panel A presents excess returns (in excess of the 3month Treasury bill), 1-factor (CAPM), 3-factor Fama-French, 4-factor Carhart, and 5factor (including the Pastor-Stambaugh liquidity factor) alphas, and Panel B presents
factor loadings. 14
Panel A of Table VII indicates that the Long/Short (Q1 minus Q5) portfolio earns
monthly abnormal returns ranging from 129 basis points (t=2.59) to 149 basis points
(t=2.64) per month, or roughly 18 percent abnormal returns per year. 15 Out of the 129
basis points, around 38% is due to the spread on the long side (Q1 minus Q3), and the
remaining 62% due to the spread on the short side (Q5 minus Q3). 16
Importantly, as shown earlier in Table V in a regression context, Appendix Table
A3 also demonstrates in a portfolio setting that the return predictability we demonstrate
in this paper is not simply a repackaging of the well-known predictability associated with
Note that here in these initial tests we are using the daily, realized timing of earnings announcements,
which may not be perfectly knowable in advance. In Appendix Table A4, we instead use predicted earnings
announcement months, which are forecasted a year in advance, and present the returns to simple monthly,
calendar-time portfolios using these, in addition.
15
This portfolio return result is not driven by Friday announcements. Excluding all Friday announcements,
the spread portfolio still earns 123 basis points per month (t=2.53).
14

16
As can be seen from Panel A of Table VII, the average abnormal return across all quintiles in our sample
is positive. This is consistent with a large literature (see Frazzini and Lamont (2006) for a summary)
documenting an “earnings announcement premium” for all stocks announcing earnings in a particular month.

Playing Favorites – Page 20

either discretionary accruals or analyst forecast dispersion. Controlling for both accruals
and forecast dispersion as factor mimicking portfolios, we show that the return
predictability associated with casting conference calls remains large and significant.
Note that the negative information that firms appear to be hiding by casting their
calls could be released into the market at any point following the earnings call.
Transcriptions of the calls are publicly available during our sample period usually within
hours (or minutes) of the call itself. 17 Therefore, while the next earnings announcement
(and conference call) provides a natural information revelation event (that is also
standardized across firms in its occurrence), it is not necessarily the time at which the bad
news is revealed.
In Appendix Figure A2, we thus examine event time returns following the earnings
call that was cast by the firm. This figure plots the event time abnormal stock returns for
the 12 months following portfolio formation of the long-short portfolio in Table VII (short
firms that cast, long firms that do not cast). The figure begins charting abnormal returns
(DGTW characteristically-adjusted) directly after the earnings announcement in which the
firm cast (or did not cast). We see that the returns to this L-S portfolio concentrate
primarily around the subsequent earnings announcement (Month 3). Critically, while there
is a return shock at the subsequent earnings call, this shock in abnormal returns never
reverses following Month 3. Given that prices react sharply around subsequent information
revelation and never revert, far from being overreaction, this suggests that the negative
information that was hidden by the firms, and is subsequently revealed, is information
fundamentally important for firm value.

E. Future Earnings Restatements
Given the findings on future negative earnings surprises, and the future negative stock
returns associated with these casting firms, and in particular the results in Table III
suggesting that casting firms tend to be those with higher discretionary accruals, a natural
question is to what extent this type of behavior predicts future earnings restatements and
accounting irregularities. Ultimately, in the future the market seems to realize the negative
17
For instance, Morningstar, Inc. and Thomson Reuters offer subscription products, while Seeking Alpha and
Earnings Impact offer free access to transcripts following earnings calls.

Playing Favorites – Page 21

information that these firms were withholding during their prior earnings calls, and in the
same manner we might expect abnormal accruals ultimately may be undone in the form of
future earnings restatements. To test this conjecture, we run a predictive regression of
future restatements (drawn from the Audit Analytics database) in quarter t+1 on lagged
RecIn-RecOut, plus the same firm-level control variables used in Tables V and VI. Table
VIII confirms that RecIn-RecOut is a positive and significant predictor of future earnings
restatements. In particular, as shown in Columns 1-3, a one standard-deviation move in
(RecIn-RecOut) this period predicts a 32% increase in the likelihood of future restatements
by the firm, as a fraction of the unconditional probability of having a restatement. Again,
as can be seen in Columns 4-6, this result is concentrated in conference calls where the
management is likely to be casting, and completely disappears if we focus solely on the set
of conference calls ending with no more questions in the queue.

V. International Evidence
In this section, we explore international evidence on earnings conference calls. We do
this for two reasons. First, any paper that shows evidence of stock return predictability is
strengthened by the use of out-of-sample evidence, since this helps to assuage concerns
about data mining. Second, the U.S. sample period we explore in Section IV all takes place
in the period after the enactment of Regulation Fair Disclosure (RegFD) (in August of
2000) as well as the subsequent Global Analyst Research Settlement (in April of 2003).
RegFD mandated that all publicly traded companies must disclose material information to
all investors at the same time, and potentially changed the extent to which analysts can
benefit from especially close relationships with firms (e.g., through additional underwriting
links between their brokerage house and the firms in question). The Global Settlement
was an enforcement agreement reached between the SEC, NASD, NYSE, and ten of the
largest brokerage houses that sought to address conflicts of interest within brokerage houses
specifically with regard to analyst recommendations.
Although these changes mean that our sample takes place entirely within the current
regulatory regime--and hence the most relevant one on a forward-looking basis—in this
section we explore out-of-sample evidence to investigate whether or not our findings extend
Playing Favorites – Page 22

to other settings and other regulatory regimes. We cannot go back to the “pre-RegFD”
sample, because we do not have transcript data available in that period, 18 but we can
explore international evidence. As described in Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy (2010), the
regulatory environment in many other countries (e.g., the United Kingdom) did not change
over this period, meaning that the structural shift in the disclosure environment experienced
in the U.S. since the early 2000s has not been replicated outside the U.S. Therefore,
exploring non-U.S. evidence can help determine the extent to which our findings are
confined to the current U.S. regulatory environment.
To investigate this question, we compile international transcript data from four
countries: the United Kingdom, France, Canada, and Japan. This required an intensive
hand-matching process in order to match these transcripts to the firms and analysts listed
in the I/B/E/S database. Collectively, the international sample contains an additional
7770 unique conference calls, covering 637 firms, 2723 analysts, and 12 years.
In Table IX we replicate our tests from Table II that explore the likelihood of being
called on during a conference call, for these four foreign countries. As in Table II, the
dependent variable in Table IX is an indicator that takes the value of one if the analyst
asks a question on the call, and zero otherwise. Columns 1, 3, 5, and 7 of Table IX conduct
a panel OLS regression, where the main independent variable is the average
recommendation level of the analyst in the year prior to the conference call (𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅);
Columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 conduct a pooled logit regression, where the main independent
variable is the average prior-year recommendation level of the analyst relative to the firm’s
consensus recommendation (𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 ). Columns 1, 3, 5, and 7 also include firm*quarter

fixed effects.

Table IX shows that for all specifications, across all four countries, the level of an
analyst’s prior recommendation is a positive and significant predictor of the likelihood of
being called on during an earnings call. In terms of the marginal effect (from the logit
regressions), a one-standard deviation move in recommendation level is associated with a
2.2%, 1.8%, 1.2%, and 2.2% increase in the likelihood of having the opportunity to ask a

We attempted to obtain data pre-2003, but Thomson only kept electronic transcripts of conference calls
starting in 2003, and we could not find another source that had transcribed data before this time period.

18

Playing Favorites – Page 23

question in a conference call in Canada, UK, France, and Japan, respectively. Collectively,
these findings confirm that casting behavior by corporations on earnings conference calls is
an international phenomenon, and not one that is confined to the U.S., or to the current
regulatory regime in the U.S.
Next we examine the future earnings announcement returns associated with the
casting behavior that we observe outside the U.S. We present these results in Table X.
As in Table V, this table reports forecasting regressions of earnings announcement day
returns on lagged differences in average recommendations between analysts that ask
questions in the conference call and those that do not in the international setting. Our
sample includes conference calls in four foreign countries: Canada (column 1), UK (column
2), France (column 3), and Japan (column 4). In column 5, we pool all observations from
the four countries together. The dependent variable in each column is the cumulative
abnormal return in the five day window around the future subsequent earnings
announcement (CAR, in %). The main independent variable is a dummy variable equal to
one if the average lagged recommendation level of in-analysts is larger than that of outanalysts (RecIn-RecOut), and zero otherwise.
Consistent with the U.S. evidence, Table X shows that casting behavior on an
international earnings call predicts significantly negative future announcement returns on
the subsequent earnings event. This finding holds true for all four foreign countries. In
terms of magnitude, as shown in Column 5, when pooling observations across all four
countries, we find that a one-standard-deviation move in RecIn-RecOut predicts a 32bp
(t=3.21) lower earnings announcement return in the next quarter.
In sum, the out-of-sample evidence we present in this section suggests that our U.S.
evidence is unlikely to be a result of data mining, nor is it confined to a particular regulatory
regime in the U.S. Rather, the casting phenomenon we document, and the impact of this
behavior on future stock returns, is a global phenomenon engaged in - and experienced by
- worldwide financial markets.

VI. Additional Tests of Mechanism and Discussion
In this final section we explore the mechanism at work behind our results in greater
Playing Favorites – Page 24

depth. To do so, we investigate the nature of the questions asked during earnings calls in
more detail, both by examining the ordering of analysts called upon during the conference
call, and by conducting exploratory textual analysis. We conclude by discussing some
potential costs and benefits of the casting phenomenon we document, for both firms and
analysts.

A. Order of Analysts Called Upon During Call
First, we examine the order that analysts are called on during these earnings calls.
The results in Table II (regarding more favorable analysts being called upon during the
call), imply a natural extension of our tests to examine not just who participates, but when
they participate on a call. If company behavior is pre-meditated (and the length of the call
is somewhat unknown), one would suspect that the true favorites (i.e., bullish analysts)
might be called upon earlier in the call. This favoritism in ordering might also extend to
other analysts with observably “high status” (e.g., All-Star analysts, and/or analysts from
an affiliated or prestigious brokerage house), followed by analysts from the largest brokerage
firms, followed by the small firm analysts, and so on down the line.
Table XI examines the order in which analysts are called upon conditional on being
in the conference call. Thus, this analysis is independent of that in Table II, in that it
examines solely within-call ordering conditional on call participation (as opposed to
participation or not). The dependent variable in all columns represents the order of the
analysts asking questions (e.g., the first questioner would have a value of one). The main
independent variables include: the recommendation level of the analyst prior to the
conference call (𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅), whether the analyst is an all-star analyst (𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴), whether the
analyst is affiliated with a broker that underwrites for the firm in question (𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴),
and the number of All-Star analysts employed by the broker (𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃), which is a
common measure of broker prestige. We also interact the analyst’s recommendation with
these “high status” variables.
Table XI indicates that bullish analysts are significantly more likely to be called on
earlier in a call; a one-standard deviation increase in 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 brings a questioner forward by

about two tenths of a position in the queue. In addition, Table XI shows that All-Star
Playing Favorites – Page 25

analysts, affiliated analysts, and analysts from more prestigious brokerage firms are called
on earlier in a call. Further, the interaction terms between the recommendation level and
the status variables are all negative and significant, suggesting that bullish analysts with
status are particularly likely to be called on earlier in a call. In sum, these results provide
additional evidence on the extent to which firms manipulate the structure and content of
their earnings calls.

B. Types of Questions Asked
To further assess the degree to which firms manage the information environment of
the call, we explore the aggressiveness of the questions asked by the analysts called upon.
If firms truly are trying to conceal negative information by calling on analysts less likely to
uncover problematic information through their questioning, one might expect to see that
the questions posed by favorable analysts are more favorable or less probing in some way.
Gauging the difficulty of a question is obviously a nontrivial exercise without understanding
the context in which a question is asked. We use a straightforward, but imperfect, measure,
and hence view these results as merely suggestive. Specifically, we measure how “positive”
each question is by the number of positive relative to negative words in an analyst’s
question using the Loughran and McDonald (2011) dictionary, which is constructed for
financial contexts.
Appendix Table A5 shows the results examining aggressiveness of question.
Columns 1 and 2 have as dependent variable the ratio of positive words relative to total
coded words (#positive + #negative).

Columns 3 and 4 use a slightly different

specification, with the dependent variable being the log difference between the number of
positive and negative words in the question. Columns 1-4 of Appendix Table A5 give a
consistent message: those analysts who are called on during the call that are more favorable
ask significantly more positive questions. In terms of magnitude, the coefficient of 0.031
(t=2.82) implies that analysts with one notch higher recommendation (e.g., Buy vs. Hold),
have 3.1% more positive words in their questions.

Playing Favorites – Page 26

C. Discussion of Costs and Benefits of Casting for Firms and Analysts
We conclude by briefly discussing a series of ancillary results that speak to the issue
of the relative costs and benefits of casting for both the firms and the analysts.

i. Potential Firm Benefits: Contemporaneous Investor Response
We explore one potential benefit that firms receive by engaging in this type of
behavior. Specifically, we investigate the investor response around the earnings call in
which the firm is calling on more favorable analysts. If the firm is successful in preventing
the flow of negative information by avoiding negative or cynical analysts, then the stock
market response around the earnings call may be relatively positive. In Appendix Table
A6 we test this idea by running Fama-Macbeth quarterly regressions of contemporaneous
earnings announcement returns on the spread between recommendation levels of analysts
in and out of the current call (RecIn-RecOut), plus a host of additional control variables
(identical to Table V) including the magnitude of the earnings surprise itself.
Appendix Table A6 indicates that firms have significantly more positive abnormal
returns around the call when they engage in casting behavior (i.e., call on more favorable
analysts). In terms of magnitude, a one standard-deviation increase in (RecIn-RecOut)
implies a 24% increase in the contemporaneous earnings announcement effect (CAR t ). For
robustness, we also compute an indicator variable equal to one if RecIn is greater than
RecOut in quarter t (RecIn>RecOut), which again captures the contemporaneous effect of
casting on earnings announcement returns in that same quarter t. Columns 4-6 reveals
that this indicator variable yields similar results as the continuous measure used in Columns
1-3. In fact, from Column 6, CARs are 41% higher in quarters where firms stage their
conference calls (RecIn>RecOut), controlling for other determinants of earnings returns
including the level of surprise itself.

ii. Future Analyst Accuracy
On the analyst side, we also explore if analysts who participate on the call are more
accurate in their earnings forecasts in the future in our sample (see also Mayew (2008) and
Playing Favorites – Page 27

Mayew, Sharp, and Venkatachalam (2011) for similar evidence). To do so, we run panel
regressions of future earnings forecast accuracy on a participation dummy, and a host of
analyst- and firm-level characteristics. If an analyst was called on during a given call, the
dummy equals one; otherwise the dummy is set to zero. We measure earnings forecast
error in the next quarter (t+1) in percentage terms as follows: [(absolute_value_of(actual
earnings in quarter t+1 minus forecasted earnings in quarter t+1)), divided by lagged
quarter t-1 price]. We include the same analyst- and firm-level controls as in Table II.
We run several different specifications of this basic test, and report the results in
Appendix Table A7. For example, Columns 1-2 include firm-quarter fixed effects, and
hence examine the relative accuracy of analysts covering the same firm (A is in stock X’s
call, and B is out of stock X’s call). Then in Columns 3-4 we include analyst-quarter fixed
effects, and hence examine the relative accuracy on stocks covered by the same analyst (A
is in stock X’s call, but is out of stock Y’s call). Next in Columns 5-6 we include firmquarter fixed effects, and examine the relative accuracy of analysts on the same other firm
(A is in stock X’s call, but not in stock Y’s call, and B is in neither; we examine A and B’s
forecast accuracy for stock Y). Columns 1-4 of Appendix Table A7 indicate that analysts
participating in the call are more accurate in their next earnings forecast, both relative to
other analysts on the same stock who do not participate, and relative to themselves on
other stocks where they themselves do not participate. This finding is consistent with the
idea that analysts receive some benefit to being able to receive answers to their own private
questions. In terms of magnitude, the coefficient in Column 4 of -0.028 (t=2.80) suggests
that being in the call reduces forecast error on the next earnings by 5.4% (of the average
forecast error) relative to the other firms covered by the same analyst. Columns 5-6 confirm
this, further showing only modest evidence that this benefit spills over to their accuracy on
other stocks.

iii. Future Changes in Analyst Coverage
Lastly, we examine if there is a potential cost to firms of persistently casting their
calls over time. Given that there is a benefit to firms in the form of higher contemporaneous
earnings announcement returns, one might expect virtually all firms to engage in this
Playing Favorites – Page 28

behavior continuously. One possibility is that firms will lose analyst coverage over time,
as analysts are unable to ask their own privately-valued questions (which lead to increases
in future earnings accuracy as shown above in Appendix Table A7), and become unwilling
to cover the firm. Analyst coverage is valuable to a firm as it potentially increases liquidity
in the stock (see Irvine (2003) for evidence in favor of this idea).
We test this idea in Appendix Table A8 by running regressions of the change in
analyst coverage on a measure of “persistent casting,” defined as the average of (RecInRecOut) over the prior 4 quarters (or alternatively, as the fraction of quarters in which
RecIn is greater than RecOut). The dependent variable is “post-coverage,” defined as
coverage after the event year during which we measure persistent casting. We also control
for “pre-coverage,” which is defined as coverage before the event year.
Appendix Table A8 shows that persistent casting predicts a significant decline in
future analyst coverage. In terms of magnitude, the estimates in Column 4 (which uses
the fraction of quarters in which RecIn>RecOut to define persistence) imply that an
additional quarter of casting is associated with a 0.12 drop in analyst coverage the following
year. In Appendix Table A9, we also show that, perhaps not surprisingly, it is the analysts
who do not speak on the call that ultimately drop coverage.

VII. Conclusion
In this paper we explore a subtle, but economically important way in which firms
shape

their

information

environments:

through

the

specific

organization

and

choreographing of earnings conference calls. Our analysis rests on a simple premise: firms
have an information advantage, and they understand this and have the ability to be
strategic in its release. Our key finding is that firms that organize their conference calls by
calling on those analysts with the most optimistic views about their firm appear to be
hiding bad news, which ultimately leaks out in the future. Specifically, we show that these
“casting” firms experience negative returns when the hidden information is revealed in the
future. A long-short portfolio that goes long the non-casting firms and short the casting
firms around their subsequent calls earns abnormal returns ranging from 129 to 149 basis
points per month, or almost 18 percent per year.
Playing Favorites – Page 29

We demonstrate that firms with an ex-ante larger incentive to cast their calls,
namely firms with higher discretionary accruals, firms that barely meet/exceed earnings
expectations, and firms (and their executives) about to issue equity, sell shares, and exercise
options, are all significantly more likely to do so.
We also provide out-of-sample evidence for the core findings in this paper, and show
that the phenomenon of casting conference calls extends beyond the U.S., to an
international sample including the United Kingdom, Canada, France, and Japan.
Collectively, our data spans 5 countries, 13 years, 4101 firms, and 7125 analysts, covering
91,878 conference calls in total, making our dataset the largest and most extensive of any
project analyzing corporate earnings calls. We estimate that between 17-22% of firms in a
given quarter engage in this type of opportunistic behavior. However, it is not costless for
firms to engage in casting their calls: firms who are frequent casters of their calls, see
significant future drops in analyst coverage.
In sum, we provide new evidence on a channel through which firms influence
information disclosure even in level-playing-field information environments. And while we
have focused on a specific set of firm behaviors, there are likely many other ways in which
firms seek to control information flow to the market. Our paper suggests that exploring
these subtle but important mechanisms through which firms manipulate their information
environments is a promising avenue for future research.

Playing Favorites – Page 30

References
Agrawal, Anup, Sahiba Chadha and Mark A. Chen, 2006, Who is afraid of Reg FD? The
behavior and performance of sell-side analysts following the SEC’s Fair Disclosure
Rules, Journal of Business 79, 2811-2834.
Beaver, William, 1968, The information content of annual earnings announcements, Journal
of Accounting Research 6, 67-92.
Bergman, Nittai and Sugata Roychowdury, 2008, Investor Sentiment, Expectations, and
Corporate Disclosure, Journal of Accounting Research 46, 1057-1083.
Chen,

Shuping, and Dawn Matsumoto. 2006. Favorable versus unfavorable
recommendations: The impact on analyst' access to management-provided
information, Journal of Accounting Research 40 (4): 657-689.

Chen, Shuping, Stephan Hollander, and Kelvin Law, 2014, The price of silence: When no
one asks questions during conference calls, Working paper, University of Texas.
Cohen, Lauren, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher Malloy, 2010. Sell side school ties,
Journal of Finance 65, 1409-1437.
Cooper, Rick, Theodore Day, and Craig Lewis, 2001, Following the leader: A study of
individual analysts’ earnings forecasts, Journal of Financial Economics 61, 383-416.
Degeorge, Francois, Jayendu Patel, and Richard Zeckhauser, 1999. Earnings management
to exceed thresholds, Journal of Business 72, 1-33.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Joshua Pollet, 2009, Investor inattention and Friday earnings
announcements, Journal of Finance 64, 109-749.
Diether, Karl B, Anna Scherbina, and Christopher Malloy, 2002, Differences of opinion and
the cross-section of stock returns, Journal of Finance 57, 2113-2141.
Frazzini, Andrea, and Owen Lamont, 2006, The earnings announcement month premium
and trading volume, Working paper, Yale University.
The Effectiveness of Regulation FD. Journal of
Accounting and Economics 37: 293-314.

Gintschel, A. and S. Markov. 2004.

Groysberg, Boris, Paul Healy, Craig Chapman, Devin Shanthikumar, and Yang Gui (2007),
Do buy-side analysts out-perform the sell-side?, Working paper, Harvard University.
Hobson, Jessen, William J. Mayew, and Mohan Venkatachalam. 2012. Analyzing Speech
to Detect Financial Misreporting, Journal of Accounting Research, 50 (2): 349-392.
Hollander, Stephan, Maarten Pronk, and Erik Roelofsen, 2010, Does Silence Speak? An

Empirical Analysis of Disclosure Choices During Conference Calls, Journal of
Accounting Research, Vol. 48, Issue 3, pp. 531-563.
Hirshleifer, David, Kewei Hou, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2012, The accruals anomaly: Risk or
mispricing? Management Science 58, 320-335.
Hirshleifer, David, Sonya Lim, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2009, Driven to distraction:
Extraneous events and underreaction to earnings news, Journal of Finance 64, 22892325.
Hong, Harrison, and Jeffrey D. Kubik, 2003, Analyzing the analysts: Career concerns and
biased forecasts, Journal of Finance 58, 313-351.
Kinney, William, David Burgstahler and Roger Martin, 2002, Earnings Surprise
“Materiality” as Measured by Stock Returns, Journal of Accounting Research 40,
1297-1329.
Kothari, SP, Susan Shu and Peter Wysocki, 2009, Do managers withhold bad news?,
Journal of Accounting Research 47, 241-276.
Larcker, David, and Anastasia Zakolyukina, 2012, Detecting Deceptive Discussions in
Conference Calls, Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 50, Issue 2, pp. 495540.
Lin, Hsiou-wei and Maureen F. McNichols, 1998, Underwriting relationships, analysts’
earnings forecasts and investment recommendations, Journal of Accounting and
Economics 25, 101-127.
Lin, Hsiou-wei, Maureen F. McNichols, and Patricia O’Brien, 2005, Analyst impartiality
and investment banking relationships, Journal of Accounting Research 43, 623-650.
Kumar, Alok, 2010, Self-selection and the forecasting abilities of female equity analysts,
Journal of Accounting Research, 48, 393-435.
Matsumoto, Dawn, Maarten Pronk, and Erik Roelofsen, 2011, What Makes Conference
Calls Useful? The Information Content of Managers' Presentations and Analysts
Discussion Sessions. The Accounting Review 86 (4), 1383-1414.
Mayew, W. 2008. Evidence of Management Discrimination Among Analysts During
Earnings Conference Calls. Journal of Accounting Research 46 (3): 627-659.
Mayew, William J., and Mohan Venkatachalam. 2012, The Power of Voice: Managerial
Affective States and Future Firm Performance, Journal of Finance, 67 (1): 1-43.
Mayew, W., N. Sharp, and M. Venkatachalam, 2013, Using Earnings Conference Calls to
Identify Analysts with Superior Private Information, Review of Accounting Studies
18(2): 386–413.

Michaely, Roni, and Kent L. Womack, 1999, Conflict of interest and the credibility of
underwriter analyst recommendations, Review of Financial Studies 12, 653-686.
Mohanran, Partha and Shyam V. Sunder, 2006, How has Regulation FD affected the
operations of financial analysts?, Contemporary Accounting Research 23, 49152
Niessner, Marina, 2013, Strategic disclosure timing and insider trading, Working paper,
Yale University.
Sloan, R., 1996, Do stock prices fully reflect the information in accruals and cash flows
about future earnings?, Accounting Review 71, 289-316.
Stickel, Scott, 1992, Reputation and performance among security analysts, Journal of
Finance 47, 1811-1836.
Zhou, Dexin, 2014, The blame game, Working paper, Emory University.

Table I: Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics of our sample. Panel A reports the key statistics of our US conference
call sample (2003-2015), and Panel B reports the key statistics of our pooled international conference call
sample (which includes Canada, UK, France, and Japan). #(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼) is the number of sell-side analysts that
have an opportunity to ask questions in a conference call (in-analysts), and #(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂) is the number of
analysts that do not have the opportunity to ask questions in the conference call (out-analysts). 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 is
the average recommendation level of an in-analyst in the year prior to the conference call, and 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 is
the average recommendation level of an out-analyst in the same period. 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼) − 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂) is the
difference between the average 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 and average 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 for each conference call, and is our main
measure of firms’ casting behavior. Finally, 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 is the cumulative abnormal return in the five-day window
surrounding the quarterly earnings announcement, 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆 is the standardized earnings surprise, defined as
seasonally-adjusted quarterly earnings growth scaled by lagged stock price, and 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 is a dummy
variable that takes the value of one if a firm restates its earnings in a quarter and zero otherwise. We report
in the table below the mean, standard deviation, 1st, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 99th percentiles of the distribution
of each variable.
Panel A: US Firms
No. Calls

Mean

Std Dev

P1

Q1

Median

Q3

P99

Number of analysts in vs. out of each conference call
#(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼)

#(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂)

83,685

3.73

2.50

1

2

3

5

11

83,685

6.20

5.04

1

3

5

8

24

3.75

0.77

2.00

3.04

3.79

4.25

5.00

3.61

0.81

1.75

3.00

3.54

4.00

5.00

0.15

0.61

-1.40

-0.22

0.13

0.50

1.71

Analyst recommendations
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖

𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼) −
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂)

Earnings Announcement Day Returns, Earnings Surprises
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶
𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆

𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅

0.0040

0.1023

-0.2660

-0.0437

0.0027

0.0500

0.2870

-0.0032

0.1979

-0.3548

-0.0046

0.0012

0.0060

0.2691

0.02

0.14

0

0

0

0

1

Panel B: International Firms

Number of analysts in vs. out of each conference call
#(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼)

#(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂)

5,471

4.72

3.05

1

2

4

7

13

5,471

14.42

9.84

1

6

13

21

43

3.63

0.60

2.00

3.20

3.67

4.00

5.00

3.55

0.47

2.14

3.26

3.57

3.86

4.67

0.08

0.61

-1.50

-0.31

0.08

0.43

1.61

0.0713

-0.1983

-0.0299

0.0027

0.0413

0.2058

Analyst recommendations
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖

𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼) −
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂)

Earnings Announcement Day Returns
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶

0.0041

Table II: Firm Behavior on Conference Calls
This table examines the likelihood of an analyst having an opportunity to ask a question in the conference
call. The dependent variable in all columns is an indicator that takes the value of one if the analyst asks a
question in the conference call and zero otherwise. Columns 1-4 conduct a panel OLS regression, and
columns 5 and 6 conduct a pooled logit regression. The main independent variable in columns 1-4 is the
average recommendation of the analyst in the year prior to the conference call (𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅), and that in columns
5 and 6 is the prior-year average recommendation of the analyst relative to the consensus recommendation
(𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 ). Analyst level controls include: the number of years the analyst has covered the firm (𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿),
the number of years the analyst has been in the IBES database (𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶), the number of stocks covered
by the analyst, the number of stocks covered by the broker (a measure of broker size), whether the analyst
is an all-star analyst, and whether the analyst is affiliated with a broker that underwrites for the firm in
question. Firm level controls include: lagged market capitalization, book to market ratio, past one year
stock returns, monthly share turnover in the previous year, daily idiosyncratic volatility in the previous
year, number of analysts covering the firm, institutional ownership, and discretionary accruals. Columns 1
and 2 include firm*quarter fixed effects, and columns 3 and 4 include analyst*quarter fixed effects. Standard
errors, clustered at both the firm and quarter level, are shown in parenthesis. *, **, *** denote significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
[1]
0.057***
(0.004)

𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡

𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
[2]
0.067***
(0.004)

𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
[3]
0.070***
(0.004)

𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
[4]
0.072***
(0.004)

𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎

𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡

𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡

𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
[6]

0.245***
(0.018)

0.295***
(0.018)

0.031***
(0.004)
-0.016***
(0.003)
-0.003
(0.004)
0.043***
(0.002)
0.110***
(0.007)
0.041***
(0.009)

𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡

𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎

#𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡

𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏
#𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡

𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡

𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
Other Controls
No Obs.
Adj-/Pseudo R2

𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
[5]

No
832,262
0.025

No
832,262
0.054

0.082***
(0.016)
-0.044***
(0.013)
0.011
(0.018)
0.202***
(0.010)
0.325***
(0.030)
0.245***
(0.031)
No
832,262
0.362

Yes
832,262
0.366

No
832,262
0.005

Yes
832,262
0.025

Table III: Which Firms Call on More Favorable Analysts
This table examines which firms call on more favorable analysts. Columns 1-3 relate the difference in average
recommendation between analysts that ask questions in the conference call and those that do not to a host
of firm characteristics, and columns 4-7 analyze whether this recommendation differential forecasts
subsequent selling behavior of company shares. The dependent variable in the first three columns is the
lagged difference in average prior-year recommendations between in-analysts and out-analysts (𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼) −
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂)). The dependent variable in column 4 is an indicator that equals one if the firm has at least
one seasoned equity offering in the following quarter and zero otherwise; that in column 5 is an indicator
that equals one if the firm has positive net insider selling in the following quarter and zero otherwise; that
in column 6 is an indicator that equals one if top executives exercise their stock options in the following
quarter and zero otherwise; and that in column 7 is an indicator that equals one if top executives receive
option grants in the following quarter and zero otherwise. The main independent variable in columns 4-7 is
lagged 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼) − 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂). Other independent variables include: a dummy (𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆0)that equals one if
the firm has a zero or one cent earnings surprise and zero otherwise, discretionary accruals, analyst forecast
dispersion and recommendation dispersion, institutional ownership, the number of analysts covering the
firm, and idiosyncratic volatility. Other control variables include: lagged market capitalization, book to
market ratio, past one year stock returns, average stock recommendation, and past one year monthly share
turnover. Columns 1-3 conduct a pooled OLS regression with both firm and quarter fixed effects. Columns
4-7 conduct a logit regression. Standard errors, clustered at both the firm and quarter level, are shown in
parenthesis. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼)𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 − 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂)𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

[1]
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼)𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 −
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂)𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆0𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

[2]

[3]

0.030**

0.027**

0.027**

𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1
[4]

0.076**

𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1
[5]

[6]

[7]

0.044**

0.032*

-0.045**

(0.036)

(0.020)

(0.019)

(0.022)

0.010

-0.114***

-0.117***

-0.029

(0.013)

(0.013)

(0.013)

(0.100)

(0.043)

(0.042)

(0.048)

0.139**

0.104*

0.100*

2.208***

0.425*

0.293

-0.576**

(0.054)

(0.054)

(0.054)

(0.349)

(0.243)

(0.273)

(0.273)

-0.014

-0.002

0.155

-0.349***

-0.495***

-0.049

𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

(0.040)

(0.033)

(0.276)

(0.114)

(0.127)

-0.031

𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

0.194***

0.192***

-0.053

0.023

0.043

0.348***

(0.020)

(0.020)

(0.097)

(0.060)

(0.071)

(0.073)

-0.004

-0.004

-0.488***

0.421***

0.315***

0.670***

(0.014)

(0.015)

(0.133)

(0.086)

(0.077)

(0.111)

#𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

-0.004***

-0.004***

-0.019**

0.005

-0.002

-0.020***

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.008)

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.005)

0.323

0.353

0.345***

-0.165***

-0.245***

0.033

(0.492)

(0.493)

(0.584)

(0.044)

(0.040)

(0.049)

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

66,357

66,357

66,357

66,357

66,357

66,357

66,357

0.101

0.128

0.129

0.103

0.081

0.075

0.039

𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

Other Controls
No Obs.
Adj-/Pseudo R

2

Table IV: Distribution of RecIn-RecOut by Year
Panel A reports the mean, standard deviation, 1st, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 99th percentiles of the distribution of
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼) − 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂) by year. Panel B reports the fraction of 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼) − 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂) greater than
a certain threshold in each year.
Panel A: Distribution of 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼) − 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂) by Year

Year

No. Obs

Mean

StdDev

1%

25%

50%

75%

99%

2003

3,579

0.123

0.553

-1.389

-0.215

0.123

0.462

1.497

2004

4,984

0.186

0.617

-1.322

-0.189

0.158

0.545

1.842

2005

6,022

0.165

0.640

-1.458

-0.217

0.151

0.542

1.817

2006

6,757

0.163

0.639

-1.393

-0.215

0.138

0.521

1.883

2007

7,307

0.147

0.631

-1.500

-0.225

0.105

0.521

1.750

2008

7,799

0.169

0.613

-1.396

-0.196

0.142

0.535

1.741

2009

8,047

0.134

0.603

-1.361

-0.239

0.110

0.500

1.659

2010

7,879

0.134

0.599

-1.399

-0.228

0.119

0.499

1.658

2011

7,675

0.143

0.603

-1.405

-0.223

0.131

0.500

1.667

2012

7,702

0.148

0.592

-1.361

-0.202

0.137

0.484

1.741

2013

7,418

0.135

0.581

-1.306

-0.211

0.125

0.477

1.625

2014

7,201

0.124

0.583

-1.393

-0.211

0.122

0.458

1.633

2015

1,315

0.128

0.609

-1.542

-0.232

0.155

0.493

1.637

2003-2015

83,685

0.147

0.606

-1.400

-0.215

0.129

0.500

1.708

Panel B: Fraction of 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼) − 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂) Greater Than Some Threshold

Year

No. Obs

%>0

% > 0.2

% > 0.4

% > 0.6

% > 0.8

%>1

2003

3,579

59.49%

44.12%

29.53%

17.71%

10.31%

4.89%

2004

4,984

62.70%

46.77%

33.37%

22.45%

14.55%

8.61%

2005

6,022

60.48%

46.28%

32.90%

22.39%

14.25%

8.75%

2006

6,757

59.94%

45.43%

31.57%

21.86%

14.33%

8.97%

2007

7,307

57.73%

43.93%

31.30%

21.54%

14.07%

8.47%

2008

7,799

60.61%

46.02%

32.71%

21.84%

14.07%

8.27%

2009

8,047

58.05%

43.53%

30.87%

20.12%

12.84%

7.41%

2010

7,879

59.32%

44.36%

30.65%

19.51%

11.84%

7.21%

2011

7,675

59.70%

45.17%

31.02%

20.22%

12.83%

7.48%

2012

7,702

60.17%

45.17%

31.06%

18.54%

11.82%

7.02%

2013

7,418

59.57%

43.83%

29.63%

19.20%

11.26%

6.44%

2014

7,201

58.98%

43.80%

28.50%

17.83%

11.14%

5.97%

2015

1,315

59.24%

46.08%

31.56%

18.40%

11.48%

6.24%

2003-2015

83,685

59.63%

44.84%

31.08%

20.24%

12.78%

7.49%

Table V: Future Earnings Announcement Returns and Earnings Surprises
Panel A reports forecasting regressions of earnings announcement day returns and earnings surprises on
lagged differences in average recommendations between analysts that ask questions in the conference call
and those that do not. The dependent variable in columns 1-3 is the cumulative abnormal return in the
five-day window around the earnings announcement (𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶, in %) and that in columns 4-6 is the standardized
unexpected earnings, defined as seasonally adjusted quarterly earnings growth scaled by lagged stock price
(𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆, in %). Both dependent variables are measured in the subsequent quarter. The main independent
variable across all columns is the lagged difference in average prior-year recommendations between inanalysts and out-analysts (𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼) − 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂)). We also include in the regression lagged analyst
forecast dispersion, analyst recommendation dispersion, institutional ownership, number of analysts
covering the firm, an 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆 dummy that equals one if the firm has at least one seasoned equity offering in
the current quarter and zero otherwise, an 𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 dummy that equals one if the firm has net insider
selling in the current quarter and zero otherwise, an 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸 dummy that equals one if top executives
exercise their stock options in the current quarter and zero otherwise. Other control variables include: lagged
market capitalization, book to market ratio, past one year stock returns, monthly share turnover,
idiosyncratic volatility, average stock recommendation, and discretionary accruals. Panel B reports the
results of similar forecasting regressions, where we also include a 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁 dummy (which takes the
value of one if there is no more question in the queue at the end of the conference call and zero otherwise),
as well as its interaction with 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼) − 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂). In both panels, we conduct Fama-MacBeth
regression with Newey-West adjusted standard errors of four lags. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Panel A: Forecasting Future Announcement Returns and Earnings Surprises
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1
𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1
𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1
𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
-0.244*** -0.190*** -0.259***
-0.370**
-0.268**
-0.269**
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼)𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 −
(0.081)
(0.073)
(0.098)
(0.158)
(0.136)
(0.139)
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂)𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

#𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

0.256
(0.612)
-0.290
(0.215)
0.470***
(0.129)
0.026
(0.100)

0.117
(0.390)
-0.290
(0.228)
0.481***
(0.111)
0.200
(0.140)
-0.585
(0.263)
-0.075
(0.179)
0.199
(0.133)

No
49
0.014

Yes
49
0.050

𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
Other Controls
No Quarters
Adj-R2

No
49
0.003

No
49
0.020

-0.484
(1.328)
-0.340
(0.415)
-0.174
(0.388)
0.243
(0.295)

-0.371
(1.274)
-0.750*
(0.428)
-0.269
(0.566)
-0.463***
(0.162)
0.899
(0.930)
0.147
(0.174)
0.223**
(0.090)

No
49
0.120

Yes
49
0.158

Table V (ctd.): Future Earnings Surprises and Earnings Announcement Returns

𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼)𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 −
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂)𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

Panel B: Interaction with the 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁 Dummy
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1
𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1
𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
-0.359*** -0.270*** -0.347*** -0.652***
-0.556**
(0.105)
(0.094)
(0.108)
(0.234)
(0.227)
0.235**
0.198*
0.220**
0.638**
0.663**
(0.105)
(0.104)
(0.105)
(0.242)
(0.325)
-0.221
-0.249
-0.265
0.365
0.370
(0.154)
(0.183)
(0.161)
(0.357)
(0.401)

𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

#𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

0.306
(0.672)
-0.241
(0.183)
0.484***
(0.118)
-0.051
(0.122)

0.164
(0.442)
-0.216
(0.174)
0.464***
(0.116)
0.119
(0.129)
-0.583**
(0.270)
-0.038
(0.149)
0.182
(0.119)

No
49
0.022

Yes
49
0.055

𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
Other Controls
No Quarters
Adj-R2

No
49
0.009

No
49
0.022

𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1
[6]
-0.620***
(0.252)
0.796**
(0.352)
0.489
(0.305)

-0.488
(1.328)
-0.333
(0.414)
-0.177
(0.391)
0.313
(0.349)

-0.374
(1.274)
-0.739*
(0.425)
-0.260
(0.564)
-0.420***
(0.162)
0.887
(0.927)
0.154
(0.178)
0.213**
(0.092)

No
49
0.122

Yes
49
0.160

Table VI: Future Earnings Announcement Returns to Extreme Casting
This table reports forecasting regressions of earnings announcement day returns on lagged differences in
average recommendations between analysts that ask questions in the conference call and those that do not.
The dependent variable in all columns is the cumulative abnormal return in the five day window around
the subsequent earnings announcement (𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶, in %). The main independent variable in columns 1-3 is a
dummy that equals one if 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼) − 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂) is greater than the 75th percentile of its distribution in
each quarter; the main independent variable in columns 4-6 is a dummy that equals one if 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼) −
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂) is greater than the 90th percentile of its distribution in each quarter. We include in the
regressions the same set of control variables as in Table V. Columns 1 and 4 report the baseline result.
Columns 2, 3, 5 and 6 further include a 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁 dummy (which takes the value of one if there is no
more question in the queue at the end of the conference call and zero otherwise), as well as its interaction
with the indicator based on 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼) − 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂). In each column, we conduct a Fama-MacBeth
regression with Newey-West adjusted standard errors of four lags. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑡𝑡+1

𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼)𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 −
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂)𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

[1]
-0.219**
(0.094)

𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑡𝑡+1
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑡𝑡+1
CASTING > 75%
[2]
[3]
-0.291**
-0.327**
(0.133)
(0.151)
0.155**
0.187**
(0.077)
(0.079)
-0.230
-0.291*
(0.162)
(0.173)

𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑡𝑡+1
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑡𝑡+1
CASTING > 90%
[4]
[5]
[6]
-0.300**
-0.487*** -0.430***
(0.120)
(0.161)
(0.155)
0.510***
0.435**
(0.175)
(0.196)
-0.237
-0.283*
(0.158)
(0.159)

0.158
(0.431)
-0.222
(0.187)
0.473***
(0.112)
0.113
(0.133)
-0.572**
(0.266)
-0.047
(0.156)
0.200
(0.131)

0.327
(0.590)
-0.274
(0.220)
0.444***
(0.118)
0.094
(0.137)
-0.589**
(0.269)
-0.041
(0.147)
0.174
(0.113)

𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

#𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
Other Controls
F-M # Qtrs
Adj-R2

No
49
0.003

No
49
0.009

Yes
49
0.056

𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑡𝑡+1

No
49
0.003

No
49
0.008

Yes
49
0.055

Table VII: Portfolio Approach
This table reports monthly returns to a calendar-time portfolio that exploits the return predictability of
recommendation differentials between analysts that ask questions in the conference call and those that do
not. Specifically, on each day, we rank all firms into five quintiles based on the recommendation differential
between in-analysts and out-analysts in the previous quarter. Next, in the five days surrounding the
following quarterly earnings announcement, we go long stocks whose 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼)-𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂) in the previous
quarter is in the top quintile, and short stocks whose 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼)-𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂) in the previous quarter is in
the bottom quintile. If on any given day, there are fewer than 5 stocks in either the long or short lag, we
hold the 30-day Treasury bill instead (this is the case for less than 10% of the trading days). We then
aggregate these daily returns to the monthly level. Panel A reports the monthly returns to the five quintile
portfolios after adjusting for various risk factors; and Panel B reports the risk exposures of these five
portfolios. In the full specification, we control for the Carhart four factors (including momentum) and the
liquidity factor. T-statistics, with Newey-West adjustments of four lags, are shown in brackets. Estimates
significant at the 5% level are indicated in bold.

Quintile
1
2
3
4
5
5-1

1
5
5-1

XRet
1.46%
[2.59]
0.18%
[0.30]
-1.29%
[-2.59]

Panel A: Portfolio Returns
Excess
1-Factor 3-Factor 4-Factor
Returns
Alpha
Alpha
Alpha
1.46%
1.08%
1.07%
1.07%
[2.59]
[1.80]
[1.88]
[1.85]
1.26%
0.91%
0.86%
0.90%
[2.55]
[1.65]
[1.65]
[1.72]
0.96%
0.39%
0.35%
0.36%
[1.87]
[0.85]
[0.77]
[0.80]
0.48%
-0.13%
-0.19%
-0.20%
[0.75]
[-0.20]
[-0.31]
[-0.32]
0.18%
-0.43%
-0.39%
-0.38%
[0.30]
[-0.69]
[-0.65]
[-0.63]
-1.29%
[-2.59]

-1.53%
[-2.86]

-1.48%
[-2.78]

Panel B: Factor Loadings
Alpha
MKT
SMB
1.03%
0.175
0.742
[1.62]
[0.87]
[2.77]
-0.44%
0.468
0.324
[-0.66]
[2.13]
[1.30]
-1.49%
0.304
-0.403
[-2.64]
[1.77]
[-1.78]

5-Factor
Alpha
1.03%
[1.62]
0.90%
[1.54]
0.37%
[0.76]
-0.30%
[-0.46]
-0.44%
[-0.66]

-1.47%
[-2.78]

-1.49%
[-2.64]

HML
0.448
[2.01]
0.556
[2.17]
0.128
[0.43]

UMD
0.014
[0.13]
-0.055
[-0.54]
-0.066
[-0.67]

LIQ
0.078
[0.48]
0.119
[0.64]
0.049
[0.37]

Table VIII: Future Earnings Restatements
This table reports logit regressions of earnings restatements on the lagged difference in average
recommendations between analysts that ask questions in the conference call and those that do not. The
dependent variable in all columns is a 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 dummy that equals one if the firm restates its earnings in
the following year and zero otherwise. The main independent variable is the lagged difference in average
prior-year recommendations between in-analysts and out-analysts (𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼) − 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂)). We also
include in the regression lagged analyst forecast dispersion, analyst recommendation dispersion, institutional
ownership, number of analysts covering the firm, an 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆 dummy that equals one if the firm has at least
one seasoned equity offering in the current quarter and zero otherwise, an 𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 dummy that equals one
if the firm has net insider selling in the current quarter and zero otherwise, an 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸 dummy that
equals one if top executives exercise their stock options in the current quarter and zero otherwise. Other
control variables include: lagged market capitalization, book to market ratio, past one year stock returns,
monthly share turnover, idiosyncratic volatility, average stock recommendation, and discretionary accruals.
In each column, we conduct a pooled logit regression. Columns 1-3 report the baseline results. Columns 46 further include a 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁 dummy (which takes the value of one if there is no more question in the
queue at the end of the conference call and zero otherwise), as well as its interaction with 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼) −
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂). Standard errors, clustered at the quarterly level, are reported in parenthesis. *, **, *** denote
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼)𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 −
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂)𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

Dependent Variable = 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
0.067**
0.057**
0.056*
0.137***
(0.030)
(0.029)
(0.029)
(0.036)
-0.176***
(0.062)
0.056
(0.049)

𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

#𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

-0.069
(1.811)
-0.018
(0.102)
0.005
(0.091)
-0.146***
(0.033)

-0.098
(1.785)
-0.021
(0.102)
0.010
(0.091)
-0.145***
(0.034)
0.243**
(0.097)
0.059
(0.050)
-0.081*
(0.049)

No
53,409
0.020

Yes
53,409
0.024

𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
Other Controls
No Obs.
Pseudo-R2

No
53,409
0.002

No
53,409
0.006

[5]
0.123***
(0.035)
-0.166***
(0.060)
-0.007
(0.048)

[6]
0.122***
(0.035)
-0.165***
(0.060)
-0.008
(0.048)

-0.072
(1.815)
-0.017
(0.102)
0.004
(0.091)
-0.150***
(0.033)

-0.102
(1.791)
-0.020
(0.102)
0.009
(0.091)
-0.149***
(0.034)
0.241**
(0.097)
0.059
(0.050)
-0.081*
(0.049)

No
53,409
0.023

Yes
53,409
0.027

Table IX: Firm Behavior on Conference Calls (Global)
This table examines the likelihood of an analyst having an opportunity to ask a question in a conference
call in the international setting. Our sample includes conference calls in four foreign countries: Canada
(columns 1-2), UK (columns 3-4), France (columns 5-6), and Japan (columns 7-8). The dependent variable
in all columns is an indicator that takes the value of one if the analyst asks a question in the conference
call and zero otherwise. Columns 1, 3, 5, and 7 conduct a panel OLS regression, where the main independent
variable is the average recommendation level of the analyst in the year prior to the conference call (𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅).
Columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 conduct a pooled logit regression, where the main independent variable is the prioryear average recommendation level of the analyst relative to the firm’s consensus recommendation
(𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 ). Other control variables include: the number of years the analyst has covered the firm (𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿),
the number of years the analyst has been in the IBES database (𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶), the number of stocks covered
by the analyst, the number of stocks covered by the broker (a measure of broker size). Columns 1, 3, 5, and
7 also include firm*quarter fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at both the firm and quarter level, are
shown in parenthesis. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
[1]

[2]

Canada
0.023***

𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡

(0.004)

𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡

𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡

𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎
#𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏
#𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡

No Obs.
Adj-/Pseudo R

𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡

2

𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
[3]

𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
[4]

UK
0.017***
(0.003)

𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
[5]

𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
[6]

France
0.011***
(0.004)

𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
[7]

𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
[8]

Japan
0.024**
(0.012)

0.102***

0.115***

0.097***

0.160**

(0.021)

(0.022)

(0.029)

(0.079)

-0.015

-0.108*

0.027***

0.120***

0.009

0.069

0.067***

0.485***

(0.012)
-0.007

(0.063)
0.007

(0.007)
0.021***

(0.036)
0.146***

(0.007)
0.030***

(0.050)
0.241***

(0.013)
0.054***

(0.095)
0.399**

(0.010)

(0.046)

(0.005)

(0.036)

(0.009)

(0.075)

(0.020)

(0.172)

0.033***

0.046

-0.017***

-0.038

-0.008

-0.011

-0.053***

-0.374***

(0.008)

(0.039)

(0.006)

(0.038)

(0.007)

(0.047)

(0.010)

(0.125)

0.027***
(0.006)

0.079***
(0.024)

0.057***
(0.004)

0.393***
(0.030)

0.059***
(0.007)

0.542***
(0.056)

0.011
(0.014)

0.124
(0.104)

49,159

49,159

39,934

39,934

25,302

25,302

9,497

9,497

0.120

0.003

0.053

0.031

0.062

0.047

0.080

0.061

Table X: Future Announcement Day Returns (Global)
This table reports forecasting regressions of earnings announcement day returns on lagged differences in
average recommendations between analysts that ask questions in the conference call and those that do not
in the international setting. Our sample includes conference calls in four foreign countries: Canada (column
1), UK (column 2), France (column 3), and Japan (column 4). In column 5, we pool all observations from
the four countries together. The dependent variable in each column is the cumulative abnormal return in
the five day window around the next earnings announcement (𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶, in %). The main independent variable
is a dummy variable equal to one if the prior-year average lagged recommendation level of in-analysts is
greater than that of out-analysts (𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼) > 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂)), and zero otherwise. We also include in the
regression lagged analyst forecast dispersion, analyst recommendation dispersion, and the number of
analysts covering the firm. In each column, we conduct a Fama-MacBeth regression with Newey-West
adjusted standard errors of four lags. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼)𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 ≥
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂)𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

#𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
No. Qtrs.
Adj-R2

𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1
[1]
Canada
-0.594***
(0.188)

𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1
[2]
UK
-0.862***
(0.284)

𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1
[3]
France
-0.791**
(0.387)

𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1
[4]
Japan
-0.994*
(0.571)

𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡+1
[5]
All
-0.530***
(0.165)

-0.903
(0.615)
0.000
(0.006)
-0.028
(0.041)

0.991
(0.672)
0.012
(0.008)
-0.039*
(0.022)

5.966
(5.373)
-0.029
(0.020)
-0.093
(0.116)

0.954
(1.249)
0.094**
(0.039)
-0.107
(0.359)

0.264
(0.504)
0.011**
(0.005)
-0.071**
(0.034)

44
0.100

28
0.152

34
0.372

27
0.483

44
0.074

Table XI: Order of Questions
This table examines the order of the questions asked. The dependent variable in all columns is the order of
analysts asking questions (e.g., the first questioner would have a value of one). The main independent
variables include: the average recommendation level of the analyst in the year prior to the conference call
(𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅), whether the analyst is an all-star analyst (𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴), whether the analyst is affiliated with a
broker that underwrites for the firm in question (𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴), and the number of All-Star analysts employed
by the broker (𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃), which is a common measure of broker prestige. We also interact the analyst’s
recommendation with these status variables. Other analyst-level controls include: the number of years the
analyst has covered the firm (𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿), the number of years the analyst has been in the IBES database
(𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶), the number of stocks covered by the analyst, the number of stocks covered by the broker. In
each column, we conduct a pooled OLS with firm*quarter fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at both
the firm and quarter level, are shown in parenthesis. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level, respectively.
𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
[3]
-0.209***
(0.020)
-0.706***
(0.040)

𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
[4]
-0.219***
(0.020)
-0.630***
(0.040)

𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡

-0.365***
(0.065)

-0.307***
(0.064)

𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡

-0.225***
(0.043)

-0.150***
(0.041)

No
313,179
0.150

Yes
313,179
0.152

𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡

𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
[1]
-0.167***
(0.020)

𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
[2]
-0.193***
(0.020)

𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡

𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡 ∗ 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡 ∗ 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅
𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡 ∗ 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅
Other Controls
No. Obs.
Adj-R2

No
313,179
0.142

Yes
313,179
0.147

𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
[5]
-0.172***
(0.021)
-0.334***
(0.115)
-0.103***
(0.033)
0.290
(0.301)
-0.169**
(0.073)
0.154
(0.161)
-0.106**
(0.045)

𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗,𝑡𝑡
[6]
-0.185***
(0.021)
-0.281***
(0.118)
-0.097***
(0.034)
0.361
(0.298)
-0.172**
(0.072)
0.175
(0.160)
-0.091**
(0.045)

No
313,179
0.150

Yes
313,179
0.152

Figure 1: Sealed Air Corporation Q1 2007 Conference Call
This figure gives excerpts from Sealed Air Corporation’s Q1 2007 earnings conference call, which occurred
on April 25, 2007.

Panel A: Joking and complimenting cash usage

Panel B: Familiarity and analyst pointing out successful strategy (with no real question)

Panel C: More complimenting

Figure 2: Histogram of the Distribution of Casting Episode Length
This figure shows the number of quarters that each casting episode lasts in our sample—i.e., situations
where a firm calls on ex-ante more favorable analysts in the earnings call (𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼) > 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂)). So,
for instance, about 38% of the cases of casting by firms are for a single quarter.
50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

Playing Favorites:
How Firms Prevent the Revelation of Bad News

ONLINE APPENDIX

(The table numbers in the parentheses indicate which table in the main text each
appendix table is associated with, if any.)

Table A1: Additional Summary Statistics (Table I)
This table reports additional summary statistics of our sample. Panel A corresponds to the US sample, and Panel B
corresponds to the pooled international sample (which includes Canada, UK, France, and Japan). Firm-level variables
include:
is the market capitalization of the firm (in $billion);
is the book-to-market ratio;
12 is the
cumulative return over the past 12 months;
12 is the average monthly turnover over the past 12 months;
is the daily idiosyncratic volatility with respect to the Carhart four-factor mode over the past year;
is the fraction of shares outstanding owned by institutional investors (as reported in 13F filings);
is the
discretionary accruals based on the Jones (1991) model;
is the standard deviation of the most recent earnings
forecasts across all analysts covering the firm;
is the standard deviation of the most recent stock
recommendations level by all analysts;
0 is a dummy that equals one if the firm has a zero or one cent earnings surprise
and zero otherwise;
is an indicator that equals one if the firm has at least one seasoned equity offering in a quarter
and zero otherwise;
is an indicator that equals one if the firm has positive net insider selling in a quarter and
zero otherwise;
is an indicator that equals one if top executives exercise their stock options in a quarter and
zero otherwise; and
is an indicator that equals one if top executives receive option grants in a quarter and zero
otherwise. Analyst-level variables include:
is the number of years the analyst has covered the firm;
is
the number of years the analyst has been in the IBES database; #
_
is the number of stocks covered by
the analyst; and #
_
is the number of stocks covered by the broker (a measure of broker size);
is an indicator that equals one if the analyst is an all-star and zero otherwise;
is an indicator is the analyst is
affiliated with a broker that underwrites for the firm in question and zero otherwise;
is the earnings forecast
error in the following quarter (defined as the absolute difference between the analyst’s most recent earnings forecast and
the actual reported earnings). We report in the table below the mean, standard deviation, 1st, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 99th
percentiles of the distribution of each variable.
Panel A: US Firms
Mean

Std Dev

P1

Q1

Median

Q3

P99

7.61

24.22

0.05

0.56

1.56

4.81

120.54

0.61

0.57

0.05

0.29

0.48

0.76

2.77

0.13

0.49

-0.72

-0.15

0.10

0.34

1.76

2.69

2.22

0.37

1.34

2.10

3.32

10.94

0.02

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.07

0.70

0.20

0.14

0.59

0.75

0.86

0.99

0.06

0.07

0.00

0.02

0.04

0.07

0.36

0.35

3.66

0.00

0.04

0.09

0.22

4.16

0.83

0.25

0.00

0.73

0.84

0.97

1.41

0.04

0.20

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.06

0.24

0

0

0

0

1

0.43

0.50

0

0

0

1

1

0.32

0.47

0

0

0

1

1

0.24

0.43

0

0

0

0

1

Firm Characteristics
($B)
12
12

(*100)
0

Panel A: US Firms (Cont’d)
Mean

Std Dev

P1

Q1

Median

Q3

P99

5.74

4.68

1

3

4

7

24

13.30

8.11

2

6

12

20

31

Analyst Characteristics

#

_

17.74

8.92

1

13

17

22

48

#

_

641

417

14

257

623

977

1502

0.14

0.35

0

0

0

0

1

0.03

0.16

0

0

0

0

1

0.52

1.38

0.00

0.05

0.15

0.40

9.18

(*100)

Panel B: International Firms
Firm Characteristics
(*100)

0.44

2.35

0.00

0.00

0.11

0.32

6.20

0.86

0.24

0.00

0.70

0.85

1.01

1.46

4.82

4.57

0

2

3

7

20

11.00

7.05

0

5

11

17

26

Analyst Characteristics

#

_

11.30

6.71

1

7

10

14

34

#

_

617

695

9

170

314

764

2878

Table A2: Firm Behavior on Conference Calls (Table II)
This table examines the likelihood of an analyst having an opportunity to ask a question in the conference call. The
dependent variable in all columns is an indicator that takes the value of one if the analyst asks a question in the conference
call and zero otherwise. Columns 1 and 2 conduct a panel OLS regression, and columns 3 and 4 conduct a pooled logit
regression. The main independent variable in columns 1 and 2 is the average recommendation level of the analyst in the
year prior to the conference call (
), and that in columns 3 and 4 is the prior-year average recommendation level of
). Analyst level controls include: the number of years the
the analyst relative to the consensus recommendation (
analyst has covered the firm (
), the number of years the analyst has been in the IBES database (
), the
number of stocks covered by the analyst, the number of stocks covered by the broker (a measure of broker size), whether
the analyst is an all-star analyst, and whether the analyst is affiliated with a broker that underwrites for the firm in question.
We also include in the regression the number of times the analyst has been called on to ask questions in prior earnings
conference calls (
). We skip the first three years of the sample to compute
, which is why we have
fewer observations here compared to Table II. Firm level controls include: lagged market capitalization, book to market
ratio, past one year stock returns, monthly share turnover in the previous year, daily idiosyncratic volatility in the previous
year, number of analysts covering the firm, institutional ownership, and discretionary accruals. Columns 1 and 2 include
firm*quarter fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at both the firm and quarter level, are shown in parenthesis. *, **, ***
denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
, ,

[1]
0.036***
(0.002)

, ,

, ,

[2]
0.043***
(0.002)

, ,

, ,

0.027***
(0.001)

,

,

#

,

,
,

Other Controls
No Obs.
Adj/Pseudo R2

No
704,022
0.141

No
704,022
0.171

, ,

[4]

0.180***
(0.008)

0.216***
(0.009)

0.111***
(0.006)

0.136***
(0.006)

-0.128***
(0.006)
-0.005**
(0.003)
0.006**
(0.003)
0.032***
(0.002)
0.043***
(0.006)
0.032***
(0.010)

,

#

0.030***
(0.001)

, ,

[3]

-0.737***
(0.031)
0.002
(0.012)
0.124***
(0.016)
0.170***
(0.010)
0.117***
(0.029)
0.330***
(0.036)
No
704,022
0.126

Yes
704,022
0.093

Table A3: Controlling for Accruals and Dispersion Factors (Table VII)
This table reports monthly returns to a calendar-time portfolio that exploits the return predictability of recommendation
differentials between analysts that ask questions in the conference call and those that do not. Specifically, on each day, we
rank all firms into five quintiles based on the recommendation differential between in-analysts and out-analysts in the
previous quarter. Next, in the five days surrounding the following quarterly earnings announcement, we go long stocks
whose
in the previous quarter is in the top quintile, and short stocks whose
in the previous quarter is in the bottom quintile. If on any given day, there are fewer than 5 stocks in either
the long or short lag, we hold the 30-day Treasury bill instead (this is the case for less than 10% of the trading days). We
then aggregate these daily returns to the monthly level. Panel A reports the monthly returns to the five quintile portfolios
after adjusting for various risk factors; and Panel B reports the risk exposures of these five portfolios. In the full
specification, we control for the Carhart four factors (including momentum), the liquidity factor, the accruals factor (CMA,
Hirshleifer, Hou, and Teoh, 2012), and the analyst forecast dispersion factor (DISP, i.e., low dispersion portfolio – high
dispersion portfolio). T-statistics, with Newey-West adjustments of four lags, are shown in brackets. Estimates significant
at the 5% level are indicated in bold.

Quintile
1
2
3
4
5
5-1

1
5
5-1

XRet
1.46%
[2.59]
0.18%
[0.30]
-1.29%
[-2.59]

Alpha
0.97%
[1.39]
-0.26%
[-0.43]
-1.23%
[-2.42]

Excess
Returns
1.46%
[2.59]
1.26%
[2.55]
0.96%
[1.87]
0.48%
[0.75]
0.18%
[0.30]
-1.29%
[-2.59]

MKT
0.154
[0.73]
0.315
[1.36]
0.161
[1.30]

Panel A: Portfolio Returns
1-Factor 3-Factor 4-Factor
Alpha
Alpha
Alpha
1.08%
1.07%
1.07%
[1.80]
[1.88]
[1.85]
0.91%
0.86%
0.90%
[1.65]
[1.65]
[1.72]
0.39%
0.35%
0.36%
[0.85]
[0.77]
[0.80]
-0.13%
-0.19%
-0.20%
[-0.20]
[-0.31]
[-0.32]
-0.43%
-0.39%
-0.38%
[-0.69]
[-0.65]
[-0.63]
-1.53%
-1.48%
-1.47%
[-2.86]
[-2.78]
[-2.78]

Panel B: Factor Loadings
SMB
HML
0.701
0.563
[3.20]
[2.24]
0.159
0.406
[0.76]
[1.58]
-0.542
-0.157
[-2.03]
[-0.55]

UMD
0.042
[0.35]
0.110
[1.09]
0.068
[0.54]

5-Factor
Alpha
1.03%
[1.62]
0.90%
[1.54]
0.37%
[0.76]
-0.30%
[-0.46]
-0.44%
[-0.66]
-1.49%
[-2.64]

LIQ
0.080
[0.47]
0.092
[0.68]
0.012
[0.10]

7-Factor
Alpha
0.97%
[1.39]
0.96%
[1.67]
0.41%
[0.96]
-0.21%
[-0.35]
-0.26%
[-0.43]
-1.23%
[-2.42]

CMA
0.284
[1.60]
0.250
[1.13]
-0.034
[-0.20]

DISP
0.003
[0.02]
-0.345
[-1.97]
-0.348
[-1.95]

Table A4: Portfolio Returns in Expected Announcement Months (Table VII)
This table reports monthly returns to a calendar-time portfolio that exploits the return predictability of recommendation
differentials between analysts that ask questions in the conference call and those that do not. Importantly, instead of using
the actual reporting month, we follow Frazzini and Lamont (2006) to compute expected earnings announcement month,
with the assumption that firms report in the same calendar month as four fiscal quarters ago. Specifically, in each month,
we rank all firms into five quintiles based on the recommendation differential between in analysts and out analysts in the
previous quarter. Next, in the subsequent expected earnings announcement month, we go long stocks whose
in the previous quarter is in the top quintile, and short stocks whose
in the
previous quarter is in the bottom quintile. Panel A reports the monthly returns to the five quintile portfolios after adjusting
for various risk factors; Panel B reports the risk exposures of these five portfolios. In the full specification, we control for
the Carhart four factors (including momentum) and the liquidity factor. T-statistics, with Newey-West adjustments of four
lags, are shown in brackets. Estimates significant at the 5% level are indicated in bold.

Quintile
1
2
3
4
5
5-1

1
5
5-1

XRet
1.66%
[2.93]
0.99%
[1.63]
-0.67%
[-1.97]

Excess
Returns
1.66%
[2.93]
1.16%
[1.97]
1.26%
[2.27]
1.46%
[2.53]
0.99%
[1.63]
-0.67%
[-1.97]

Alpha
0.66%
[3.15]
-0.12%
[-0.52]
-0.78%
[-2.45]

Panel A: Portfolio Returns
1-Factor
3-Factor
Alpha
Alpha
0.67%
0.60%
[2.46]
[2.75]
0.09%
0.05%
[0.33]
[0.18]
0.24%
0.18%
[1.02]
[0.97]
0.41%
0.35%
[1.61]
[1.68]
-0.12%
-0.17%
[-0.46]
[-0.75]
-0.79%
[-2.50]

-0.77%
[-2.51]

Panel B: Factor Loadings
MKT
SMB
0.973
0.880
[16.62]
[7.69]
1.202
0.721
[21.25]
[6.23]
0.228
-0.159
[2.52]
[-0.92]

4-Factor
Alpha
0.65%
[3.09]
0.08%
[0.32]
0.22%
[1.19]
0.40%
[1.98]
-0.11%
[-0.54]

5-Factor
Alpha
0.66%
[3.15]
0.09%
[0.34]
0.24%
[1.27]
0.42%
[2.03]
-0.12%
[-0.52]

-0.76%
[-2.45]

-0.78%
[-2.45]

HML
0.253
[2.31]
-0.001
[-0.01]
-0.254
[-1.59]

UMD
-0.205
[-3.65]
-0.241
[-4.12]
-0.037
[-0.42]

LIQ
-0.035
[-0.81]
0.007
[0.10]
0.042
[0.50]

Table A5: Positive vs. Negative Words
This table examines the tone of analysts’ questions in conference calls. The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is the
number of positive words minus the number of negative words in a question scaled by the total number of words in the
#
#
), where positive and negative words are defined as in Loughran and
question (
#
McDonald (2011). The dependent variable in columns 3 and 4 is the difference between the log of the number of positive
words and that of negative words in the question (
#
1
#
1 ).
The main independent variable is the average recommendation level of the analyst in the year prior to the conference call.
Other control variables include: the analyst’s
in the conference call (e.g., second in line to ask a question), the
number of years the analyst has covered the firm (
), the number of years the analyst has been in the IBES
database (
), the number of stocks covered by the analyst, the number of stocks covered by the broker (as a
measure of broker size), whether the analyst is an all-star analyst, and whether the analyst is affiliated with a broker that
underwrites for the firm in question. All specifications include firm*quarter fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at both
the firm and quarter level, are shown in parenthesis. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.
, ,

, ,

, ,

[4]
0.014***
(0.004)

-0.011***
(0.002)

-0.011***
(0.002)
-0.032***
(0.009)
-0.032***
(0.011)

-0.003***
(0.001)

-0.003***
(0.001)
-0.011**
(0.005)
-0.017***
(0.005)

,

,

,

,

No Obs.
Adj-R2

, ,

[3]
0.014***
(0.005)

,

#

, ,

[2]
0.034***
(0.011)

,

#

, ,

[1]
0.031***
(0.011)

311,924
0.051

0.049***

0.028***

(0.019)
0.005
(0.008)
-0.034
(0.022)
0.061
(0.041)

(0.008)
-0.000
(0.003)
-0.016
(0.010)
0.022
(0.017)

311,924
0.051

311,924
0.099

311,924
0.099

Table A6: Contemporaneous Investor Response
This table conducts Fama-MacBeth regressions of earnings announcement day returns on the contemporaneous difference
in average recommendations between analysts that ask questions in the conference call and those that do not. The
dependent variable is the cumulative abnormal return in days 0 to 2 of the quarterly earnings announcement (in %). The
main independent variable in columns 1-3 is the difference in average prior-year recommendations between in-analysts
and out-analysts measured in the same quarter (
), and that in columns 4-6 is a dummy that
equals one if this recommendation differential is greater than zero, and zero otherwise. Other control variables include:
the standardized unexpected earnings, and its squared term, analyst forecast dispersion and recommendation dispersion,
institutional ownership, number of analysts covering the firm, market capitalization, book to market ratio, past one year
stock returns, monthly share turnover in the past year, daily idiosyncratic volatility in the past year, and discretionary
accruals. Standard errors, with Newey-West adjustments of four lags, are shown in parenthesis. *, **, *** denote
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

,
,

[1]
0.156**
(0.073)

Dependent Variable =
[2]
[3]
0.153**
0.148**
(0.069)
(0.074)

,
,

,

,

[5]

[6]

0.165***
(0.042)

0.163***
(0.041)

0.174***
(0.046)

2.910***
(0.140)
0.130***
(0.024)
-0.353***
(0.113)
-0.205**
(0.086)
0.636***
(0.166)
-0.062
(0.090)

2.917***
(0.143)
0.134***
(0.023)
-0.237**
(0.106)
-0.161
(0.098)
0.668***
(0.197)
0.082
(0.106)

2.895***
(0.138)
0.116***
(0.028)

2.912***
(0.140)
0.130***
(0.024)
-0.350***
(0.112)
-0.209**
(0.089)
0.623***
(0.163)
-0.070
(0.092)

2.917***
(0.143)
0.134***
(0.023)
-0.234**
(0.106)
-0.166
(0.102)
0.651***
(0.193)
0.075
(0.107)

No
49
0.075

No
49
0.081

Yes
49
0.095

No
49
0.075

No
49
0.081

Yes
49
0.095

,

,

,

Other Controls
F-M # Qtrs
Adj-R2

[4]

2.893***
(0.138)
0.116***
(0.028)
,

#

,

Table A7: Analyst Earnings Forecast Errors
This table examines the earnings forecast accuracy of analysts that ask questions in the conference call vs. those that do
not. The dependent variable in all columns is the earnings forecast error (in %) in the following quarter (defined as the
absolute difference between the analyst’s most recent earnings forecast and the actual reported earnings). The main
independent variable is the
dummy that takes the value of one if the analyst asks a question in the conference call in
the current quarter and zero otherwise. Analyst level controls include: the number of years the analyst has covered the
firm (
), the number of years the analyst has been in the IBES database (
), the number of stocks covered
by the analyst, the number of stocks covered by the broker (a measure of broker size), whether the analyst is an all-star
analyst, and whether the analyst is affiliated with a broker that underwrites for the firm in question. Firm level controls
include: lagged market capitalization, book to market ratio, past one year stock returns, monthly share turnover over the
past year, daily idiosyncratic volatility over the past year, number of analysts covering the firm, institutional ownership,
and discretionary accruals. Columns 1 and 2 include firm*quarter fixed effects and examine the relative accuracy of inanalysts and out-analysts covering the same firm. Columns 3 and 4 include analyst*quarter fixed effects and examine the
relative accuracy of in-stocks (for which the analyst asks a question) and out-stocks (for which the analyst does not ask a
question) covered by the same analyst. Finally, Columns 5 and 6 include firm*quarter fixed effects and examine the relative
accuracy of in-analysts (of at least one conference call) and out-analysts covering the same firm where neither of the two
analysts is in the conference call in question. Standard errors, clustered at both the firm and quarter level, are shown in
parenthesis. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
, ,

[1]
-0.010***
(0.002)

, ,

,

,

#

,

,

,

Other Controls
No Obs.
Adj-R2

, ,

[3]
-0.065***
(0.013)

, ,

[4]
-0.028***
(0.010)

, ,

[5]
-0.005**
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.002**
(0.001)
0.007*
(0.004)
0.006
(0.004)

,

#

, ,

[2]
-0.010***
(0.002)

No
527,827
0.850

No
527,827
0.850

, ,

[6]
-0.003
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.000
(0.002)
0.002
(0.002)
-0.003**
(0.001)
0.008
(0.006)
0.005
(0.005)

No
514,614
0.138

Yes
514,614
0.214

No
355,337
0.849

No
355,337
0.849

Table A8: Drop in Analyst Coverage
This table reports regressions of subsequent changes in analyst coverage on lagged recommendation differentials between
analysts that ask questions in the conference call and those that do not. The dependent variable in all columns is the
number of analysts covering the firm in the following year (we also control for analyst coverage in the previous year). The
main independent variable,
, is defined as the average recommendation differential between in-analysts and outanalysts (
) in the previous four quarters in columns 1 and 2, and it is equal to the fraction of
quarters in which
is greater than
in the previous four quarters in columns 3 and 4. Other control
variables include: analyst forecast dispersion, analyst recommendation dispersion, institutional ownership, market
capitalization, book to market ratio, past one year stock returns, monthly share turnover in the past year, daily idiosyncratic
volatility in the past year, and discretionary accruals. In each column, we conduct a pooled OLS regression. Standard errors,
clustered at both the firm and quarter level, are reported in parenthesis. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% level, respectively.
#
,

#

,

,

,

#

,

#

,

[1]
-0.512**
(0.244)

[2]
-0.391**
(0.196)

[3]
-0.367*
(0.214)

[4]
-0.458**
(0.212)

0.667***
(0.073)

0.639***
(0.066)
-3.109
(1.928)
1.653***
(0.387)
0.975**
(0.398)
1.580***
(0.136)
-1.920***
(0.356)
-0.358
(0.757)
0.628***
(0.078)
1.013***
(0.232)
-5.607***
(1.513)

0.669***
(0.073)

0.640***
(0.066)
-3.106
(1.928)
1.642***
(0.387)
0.978**
(0.399)
1.583***
(0.136)
-1.924***
(0.357)
-0.359
(0.757)
0.629***
(0.079)
1.013***
(0.232)
-5.585***
(1.512)

Yes
36,946
0.321

Yes
36,946
0.404

Yes
36,946
0.321

Yes
36,946
0.404

,

,

,

,

,

12 ,
,

,

,

Other Controls
No Obs.
Adj-R2

#

Table A9: Which Analysts Drop Coverage
This table examines analysts’ decisions to stop covering a firm. The dependent variable in all columns is the
dummy
that equals one if the analyst stops producing earnings forecasts for the firm in the following year, and zero otherwise.
Columns 1-2 conduct a panel OLS regression and columns 3-4 conduct a pooled logit regression. The main independent
variables is the
dummy that takes the value of one if the analyst asks a question in the conference call and zero
otherwise. Analyst level controls include: the average 12-month recommendation level of the analyst (
) on the firm,
), the number of years the analyst has covered
his recommendation relative to the consensus recommendation (
the firm (
), the number of years the analyst has been in the IBES database (
), the number of stocks
covered by the analyst, the number of stocks covered by the broker (a measure of broker size), whether the analyst is an
all-star analyst, and whether the analyst is affiliated with a broker that underwrites for the firm in question. Firm level
controls include: market capitalization, book to market ratio, past one year stock returns, monthly share turnover in the
past year, daily idiosyncratic volatility in the previous year, number of analysts covering the firm, institutional ownership,
and discretionary accruals. Columns 1 and 2 include firm*quarter fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at both the firm
and quarter level, are shown in parenthesis. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
, ,

[1]
-0.324***
(0.014)
-0.002
(0.002)

, ,

, ,

, ,

[2]
-0.297***
(0.014)
-0.006***
(0.002)

, ,

,

,

#

,

,

,

Other Controls
No Obs.
Adj/Pseudo R2

No
832,262
0.216

Yes
832,262
0.293

, ,

[4]
-2.697***
(0.065)

-0.010

-0.023*

(0.011)

(0.013)

-0.010**
(0.004)
-0.009*
(0.005)
-0.144***
(0.005)
-0.010***
(0.004)
-0.016***
(0.006)
0.024***
(0.006)

,

#

, ,

[3]
-2.621***
(0.082)

-0.342***
(0.034)
-0.127***
(0.033)
-0.833***
(0.034)
-0.039
(0.029)
-0.146***
(0.055)
0.147***
(0.053)
No
832,262
0.147

Yes
832,262
0.246

Figure A1: Placebo Casting Episodes (Figure 2)
50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

Placebo 1: a histogram of the number of consecutive quarters of casting spells (i.e.,
the assumption that firms calls on analysts randomly.

50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

Placebo 2: a histogram of the number of consecutive quarters of non-casting episodes (that is,
).

) under

Figure A2: Event-time Cumulative Abnormal Returns
This figure plots event-time stock returns for the 12 months following an earnings conference call. Specifically, the figure
examines the long-run return predictability of recommendation differentials between analysts that ask questions and those
that do not in earnings conference calls: Specifically, we go long in stocks whose
is smaller than
in the previous earnings call, and go short in stocks whose
is greater than
in the previous
earnings call. The figure presents DGTW characteristic-adjusted returns to this long-short portfolio, starting directly after
the call, until 12 months later. Note that the next earnings announcement/conference call usually occurs in month three
following the current call.

0.03

Next Earnings Announcement

0.025

0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

