NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOUSES AS ATMS? MORTGAGE REFINANCING AND MACROECONOMIC
UNCERTAINTY
Hui Chen
Michael Michaux
Nikolai Roussanov
Working Paper 19421
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19421
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013
We gratefully acknowledge comments and suggestions by Andy Abel, Rui Albuquerque, Fernando
Alvarez, Nick Bloom, Paco Buera, John Campbell, Chris Carroll, Dean Corbae, John Driscoll, Joao
Gomes, Lars Hansen, Erik Hurst, Urban Jermann, Greg Kaplan, Ralph Koijen, Dirk Krueger, David
Laibson, Francis Longstaff, Debbie Lucas, Hanno Lustig, Rajnish Mehra, Dimitris Papanikolaou,
JonathanParker, Monika Piazzesi, Vincenzo Quadrini, Victor Rios-Rull, Tom Sargent, Martin
Schneider,AntoinetteSchoar, Amit Seru, Todd Sinai, Nick Souleles, Kjetil Storesletten, Harald
Uhlig, Luis Viceira, GianlucaViolante, Jessica Wachter, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, Pierre-Olivier
Weill, Toni Whited, Randy Wright,Amir Yaron, and seminar participants at the AEA, ASU Sonoran
Winter Finance conference, CFEA,Columbia, Econometric Society, Federal Reserve Board, Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, FIRS,NBER Summer Institute, SED, SITE, 2012 Summer Real Estate
Symposium, Tepper/LAEF Conference,UC Berkeley, USC, UCLA-USC Finance Day, UC San Diego,
University of Hawaii, University of Virginia, and Wharton. Roussanov acknowledges support from
the Rodney White Center for Financial Research and the Cynthia and Bennett Golub Endowed Faculty
Scholarship at Wharton. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Hui Chen, Michael Michaux, and Nikolai Roussanov. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Houses as ATMs? Mortgage Refinancing and Macroeconomic Uncertainty
Hui Chen, Michael Michaux, and Nikolai Roussanov
NBER Working Paper No. 19421
September 2013
JEL No. E21,E44,G21
ABSTRACT
We estimate a structural model of household liquidity management in the presence of long-term
mortgages.Households face counter-cyclical idiosyncratic labor income uncertainty and borrowing
constraints,which affect optimal choices of leverage, precautionary saving in liquid assets and
illiquid home equity, debt repayment, mortgage refinancing, and default. Taking the observed
historical path of house prices, aggregate income, and interest rates as given, the model quantitatively
accounts for the run-up in household debt and consumption boom prior to the financial crisis, their
subsequent collapse, and mild recovery following the Great Recession, especially among the most
constrained households.
Hui Chen
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-637
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
huichen@mit.edu
Michael Michaux
Department of Finance and Business Economics
Marshall School of Business,
University of Southern California,
3670 Trousdale Parkway, BRI-308,
Los Angeles, CA 90089
michaux@marshall.usc.edu

Nikolai Roussanov
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School, Finance Department
2400 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
nroussan@wharton.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

We show that a rational model of home equity-based borrowing by liquidity-constrained
households can quantitatively account for the empirical patterns in household leverage and
consumption over the last decade. In the aggregate, taking the observed historical path of
house prices, aggregate household income, and interest rates as exogenously given, our model
reproduces both the dramatic run-up in the housing debt over the period 2000-2006, and
the sharp contraction in consumption that followed. In the cross section, the interaction of
idiosyncratic labor income shocks with liquidity constraints, absent any ex ante heterogeneity,
generates wide dispersion in liquid assets, debt holdings, and the ability of households to
reﬁnance their mortgages. This dispersion implies diverging paths of consumption following
the Great Recession for households with diﬀerent boom-time leverage.
Both the origins of the recent ﬁnancial crisis and the severity of the Great Recession are
often attributed to the increase in consumer indebtedness during the period of house price
run-up in mid-2000s and the subsequent deterioration of household balance sheets with the
sharp decline in house prices (e.g., Dynan (2012), Mian, Rao, and Suﬁ (2013)). There is
less consensus on the structural forces driving both the borrowing boom and the consumption slump that followed. In particular, the expansion of household leverage and growth
of consumer expenditures ﬁnanced with extracted home equity over the period of house
price boom as documented by Mian and Suﬁ (2010) is consistent with liquidity-constrained
households taking advantage of relaxed housing collateral constraints. These facts are also
qualitatively consistent with alternative explanations featuring self-control problems on the
part of consumers (e.g., Laibson (1997)), irrationally optimistic expectations about future
income and house prices, and/or moral hazard on the part of mortgage originators (e.g.,
Keys, Mukherjee, Seru, and Vig (2010)).
In order to provide a benchmark for evaluating the alternative explanations of the observed household behavior both prior to the recent ﬁnancial crisis and during the Great
Recession, we build a quantitative framework of the consumption, saving, and mortgage
ﬁnancing decisions of households who are subject to idiosyncratic labor income risk and
liquidity constraints. Our analysis focuses on households’ optimal choices of leverage, pre1

cautionary savings in liquid assets and illiquid home equity, as well as the dynamic decisions
in debt repayment, mortgage reﬁnancing, cash-out, and default. The model captures the
relevant frictions impacting the households’ ability to smooth consumption over time and
across states of nature when borrowing collateralized with housing wealth is the main source
of consumer credit. We estimate the structural parameters of the model by targeting the key
moments of household consumption, asset and debt holdings, and the aggregate dynamics
of mortgage reﬁnancing and equity extraction in relation to macroeconomic conditions.
While much of the existing literature treats mortgage reﬁnancing and home-equity-backed
borrowing in isolation, our analysis indicates that an integrated approach is important for understanding both. Speciﬁcally, the decision to reﬁnance trades oﬀ the beneﬁts of reﬁnancing,
including lower interest rates and/or higher liquidity, against the substantial costs of originating a new loan, both ﬁnancial and non-pecuniary. Our model also incorporates two sets
of realistic borrowing constraints, the loan-to-value (LTV) constraint and the loan-to-income
(LTI) constraint, which require that the reﬁnanced loan amount is not too large relative to
current house value and household income, respectively. Another important feature of our
model is the counter-cyclical volatility of idiosyncratic labor income growth, documented by
Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2004) (see also Meghir and Pistaferri (2004)). This property of the labor income process implies that a macroeconomic downturn not only can make
more households become liquidity constrained, but also make households more concerned
about the increased uncertainty of future income.
Together, these ingredients generate a set of new predictions about household reﬁnancing and consumption decisions. First, because households do not have access to complete
ﬁnancial markets, the embedded options to default, prepay, or reﬁnance the mortgage can
no longer be analyzed in the standard option-pricing framework. In particular, interest rates
are not the only consideration in reﬁnancing. The ability to convert some of the home equity
into liquid assets can make reﬁnancing more attractive even when the costs of borrowing are
higher than before, a puzzle for traditional models that consider lowering the interest rate
as the only reason to reﬁnance a ﬁxed rate mortgage.1
1

Hurst and Staﬀord (2004) ﬁrst pointed out this possibility and supported it with empirical evidence
using household-level data from an earlier time period.

2

Second, the interactions between labor income risk, house price risk, and liquidity constraints can cause households to preemptively reﬁnance before actually becoming constrained.
Because idiosyncratic labor income risk jumps up signiﬁcantly in recessions, households may
reﬁnance early to build up a buﬀer stock of liquid assets preemptively in order to avoid being
caught by a binding loan-to-income constraint in the future. Similarly, because house price
shocks are persistent, reﬁnancing activity might increase following a drop in house price due
to the concern that the loan-to-value constraint might become binding soon. Such preemptive behavior is unique to our model due to the combination of long-term loans and realistic
modeling of the origination process, and does not apply to models with only short-term debt.
Households build up precautionary savings using both liquid assets and home equity. Since
liquid assets provide limited returns while home equity is itself illiquid due to the reﬁnancing costs and the limits on loan-to-income and loan-to-value ratios, households dynamically
balance these two types of savings, holding more home equity when labor income risk is
relatively low, and switching to stockpiling liquidity when labor income risk is high and constraints become tighter. Compared to models of one period debt and/or frictionless access
to borrowing, our model of long-term mortgages generates greater accumulation of debt for
ﬁnancially constrained households, because debt and liquid assets are imperfect substitutes.
It also generates a more pro-longed deleveraging process, since households are not required
to pay back their debt at the end of each period but rather rebalance it optimally in response
to changing conditions.
Third, even though households in the model face identical schedules of reﬁnancing costs,
their reﬁnancing decisions can diﬀer signiﬁcantly due to idiosyncratic labor income risk and
the resulting dispersion in balance sheet positions, which might appear suboptimal according
to standard theory.2 The model thus helps to connect aggregate reﬁnancing activity with
the cross section of household characteristics by identifying the economic mechanisms behind
the individual households’ decisions.
Fourth, our sensitivity analysis indicates that diﬀerences in preference parameters could
also have nontrivial eﬀects on reﬁnancing. Households with low discount rates or high risk
2

In his AFA presidential address Campbell (2006) reviews the literature on mortgage reﬁnancing and
calls for a deeper analysis of the underlying economic causes of “suboptimal” exercise of the prepayment
option by many households.

3

aversion will choose lower mortgage balances and reﬁnance less frequently, and their reﬁnancing activities are less sensitive to mortgage rate changes but more sensitive to aggregate
income shocks. A higher elasticity of intertemporal substitution leads to higher leverage,
more frequent reﬁnancing, and higher sensitivity of reﬁnancing to changes in both mortgage
rates and aggregate income.
Long-term mortgages with a ﬁxed rate and an option to prepay the outstanding balance
prior to maturity, typically by obtaining a new loan (reﬁnancing), have long been the mainstay of the U.S. housing market. A quantitative model that captures these features of the
mortgage market is valuable for two reasons. On the one hand, systematic prepayment is
the main source of risk in the $8-trillion market for residential mortgage-backed securities
(MBS) as prepayment tends to accelerate cashﬂow to MBS investors when interest rates are
low and extend duration when discount rates are high. On the other hand, the tremendous
quantity of mortgage debt outstanding and the amount of home equity extraction mean that
reﬁnancing is a central part of households’ ﬁnancial and consumption decisions. According
to the Flow of Funds, mortgages accounted for over 70% of the total liabilities of U.S. households and nonproﬁt organizations in 2012. Moreover, on average about 70% of reﬁnanced
loans involve cash-out, and U.S. households extracted over $1.7 trillion of home equity via
reﬁnancing from 1993 to 2010, corresponding to 11.5% of new loan balances.3
Besides the level of mortgage debt and the amount and frequency of reﬁnancing, our
estimation targets the time-series behavior of aggregate equity extraction. To this end we
document new empirical stylized facts that help us identify the key structural parameters
of the model. We show that in the data, both mortgage reﬁnancing and cash-out appear to
respond negatively to the business cycle, even after controlling for the cyclicality of mortgage
rates. Reﬁnancing is also positively related to growth in house prices, which drives the
tightness of the borrowing constraints.
The estimated structural model quantiﬁes the degree to which reﬁnancing costs as well as
the lack of home equity constrain the ability of households to smooth consumption in the face
3

These ﬁgures are conservative as they are based on the estimates for conforming loans provided by Freddie
Mac and therefore exclude certain kinds of mortgage loans, such as subprime. In particular, survey-based
analysis in Greenspan and Kennedy (2008) suggests much greater magnitudes of home equity extraction.

4

of macroeconomic uncertainty. By feeding in the actual time series of macroeconomic shocks,
the model successfully replicates the signiﬁcant run-up in household leverage for households
experiencing large house price appreciation, compared to the situation of relatively stable
house prices. Since our simulated moments estimation only targets a few reduced-form
correlations between aggregate variables but not their realizations, such a test presents a
high hurdle for the model.
The model also generates the dynamics of individual consumption, liquid assets, leverage,
as well as mortgage reﬁnancing decisions for the cross section of households. Due to the longterm nature of mortgages, debt reduction following a sequence of adverse shocks during the
Great Recession occurs slowly, as households optimally adjust their debt and asset positions.
In contrast, in models that only allow for short-term mortgage loans, households cannot ride
out periods of high uncertainty by borrowing against their homes because falling house prices
during a recession lead to a painful deleveraging as households are forced to repay the loans
by the tightening collateral constraints (e.g. Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Van Nieuwerburgh
(2011), Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011), and Midrigan and Philippon (2011)).4 We show
that even in the presence of long-term debt the eﬀect of deleveraging on consumption is
substantial, with households in the top quintile of the leverage distribution experiencing real
consumption drops of 10% more than the average.
Our simulation-based evidence also demonstrates that the interaction between interest
rates and household liquidity constraints is important for assessing the eﬀect of monetary
policy on reﬁnancing activity.5 When many households are liquidity constrained their reﬁ4

Empirical evidence in Carroll, Slacálek, and Sommer (2012) suggests that the increase in labor income
uncertainty, rather than the tightening of credit constraints by themselves, may be the driver of the consumption decline during the Great Recession.
5
Mortgage reﬁnancing featured prominently in Alan Greenspan’s defense of low interest rates as a way
of stimulating household consumption during the “jobless recovery” from the 2001 recession: “Overall, the
economy has made impressive gains in output and real incomes; however, progress in creating jobs has
been limited. ... The very low level of interest rates ... encouraged household spending through a variety
of channels. ... The lowest home mortgage rates in decades were a major contributor ... engendering a
large extraction of cash from home equity. A signiﬁcant part of that cash supported personal consumption
expenditures and home improvement. In addition, many households took out cash in the process of reﬁnancing, often using the proceeds to substitute for higher-cost consumer debt. That reﬁnancing also permitted
some households to lower the monthly carrying costs for their homes and thus freed up funds for other
expenditures.” (Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan; Federal Reserve Board’s semiannual Monetary
Policy Report to the Congress Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives,
February 11, 2004).

5

nancing behavior becomes insensitive to changes in interest rates, especially in the face of
depressed values of housing collateral or high debt service ratios. At the same time, our analysis suggests that a monetary easing in the early stages of an economic downturn, when both
aggregate income falls and its cross-sectional dispersion rises, can elicit a sharper response of
reﬁnancing activity than what standard models would predict based solely on interest rate
changes.
Finally, our model generates new insights for analyzing the eﬀectiveness of various government programs that aim to stimulate the economy by providing direct support to the
mortgage markets. Examples of these extraordinary policy measures undertaken following
the Great Recession include lowering long-term mortgage rates (via the large scale asset purchases by the U.S. Federal Reserve Board) and relaxing the loan-to-value requirements for
homeowners who are underwater (via the Home Aﬀordable Reﬁnance Program or HARP).
Our analysis suggests that it is important to coordinate such programs. For example, households that are not able to reﬁnance due to binding reﬁnancing restrictions will beneﬁt little
from low interest rates. It also helps guide the design of “selective reﬁnancing” programs –
using criteria that help identify temporarily distressed households who can beneﬁt greatly
from relaxed borrowing constraints without signiﬁcantly raising the risk of default. For example, we ﬁnd that relaxing the loan-to-income constraint (similarly to FHA loans) may
be just as helpful in consumption smoothing as relaxing the loan-to-value constraint, but
could result in a smaller increase in mortgage defaults. Finally, our simulation analysis based
on the historical time-series indicates that the tightening of credit standards by mortgage
lenders may have contributed signiﬁcantly to the slow recovery of consumption following the
Great Recession by restricting the ability of constrained homeowners to reﬁnance.

1.1

Literature

There is a large literature on mortgage reﬁnancing. The ﬁxed-income asset pricing literature
focuses on the optimal exercise of the call option embedded in the mortgage (e.g., Dunn and
McConnell (1981), Dunn and Spatt (2005)). Boudoukh, Richardson, Stanton, and Whitelaw
(1997) and Gabaix, Krishnamurthy, and Vigneron (2007) present evidence of systematic vari-

6

ation in prepayment risk that is not fully explained by interest rate dynamics, while Duarte,
Longstaﬀ, and Yu (2007) document sensitivity of agency mortgage prices to macroeconomic
conditions captured by stock returns. The wide divergence of prepayment behavior across
households has been attributed to heterogeneity in the costs of reﬁnancing (e.g., Stanton
(1995), Deng, Quigley, and Van Order (2000)), including those arising from behavioral biases (e.g. Agarwal, Driscoll, and Laibson (2002)); Downing, Stanton, and Wallace (2005)
consider the role of house prices. Campbell and Cocco (2003) and Koijen, Van Hemert, and
Van Nieuwerburgh (2009) analyze the choice between adjustable and ﬁxed-rate mortgages.
Longstaﬀ (2004) and Mayer, Piskorski, and Tchistyi (2010) consider equilibrium mortgage
rates in environments where reﬁnancing is constrained by borrower creditworthiness.
Macro asset pricing literature on housing collateral emphasizes the implicit risk-sharing
role of mortgage ﬁnance and its impact on risk premia (e.g., Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh
(2005), Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2011)). In the context of household
risk management, Sinai and Souleles (2005) argue theoretically that homeowners trade oﬀ
house price risk against rent risk, while Piazzesi and Schneider (2009) study the interaction
of housing and uninsurable inﬂation risk.
A large literature aims to understand the importance of housing wealth for determining
consumption: recent contributions include Campbell and Cocco (2007), Carroll, Otsuka,
and Slacalek (2011), Case, Quigley, and Shiller (2011), and Calomiris, Longhofer, and Miles
(2012). While there is disagreement as to whether there is a pure wealth eﬀect of housing
on consumption in the aggregate, most authors agree that the collateral value of housing
wealth inﬂuences the consumption of constrained households. In particular, Caplin, Freeman,
and Tracy (1997) and Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2010) show that housing collateral
mutes the consumption responses to regional income shocks. Hurst and Staﬀord (2004)
were the ﬁrst to explicitly consider the role of mortgage reﬁnancing as a mechanism of
accessing home equity for the purpose of smoothing consumption in a stylized model and
provide household-level evidence. The dual role of durable goods (such as housing) as both
a source of consumable service ﬂow and collateral, as well as its role for household saving
is explored theoretically in Fernandez-Villaverde and Krueger (2011), while Rios-Rull and
Sanchez-Marcos (2008) and He, Wright, and Zhu (2012) endogenize house prices in similar
7

environments. Campbell and Hercowitz (2005) use a general equilibrium model to argue
that the increased accessibility of housing collateral contributed to the “Great Moderation.”
Our model is closely related to Attanasio, Leicester, and Wakeﬁeld (2011) who focus on the
sensitivity of consumption to housing wealth by matching key features of the U.K. housing
market.
While our portfolio-choice setting treats house prices and mortgage rates as exogenous,
the key elements of our model could be fruitfully incorporated into equilibrium settings
considered in a number of recent papers. For example, Landvoigt, Piazzesi, and Schneider
(2012) evaluate the impact of credit availability on the cross-section of house prices in an
assignment framework. Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2011) study mortgage default in a model
with both long-term loans and endogenous pricing of debt and housing collateral, but without
the possibility of reﬁnancing. Jeske, Krueger, and Mitman (2011) evaluate the aggregate
implications of the government guarantees against mortgage default risk. Corbae and Quintin
(2013) analyze the role of high-leverage mortgage products in engendering the foreclosure
crisis that followed the housing boom at the onset of the Great Recession. Khandani, Lo, and
Merton (2009) show that home equity extraction via mortgage reﬁnancing that is driven by
rapid house price appreciation substantially increases the systematic component of mortgage
default risk, and provide estimates of its eﬀect on the valuation of mortgage debt.
Finally, our paper is related to the broader literature on household liquidity management
and portfolio choice with frictions. The focus of this literature is on the role of transaction
costs (as in the tradition of Baumol-Tobin inventory models) in inhibiting households’ ability
to self-insure by accumulating ﬁnancial assets and/or durable goods (e.g., Bertola, Guiso, and
Pistaferri (2005), Alvarez, Guiso, and Lippi (2010), and Kaplan and Violante (2011)), the
implications of costly rebalancing for the optimal portfolio choice as well as asset pricing (e.g.,
Heaton and Lucas (1996), Lynch (1996), Gabaix and Laibson (2002), Gomes and Michaelides
(2005), Abel, Eberly, and Panageas (2013)), and the impact of incomplete markets on option
exercise (e.g., Chen, Miao, and Wang (2010)).

8

2

New Stylized Facts

In this section we document some new stylized facts on how households access liquidity in
response to aggregate economic conditions via mortgage reﬁnancing as well as other forms
of home equity-based borrowing. These facts suggest that mortgage reﬁnancing and homeequity withdrawal are closely linked. The evidence motivates our modeling approach (Section
3), as well as helps with the identiﬁcation of the structural parameters (Section 4) and the
assessment of model performance (Section 5).

2.1

Aggregate reﬁnancing behavior

We begin with the empirical evidence on how mortgage reﬁnancing activities at the aggregate
level relate to interest rates and macroeconomic conditions. The measures we use are the
reﬁnancing applications index from the Mortgage Bankers Association (the reﬁ index) and
the data on cash-out volume from Freddie Mac.
Figure 1 Panel A plots the MBA reﬁ index (solid line) and the diﬀerences between the
30-year conventional mortgage rate and its past 3-year moving average (dash line). Not
surprisingly, reﬁnancing activity increased in the early 90s and especially around 2003, both
of which are periods of signiﬁcant drops in mortgage rates. This is consistent with households
reﬁnancing to take advantage of newly available low mortgage rates. Panel B plots the reﬁ
index along with the year-over-year growth rate in industrial production (dash line). The
reﬁ index rose signiﬁcantly during the 2001 recession, in early 2008 – the onset of the Great
Recession, and again during the Great Recession in 2009. While this evidence is consistent
with the interpretation that households reﬁnance to smooth consumption when experiencing
bad income shocks or reﬁnance preemptively in anticipation of worsening economic conditions
in the future, it could also be driven by pro-cyclical variation in mortgage rates.
To further investigate the dynamics of the aggregate reﬁnancing activity, we regress the

9

A. Refinancing and Mortgage Rates
10000

2

0

5000

0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Mortgage rates

Refi index

refi index
changes in 30y mortgage rate

−2
2015

B. Refinancing and Industrial Production
10000

0.2

5000

0
1990

0

1995

2000

2005

2010

Indpro growth

Refi index

refi index
industrial production growth

−0.2
2015

Figure 1: Reﬁnancing, Interest Rates, and Macroeconomic Conditions. The reﬁ
index is from the Mortgage Bankers Association. The change in 30-year mortgage rate is
deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the 30-year conventional mortgage rate and its past 3-year
moving average. The industrial production growth is computed on a year-over-year basis
using monthly data.
reﬁ index on a host of ﬁnancial and macroeconomic variables:
REF I
REF I
REF It = β0REF I +βZREF I ∆IPt +βH
∆HP It +βRREF I RtM 30 +βRl
∆RtM 30 +βrREF I rt1Y +ϵt ,

(1)
where ∆IPt is the year-on-year growth in the Industrial Production index, ∆HP It is the yearon-year growth in the Case-Shiller housing price index, RtM 30 is the 30-year ﬁxed mortgage
M 30
M 30
with Rlag,t
being a lagged 30-year ﬁxed mortgage rate (we
rate, ∆RM 30 = RtM 30 − Rlag,t

try both the 12-month lagged rate and the average rate in the past 3 years), and rt1Y is the
1-year Treasury rate. To make the coeﬃcients easier to interpret, we rescale the MBA reﬁ
index to have a mean of 8%, which is the average annual reﬁnancing rate for homeowners
according to the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) and Census data.

10

Table 1 reports the results. Among the key drivers of mortgage reﬁnancing are the current
30-year mortgage rate and the change in the mortgage rate, both of which come in with
negative and signiﬁcant coeﬃcients. This is consistent with the standard theory of mortgage
reﬁnancing, which argues that the primary reason to reﬁnance is to take advantage of lower
interest rates and thus lower interest payments. House price growth aﬀects reﬁnancing
positively, since an increase in house prices implies an increase in home equity that can
be cashed out. The industrial production growth, a direct measure of economic activity,
has a robustly signiﬁcant and negative coeﬃcient even after controlling for mortgage rates
and house price growth. This again suggests that households reﬁnance more in economic
downturns, beyond what can be explained by the changes in interest rates.
A potential reason for the negative relation between reﬁnancing activity and the growth in
industrial production is that the latter is a proxy for the eﬀects of interest rates not captured
by the term structure variables in (1). In the Appendix, we present further evidence on the
negative response of mortgage reﬁnancing to economic activity using state-level data. This
helps us to separate the eﬀect of low interest rates from that of deteriorating economic
conditions, insofar as the local economic activity measures are less synchronized with the
interest rates than are the aggregate measures, and that households cannot diversify away
state-level shocks.

2.2

Aggregate home equity withdrawal

The aggregate reﬁnancing rate does not distinguish between cash-out reﬁnancing (taking out
a loan with a larger balance than the previous one) from those that result in the same or
lower loan balances. We now examine how actual withdrawal of home equity by households
relates to macroeconomic conditions and inﬂuences reﬁnancing activity.
Figure 2 Panel A plots the time series of the percentage of reﬁnancing for which the loan
amount (i) is raised by 5% or more (classiﬁed as cash-out), (ii) remains within 5% of the
original amount (classiﬁed as no change), or (iii) is reduced by 5% or more (classiﬁed as
pay-down). On average, 61% of reﬁnancing over this period are cash-outs, which shows the
importance of cash-outs in mortgage reﬁnancing. The share of cash-outs is visibly higher
11

A. Components of refinances

Percentage of Refis

100
80
60

← cash-out

40

← no change
20

← pay-down
0
1985

1989

1993

1997

2001

2005

2009

2013

2005

2009

2013

B. Ratio of new to old loan rates

New Rate/Old Rate

1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
1985

1989

1993

1997

2001

Figure 2: Fraction of cash-out and the median rate ratio for reﬁnance loans. Panel
A plots the percentage of reﬁnancing resulting in 5% higher loan amount (cash-out), no
change, or lower loan amount (pay-down). Panel B plots the median ratio of new to old loan
rates upon reﬁnance. The data is from Freddie Mac for the period 1985Q1 to 2012Q4.
towards the end of each expansion, and it declines coming out of recessions. In contrast,
the fraction of reﬁnancing that results in no change in loan balance or pay-down typically
rises following a recession, presumably because households reﬁnance to take advantage of
the lower mortgage rates and to repay the loans they take out entering the recession.
Since the standard theory predicts that the primary driver of reﬁnancing is lowering the
borrowing costs, it is informative to examine under what conditions reﬁnancing actually
lowers borrowers’ loan rates. Panel B of Figure 2 plots the median of the ratio of new mortgage rates to the old rates on the reﬁnanced loans (adjustable rate mortgages are excluded).
Households tend to reﬁnance despite higher rates towards the end of expansions and the
beginning of recessions, when the median rate ratio often exceeds unity, but at lower rates
coming out of recessions.
This evidence strongly suggests that interest savings are not the only driver of reﬁnancing.
An important role may be played by the ability of borrowers to alleviate liquidity constraints
12

either by increasing the loan amount (cash-out) or extending the loan term (thus reducing the
monthly payments).6 Indeed, the correlation between the rate ratio and the cash-out share in
Panel A is 78%. Given that labor income is not tradable and other non-collateralized personal
loans (e.g., credit card loans) are expensive, mortgage loans are a major source of credit
for liquidity constrained households. This is consistent with household-level evidence in
Hurst and Staﬀord (2004) that the most liquidity-constrained households reﬁnance following
negative income shocks even as interest rates increase in order to access their home equity.
Next, we examine to what extent does home equity extraction help smooth shocks to
income in the aggregate. We separately examine two types of home equity withdrawal to
study the potentially diﬀerent roles that senior and junior mortgage loans play in smoothing
income shocks. The ﬁrst measure is cash-out reﬁnancing of ﬁrst-lien conforming mortgages,
while the second combines home equity loans and lines of credit (HEL+HELOC, computed
as the net change of the outstanding balances reported in the Flow of Funds). We normalize
the dollar amount of total home equity withdrawn each year by the personal income in the
previous year and then regress it on real personal income growth, house price growth, and
several interest rate variables as in the regression of reﬁ rates:
j
j
HEWtj = β0j + βZj ∆P It + βH
∆HP It + βRj RtM 30 + βRl
∆RtM 30 + βrj rt1Y + ϵt .

(2)

where j ∈ {Cash-out, HELOC}, HEWt is the home equity withdrawal in a year (via cash-out
or HELOC) scaled by the total personal income in the previous year, ∆P It is the one-year
M 30
growth rate in real personal income, ∆RtM 30 = RtM 30 − Rt−1
, and the other variables are the

same as deﬁned in (1).
The results are shown in Table 2. Like reﬁnancing rates, cash-out volume is negatively
related to the level of 30-year mortgage rate. However, it is positively related to the change
in 30-year mortgage rate, the opposite of the case for reﬁ (see Table 1). When households
decide when to cash out, they not only compare the level of current mortgage rate to old
rates, but also to the costs of other sources of ﬁnancing (e.g., rates on credit card debt).
6

Households are strictly worse oﬀ by reﬁnancing into a higher rate loan in the case of “no-change” or
“pay-down” reﬁnancing as long as the loan’s time to maturity remains the same. In the case of “pay-down”,
the households will be better oﬀ by choosing to prepay instead.

13

Moreover, the degree of liquidity constraint households face is a key factor. In fact, that the
cash-out volume tends to rise as mortgage rates rise is consistent with the fact that both
the cash-out share and the rate ratio tend to peak at the end of expansions and beginning
of recessions (see Figure 2). Finally, similar to the case of reﬁnancing, house price growth is
positively related to both measures of home equity withdrawal, with an eﬀect of essentially
identical magnitude, indicating that out of an extra $1 of home equity 6 cents are withdrawn
in the same year.
Over the sample, after controlling for house price growth and interest rates, growth in real
personal income is signiﬁcantly negatively correlated with cash-out from ﬁrst-lien mortgages,
but it has no signiﬁcant relation with equity withdrawal via home equity loans and lines of
credit. This result suggests that households primarily use reﬁnancing of senior-lien mortgage
loans rather than junior HEL(OC)s for consumption smoothing (in fact, households often
use funds extracted upon cash-out to repay outstanding junior loans, as well as other forms
of debt, such as credit card balances). The magnitude of the coeﬃcient on personal income
growth suggests that if real income drops by 10%, households on average increase cash-out
from their ﬁrst-lien mortgages by 1.3% of income to oﬀset this eﬀect. While this estimated
eﬀect applies to the aggregate data, there is clearly substantial underlying heterogeneity
across households in terms of homeownership, income, leverage, among others, which will
potentially lead to diﬀerent cash-out responses to income shocks. We study these eﬀects
in our model next, where we posit that all households are ex ante identical but experience
diﬀerent histories of idiosyncratic shocks.

3

The Model

In this section, we present a dynamic model of household consumption, saving, and borrowing
decisions with incomplete markets. This model will focus on understanding households’
decisions on how to ﬁnance consumption and homeownership over time, including the choice
of being a homeowner or a renter, as well as the choices of reﬁnancing, prepayment, and
default. The households are confronted with idiosyncratic shocks to income and aggregate
shocks to interest rates, income growth, and house value. Since our focus is on understanding
14

households’ behavior in the face of realistic macroeconomic risks and constraints, we try to
capture the key elements of the institutional environment of the U.S. housing ﬁnance while
taking asset prices (including house prices) as exogenous.

3.1

Households preferences and endowments

The economy is populated by ex-ante identical, inﬁnitely lived households, indexed by i. We
assume households have recursive utility over consumption as in Epstein and Zin (1989) and
Weil (1990),

[

1−γ
θ

Ut = max (1 − δ) Ct
Ct

where
θ=

θ
[ 1−γ ] θ1 ] 1−γ
+ δEt Ut+1
,

(3)

1−γ
.
1 − ψ1

The parameters in these preferences include the discount factor δ, the coeﬃcient of relative
risk aversion γ, and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES) ψ. The parameter θ
is an index of the deviation with respect to the benchmark CRRA utility function (when
θ = 1, the inverse of the IES coincides with risk aversion as in the CRRA case).
Each household is endowed with one unit of labor supplied inelastically that receives
a before-tax wage yit . The nominal income process yit for household i has an aggregate
component, Yt , as well as an idiosyncratic component, ỹit . That is,
yit = pt Yt ỹit .

(4)

First, pt is the price level in the economy at time t. For tractability, we assume the (gross)
inﬂation rate is constant, deﬁned as pt+1 /pt = π. Second, Yt is the real aggregate income.
The growth rate of aggregate real income Zt+1 = Yt+1 /Yt is part of the aggregate state
variables in this model. We specify the dynamics of Zt in Section 3.3. Third, ỹit is the
idiosyncratic labor income component, which follows an autoregressive process with statedependent conditional volatility, i.e., heteroscedastic innovations,
log ỹit = log µy (Zt ) + ρy log ỹi,t−1 + σ(Zt )ϵyit ,
15

ϵyit ∼ N (0, 1).

(5)

The counter-cyclical nature of the idiosyncratic labor income risk, which is captured here
by having σ(Zt ) decreasing in Zt , is emphasized by Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2004).
2

(Z)
We set log µy (Z) = − 12 σ1+ρ
so that the cross-sectional mean of the idiosyncratic components
y

of income ỹit implied by the stationary distribution equals to unity in every period.7
Finally, the income tax rate is τ .

3.2

Household assets and liabilities

Liquid Assets Households have access to a savings account that pays nominal short rate
rt . The nominal short rate is another aggregate state variable in this model, and we specify
its dynamics in Section 3.3. The balance of the savings account is ait . We also refer to the
savings account as the households’ liquid assets. Interest income is taxed at the same rate τ
as labor income.
Houses Households can own houses in the model. We make the assumption that nominal
house prices Ht have a component that grows at the same rate as the economy (i.e., nominal
aggregate income), and another component that represents the aggregate risk inherent in
the housing market’s transitory deviations from the trend in aggregate income. Therefore,
the house price is
Ht = H̄ pt Yt ht ,

(6)

where H̄ is the long-run house price-to-income ratio, Yt is the real aggregate income, and
ht follows a stationary process that generates transitory shocks to house prices. Thus, real
house price level is cointegrated with real aggregate income in our model. We specify the
process for ht as part of the aggregate state variables in Section 3.3.
Debt There are two types of borrowing allowed for the households, both of which are
collateralized by the house: long-term mortgages and short-term home equity lines of credit
(HELOC). For simplicity, long-term mortgage contracts are assumed to be perpetual interestonly mortgages. Households have to make mortgage payment kit bit every period, based
7

Guvenen, Ozkan, and Song (2012) show that it is the negative skewness of labor earning that increases
during macroeconomic downturns, rather than the variance. Modeling the income process in such a way
would be an interesting extension of our model, which we leave for future research.

16

on the outstanding mortgage balance bit and the (ﬁxed) mortgage coupon rate kit . The
households can deduct the mortgage interest expense, which is the full mortgage payment
for an interest-only mortgage, from their taxable income yit .
The HELOC is modeled as a one-period debt with ﬂoating interest rate benchmarked to
the riskfree rate rt ,
rtHL = rt + ϑ,

(7)

where ϑ > 0 is the spread over the riskfree rate. The HELOC balance is subject to the borrowing constraints every period, which we specify below. HELOC transactions are costless.
Due to the interest rate diﬀerential and the fact that the borrowing constraints described
below are imposed on HELOC every period, it is never optimal to simultaneously hold nonzero balances in HELOC and liquid assets. Thus, we denote the HELOC balance with −a−
i,t
+
−
and the savings balance with a+
i,t , where ai,t = max (ai,t , 0) and ai,t = min (ai,t , 0).

Mortgage Reﬁnancing and Repayment Households have the option to reﬁnance the
long-term mortgage and reset the coupon rate ki,t+1 to the current market mortgage rate Rt ;
they can increase or decrease the outstanding mortgage loan balance at that time, so that
in general bi,t+1 ̸= bi,t ; in particular, they can increase the loan balance (cash-out) only by
reﬁnancing into a new loan. The reﬁnancing decision is denoted by the indicator IitRF , with
IitRF = 1 if the home loan is reﬁnanced at time t and IitRF = 0 otherwise, so that dynamics
of the mortgage rate kit are given by the law of motion:
ki,t+1 = kit (1 − IitRF ) + Rt IitRF .

(8)

For tractability, we specify the mortgage rate Rt as an exogenous function of all the aggregate
state variables (rt , Zt , ht ).
When households decide to reﬁnance, they incur a cost. For example, if a household
reﬁnances into a new loan with balance bi,t+1 , they will incur a reﬁnancing cost equal to
ϕ(bi,t+1 ; St ). Therefore, the net proceeds from reﬁnancing will in fact be equal to bi,t+1 −
bi,t − ϕ(bi,t+1 ; St ). The reﬁnancing costs include the opportunity cost of time spent on the
reﬁnancing process as well as direct fees associated with issuing a new mortgage. We assume

17

that the cost of reﬁnancing has both a quasi-ﬁxed component and a proportional component. Given that the economy is growing over time, the ﬁxed cost of reﬁnancing is scaled
with the nominal aggregate income, capturing the idea that the opportunity cost of time is
proportional to market wage. We assume the following functional form:
ϕ(bi,t+1 ; St ) = ϕ0 pt Yt + ϕ1 bi,t+1 .

(9)

Households can reduce their mortgage balance costlessly at any time by repaying the
mortgage, i.e., choosing bi,t+1 < bi,t and keeping the coupon rate the same, ki,t+1 = ki,t .
Collateral and debt service constraints Households are only allowed to borrow against
a fraction of the full value of their home. If a household chooses to reﬁnance its long-term
mortgage (i.e., IitRF = 1), the new combined balances of all loans, both mortgage (bi,t+1 and
HELOC −a−
i,t+1 ), must satisfy the following constraint:
(

) RF
bi,t+1 − a−
i,t+1 Iit ≤ ξLT V Ht ,

(10)

where the constant ξLT V ≥ 0 controls the tightness of the loan-to-value constraint (LTV). In
addition, every period when the HELOC balance is positive (a−
i,t+1 < 0), the total amount
of borrowing is again subject to the LTV constraint:
(
)
bi,t+1 − a−
≤ ξLT V Ht .
i,t+1 1{a−
i,t+1 <0}

(11)

Similarly, there is a set of loan-to-income constraints (LTI) on the long-term mortgage
and HELOC:
) RF
bi,t+1 − a−
i,t+1 Iit ≤ ξLT I yi,t ,
)
(
≤ ξLT I yi,t ,
bi,t+1 − a−
i,t+1 1{a−
i,t+1 <0}
(

(12)
(13)

with ξLT I ≥ 0, which mimic the debt-to-income constraint widely used in practice by mortgage lenders, in particular, for conforming loans.

18

Finally, we impose an upper bound on the HELOC balance as a fraction −a of permanent
income,
a−
i,t+1 ≥ apt Yt .

(14)

This constraint is motivated by the common practice that limits the size of HELOC loans
to reduce the risk of default.8
Home sales A home sale incurs a proportional transaction cost ϕh . Homeowners have the
option to sell their homes at any time and become renters. When they do so, they repay the
outstanding mortgage balance – including current mortgage coupon payment and HELOC
balance – using the net proceeds of house sales and their stock of liquid assets.
Default Homeowners have the option to default on their mortgages as well as HELOCs
and become renters. When a household defaults on any of its debt, its home is ceased, as well
as a portion of its liquid assets, so that the household is left with ζa in liquid wealth. Thus,
the parameter ζ ∈ [0, 1] is a way to capture in reduced form full or partial recourse, as well
as other costs of default, such as its eﬀect on the credit history. Furthermore, the household
that defaulted on its mortgage will be excluded from the housing market for a stochastic
period of time. With probability ω each period, it will regain eligibility for becoming a
homeowner, at which point the household can choose to buy a house or remain a renter.
Renting As a renter, a household must pay rent every period. For tractability, we assume
that renter households will allocate a constant fraction η/(1 + η) of their (after tax) labor
income toward the rent expense every period. This assumption is a short-hand representation of a model with Cobb-Douglas preferences over nondurable consumption and housing
services, which imply a constant expenditure share of housing.9 Renters can become homeowners by purchasing a house, using savings and borrowing. Buying a house incurs the same
transaction cost ϕh as selling, and originating a new mortgage loan incurs the same cost
8

Since these loans are smaller, they are presumably not screened as thoroughly by the lenders, which is
why we assume there is no cost to originate them.
9
Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2007) argue for a preference structure that is close to Cobb-Douglas based
on the joint behavior of the U.S. housing expenditure shares and asset prices over time, while Davis and
Ortalo-Magne (2011) show that a Cobb-Douglas speciﬁcation is broadly consistent with the cross-sectional
U.S. data.

19

Figure 3: Homeowner, renter, and post-default renter diagram.
ϕ(bi,t+1 ; St ) as reﬁnancing an existing loan.
In summary, Figure 3 shows a diagram that represents the households’ homeownership
decisions. As a homeowner, a household can choose to continue with the current mortgage
by making the payments, repay part of the mortgage balance, sell the house at market value
and become a renter, or default on the mortgage and rent. As a renter, a household can
choose to remain a renter or buy a house. This approach broadly follows Campbell and
Cocco (2010) in the treatment of the homeownership and default decision.

3.3

Summary of exogenous shocks

In total, there are three aggregate state variables, summarized in the aggregate state vector
St ≡ (Zt , ht , rt ). We assume that St follows a ﬁrst-order vector autoregressive process (VAR)
in logarithms:
log St+1 = µS + ΦS log St +

√
ΣS ϵSt+1 .

(15)

For tractability, we assume that the mortgage rate Rt is a function of the aggregate state
variables. We choose the following linear-quadratic speciﬁcation for Rt , which is motivated

20

empirically (see Section 4.1):
log R(S) = κ0 + κ′1 log S + κ2 (log ht )2 .

(16)

For an individual household, the vector of exogenous state variables, denoted by sit ,
contains the individual labor income and the aggregate states: sit ≡ (yit , St ). We assume
that all households bear the same aggregate risks since we focus on the “average” household
that is likely to need to use home equity to smooth consumption (there is some evidence in
the recent literature that wealthier households are disproportionately aﬀected by aggregate
ﬂuctuations, see e.g., Parker and Vissing-Jørgensen (2009)).

3.4

Household problem

Next, we specify the problem for homeowners and renters. In order to simplify notation, we
drop subscripts t and use primes to denote next period variables.
Homeowner problem The problem for homeowner i is to choose nominal consumption
ci , the position in the liquid asset (or HELOC) a′i , as well as the decision to reﬁnance or
repay early (both of which result in a new mortgage balance b′i ), sell the house, or default on
the debt, so as to maximize the expected lifetime utility of real consumption. The household
problem can be formalized as follows,
[
Uih (ai , bi , ki , si ) = max

a′i ,b′i ,IiRF

(1 − δ)(ci /p)

1−γ
θ

[

(

′

′

+ δE max Uih , Uihr , Uihd

) ] θ1
′ 1−γ

θ
] 1−γ

, (17)

subject to
ci +

a+′
a−′
i
i
+
+ bi = (1 − τ )(yi − ki bi ) + ai + b′i − ϕ(b′i ; S) IiRF ,
1 + (1 − τ )r 1 + rHL
(b′i − bi ) (1 − IiRF ) ≤ 0,
ci , b′i ≥ 0,

21

(18)

along with the law of motion for mortgage rate ki (8), the LTV and LTI constraints (10)(13), and the upper bound on HELOC (14). We denote the value function of the household
in the homeowner state by Uih (ai , bi , ki , si ), by Uihr (ai , bi , ki , si ) in a state of transition from
homeowner to renter by selling the home, and by Uihd (ai , bi , ki , si ) in a state of transition
from homeowner to renter by defaulting on the mortgage.
Upon transition from homeownership to renter state the proceeds from selling the house
(1 − ϕh )H are added to the resource constraint while the mortgage and HELOC borrowing
must be repaid. The problem for the household making the transition from the homeowner
to the renter state by selling its home is then given by
θ
[
[ r ′ ′ 1−γ ] θ1 ] 1−γ
1−γ
θ
Uihr (ai , bi , ki , si ) = max
(1
−
δ)(c
/p)
,
+
δE
U
(a
,
s
)
i
i
i i
′

(19)

ai

subject to
ci +

a′i
= (1 − τ )(yi − ki bi ) + ai + (1 − ϕh )H − bi ,
1 + (1 − τ )r
a′i , ci ≥ 0,

(20)

where Uir (ai , si ) denotes the value function of an unrestricted renter who is allowed to buy
a house immediately.
If a household defaults on its mortgage, it also becomes a renter, but with the added
restriction that it will be excluded from the housing market for a period of time. This
transition problem is given by
Uihd (ai , bi , ki , si )

θ
[
[ d ′ ′ 1−γ ] θ1 ] 1−γ
1−γ
θ
+ δE Ui (ai , si )
= max
(1 − δ)(ci /p)
′

(21)

ai

subject to
ci +

a′i
= (1 − τ )yi + ζa+
i ,
1 + (1 − τ )r
a′i , ci ≥ 0,

22

(22)

where Uid (ai , si ) denotes the value function of a restricted renter who is currently excluded
from the housing market due to defaulting on its mortgage. In both (21) and (22), the
constraint ai ≥ 0 is due to the fact that HELOC is unavailable to renters.
Renter problem For convenience, we deﬁne three diﬀerent types of renters: unrestricted
renter, restricted renter, and a renter in transition to become a homeowner, with value
functions Uir (ai , si ), Uid (ai , si ), and Uirh (ai , si ), respectively.
The problem for an unrestricted renter is to choose liquid assets such that
[
Uir (ai , si )

= max
(1 − δ)(ci /p)
′

1−γ
θ

ai ≥0

[
+ δE max

(

)1−γ
Uirh (a′i , s′i ), Uir (a′i , s′i )

θ
] θ1 ] 1−γ

(23)

subject to the positivity of consumption, and
ci = (1 − τ )

yi
a′i
+ ai −
.
1+η
1 + (1 − τ )r

(24)

The parameter η determines that fraction η/(1 + η) of total labor income is paid out as rent.
The transition problem for the household from the renter to the homeowner state is,
[
]1 ] θ
[ h ′ ′
1−γ
′ 1−γ θ 1−γ
θ
,
(1 − δ)(ci /p)
+ δ E Ui (ai , bi , R, si )
= max
′ ′

(25)

yi
a′i
ci = (1 − τ )
+ ai −
+ b′i − ϕ(b′i ; S) − (1 + ϕh )H,
1+η
1 + (1 − τ )r

(26)

Uirh (ai , si )

ai ,bi

subject to

ci , b′i ≥ 0,
as well as the LTV and LTI constraints (10)-(13) and the constraint on HELOC (14).

23

The problem of a restricted renter post default is given by
[
Uid (ai , si ) = max
(1 − δ)(ci /p)
′

1−γ
θ

ai ≥0

[

[
)1−γ ] θ1
(
+ δE (1 − ω) Uid (a′i , s′i )
(

+δE ω max Uirh (a′i , s′i ), Uir (a′i , s′i )

)1−γ ] θ1

θ
] 1−γ

,

(27)

subject to the positivity of consumption as well as the renter budget constraint (24).
Since households have homothetic preferences, we rescale the problem with respect to
the price level pt and the permanent aggregate income Yt in order to make it stationary.

4

Structural Estimation

This section describes the empirical implementation of the model in Section 3. To solve the
model, we discretize the state space and apply standard numerical dynamic programming
techniques. We estimate the model parameters in three steps. First, we specify the dynamics
of the exogenous state variables based on empirical estimates. Second, we set the institutional parameters to broadly represent the environment faced by U.S. households. Third,
we estimate the preference and transaction cost parameters by matching the model-implied
moments on household assets and mortgage reﬁnancing (computed from the simulation of a
large panel of households) with the data, taking the pre-estimated state variable dynamics
and pre-set institutional parameters as given. Thus, our approach is essentially a version of
the simulated method of moments (e.g., Duﬃe and Singleton (1993)) where a set of “nuisance” parameters are pre-speciﬁed before the structural parameters are estimated.10
10
Dridi, Guay, and Renault (2007) provide a formal justiﬁcation of such an approach based on the indirect inference methodology (Smith (1993), Gallant and Tauchen (1996), and Gourieroux, Monfort, and
Renault (1993)). Laibson, Repetto, and Tobacman (2007) follow a similar strategy for estimating the structural parameters in a household consumption and liquidity management model with hyperbolic discounting.
Gourinchas and Parker (2002) pioneered structural estimation of household consumption-saving models.
Hennessy and Whited (2005) is a notable example of structural estimation of a debt and investment choice
model in corporate ﬁnance.

24

4.1

Exogenously speciﬁed parameters

Aggregate state variable dynamics We ﬁrst estimate the VAR(1) for the aggregate
state variables in (15) using annual data. The variables we use are the U.S. real GDP growth
rate (our proxy for the real growth rate in aggregate income Z in the model), the one-year
Treasury bill rate (as proxy for the nominal short rate rt ), and the demeaned log house
price-GDP ratio computed using the S&P Case-Shiller house price index (HPI) and GDP
data (as proxy for the transitory component in house price ht ). The descriptive statistics
for these aggregate state variables and the estimated parameters of the VAR are reported
in Table 3. We then approximate the VAR with a discrete-state Markov chain using the
method of Tauchen and Hussey (1991). The state variables (Z, h, r) are discretized using 2,
10, and 4 grid points, respectively.
The three aggregate state variables are plotted in Panels A-C in Figure 4 for the period
1987-2012 (blue solid lines), along with the corresponding values on the grid (red circle
lines). Panel A shows that the 2-state approximation tracks the history of real growth well,
except that it understates the severity of the drop during the Great Recession and overstates
the extent of the recovery thereafter somewhat. Panel B shows the highly persistent but
transitory deviations of house prices from the trend of real economic growth, which our grid
captures closely. Panel C shows that the discretized process for rt tracks the nominal short
term rate very well.
For tractability, we have speciﬁed the mortgage rate Rt as an exogenous quadratic function of all the aggregate state variables as in Equation (16). Panel C of Table 3 reports
the regression estimates of this relation based on the 30-year conforming mortgage rate (our
empirical proxy for R). We obtain an R-square of 95% with just 4 explanatory variables
(Zt , ht , rt , h2t ), suggesting that this exogenous function R(S) captures most of the time variation in the long-term mortgage rate. Since the household’s ﬁxed mortgage rate kit is part
of the endogenous state variables that spans the same states as Rt , in order to keep the size
of the state space manageable we use a coarser grid for the latter with 5 points based on
the implied distribution of R(S). Panel D of Figure 4 plots the long-term mortgage rate in
the data and the corresponding value on the grid. The discretized process for Rt tracks the

25

B. Transitory component in house price

A. Aggregate income growth
1.06

1.4
1.3

1.04

1.2
1.02

ht

Zt

1.1
1

1

0.9
0.98
0.96
1985

0.8
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

0.7
1985

2015

1990

1995

Time
0.1

2000

2005

2010

2015

Time
D. Long-term mortgage rate

C. Short-term interest rate

0.12

0.08

0.1

0.06

Rt

rt

0.08
0.04

0.06
0.02
0.04

0
−0.02
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

0.02
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Time

Time

Figure 4: Time series of exogenous state variables.
history of the mortgage rates well before 2008 but not afterwards, as the lower bound of the
approximation is set at 6% while the observed mortgage rates over this period dip below 4%.
Given the relatively smooth evolution of inﬂation over the sample period, we assume a
constant inﬂation rate π = 2.85% per annum. The choice of the long-run mean of the ratio
of house price to income H̄ = 4 is based on estimates obtained using micro data (in the
Survey of Consumer Finances for 2001, a year when the house price to GDP ratio is close
to its long-run mean, the average ratio of housing assets to income among homeowners with
positive income equals approximately 3.95).
Idiosyncratic state variable dynamics The idiosyncratic component of the income
process ỹit is discretized as a Markov chain with 24 grid points. The conditional volatility
of ỹit depends on whether the economy is in the good or bad state, as in Storesletten,
Telmer, and Yaron (2007). In our benchmark calibration, the conditional volatility of the
log idiosyncratic income component in the good states (when Z is at the high growth level) is
σ(ZG ) = 12%, whereas in the bad state (when Z is at the low growth level) it is σ(ZB ) = 21%.
These values are on the higher end of the estimates of Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2007).
26

The autocorrelation parameter is ρy = 0.95, which is also consistent with Storesletten,
Telmer, and Yaron (2007).
Institutional parameters We follow Campbell and Cocco (2010) in specifying the main
institutional features of the U.S. economy for homeowners and renters. First, personal income
tax rate is τ = 25%. Second, the set of borrowing constraint includes (i) the constraint on the
loan-to-value ratio ξLT V = 80%, (ii) the constraint on the loan-to-income ratio ξLT I = 3.5,
which are broadly consistent with the conforming loan requirements, and (iii) the upper
bound on HELOC balances is −a = 30% of aggregate income. Third, the period of exclusion
from debt markets for households who defaulted on a mortgage loan is on average 7 years,
as represented by the probability of return to credit markets in one year equal to ω = 0.15.
Finally, we set ζ = 1, so that a household does not lose any of its liquid assets after defaulting
on the mortgage. We experimented with a range of values that capture partial recourse, but
we omit these results in the interest of brevity as they are not essential for our central
message.
The idiosyncratic labor income and institutional parameters are summarized in panel A
of Table 4.

4.2

Simulated moments estimation

The remaining structural parameters include the preference parameters (δ, γ, ψ), the rental
expense share parameter η, and the cost parameters for mortgage reﬁnancing (ϕ0 , ϕ1 ) and
house sales ϕh . We estimate Θ ≡ (δ, γ, ψ, η, ϕ0 , ϕ1 , ϕh ), taking as given the set of prespeciﬁed
parameters Θ0 ≡ (µS , ΦS , ΣS , π, µy , ρy , σy (.), H̄, τ, κ0 , κ1 , κ2 , ξLT I , ξLT V , a, ζ, ω, ϑ), by minimizing a standard objective function:
Θ̂ = arg min (M − m(Θ, Θ0 ))′ W (M − m(Θ, Θ0 )) ,
Θ

where m(Θ, Θ0 ) is the vector of reduced-form statistics of the simulated variables, M are
their empirical counterparts, and W is a weighting matrix.
For each set of parameter values, we ﬁrst solve for the optimal policies from the household
27

problem numerically. Then, we simulate a panel of households, which are initialized by
randomly drawing pairs of liquid assets ai and mortgage balance bi over the state space for
all N households in the cross section. We use a cross section of N = 1000 households and
compute all of the statistics m along the aggregate time path of T = 2000 (annual) periods,
after burn-in.
Data targets We estimate the preference and transaction cost parameters by targeting 14
moments of the data. These include 3 unconditional means applying to the whole population:
(1) aggregate ratio of nondurable and non-housing services consumption to income (from
NIPA), (2) average household-level consumption growth volatility (based on the Consumer
Expenditure Survey estimates reported by Wachter and Yogo (2010)), and (3) the average
homeownership rate (from the U.S. Census).
There are 6 moments relevant to the homeowner subset of the population: (4) average
ratio of liquid asset holdings to income, and (5) average ratio of household mortgage debt to
income (both based on 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances, or SCF); (6) the average ratio of
HELOC balances to income; (7) the average number of reﬁnance loans relative to the number
of homeowner households (based on HMDA and Census data); (8) the average loan-to-income
ratio upon reﬁnancing (from SCF); (9) dollar cash-out as a share of aggregate reﬁnancing
volume (data from Freddie Mac). There is also one moment for the renter population: (10)
the average ratio of liquid asset holdings to income for the renter subset of the population
(from SCF).11 All the moments from SCF are based on the truncated sample from the 2001
Survey of Consumer Finances, whereby we exclude the top 20% of the wealth distribution
(based on liquid assets as a measure of wealth).12 In the data, the wealth distribution is
heavily skewed to the right, which implies that its mean is much higher than the median
(1.33 vs. 0.10 for the liquid asset holdings, according to the 2001 SCF) and therefore not
representative of a typical household that our model aims to replicate, whereas the mean of
11

We deﬁne liquid assets in the SCF data as the total value of checking/savings accounts, bonds, and
public equity holdings, including both directly-held stocks and mutual funds. Kaplan and Violante (2011)
use a similar deﬁnition. For mortgage debt we use the ﬁrst lien loan collateralized by the primary residence
of the household, whereas the combined balance of the junior lien loans on the same residence is classiﬁed
as HEL(OC).
12
Gomes and Michaelides (2005) similarly truncate the empirical distribution from the SCF.

28

the bottom 80% of the distribution is close to the median of the entire sample.13
The remaining 4 moments describe the dynamics of reﬁnancing and cash-out behavior
estimated via linear regressions of these variables on aggregate income growth and house
price growth rates as documented in Section 2. Table 5 reports both the target empirical
moments and the simulated moments corresponding to the minimized objective function, as
well as several additional moments that were not targeted in the estimation.
Since we use more moments than parameters, the model is over-identiﬁed. We use a
diagonal weighing matrix that is scaled by the empirical moments in question as a normalization, that is, W = diag(M )−1 S diag(M )−1 , where diag(M ) is a diagonal matrix with the
empirical moments as the diagonal elements. The diagonal matrix S has elements of ones
corresponding to all of the moments, except: (i) average debt balances and the reﬁnancing
rate have the weight equal 6, (ii) liquid asset holdings and average consumption growth
volatility for homeowners each have the weight of 4, (iii) the 4 regression coeﬃcients, which
have the weight of 3, and (iv) the mean liquid assets of renters have the weight of 0.1. These
weights reﬂect the fact that we are most interested in capturing the leverage and liquidity
choices of homeowners. We use this pre-speciﬁed weighting matrix rather than a matrix that
is based on the estimated variance-covariance matrix of moments (such as the eﬃcient GMM
weighting matrix of Hansen (1982)) in order to make sure that the information in some of
the economically important but relatively poorly estimated moments (like the regression
coeﬃcients) is not down-weighed too much, as it is important for identiﬁcation. Since the
objective function is highly nonlinear, we use a global search algorithm to ensure that the
resulting estimates are not due to local minima.
Numerical Implementation The household problem is solved numerically using a standard value function iteration (VFI) procedure on a very large grid (more than 1.9 million
total grid points, with 1920 points for the exogenous states and 960 points for the endogenous
states). Moreover, we need to solve the model repeatedly in the estimation. These requirements make the computational problem rather challenging. To make the estimation feasible,
13

In our model all households are ex ante identical, and all of the heterogeneity is due to idiosyncratic
shocks, which are transitory. Moreover, in our model household preferences are homothetic, while explaining
the large amount of asset holdings by the wealthy households typically requires non-homotheticities, e.g.
Carroll (2000), DeNardi (2004), Roussanov (2010).

29

we programmed the numerical solution in CUDA language and ran the VFI on a Nvidia
C2050 (Fermi) graphics card (with 448 CUDA cores). The estimation was implemented
with a global optimization routine capable of using up to 8 graphics cards simultaneously.
This (software and hardware) implementation yields a signiﬁcant improvement in speed, allowing us to estimate the model in less than one week. The same estimation problem will
take 400 times as long on a standard desktop computer.
Simulation-based inference In order to be able to evaluate the statistical signiﬁcance of
the mismatch between the target and simulated moments, as well as the uncertainty about
the estimated parameter values, we need to estimate the variance-covariance matrix of the
sample moments, Ξ. Since we use a combination of time-series and cross-sectional moments,
using data directly is not feasible. Instead, we construct the variance-covariance matrix of
the simulated moments under the null that the model is true (with the parameters set at
the estimated values). In order to estimate this matrix we feed the historical time-series
of the aggregate state-variables St , appropriately discretized, into the model, and generate
a panel of N households using these aggregate shocks and simulated idiosyncratic shocks
so that it matches the small sample length TD = 25 years available in the data. While
the simulated moments used in estimation are based on long samples of length T , i.e. are
essentially population moments, the variance-covariance matrix estimated using the shortsample simulated moments measures the uncertainty about the moments measured in the
data under the null of the model.
In addition, we construct standard errors for the estimated parameters from the Ξ matrix using the standard delta-method approach, where the derivatives of the moments with
respect to the parameters are approximated using numerical ﬁnite diﬀerences.

4.3

Estimation results

Targeted moments The targeted empirical moments as well as their simulated model
counterparts are reported in panel A of Table 5 along with the simulated standard errors.
In our model, the average ratio of consumption to income at 0.6 is slightly below the
0.66 in the NIPA data (using both nondurable and durable goods expenditures, as well as
30

non-housing services); according to the model this moment is estimated very precisely, with
a standard error of 0.001, which implies that statistically this diﬀerence is signiﬁcant, even
though it is economically small. The model-implied annual household-level consumption
growth volatility of 18% is much higher than the 9% target estimated by Wachter and Yogo
(2010), which is constructed to reduce measurement error, but it is broadly consistent with
the estimate of Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy (2002) based on the CEX data (16-18% for
households with total assets exceeding $2,000). This moment also has a fairly tight standard
error of 0.9%, which implies that only some of the latter set of empirical estimates could
have been produced by the model.
Notice that the 18% household-level consumption growth volatility is essentially the same
as the unconditional labor income growth volatility, implying very little smoothing on average. There is tension in the model as it tries to match simultaneously a low level of average
liquid asset holdings, a high level of average debt holdings (both of which require low risk
aversion), and a moderate consumption volatility (which requires high risk aversion).
The model also does a good job matching the average liquid asset holding and mortgage
balance for homeowners in the data. Mortgage debt is a fraction 0.98 of household income on
average, exactly matching our estimate in the SCF data. Households pay down a part of the
mortgage balances over time for two reasons. First, mortgage borrowing is generally a costly
way to ﬁnance consumption due to the interest rate diﬀerential between mortgage loans and
personal savings. Except when the term structure of interest rates is suﬃciently ﬂat that
the eﬀective (after-tax) borrowing rate is equal to or lower than the short rate, households
optimally choose to repay part of their mortgage debt rather than holding too much in liquid
assets. Second, by partially repaying the mortgage debt, households can maintain some
home equity “for the rainy day.” Since accessing housing collateral is costly, home equity
is an illiquid form of saving that can be tapped for consumption purposes infrequently, e.g.,
following large negative income shocks. The model also matches the average holdings of
second-lien loans (0.07 of household income in the data vs. 0.06 in the model, insigniﬁcantly
diﬀerent statistically given the standard error of 0.02).
Despite the low return on liquid assets, households still hold liquid assets equal to 23%

31

of income in the model, which is close to the amount observed in the SCF data (28%, and
statistically diﬀerent given a small standard error of 1%). It is more eﬃcient to use liquid
assets to buﬀer small ﬂuctuations in income due to the costs of accessing home equity via
cash-out reﬁnancing. Liquid assets also become highly valuable in cases when the borrowing
constraints (LTV or LTI) binds.14
About 12.8% of homeowners per year reﬁnance their mortgages in the model, compared
to 8% in the data. This diﬀerence is not statistically diﬀerent from zero given the standard
error of 3.3%. The average loan-to-income ratio for the new loans originated from reﬁnancing
in the model (2.60) is signiﬁcantly higher than the average value in the 2001 SCF (1.41) and
the HMDA data for 1993-2009 (1.90). In addition, the amount cashed out equals to 48%
of new loan balances, compared to 12% in the data. Estimates from the data are based
on the average cash-out share of reﬁnance originations for prime, conventional loans, as
provided by Freddie Mac, and average loan-to-income data available from HMDA. To the
extent that these estimates are representative of the U.S. homeowners, the model predicts
too much cash-out as well as too frequent reﬁnancing into large mortgages in general, with
the diﬀerences being both economically and statistically signiﬁcant.
On the set of moments from the reﬁ and cash-out regressions, the model matches the
signs and approximately the magnitudes of all the coeﬃcients on income growth (βZ ) and on
house price growth (βH ), especially in the case of cash-out regression. Both the reﬁnancing
rate and the dollar cash-out to income ratio comove positively with house price growth, and
negatively with income growth, as we ﬁnd in the data. While these regression coeﬃcients
are estimated quite imprecisely, as evidenced by the large standard errors that we report,
targeting these coeﬃcients is important for capturing the cyclical dynamics of household
demand for liquidity, which helps to identify some of our key structural parameters.
The model fails to match the share of homeowners in the population, with only 22.5%
in the model vs. 60% in the data, well outside the reasonable conﬁdence interval (standard
14

Using 2004 SCF data, Vissing-Jørgensen (2007) estimates that by using their lower-return liquid assets
to accelerate the repayment of higher-cost housing debt U.S. consumers would have saved $16.3 billion see discussion in Guiso and Sodini (2013). Telyukova (2013) analyzes the role of liquidity in explaining
the related puzzle of concurrent credit card debt and savings account holdings documented by Gross and
Souleles (2002), while Laibson, Repetto, and Tobacman (2003) argue that consumer self-control problems
ma be necessary to explain quantitatively the extent of the puzzle.

32

error is 8.7%). This is due to the tension between homeownership and the key moments
on mortgages. Making households more patient, more risk averse, or increasing the rental
costs will help raise homeownership. However, all of these changes will cause the households
to reduce mortgage balance and the frequency of reﬁnancing. In order to address this
issue, we could model the beneﬁts of homeownership in richer ways, for example by allowing
homeowners to choose the size of the house that ﬁts their budget. The model also understates
the liquid asset holdings of renters at 7% of annual household income vs. 18% in the SCF
data. An extension of the model to allow for the choice of house size and a more realistic
rental market should help the model’s performance on these dimensions.
Parameter estimates Next, the estimated values of the preference and transaction cost
parameters are reported in panel B of Table 4, accompanied with the standard errors in the
parentheses. The preference parameters implied by the moments above are the subjective
discount factor δ = 0.929, the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion γ = 2.383, and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution ψ = 0.610. These parameters imply a moderate degree of risk
aversion and a limited willingness to substitute consumption intertemporally, i.e. a desire
for a smooth consumption proﬁle over time. These parameter estimates are driven largely
by the low target level of liquid asset holdings, high debt levels, and the observed sensitivity
to changes in interest rates and economic conditions embedded in the reﬁnancing frequency
and the regression coeﬃcients. In particular, our estimate of the IES is between the estimates obtained by Vissing-Jørgensen (2002) using household-consumption data from the
CEX using subsamples of stock- and bond-holders (below 0.3 and above 0.8, respectively).15
While a number of studies estimating the IES using the aggregate log-linearized Euler
equation following Hall (1988) ﬁnd values very close to zero (we estimate a coeﬃcient of
0.068 in the data), such an approach would not be valid in an economy that conforms to
15

Our estimate of the IES diﬀers from values typically used to reconcile asset pricing facts with consumption
dynamics in representative-agent models. For example, Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2012) estimate IES of
around 2 using aggregate consumption and asset price data, while their estimate of the coeﬃcient of relative
risk aversion is twice as large as ours. This is not surprising since the only risky asset that we target
in the data is housing (and mortgage). Moreover, we target households in the bottow 80% of the wealth
distribution, who exhibit low rates of stock market participation. Vissing-Jørgensen (2002) obtains estimates
of the IES above one for households in the upper tail of the wealth distribution who participate in ﬁnancial
markets; see also Attanasio and Weber (1995) and Vissing-Jørgensen and Attanasio (2003).

33

our model, given the substantial heterogeneity and frictions.16 In fact, as Table 5 Panel B
reports, the estimated slope coeﬃcient from the regression of consumption growth on the
lagged risk-free interest rate based on the simulated data from the benchmark model is only
0.03. The coeﬃcient is somewhat higher if the long-term mortgage rate R is used in the
regression, but at 0.06 it is still only one-tenth of the true value.
The rental expense parameter η = 0.359 implies that just over a quarter of renter’s
labor income (η/(1 + η)) are related to housing services, which is empirically sensible. This
parameter is identiﬁed jointly by the average consumption-income ratio and the share of
homeowners, since the beneﬁt of homeownership is in large part the avoidance of rental
expenses (as well as the collateral value of housing).
Households use debt primarily as a way of smoothing consumption and ﬁnancing new
home purchases. Existing debt balances are reﬁnanced either to reduce the coupon rate k,
or to cash-out equity. The quasi-ﬁxed and proportional costs of reﬁnancing, ϕ0 and ϕ1 , are
primarily identiﬁed by targeting empirically observed average reﬁnancing rates, in terms of
both frequency and loan size. They are also inﬂuenced by the average level of mortgage debt,
since higher transaction costs make higher balances less attractive by eﬀectively lowering the
value of the reﬁnancing option, as well as by making home-equity withdrawal via cash-out
more expensive. Anecdotal evidence suggests that explicit costs of roughly 2% − 5% of
loan amount are paid when reﬁnancing a mortgage loan of average size, in addition to nonpecuniary information processing costs and the opportunity cost of time required to process
the transaction. In the estimation, we obtain a quasi-ﬁxed cost of 9.3% of permanent income
(or 2.3% of the house value on average) and a proportional cost of 2.6%, which is comparable
to the costs calibrated by Campbell and Cocco (2003).17
The model implies that the cost of buying (or selling) a house ϕh is 13.8% of the house
value. This parameter is identiﬁed primarily by the average homeownership rate but also
by the asset holding levels among homeowners and renters, since this parameter controls
16

Carroll (2001) and Hansen, Heaton, Lee, and Roussanov (2007) discuss some of the issues associated
with the standard approaches to estimating the IES.
17
Empirically the bulk of explicit cost of reﬁnancing can be attributed to title insurance, which is proportional to house value, whereas the non-monetary costs such as the opportunity cost of time spend searching
for an attractive mortgage rate and preparing the necessary documents are likely quasi-ﬁxed.

34

the cost of transition from one group to another. This estimated cost is high, although it
is meant to capture the psychic and physical costs of moving, besides the actual pecuniary
transaction costs (such as transfer taxes and realtor commissions).
As indicated by the standard errors, most of the parameters are estimated imprecisely in
the sense that the sampling uncertainty about the data moments, under the null of the model,
translates into wide conﬁdence bands for the point estimates. The implied 95% conﬁdence
intervals include zero for all of the parameters except the discount factor δ, which is also
statistically signiﬁcantly lower than unity. Such wide conﬁdence bands are a consequence
of a very short aggregate time series sample of 25 annual observations (the cross-sectional
moments are in fact estimated very precisely). However, this does not imply that the point
estimates of the structural parameters are not meaningful, only that the small sample makes
statistical inference about these parameters diﬃcult.18 In order to verify that our model is
well speciﬁed and that the estimated model parameters are indeed economically reasonable,
in the remainder of the paper we conduct a series of detailed sensitivity analysis exercises as
well as evaluate the model by confronting it with features of the data that are not targeted
in the estimation. These include additional aggregate moments, cross-sectional statistics,
and actual realizations of the aggregate variables in the time series.

Additional moments Panel B of Table 5 reports several additional moments that are not
targeted in the structural estimation. The ability of the model to match these moments can
be seen as a successful out-of-sample test. The volatility of aggregate consumption growth in
the model is 3.1%, compared to 2.7% in the data; while this diﬀerence is economically small,
it is statistically signiﬁcant due to the small standard error of 0.06%. Finally, the model
also matches well the sensitivities of both the total reﬁnancing rate and the dollar cash-out
to the ﬂuctuations in the mortgage rate. In the reﬁnancing regression, the coeﬃcient on
mortgage rate, βRREF I , is −1.19 in the model, compared to −1.91 in the data. In the cashout regression, βR = −0.46 in the model vs. −0.43 in the data. This close ﬁt is especially
remarkable since we do not target these particular coeﬃcients in our estimation. The huge
18

One way to assess whether a particular parameter of the model is statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from,
say, zero, would be to solve the model under the null hypothesis that the latter is true, and use simulated
data to compute the probability of observing the empirical values of the target moments.

35

sampling uncertainty about these moments swamps whatever diﬀerences that remain between
the regression moments.

4.4

Sensitivity analysis

We now analyze the sensitivity of the simulated moments to the estimated parameters, which
underpins our structural identiﬁcation. Table 6 displays the values of simulated moments
for diﬀerent values of the key parameters in Θ, compared to the baseline case. For each of
the seven estimated parameters we consider two values equidistant from the point estimates
in either direction. Our discussion focuses on the key eﬀect of each of the parameters.
Subjective discount factor δ

Making households more patient via a larger δ increases

their homeownership, and increases their savings in the form of liquid asset holdings and
home equity (lower the average mortgage balances). HELOC balances stay essentially the
same (even though HELOC is more expensive than the mortgage on average in terms of
the interest rate, they can be cheaper to access when liquidity is needed). As mortgage
balances decline, so does the frequency of reﬁnancing and the sensitivity of reﬁnancing to
interest rates (βRREF I closer to 0): since the beneﬁt of interest savings from reﬁnancing is
small, only those suﬀering from large income shocks ﬁnd it worthwhile to pay the ﬁxed costs
of reﬁnancing, as evidenced by the higher loan-to-income ratios and cash-out share for the
new loans after reﬁnancing. Moreover, while households cashout more following negative
aggregate income shocks (more negative βZ ), the consumption growth is still more aﬀected
by income shocks (larger βZC ), suggesting that households save the cashed-out home equity
rather than consuming it. Finally, the average consumption/income ratio is higher with
more patient households, again due to the fact that they have accumulated more savings via
liquid assets and home equity.
Coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion γ

Increasing the risk aversion leads to more precau-

tionary savings in the forms of liquid asset holdings and home equity (higher homeownership
and lower mortgage balances), but also reduces the usage of HELOC as households accumulate enough liquid assets. Reﬁnancing is mainly driven by the need to withdraw home equity

36

rather than the purely ﬁnancial incentive of lowering the mortgage rate, as cash-out/reﬁ
ratios increase sharply in risk aversion and the sensitivity of reﬁnancing to mortgage rate
βRREF I moves close to 0. Like the patient households, risk-averse households also cashout
more following negative aggregate consumption shocks (more negative βZ ), but unlike the
patient households, they use the money to raise consumption today rather than saving it,
as is evident in a lower βZC . As a result, aggregate consumption is less volatile (in particular, less cyclical) with higher risk aversion, even though consumption is more volatile at the
household level.
Intertemporal elasticity of substitution ψ

A higher IES lowers liquid asset holdings

and increases mortgage balances. These eﬀects are qualitatively similar to but quantitatively
not as strong as those of a lower risk aversion. The IES has virtually no eﬀect on the homeownership rate or the frequency and magnitude of reﬁnancing. Crucially, however, the IES
is important for the dynamics of reﬁnancing and cash-out. With a higher ψ, households are
more willing to substitute consumption over time, therefore both cash-out and consumption
are responding more to the changes in interest rates, as shown in a more negative βR and a
larger βRC . The latter is in stark contrast to the eﬀect of a lower risk aversion.
Rent share η

The eﬀect of the share of rent in labor income is intuitive: high cost of

renting leads to a high rate of homeownership. The eﬀect of η on other quantities operates
through the homeownership channel as well, and is not always monotonic. In particular,
while both asset holdings and mortgage balances are lower on average when η is lower than
the baseline case, they are also dramatically lower when η = 1.437 (implies that 58% of
consumption expenditures are attributed to housing). The former is because with lower
rental costs higher-income households dominate the ranks of homeowners. In the latter
case, it is the opposite: since renting is very costly, most households prefer homeownership,
including the low-income ones, but maintain very low debt levels to reduce the risk of being
forced to sell the house (when the interest payments become unaﬀordable to them as a result
of persistent negative income shocks). This composition eﬀect also explains why cash-out is
more responsive to aggregate income shocks when η is high. Other implications of high η
include lower liquid asset holdings and more HELOC borrowing, and more savings by renters
37

to buy a house.
Cost of reﬁnancing ϕ0 , ϕ1

Raising the quasi-ﬁxed cost ϕ0 of reﬁnancing reduces the

frequency of reﬁnancing while increasing the new loan size and its cash-out component. Since
costly reﬁnancing makes mortgages eﬀectively more expensive, average mortgage balances
decline, as does homeownership. Its eﬀect on the total leverage is partly oﬀset by higher
HELOC balances. Since lower mortgage balance reduces the risk in the household balance
sheet, the precautionary holding of liquid assets is also lower. Raising the proportional cost
parameter ϕ1 has very similar eﬀects. It might appear surprising that higher proportional
reﬁnancing cost increases the average new loan size and the cash-out share. This is driven
by the composition eﬀect: households are less likely to reﬁnance for the purpose of lowering
mortgage rates (βRREF I is −0.34 with high ϕ1 , compared to −1.19 in baseline case) and more
likely to reﬁnance to cash out home equity.
Cost of housing transactions ϕh

Finally, the housing transaction cost parameter ϕh

naturally lowers homeownership. For homeowners, a high ϕh has an eﬀect similar to high
rental cost η, whereby leverage is lower on average in order to reduce the probability of
having to sell the house when income falls below required interest payment. The more liquid
HELOC partially substituting for the illiquid mortgage borrowing when needed. Given the
lower mortgage balances, lower reﬁnancing frequency and higher loan/value ratios follow
due to the ﬁxed costs of reﬁnancing. One signiﬁcant diﬀerence from the case of high η is
that households cashout less, not more, following negative aggregate income shocks. This
is again due to the composition of homeowners. Whereas a higher rental cost drives more
low-income people into homeownership, a higher housing transaction cost drives this part of
the population away. The remaining high-income homeowners have less need to use cashout
to smooth consumption.

5

Model Evaluation and Quantitative Implications

We evaluate the quantitative performance of our model along several dimensions. Using a
series of comparative statics, we ﬁrst investigate the eﬀects of the key structural features of
38

the model on its ability to reproduce the key targeted moments of the data, as well as their
additional quantitative implications. We then use the estimated parameters of the model
to evaluate its ability to explain both the cross-sectional and the time-series features of the
data that were not targeted in estimation.

5.1

Comparative statics

In order to analyze the model’s mechanism we compute a range of comparative statics for its
key structural elements. We report the simulated moments from the model for each of the
model speciﬁcation alongside the baseline that uses the estimated parameter values, similarly
to the sensitivity analysis described above.
Labor income risk Table 7 displays the comparative statics that pertain to the underlying dynamics and the key frictions faced by the households in the model. Speciﬁcation
in column (2) shuts down heteroscedasticity in the idiosyncratic labor income process by
setting σ(ZG ) = σ(ZB ) = 18%. In this case, the reduction in risk due to the removal
of the counter-cyclical variation in income uncertainty leads households to choose higher
leverage than in the baseline (mortgage-to-income ratio rises from 0.98 to 1.05), while the
consumption growth volatilities at both the individual and aggregate level change very little.
With higher mortgage balances, homeowners also reﬁnance their mortgages more frequently, with the average reﬁnancing rate rising from 12.8% to 14.2% per year. In particular,
reﬁnance becomes more sensitive to changes in mortgage rates (βRREF I changing from −1.19
to −1.36). However, households cashout less following negative aggregate income shocks (βZ
changing from −0.17 to −0.11). One reason is that there is less cross-sectional dispersion
in realized income, thus fewer distressed households. The other reason is that there is also
less preemptive cashout by those households whose income have not dropped yet but are
concerned that the LTI constraint might prevent them from cashing out in the future. As
a result, consumption becomes more responsive to aggregate incomes shocks contemporaneously (βZC is higher), while consumption growth becomes more responsive to lagged interest
rate changes. Still, both βrC and βRC are well below the actual value of the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution (the highest value is 0.21 for βRC ).
39

In speciﬁcation (3) we magnify the time-varying labor income uncertainty by increasing
the value of σ(ZB ) from 21% in the baseline case to 30%. In response, households dramatically reduce their leverage (mortgage debt to income ratio drops to 0.62) and hold more
liquid assets (asset to income ratio rises from 0.23 to 0.31), yet the consumption volatility at
both the household and aggregate level are higher on average. Reﬁnancing is less frequent,
at 8.08%, but households withdraw more equity upon reﬁnancing, with the ratio of cash-out
amount to new loan balance increasing from 0.48 to 0.58. This is because households are
more likely to encounter large negative shocks that require them to access housing collateral
for consumption smoothing. Furthermore, reﬁnancing becomes less sensitive to interest rates
(βRREF I changes from −1.19 to −0.5), while cashout becomes signiﬁcantly more responsive
to aggregate income shocks (βZ changes from −0.17 to −0.28). These results are consistent with households preserving their home equity for the bad state as well as cashing out
preemptively when income uncertainty rises.
Relaxing the constraints Speciﬁcations (4) and (5) consider the cases where the borrowing constraints imposed on mortgage origination and reﬁnancing are relaxed. In case
(4) we remove the LTI constraint (ξLT I = ∞). Naturally, the average mortgage balances
are almost 40% higher, at 1.38 (relative to income), compared to 0.98 in the baseline. Reﬁnancing becomes more frequent (15.4% per year) and more sensitive to interest rate changes
(βRREF I = −1.79). Removing the LTI constraint also enables households to cashout more
following aggregate income shocks, as βZ becomes nearly twice as high as in the baseline
case. As a result, despite the fact that consumption growth becomes more volatile at the
aggregate level, its sensitivity to aggregate income shocks βZC remains essentially the same
as in the baseline case. Greater leverage also leads to a slight increase in the default rate,
albeit it is still just under one tenth of one percent of homeowner households per year.
In speciﬁcation (5) we instead relax the LTV constraint by setting ξLT V = 125%, mimicking the Homeowner Aﬀordable Reﬁnance Program (HARP) instituted by the U.S. government in 2011, which is intended to allow underwater homeowners who are current on their
mortgage payments and whose loans were guaranteed by the government-sponsored enterprizes (GSEs) Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac to reﬁnance. Similar to case (4), relaxing the

40

LTV constraint leads to higher mortgage balances and higher consumption volatility. Reﬁnancing also becomes more frequent, and cashout is more sensitive to shocks to aggregate
income and interest rates.
Interestingly, households now cashout more, not less, following drops in house prices (βH
changes from 0.06 in the baseline case to −0.35). Two eﬀects are at work in determining how
cashout responds to house price shocks. On the one hand, a rise in house price relaxes the
LTV constraint, which helps generating a positive relation between cashout and house price
changes. On the other hand, because house price shocks are persistent, households will want
to cashout preemptively following drops in house prices, before the LTV constraint binds.
The ﬁrst eﬀect dominates when the LTV constraint is relatively tight (as in the baseline
case), while the second eﬀect dominates when ξLT V is raised to 125%.
Most notably, relaxing the housing collateral constraint raises the default rate sharply, to
7.83% of homeowners per year. This is not surprising, as with higher leverage it is more likely
that a household would ﬁnd its home equity negative after a decline in house prices, which
is a necessary (but not suﬃcient) condition for a strategic default to be optimal (Corbae
and Quintin (2013) analyze the eﬀect of the loosening and subsequent tightening of leverage
constraints on mortgage default following the decline in house prices; see also Campbell and
Cocco (2010) for a detailed analysis of household default decisions in the presence of labor
income shocks and diﬀerent mortgage products).
This result is in sharp contrast to the case of relaxing the LTI constraint. In the presence
of the LTV constraint, relaxing the LTI constraint has very limited impact on mortgage
default, but it can already help facilitate consumption smoothing by boosting cashout reﬁnancing in bad times. In this sense, a program that relaxes the LTI constraint instead of the
LTV constraint (like the HARP) might be able to relax the household ﬁnancial constraints
without causing as much a rise in default risk. Moreover, the diﬀerent sensitivity of default
risk to the LTI and LTV constraint as captured in our model will also be important for
mortgage pricing and mortgage contract design.
Finally, in speciﬁcation (6) we examine whether our results are sensitive to the availability
of HELOCs. In the absence of HELOCs, households hold more liquid assets, but the other

41

predictions including mortgage balance, consumption volatility, and cashout response to
aggregate income shocks are all similar to the baseline case. As discussed before, HELOCs
are used mainly to smooth small idiosyncratic income shocks. Without HELOCs, households
simply substitute into liquid assets, and their consumption and mortgage ﬁnancing behaviors
are not signiﬁcantly aﬀected.

5.2

Cross-sectional implications

Having examined the aggregate implications of the estimated model, we now turn to its
cross-sectional predictions. We focus on the behavior of homeowners with respect to their
use of mortgage debt as a key tool of balance sheet adjustment.
Figure 5 presents the key variables capturing the household reﬁnancing behavior for the
quintiles of households sorted on income relative to the aggregate (i.e., on the idiosyncratic
component ỹ), conditional on homeownership. In the model, liquidity needs drive much of
the reﬁnancing behavior. Consequently, the rate of reﬁnancing is declining in income (see
Panel A). In the bottom quintile, 27% of the households reﬁnance in a given year, against
about 2.5% in the fourth quintile, and close to zero in the top quintile. Conditional on
reﬁnancing, the average dollar cash-out to income ratio is also decreasing in income (Panel
B), from close to 1.5 in the bottom quintile to about 0.25 in the top.
The average reﬁnancing households in all the income quintiles have nonzero HELOC
balances before reﬁnancing, suggesting that liquidity-constrained households ﬁrst borrow
using short-term HELOCs, which have no transaction costs, and then switch to cashing out
home equity when the liquidity needs become suﬃciently strong. The HELOC-to-income
ratio is decreasing in income, ranging from 0.32 for the bottom quintile to 0.02 for the top
quintile. After reﬁnancing, the cashed-out home equity not only helps pay down the HELOC
balances, but substantially boosts the liquid asset positions, up to around 80% of annual
income for the bottom two quintiles, and about 60% for the fourth quintile. As a clear
indication that it is liquidity demands that drive much of the reﬁnancing for relatively low
income homeowners, the ratio of the new mortgage rate obtained upon reﬁnancing k ′ to the
old rate k (Panel D) is above unity for the bottom three quintiles, and signiﬁcantly below
42

A. Annual refinancing rate
30

1.5

B. Cash-out for refi loans

20

(b′ − b)+ /y

REF I, %

25

15
10

1

0.5

5
0

1
2
Low income

3

0

4
5
High income

C. Asset holding
Pre-refi
Post-refi

0.9

k ′ /k

a/y

1

0.4
0.2

0.8

0

0.7

−0.2

0.6
1
2
Low income

3

4
5
High income

1.1

0.6

−0.4

3

D. Rate ratio

1
0.8

1
2
Low income

0.5

4
5
High income

1
2
Low income

3

4
5
High income

Figure 5: Cross-sectional implication for homeowners sorted on income.
unity (at 0.7) for the top income quintile. The low income households are willing to increase
their average debt service cost in order to access liquidity. On the other hand, the high
income households tend to have low mortgage balances, which means that they will require
a signiﬁcant drop in mortgage rate to be willing to incur the ﬁxed cost for reﬁnancing.
Figure 6 plots the same set of quantities for quintiles sorted on mortgage debt relative to
income. Here the results are more nuanced. While the households with high debt-to-income
ratio may have a stronger incentive to reﬁnance either to access liquidity (if income is low) or
to lower the cost of borrowing when rates decline (if debt is high), the pattern of reﬁnancing
rates is not monotonic. In the bottom two quintiles, the reﬁnancing rate is only about 3%,
in the third and fourth quintiles the rate rises to above 20%, but in the top quintile the
reﬁnancing rate drops to about 10%. This result is driven by the fact that for the high
debt-to-income ratio cases the LTI constraint is likely to be binding, preventing many of the
households who would like to reﬁnance from doing so.
Panel B shows that, conditional on reﬁnancing, the ability of households to withdraw

43

2.5

25

2

20

(b′ − b)+ /y

REF I, %

A. Annual refinancing rate
30

15
10

B. Cash-out for refi loans

1.5
1
0.5

5
0
1
2
Low debt/income

3

0
1
2
Low debt/income

4
5
High debt/income

C. Asset holding
2

1.1

3

4
5
High debt/income

D. Rate ratio

Pre-refi
Post-refi
1.5

1.05

a/y

k ′ /k

1

1

0.5
0.95

0
−0.5

1
2
Low debt/income

3

0.9

4
5
High debt/income

1
2
Low debt/income

3

4
5
High debt/income

Figure 6: Cross-sectional implication for homeowners sorted on mortgage debtto-income ratio.
home equity upon reﬁnancing declines with debt-to-income ratios, with the bottom two
quintiles cashing out almost 2.5 times their annual income, the third and fourth quintile
about 1.1 times, and the top quintile only about three quarters. Indeed, for the bottom
two quintiles, accessing liquidity is the only reason to reﬁnance (or even originate a new
loan if current balance is zero). They come into the period with HELOC balances equal
to 0.36 times annual income, and leave the period with about 1.5 times income on average
(Panel C), or 65% of the amount cashed out. About 21% of the cashed-out equity is used on
consumption, allowing them to consume roughly 1.5 times their annual income this period.
For the middle quintile, 17% of the cashed-out equity is used for paying oﬀ the HELOCs,
12% consumed, with the remaining 71% saved as liquid assets (0.87 times annual income).
These households with low or medium leverage typically reﬁnance at disadvantageous rates,
as shown in Panel D. In contrast, the high-leverage households have limited ability to cash
out. Thus, the incentive to reduce the cost of borrowing dominates, and their average rate
ratio falls below one (albeit slightly). For the high-leverage households, the average fraction
44

B. Loan-to-income ratio: post-refi

A. Loan-to-income ratio: all homeowners

6

2

4

b/y

b′ /y

3

1
0

2

1

2

3

4

0

5

0.8

0.6

0.6

b′ /H

b/H

2

3

4

5

D. Loan-to-value ratio: post-refi

C. Loan-to-value ratio: all homeowners

0.8

0.4
0.2
0

1

0.4
0.2

1

2

3

4

0

5

E. Annual refinancing rate

1
2
Low income

3

4
5
High income

REF I, %

30
20

model
data

10
0

1
2
Low income

3

4
5
High income

Figure 7: Comparing the cross-sectional implication for homeowners sorted on
income with the data.
of the cashed-out equity used to pay oﬀ HELOCs, consumed, and saved are 36%, 29%, and
35%, respectively. The savings amount to just 0.27 times annual income.
Next, we confront the model’s cross-sectional predictions with empirical evidence in Figure 7. We use data from SCF for years 1998, 2001, 2004, 2007, and 2010, which contain
questions about mortgage reﬁnancing. In the model, we sort households into quintiles based
on relative income as before (conditional on homeownership); in the data, we sort households
based on income relative to the value of their primary residence, since in the model we do
not allow for heterogeneity in home value; we sort within each year and then average the
values over all years.
The model matches the cross-sectional distribution of mortgage debt-to-income ratios
remarkably well (Panel A): the bottom quintile on average has mortgage balances that are
about twice as large as annual income on average (slightly above in the model, slightly
below in the data); these decline to just over a single year’s worth of income in the second
45

quintile, and down to about a quarter of annual income in the top quintile (other than for
the bottom group, the model undershoots these levels somewhat). For the households in
the data who report reﬁnancing their mortgage over the previous year (or the year of the
survey), we compare their mortgage loan-to-value ratios with the LTI for homeowners who
choose to reﬁnance in the model, b′ /y (Panel B). The loan-to-income ratios also match very
closely, especially for the middle quintiles. For the bottom quintile, the model-implied LTI
undershoots the value in the data, which is in part because the ratio is by assumption capped
at 3.5 for new loans in the model, while in the data the average is close to 5 times income.19
The model’s ability to match the unconditionally distribution of loan-to-value ratios (i.e.,
for all homeowners) is weaker (Panel C). In the data, the average mortgage debt relative to
home value is hump-shaped in income/house ratio, ranging from about 0.2 in the bottom
quintile, peaking at about 0.4 in quintiles 3 and 4, and declining slightly in the top quintile. In
the model, the ratio is monotonically decreasing from 0.4 to about 0.1. The likely reason for
this discrepancy is our stark modeling of housing that allows for no cross-sectional variation in
the home value. Indeed, as indicated in Panel D, conditional on reﬁnancing the LTV patterns
in the model are very close to those in the data: they almost monotonically increase with
income from about 0.5 in the bottom quintile to above 0.6 in the top according to the data,
with the model values overshooting by about 0.05 to 0.1 throughout. Overall, there is much
less variation in LTV ratios upon reﬁnancing relative to the LTI ratios.
Finally, the model matches reasonably well the rates of reﬁnancing for the middle of
the income distribution (quintiles 2 and 3), where they are close to the average. For the
bottom quintile, the model dramatically overshoots the fraction of household reﬁnancing –
over 25% in the model but just under 10% in the data, on average. In the top quintile, very
few households in the model reﬁnance, where as about 8% of those in the data do. This
discrepancy may be driven by the fact that cognitive costs associated with understanding the
reﬁnancing process are decreasing with household income, which our model does not capture.
Woodward and Hall (2010) report that many consumers overpay their mortgage brokers
19

While conventional mortgage loans are typically restricted to allow for debt service ratios that are
consistent with our assumption of ξLT I = 3.5, household do have access to alternative mortgage products
that allow higher LTIs, e.g. Federal Housing Administration (FHA) loans, as well as subprime and alternative
documentation loans that were popular prior to the ﬁnancial crisis of 2008.

46

during their mortgage transactions, which eﬀectively increases their cost of reﬁnancing. If
these costs are a function of ﬁnancial sophistication, which likely rises with income, our
model should overshoot reﬁnancing among low income households, and undershoot it at the
top of the distribution.

5.3

Historical time series

In order to evaluate the model’s ability to explain the observed history of consumption, debt,
and reﬁnancing behavior, we simulate a panel of 1000 households, who face random idiosyncratic labor income shocks generated within the model as well as the time series of realized
shocks to the exogenous state variables in the data (discretized accordingly) for the period
1988–2012. We report the time-series aggregates of the model-generated variables along with
their data counterparts in Figure 8. Panel A depicts the annual series for real consumption
growth. The model-generated series of consumption growth tracks the data closely both
in direction and in the magnitude of variations. In particular, the model matches reasonably well the low consumption growth in 1990-1991 and the consumption boom in the late
1990s, somewhat exaggerates the “consumption boom” of mid-2000s, matches well the large
consumption drop during the Great recession, with three consecutive years of consumption
declines close to 2% per year (2007-2009), and somewhat overshoots the subsequent recovery.
What is driving these consumption patterns in the data? Clearly, the empirically observed
processes for aggregate income and house prices that we feed into the model play a role. But
the model provides households with opportunities to endogenously adjust their decisions on
consumption, savings, owning a house vs. renting, as well as the decisions related to mortgage
reﬁnancing. The degree to which households take advantage of these opportunities in the
model can be assessed by studying the dynamics of their balance sheets.
Panel B of Figure 8 depicts the average stock of (housing) debt relative to household
income. We construct two empirical measures to compare to the average debt-to-income
ratio in the model. The ﬁrst one is the ratio of total housing debt from the U.S. Flow of Funds
Accounts (FFA) to aggregate personal income. The disadvantage of this measure is that it
ignores the fact that almost 40% of households are renters and therefore do not have access
47

A. Real consumption growth
1.8

0.06

B. Debt-to-income ratio

1.6
0.04

1.4
1.2

0.02
1
0.8

0

0.6
−0.02
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

0.4
1985

2015

C. Cash-out share

0.8

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2010

2015

D. Rate ratio

1.4
1.3

0.6

1.2
1.1

0.4

1
0.9

0.2

0.8
0.7

0
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Figure 8: Model-implied aggregate time series. This ﬁgure plots the model-implied
aggregate time series (solid lines) for real consumption growth (all households), debt-toincome ratio (all homeowners), and the cash-out share and rate ratio of reﬁnance loans from
1988 to 2012. The dash lines in Panels A, C, D represent the data counterpart. The dash
line and dotted line in Panel B represent two alternative measures of debt-to-income ratio
based on the data from the Flow of Funds and the SCF, respectively.
to mortgage debt, which will make it understate the debt-to-income ratio for homeowners.
Its advantage is that it is available at an annual frequency. The second empirical measure
uses the triennial Surveys of Consumer Finances for years 1989, 1992, 1995, 1998, 2001,
2004, 2007, and 2010. We compute the average ratio of total debt collateralized by the
household’s primary residence (including both ﬁrst mortgage and second-lien borrowing,
such as home-equity loans and HELOCs) to total household income across all households
in the bottom 80% of the wealth distribution that we targeted in estimation. The model
is able to replicate the dramatic run-up in debt-to-income ratios starting in the mid-1990’s
and through the later 2000’s: the ratio peaks at about 1.2 in the model in year 2007, before
cresting in 2008-2009 and declining roughly back to it’s 2005 value of approximately one
by 2012. This is somewhat lower than the average in the SCF data, which peaks at 1.6 in
2010 (the most recent survey available). The FFA series follows similar dynamics as the
48

model-generated series but at a lower level.
The model also predicts a sharp drop in the debt ratio in 2011. While there is no
SCF data available past 2010, other data sources (such as the Flow of Funds) indicate a
decline in debt ratios over the recent period, consistent with the model’s predictions (e.g.
see Midrigan and Philippon (2011), Mian, Rao, and Suﬁ (2013), and Justiniano, Primiceri,
and Tambalotti (2013)). While the decline in total debt begins as early as 2008, sharply
falling aggregate income keeps the debt-to-income ratio high during the Great Recession, so
that the “deleveraging” eﬀect only becomes apparent once incomes begin to recover.
The rise and fall in household debt clearly mimics the coincident rise and subsequent
decline in house prices, as households’ liquidity constraints ﬁrst become relaxed, and then
tighten. The fastest increases in the debt-to-income ratios occur during the 2001 recession
and the subsequent “jobless recovery” (through 2003), and at the onset of the Great Recession
(2007-2008). However, the increase in home equity cash-out precedes the peak of the debtto-income ratio, as demonstrated in Panel C: the share of reﬁnance loan dollar volume
attributed to cash-out peaks in 2006 in the data and the model. Panel C also reﬂects the
fact that our model generates too much cash-out on average relative to the data, as it is
already shown in Table 5.
The model matches the dynamics of the median ratio of the new mortgage rate to the
old rate upon reﬁnancing (Panel D) closely, including the peaks when the ratio goes above
unity, capturing the eﬀect of liquidity demand by constrained households at the onset of a
recession. The ratio in the model is somewhat more variable. It does not match the dramatic
decline in the rate ratio after 2008 due to the fact that the discretized mortgage rate time
series that we feed into the model does not capture the eﬀect of the extraordinary monetary
policy measures undertaken by the Federal Reserve following the global ﬁnancial crisis (see
Panel D, Figure 4).
In sum, our model successfully replicates the main dynamics in consumption, debt, and
the cash-out share and rate ratio of reﬁnance loans in the period 1998–2012. In particular,
it captures the relaxation of liquidity constraints due to the rise in house prices in the
2000s, which allowed households to rationally withdraw home equity via cash-out reﬁnancing

49

(and second-lien borrowing), driving up household leverage and generating (in part) the
consumption boom of the mid-2000s. The fall in house prices and income starting in 2007
following the dramatic expansion of leverage tightened households’ balance sheets, causing
a sharp and protracted consumption drop. Despite the fact that in the model households
are given an opportunity to “ride out” bad times by only paying interest on long-maturity
loans, the tightening of the collateral constraints, combined with an increased uncertainty
about future labor income (and a lower expected growth rate) lead households to reduce
their leverage and improve their asset position, which entails cutting consumption. This
mechanism is consistent with the evidence of depressed consumption by highly-indebted
households as documented by Dynan (2012) and Mian, Rao, and Suﬁ (2013).

5.4

Cross-sectional analysis of the housing boom and bust

In this section, we examine our model’s predictions about the cross-sectional household behavior during the recent housing boom and bust. We focus on two types of heterogeneities.
First, we compare households that have experienced diﬀerent degrees of house price appreciation but otherwise similar macroeconomic conditions during the housing boom. Second,
we compare how households with diﬀerent amount of leverage in 2007 behave diﬀerently
following the housing bust.
Mian and Suﬁ (2010) document an important piece of empirical evidence in support of
the eﬀect of house prices on household borrowing. They use the measure of elasticity of
housing supply developed by Saiz (2010) to show that U.S. MSAs with relatively inelastic
supply of housing that experienced fast house price growth prior to the Great Recession saw
a dramatic increase in household leverage due to home equity withdrawal, while MSAs with
more elastic housing supply that had not experienced such a run-up in prices did not.
Since there is no heterogeneity in house price dynamics built into our model, we approach this evidence by conducting a counterfactual experiment. Speciﬁcally, we consider
the baseline model as broadly representative of the “inelastic” areas, since it matches the
general dynamics of the boom and bust in house prices. In order to construct a theoretical
proxy for the house prices in the “elastic” areas, we solve the model using the same set of
50

A. House price growth, relative to 2001
1
0.5

Baseline
Elastic Supply

0
−0.5
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2006

2007

2008

2007

2008

B. Total debt growth, relative to 2001
1.5
1
0.5
0
−0.5
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

C. Change in debt-to-income ratio, relative to 2001
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Year

Figure 9: Replicating Mian and Suﬁ (2010) evidence on leverage patterns. The
solid line represents the case with the house price path from the baseline model. The dash
line represents the case with the ratio of real house price to real income being constant,
which mimics the eﬀect of elastic housing supply.
parameters as in the baseline model but a diﬀerent stochastic process of house prices. In
particular, we assume that the ratio of real house price to real income is constant, i.e. ht = 1.
This assumption captures the notion that in areas with elastically supplied housing prices
are closely aligned with construction costs (e.g., see Glaeser, Gyourko, and Saiz (2008)).
Since labor wages are a large component of these costs, we expect house prices to be roughly
proportional to income in the elastic areas.
We plot the simulated total debt growth and changes in debt-to-income ratio over the
decade 1998-2008 in Figure 9, analogous to Figure 1 in Mian and Suﬁ (2010). Panel A depicts
the cumulative growth in house prices under the “inelastic” scenario (i.e., the baseline model)
as well as under the “elastic” scenario (i.e., the counterfactual experiment). The latter shows
only moderate growth in house prices, driven by the increase in aggregate income, consistent
with the Mian-Suﬁ data. Panel B and C depict the evolution of the total housing debt and the
51

debt-to-income ratio under the two scenarios. Under the baseline scenario with signiﬁcant
house price appreciation, household debt grows dramatically, especially during the latter
part of the period 2005-2008, both in total amount and relative to income, (although the
model overstates the former and understates the latter increase compared to the Mian-Suﬁ
data). In contrast, under the “elastic” scenario, total debt and debt-to-income ratio stay
relatively ﬂat over the entire period, broadly in line with the evidence documented by Mian
and Suﬁ (2010). Therefore, according to our model, relaxation of the liquidity constraints as
a result of house price run up can account for the observed increase in household leverage in
a rational framework, insofar as it can be consistent with the observed path of house prices.
What about the cross-sectional evidence of household behavior following the housing
bust of 2007 and the ensuing Great Recession? Mian, Rao, and Suﬁ (2013) document
evidence of “debt overhang” whereby households whose leverage grew the most during the
boom period experienced the sharpest declines in consumption subsequently. We use the
simulated artiﬁcial panel based on the aggregate historical time-series described in Section
5.3 above to analyze the model’s cross-sectional implications in this period. Figure 10 plots
several key variables aggregated over groups of households in the model: the top (dashed
line) and bottom (dash-dotted line) quintile based on debt relative to income in 2006, and the
average of all homeowners (solid line). We plot the simulated series for the years 2007-2012
to illustrate the heterogeneity in households’ responses to aggregate economic conditions.
Panel A depicts the cumulative consumption growth (relative to 2006) for the three
groups. The high-leverage households experience a much sharper drop in consumption during
the Great Recession than an average household, with a cumulative decline of 20% by 2008 (vs.
10% by 2009 for the average homeowner). In contrast, low leverage households experience a
smaller consumption drop than the average. This pattern is broadly consistent with evidence
in Mian, Rao, and Suﬁ (2013).
Panel B plots the liquid asset positions of the three groups. The high-leverage group
enters the recession with substantial cash holdings, of about one year’s worth of income on
average: this is the result of the cash-out over the preceding boom period, which led to
the high leverage in the ﬁrst place. This endogenous link between leverage and liquid asset

52

B. Liquid assets/Income

A. Consumption vs. 2006
0

C. Debt/Income

1.2

3

1

2.5

0.8

2

−0.1

b/y

a+ /y

ln(Ct /C2006)

−0.05

0.6

1.5

0.4

1

0.2

0.5

−0.15

−0.2
2006

2008

2010

0
2006

2012

D. Refinancing rate
0.35

1

0.3

2008

2010

0
2006

2012

E. Cash-out share

2012

F. Rate ratio
1.15

0.8

1.1

0.2
0.15

0.6

k′ /k

(b′ − b) + /b′

REFI

2010

1.2

0.25

0.4

0.1

1.05
1
0.95

0.2

0.05
0
2006

2008

2008

2010

2012

0
2006

0.9
2008

2010

2012

0.85
2006

2008

2010

2012

Figure 10: Consumption, balance sheet, and reﬁnancing behavior for households
with diﬀerent amount of leverage. The dash-diamond line and the dot-square line
represent the top and bottom quintile of the distribution of debt-to-income ratio in 2006,
respectively. The solid-cross line represents the average homeowner.
holding will be important for assessing the impact of income shocks on consumption. In
contrast, the low leverage group has one tenth as much in assets relative to income at the
beginning of the recession, whereas the average homeowner’s asset holding is about 40% of
income. In the recession, the high- and average-leverage households draw down their liquid
assets over time, while the low-leverage homeowners accumulate liquid assets due to elevated
income uncertainty (and demand for precautionary savings). The high-leverage households
also signiﬁcantly reduce their leverage over 2007-2010 as a result of debt repayment and (in
the later period) the rebound in income (Panel C).
The households’ reﬁnancing behaviors in this period are also quite revealing. In Panel
D we plot the reﬁnancing rates for the three groups. The high-leverage group initially
experiences lower reﬁnancing rates than average, as the LTI and LTV constraints are binding
for some of the households in this group. Reﬁnancing activity rises signiﬁcantly for this group
after 2008, from 2% in 2008 to 18% in 2009. This jump in reﬁnancing is part due to decline

53

in debt which relaxed the collateral constraints, and in part due to the lower mortgage rates.
This prediction is likely to be counterfactual, however, due to the banks tightening their
lending standards following the subprime mortgage crisis. Conditional on reﬁnancing, the
model predicts that the high leverage households cashout at a lower rate than average (see
Panel E), as they likely have less home equity and are closer to the collateral constraints.
Also, in 2007, the rate ratio for reﬁnance loans is 1.11 on average and 1.17 for the highleverage households (see Panel F), as liquidity-constrained households cash out to smooth
consumption despite higher mortgage rates.
Households in the low-leverage group have almost no mortgage debt. A few of these
households “reﬁnance” in 2010 by taking out a new loan with a 100% cash-out. However,
such behavior is rare (the reﬁnancing rate is 0 for this group in all other years), because
even though liquidity is valuable, these households do not possess the interest rate option
embedded in the mortgage (i.e., they do not beneﬁt from lower mortgage payments by reﬁnancing when interest rates are low), which makes it less worthwhile to incur the ﬁxed costs
of reﬁnancing. In contrast, for households with non-zero mortgage balances, the exercising
of the interest rate option complements the liquidity needs in their reﬁnancing decisions.

6

Concluding Remarks

We present an estimated structural model of household mortgage debt and liquidity management that accounts for a range of key features of both the historical time-series and the
cross-sectional facts on mortgage reﬁnancing, household leverage, and consumption. The
model can be useful for quantitative evaluation of economic policies aimed at supporting
household balance sheets via the mortgage market.
Our model could be extended in a number of ways in order to investigate a set of closely
related issues. While our focus is on understanding household decisions in response to
the empirically observed prices of houses and ﬁnancial assets, an evaluation of welfare and
distributional implications would require closing the model by clearing both housing and
asset markets. First, a fully speciﬁed model of the housing market would require not only

54

a careful consideration of supply and its elasticity, but also a richer set of preferences over
housing and the decision of whether to rent or own. Second, it would be useful to endogenize
the interest rates on mortgages and HELOCs. One could endogenize mortgage rates within
our framework using a partial equilibrium setting by introducing an exogenous stochastic
discount factor, which would allow an evaluation of the welfare impact of reﬁnancing costs
by incorporating the equilibrium response of mortgage spreads to slower prepayment speeds.
Understanding the impact of securitization on mortgage borrowing, as well as its welfare
implications, requires a general equilibrium analysis (e.g., as in Landvoigt (2013)). While
Gerardi, Rosen, and Willen (2010) show empirically that mortgage securitization improved
households’ ability to smooth their housing consumption over time, the net eﬀect on total
consumption and welfare can only be ascertained in a structural model that captures all of
the relevant frictions. Our framework should prove useful in pursuing this line of research.

55

Appendix
A

State level evidence on counter-cyclical reﬁnancing

To investigate the response of mortgage reﬁnancing to economic activity further, we use
data on the origination of home mortgage loans at the state level. This potentially allows
us to separate the eﬀect of low interest rates from that of deteriorating economic conditions,
insofar as the local economic activity variables are less synchronized with the interest rates
than are aggregate quantities, and that households cannot diversify away state-level shocks.
We use quarterly data on the mortgage loans (both reﬁnance and purchase) for each of the
50 states and D.C., based on aggregated Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) reporting.
We regress the quarterly changes in the number of loans taken in order to reﬁnance existing
mortgages (adjusted by the state population) on measures of economic conditions. We
use three such measures, speciﬁcally growth rates of nonfarm payroll employment, of the
State Coincident Economic Activity Index (CEAI ), which combines information contained
in nonfarm payrolls, unemployment, hours worked and wages, and trends with the Gross
State Product (GSP), and of the total personal income (TPI ), deﬂated using the national
consumer price index.20 We use year-on-year (log) growth rates of quarterly levels of these
measures as the main explanatory variables.
House prices determine both the motive to reﬁnance due to a wealth eﬀect and the ability
of households to borrow against the value of their homes (perhaps for reasons unrelated to
consumption smoothing). Since economic conditions are correlated with the level of house
prices, reﬁnancing activity could be high under good economic conditions due to high house
prices. Thus, to better capture the eﬀect of consumption smoothing on reﬁnancing, it is
important to control for house price appreciation in our regression. We use the FHFA house
price indices for the 50 states and DC as our measure of house prices. As before, we also
control for aggregate variables: the 30 year mortgage rate (contemporaneous and lagged by
one year) and the short-term interest rate.
20

Unlike the payroll employment and personal income measures, CEAI is not available for D.C.

56

We run pooled time series/cross-sectional regressions of the form:
REF I
REF I
REF I
REF ItState = βCycle
CycleState
+ βH
∆HP ItState + βCH
CycleState
× HP ItState + R̄ti
t
t
REF I M 30
+ βwREF I W ACtState + βrREF I Rt3M + βRREF I RtM 30 + βRl
Rt−4 + βt + βState + ϵt ,

(A.1)
where REF ItState is the number of reﬁnance loans originated in state i over the quarter t,
scaled by the state’s population in the prior year. CycleState is the variable that measures
state-level aggregate economic conditions, ∆HP It measures house price appreciation using
the 2-year growth in the FHFA state-level house price index that captures appreciation of
the mortgaged properties, R̄ti is the average rate on newly originated conventional mortgages
in state i over the past year,21 W ACtState is the weighted average coupon on conforming
mortgage loans outstanding in the state in the ﬁrst month of the quarter that summarizes
the rates currently paid by borrowers, bt is the vector of quarter ﬁxed eﬀects that captures
aggregate information not contained in other variables, and bState a vector of state ﬁxed
eﬀects. State ﬁxed eﬀects are important since there is substantial heterogeneity across states
in the ﬁxed costs associated with reﬁnancing a mortgage (such as title insurance, taxes, etc.),
which result in diﬀerent average levels of reﬁnancing as well as its sensitivity to aggregate
variables. Given this speciﬁcation, we are identifying the eﬀect of within-state variation
in economic conditions on reﬁnancing. We include the lagged Cycle variable to capture
delayed response of households to economic conditions, and include an interaction term
between Cycle and the house price growth, orthogonalized with respect to both variables,
to test whether higher level of house prices help relax the borrowing constraint especially in
bad times.
Table A.1 presents the results of the state-level regressions for diﬀerent speciﬁcations
(two diﬀerent economic activity measures). The coeﬃcients on the state-level business cycle
variables in the ﬁrst column are all negative and statistically signiﬁcant in all but one speciﬁcation (T P I without time ﬁxed eﬀects), consistent with the view that households are more
likely to reﬁnance their mortgages in a downturn. The state-level cycle variable remains
21

This variable is available from FHFA at annual frequency; we interpolate it linearly to generate quarterly
observations.

57

signiﬁcantly negatively related to reﬁnancing when the quarter ﬁxed eﬀects are included,
indicating that their presence does not simply proxy for variation in the aggregate term
structure variables.
As expected, house price appreciation is positively related to reﬁnancing. In fact, the
eﬀects of the business cycle variables become stronger (more negative) after house price
appreciation is taken into account, which helps tease out the rise in reﬁnancing in good
times due to house value appreciation (results without house price index are not reported).
Moreover, the interaction terms of house prices and the cycle variables are negative and
typically statistically signiﬁcant, suggesting that higher levels of house prices are particularly
important for reﬁnancing during economic downturns.
Both the 30-year mortgage rates and the short-term interest rate have a signiﬁcant negative eﬀect on reﬁnancing, as expected. Similarly, the WAC has a signiﬁcant positive coeﬃcient, consistent with the fact that it captures the rates currently paid by borrowers, so
that higher WAC translated into a greater incentive to reﬁnance if current rates are low.
In the speciﬁcation with time ﬁxed eﬀects (where aggregate interest rates are not included)
WAC has a negative coeﬃcient, potentially due to the fact that it may capture persistent
state-speciﬁc variation in mortgage spreads that we cannot control for separately without
detailed state-level data on mortgage rates. Interestingly, the eﬀect of current state-level
mortgage rates is positive rather than negative, although not signiﬁcant with time ﬁxed effect, suggesting that it is capturing mostly aggregate variation in mortgage spreads (which
are positively related to both default and prepayment risk).
Another measure of reﬁnancing is the total volume of reﬁnance loans. Table A.2 reports
results of regressions (A.1) where REF ItState is deﬁned as the total dollar volume of newly
originated reﬁnance loans in state i over quarter t divided by the total personal income in
the state over the previous quarter. The results are very similar: the Cycle variable comes
in negatively (and signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero in all but one speciﬁcation), house prices
have a strongly positive eﬀect, and the interaction is negative, albeit not signiﬁcant when
time ﬁxed eﬀects are present.

58

Table 1: Aggregate Reﬁnancing Activity
∆IPt

-0.422
(0.161)

∆HP It
RtM 30

-0.253
(0.087)
0.148
(0.098)
-1.914
(0.667)

M 30
RtM 30 − Rt−12

-0.196
(0.097)
0.156
(0.095)
-1.982
(0.675)
-1.464
(0.845)

M 30
RtM 30 − Ravg,t

rt1Y
Adj. R2

0.060

-1.156
(0.611)
0.654

-0.986
(0.566)
0.673

-0.268
(0.091)
0.155
(0.095)
-2.700
(0.601)

-2.609
(1.247)
-0.278
(0.496)
0.687

Note: Monthly data, January 1990 - December 2012. Numbers in parentheses are NeweyWest standard errors with 12 lags. The left-hand-side variable is the MBA reﬁ index scaled to
match the average aggregate reﬁ rate of 8%. ∆IPt is the 12-month growth rate in industrial
production. ∆HP It is the real 12-month growth rate in the Case-Shiller house price index.
M 30
RM 30 is the 30-year mortgage rate and Ravg
is the average 30-year mortgage rate in the past
1Y
3 years. r is the 1-year constant maturity treasury yield.

59

Table 2: Aggregate Home Equity Extraction
Prime, ﬁrst-lien mortgage

∆P It

-0.003
(0.051)

∆HP It
RtM 30

-0.116
(0.041)
0.061
(0.023)
-0.430
(0.146)

M 30
RtM 30 − Rt−1

rt1Y
Adj. R2

-0.055

0.279
(0.099)
0.487

-0.132
(0.042)
0.063
(0.021)
-0.431
(0.133)
0.207
(0.084)
0.262
(0.087)
0.545

Home equity loans, lines of credit

0.056
(0.041)

0.111

-0.013
(0.032)
0.062
(0.018)
-0.038
(0.112)

0.045
(0.076)
0.611

-0.027
(0.031)
0.064
(0.016)
-0.039
(0.099)
0.185
(0.063)
0.030
(0.065)
0.679

Note: Annual data, 1993 – 2012. Numbers in parentheses are Hansen-Hodrick standard
errors with 4 lags. The left-hand-side variable is the ratio of annual dollar amount of cashout from prime, ﬁrst-lien conventional mortgages or home-equity loans and lines of credit
(HEL+HELOC) to previous-year personal income. ∆P It is the one-year real personal income
growth. ∆HP It is the real one-year growth in the FHFA house price index. RM 30 is the
average 30-year conventional mortgage rate. r1Y is the 1-year constant maturity treasury
yield.

60

Table 3: Aggregate State Variables
Panel A: Descriptive Statistics
GDP

ht

rt

0.025
0.018
0.431

0
0.178
0.852

0.040
0.025
0.773

-0.037

0.449
0.190

Mean
Std
Autocorrelation
correlation:
GDP
ht

Panel B: VAR Parameters
µ
GDP
ht
rt

Σs × 10−3

Φs

0.013
-0.015
0.002

0.420
0
0

0
0.888
0

0
0
0.844

0.492
0.576
0.006

0.576
6.525
0.440

0.006
0.440
0.192

Panel C: Mortgage Rate Parameters
κ0
0.049
(0.001)

R2

κ
Z

h

r

h2

0.094
(0.023)

0.011
(0.004)

0.684
(0.025)

-0.270
(0.022)

61

0.949

Table 4: Parameter Values
Panel A. Exogenously-ﬁxed parameters
Dynamics

Institutional

ρy
σ(ZG )
σ(ZB )

0.95
0.12
0.21

Autocorrelation of y
Volatility of y for Z G
Volatility of y for Z B

τ
H̄

0.25
4
0.8
3.5
30%
0.15
1
0.04

Income tax rate
Average house price to income ratio
Collateral constraint
Debt service constraint
Maximum HELOC balance as fraction of aggregate income
Probability of return to credit market after default
1-ζ = conﬁscation rate of liquid assets upon default
Interest rate premium on HELOC

ξLT V
ξLT I
−a
ω
ζ
ϑ

Panel B. Estimated parameters
Preferences

δ
γ
ψ
η

Institutional

ϕ0
ϕ1
ϕh

0.929
(0.038)
2.383
(3.963)
0.610
(0.988)
0.359
(0.362)

Subjective discount rate
Risk aversion
Intertemporal elasticity of substitution
Rent as a share of labor income

0.093 Fixed cost of issuing new mortgage
(0.088)
0.026 Proportional cost of issuing new mortgage
(0.078)
0.138 Proportional cost of buying/selling a house
(0.222)

Note: This table reports the exogenously-ﬁxed parameters and the estimated parameters
of the model. For the estimated parameters, the values in parentheses are standard errors.

62

Table 5: Target Moments for the Estimation and Model Outputs
Moment

Variable

Data

Model

s.e.

Panel A. Targeted Moments
All Households:
1. Consumption/Income
2. Consumption growth volatility, %
3. Homeownership rate, %

c/pY
σ(∆ log cit+1 )
E[I h ]

0.66
9
60

0.60 0.001
18.0
0.9
22.5
8.7

a/pY
b/pY
−a− /pY
REF I
b′ /pY
′
(b − b)+ /b′

0.28
0.98
0.07
8.0
1.41
0.12

0.23
0.98
0.06
12.8
2.60
0.48

0.01
0.18
0.02
3.3
0.28
0.08

Renters:
10. Liquid assets/Income

a/pY

0.18

0.07

0.02

Reﬁnancing Regression:
11. Coeﬃcient on Z
12. Coeﬃcient on ∆ log H

βZREF I
REF I
βH

−0.25
0.15

−0.46
0.14

1.33
0.35

Cashout Regression:
13. Coeﬃcient on Z
14. Coeﬃcient on ∆ log H

βZ
βH

−0.13
0.06

−0.17
0.06

0.34
0.14

2.7
0.46
0.06
0.068
0.091
-1.91
-0.43

3.1
1.00
0.11
0.03
0.06
-1.19
-0.46

0.06
0.64
0.12
7.58
1.55
1.13
0.53

Homeowners:
4. Liquid assets/Income
5. Mortgage/Income
6. HELOC/Income
7. Reﬁnancing rate, % of homeowners
8. Reﬁnance loan/Income
9. Dollar cash-out/Reﬁnance loan

Panel B. Additional Moments
Volatility of aggregate consumption growth, % σ(∆ log Ct+1 )
Sensitivity of consumption to Z shocks
βZC
C
Sensitivity of consumption to H shocks
βH
Sensitivity of consumption to lagged r
βrC
Sensitivity of consumption to lagged R
βRC
Reﬁnancing regression coeﬃcient on R
βRREF I
Cashout regression coeﬃcient on R
βR

63

64

0.60
17.98
22.51

0.23
0.06
0.98
12.84
2.60
0.48
0.01

0.07

-1.19

-0.46
-0.17
0.06

3.12
1.00
0.11
0.03
0.06

All Households:
Consumpion/Income
Cons. growth vol, %
Homeownership rate, %

Homeowners:
Liquid assets/Income
HELOC/Income
Mortgage/Income
Reﬁnancing rate, %
Reﬁ loan/Income
Cash-out $/Reﬁ loan
Default rate, %

Renters:
Liquid assets/Income

Reﬁnancing Regression:
Coeﬃcient on R, βRREF I

Cashout Regression:
Coeﬃcient on R, βZ
Coeﬃcient on Z, βZ
Coeﬃcient on H, βH

Aggregate Consumption:
Volatility , %
Sensitivity to Z, βZC
C
Sensitivity to H, βH
C
Sensitivity to r, βr
Sensitivity to R, βRC

Baseline

(1)
δ
0.976

(3)

2.43
0.86
0.06
-0.01
0.05

-0.05
-0.01
0.02

-3.15

0.00

0.10
0.06
1.41
30.32
1.80
0.27
0.06

3.21
1.11
0.02
0.23
0.28

-0.08
-0.28
0.02

-0.05

0.45

0.31
0.07
0.11
1.54
2.94
0.59
0.00

0.56 0.73
18.15 18.32
3.44 75.13

0.837

(2)
γ

(5)

3.05
0.94
0.12
0.00
0.06

-0.29
-0.07
0.07

-2.39

0.03

0.18
0.07
1.49
23.08
2.31
0.34
0.03

2.71
0.81
0.09
0.12
0.18

-0.25
-0.19
0.01

-0.09

0.90

0.74
0.03
0.14
1.92
2.93
0.73
0.00

0.59 0.69
18.49 19.10
16.58 52.40

0.596 9.532

(4)
ψ

(7)

3.07
1.06
0.08
0.02
0.02

-0.30
-0.11
0.03

-0.66

0.10

0.32
0.05
0.87
12.35
2.57
0.48
0.01

3.39
0.89
0.17
0.02
0.13

-0.73
-0.23
0.09

-2.22

0.05

0.18
0.07
1.15
14.32
2.58
0.47
0.01

0.61 0.60
17.22 19.78
23.53 23.21

0.153 2.441

(6)

Table 6: Sensitivity Analysis

η
1.437

(9)

2.62
1.01
0.03
0.08
0.15

-0.15
-0.02
0.00

-1.30

0.04

0.20
0.04
0.59
9.53
1.87
0.61
0.00

3.39
1.17
0.02
0.20
0.24

0.15
-0.24
0.04

0.12

0.18

0.07
0.20
0.16
2.39
2.93
0.56
0.00

0.70 0.61
17.48 20.06
4.04 66.21

0.090

(8)
ϕ0

(11)

3.28
1.03
0.12
0.03
0.07

-0.56
-0.16
0.04

-1.49

0.08

0.21
0.06
1.19
21.45
2.20
0.38
0.01

2.82
0.99
0.07
0.06
0.09

-0.09
-0.11
0.04

-0.11

0.07

0.12
0.10
0.24
1.99
3.06
0.83
0.00

0.61 0.60
18.00 17.99
25.79 17.19

0.023 0.372

(10)
ϕ1

(13)

3.26
1.02
0.13
0.03
0.07

-0.51
-0.16
0.07

-1.63

0.07

0.25
0.06
1.20
17.12
2.52
0.42
0.01

2.86
0.99
0.08
0.06
0.09

-0.22
-0.19
0.04

-0.34

0.07

0.14
0.09
0.35
3.75
2.80
0.74
0.00

0.61 0.60
18.06 17.87
24.59 18.06

0.007 0.105

(12)

3.63
0.98
0.18
-0.02
0.01

-0.62
-0.35
0.01

-2.12

0.13

0.22
0.07
1.19
15.58
2.49
0.43
0.00

2.69
1.03
0.03
0.09
0.15

-0.04
-0.07
0.01

-0.18

0.03

0.19
0.09
0.48
6.73
2.97
0.51
0.59

0.62 0.58
18.63 17.69
29.46 10.39

0.035 0.554

(14) (15)
ϕh

Table 7: Comparative Statics

(1)
Baseline

(2)
σB = σG

(3)
σB = 30%

(4)

(5)

ξLT I = ∞

ξLT V = 125%

(6)
a=0

All Households:
Consumpion/Income
Consumption growth vol, %
Homeownership rate, %

0.60
17.98
22.50

0.60
17.91
23.10

0.64
21.77
32.10

0.61
18.02
27.10

0.62
18.92
32.50

0.60
17.93
19.80

Homeowners:
Liquid assets/Income
HELOC/Income
Mortgage/Income
Reﬁnancing rate, % of homeowners
Reﬁnance loan/Income
Dollar cash-out/Reﬁnance loan
Default rate, % of homeowners

0.23
0.06
0.98
12.84
2.60
0.48
0.01

0.22
0.07
1.05
14.22
2.56
0.47
0.01

0.31
0.06
0.62
8.08
2.76
0.58
0.01

0.28
0.07
1.38
15.41
3.07
0.44
0.09

0.25
0.06
1.56
14.59
2.93
0.37
7.83

0.30
–
0.94
13.29
2.61
0.44
0.01

Renters:
Liquid assets/Income

0.07

0.06

0.20

0.06

0.09

0.07

Reﬁnancing Regression:
Coeﬃcient on R, βRREF I

-1.19

-1.36

-0.50

-1.79

-1.81

-1.48

Cashout Regression:
Coeﬃcient on R, βR
Coeﬃcient on Z, βZ
Coeﬃcient on ∆ log H, βH

-0.46
-0.17
0.06

-0.40
-0.11
0.05

-0.40
-0.28
0.04

-0.74
-0.32
0.13

-1.57
-0.62
-0.35

-0.38
-0.15
0.05

Aggregate Consumption Growth:
Volatility, %
Sensitivity to Z, βZC
C
Sensitivity to H, βH
Sensitivity to lag r, βrC
Sensitivity to lag R, βRC

3.12
1.00
0.11
0.03
0.06

3.04
1.03
0.10
0.07
0.21

3.74
1.06
0.14
0.08
0.09

3.34
1.01
0.14
0.03
0.07

3.42
1.10
0.08
0.08
0.15

3.00
0.99
0.10
0.04
0.07

65

Table A.1: State-level reﬁnancing activity

1
Robust
NW
2
Robust
NW
3
Robust
NW
4
Robust
NW
5
Robust
NW
6
Robust
NW

Cyclet

HP It

Ct × Ht

WAC

R̄ti

RtM 30

Rt3M

M 30
Rt−4

R̄2

-0.29
( 0.05)
( 0.05)
-0.24
( 0.05)
( 0.05)
-0.10
( 0.03)
( 0.03)
-0.14
( 0.04)
( 0.03)
0.01
( 0.03)
( 0.03)
-0.10
( 0.03)
( 0.03)

0.17
( 0.01)
( 0.01)
0.10
( 0.01)
( 0.01)
0.16
( 0.01)
( 0.01)
0.10
( 0.01)
( 0.01)
0.15
( 0.01)
( 0.01)
0.09
( 0.01)
( 0.01)

-1.85
( 0.51)
( 0.39)
-0.64
( 0.27)
( 0.20)
-1.29
( 0.42)
( 0.34)
-0.47
( 0.19)
( 0.13)
-1.89
( 0.54)
( 0.37)
-0.36
( 0.25)
( 0.22)

0.62
( 0.03)
( 0.05)
-2.74
( 0.70)
( 0.67)
0.64
( 0.04)
( 0.05)
-2.62
( 0.70)
( 0.69)
0.61
( 0.04)
( 0.05)
-2.63
( 0.70)
( 0.70)

1.50
( 0.22)
( 0.22)
0.32
( 0.41)
( 0.37)
1.56
( 0.24)
( 0.23)
0.36
( 0.42)
( 0.37)
1.84
( 0.27)
( 0.26)
0.18
( 0.44)
( 0.39)

-1.70
( 0.11)
( 0.12)

-0.75
( 0.06)
( 0.06)

-0.20
( 0.11)
( 0.12)

0.61

0.89

-1.79
( 0.12)
( 0.12)

-0.80
( 0.06)
( 0.07)

-0.23
( 0.11)
( 0.12)

0.60

0.89

-1.89
( 0.14)
( 0.13)

-1.00
( 0.06)
( 0.07)

-0.32
( 0.11)
( 0.13)

0.60

0.89

Note: Quarterly data, 1993.III - 2009.IV (time subscript t is in monthly units). The
dependent variable is the total number of newly originated reﬁnance loans in the state over a
quarter relative to the rescaled population of the state for the previous year (based on HMDA
data). Cycle refers to the year-on-year growth in either the non-farm payroll employment index
scaled by the state population (Payroll, speciﬁcations 1 - 2), State Coincident Economic Activity
index in columns (CEAI, speciﬁcations 3 - 4 ), or the Total Personal Income (TPI, deﬂated using
the CPI, speciﬁcations 5 - 6). HP I is the two-year growth rate of the state-level house price index.
Ct × Ht is the orthogonalized interaction term, i.e. the residual from regressing the product of
Cycle and HP I on a constant and both of these variables. WAC is weighted average coupon rate
for conforming ﬁxed-rate mortgages (equal-weighted average across FNMA and FHLMC loans) in
a given state. R̄ti is the average coupon rate on all newly-originated conventional prime loans in
the state over the quarter. Speciﬁcations 2, 4 and 6 have quarter ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors are
in brackets (Robust are clustered by state, and NW are Newey-West with 20 lags).

66

Table A.2: Reﬁnance loan volume relative to total income

1
Robust
NW
2
Robust
NW
3
Robust
NW
4
Robust
NW
5
Robust
NW
6
Robust
NW

Cyclet

HP It

Ct × Ht

WAC

R̄ti

RtM 30

Rt3M

M 30
Rt−4

R̄2

-1.63
( 0.26)
( 0.25)
-1.70
( 0.35)
( 0.30)
-0.74
( 0.16)
( 0.16)
-1.00
( 0.21)
( 0.19)
-0.25
( 0.14)
( 0.15)
-0.75
( 0.17)
( 0.15)

0.86
( 0.05)
( 0.05)
0.64
( 0.08)
( 0.06)
0.84
( 0.05)
( 0.05)
0.63
( 0.07)
( 0.06)
0.76
( 0.05)
( 0.04)
0.56
( 0.07)
( 0.06)

-6.78
( 2.52)
( 1.77)
-2.52
( 1.83)
( 1.43)
-4.92
( 1.94)
( 1.41)
-1.92
( 1.17)
( 0.83)
-7.14
( 2.72)
( 1.81)
-1.17
( 1.84)
( 1.50)

2.30
( 0.16)
( 0.20)
-15.54
( 5.19)
( 4.57)
2.39
( 0.17)
( 0.21)
-14.78
( 5.41)
( 4.74)
2.30
( 0.18)
( 0.20)
-14.48
( 5.26)
( 4.77)

7.77
( 1.17)
( 1.07)
5.32
( 2.45)
( 2.21)
7.93
( 1.22)
( 1.13)
5.44
( 2.47)
( 2.23)
8.98
( 1.28)
( 1.21)
4.54
( 2.46)
( 2.27)

-8.21
( 0.58)
( 0.59)

-3.69
( 0.28)
( 0.31)

-1.37
( 0.53)
( 0.57)

0.65

0.87

-8.61
( 0.62)
( 0.61)

-3.80
( 0.31)
( 0.33)

-1.53
( 0.53)
( 0.59)

0.65

0.86

-9.19
( 0.69)
( 0.64)

-4.69
( 0.29)
( 0.32)

-1.88
( 0.54)
( 0.63)

0.64

0.86

Note: Quarterly data, 1993.III - 2009.IV (time subscript t is in monthly units). The
dependent variable is the total dollar volume of newly originated reﬁnance loans in the state over a
quarter relative to the total personal income in the state for the previous quarter (based on HMDA
data).Cycle refers to the year-on-year growth in either the non-farm payroll employment index
scaled by the state population (Payroll, speciﬁcations 1 - 2), State Coincident Economic Activity
index in columns (CEAI, speciﬁcations 3 - 4 ), or the Total Personal Income (TPI, deﬂated using
the CPI, speciﬁcations 5 - 6). HP I is the two-year growth rate of the state-level house price index.
Ct × Ht is the orthogonalized interaction term, i.e. the residual from regressing the product of
Cycle and HP I on a constant and both of these variables. WAC is weighted average coupon rate
for conforming ﬁxed-rate mortgages (equal-weighted average across FNMA and FHLMC loans) in
a given state. R̄ti is the average coupon rate on all newly-originated conventional prime loans in
the state over the quarter. Speciﬁcations 2, 4 and 6 have quarter ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors are
in brackets (Robust are clustered by state, and NW are Newey-West with 20 lags).

67

References
Abel, Andrew B., Janice C. Eberly, and Stavros Panageas, 2013, Optimal inattention to the
stock market with information costs and transactions costs, Econometrica 81, 1455–1481.
Agarwal, Sumit, John C. Driscoll, and David I. Laibson, 2002, When should borrowers reﬁnance their mortgages?, working paper, available at http://www.nber.org/ confer/2002/si2002/laibson.pdf.
Alvarez, Fernando E., Luigi Guiso, and Francesco Lippi, 2010, Durable consumption and
asset management with transaction and observation costs, NBER Working Papers 15835
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Attanasio, Orazio, Andrew Leicester, and Matthew Wakeﬁeld, 2011, Do house prices drive
consumption growth? The coincident cycles of house prices and consumption in the UK,
Journal of the European Economic Association 9, 399–435.
Attanasio, Orazio P., and Guglielmo Weber, 1995, Is consumption growth consistent with
intertemporal optimization? evidence from the consumer expenditure survey, Journal of
Political Economy 103, 1121–1157.
Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku, and Amir Yaron, 2012, Risks for the long run: Estimation with
time aggregation, Working Paper 18305 National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bertola, Giuseppe, Luigi Guiso, and Luigi Pistaferri, 2005, Uncertainty and consumer
durables adjustment, The Review of Economic Studies 72, 973–1007.
Boudoukh, Jacob, Matthew P. Richardson, Richard H. Stanton, and Robert Whitelaw, 1997,
Pricing mortgage-backed securities in a multifactor interest rate environment: A multivariate density estimation approach, Review of Financial Studies 10, 405–46.
Brav, Alon, George M. Constantinides, and Christoper Geczy, 2002, Asset pricing with heterogeneous consumers and limited participation: Empirical evidence, Journal of Political
Economy 110, 793–824.
Calomiris, Charles W, Stanley D Longhofer, and William Miles, 2012, The housing wealth
eﬀect: The crucial roles of demographics, wealth distribution and wealth shares, Discussion
paper National Bureau of Economic Research.
Campbell, Jeﬀrey C., and Zvi Hercowitz, 2005, The role of collateralized household debt in
macroeconomic stabilization, NBER Working Paper Series No. 11330.
Campbell, John Y., 2006, Household ﬁnance, Journal of Finance 61, 1553–1604.
, and Joao F. Cocco, 2003, Household risk management and optimal mortgage choice,
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1449–1494.
, 2007, How do house prices aﬀect consumption? evidence from micro data, Journal
of Monetary Economics 54, 591–621.
68

, 2010, A model of mortgage default, working paper, Harvard University.
Caplin, Andrew, Charles Freeman, and Joseph Tracy, 1997, Collateral damage: How reﬁnancing constraints exacerbate regional recessions, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
29, 496–516.
Carroll, Christopher, 2001, Death to the Log-Linearized Consumption Euler Equation! (And
Very Poor Health to the Second-Order Approximation), The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics 1, 1–38.
, Jirı́ Slacálek, and Martin Sommer, 2012, Dissecting saving dynamics: Measuring
credit, uncertainty, and wealth eﬀects, JHU Working Paper.
Carroll, Christopher D., 2000, Why do the rich save so much?, in Joel Slemrod, ed.: Does
Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich (Harvard University Press:
Cambridge, MA).
, Misuzu Otsuka, and Jiri Slacalek, 2011, How large are housing and ﬁnancial wealth
eﬀects? A new approach, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 43, 55–79.
Case, Karl E., John M. Quigley, and Robert J. Shiller, 2011, Wealth eﬀects revisited 19782009, NBER Working Paper Series No. 16848 Yale University.
Chatterjee, Satyajit, and Burcu Eyigungor, 2011, A Quantitative Analysis of the U.S. Housing and Mortgage Markets and the Foreclosure Crisis, SSRN eLibrary.
Chen, Hui, Jianjun Miao, and Neng Wang, 2010, Entrepreneurial ﬁnance and nondiversiﬁable
risk, Review of Financial Studies 23, 4348–4388.
Corbae, Dean, and Erwan Quintin, 2013, Leverage and the foreclosure crisis, NBER Working
Paper.
Davis, Morris A., and Francois Ortalo-Magne, 2011, Household expenditures, wages, rents,
Review of Economic Dynamics 14, 248 – 261.
DeNardi, Mariacristina, 2004, Wealth inequality and intergenerational links, Review of Economic Studies 71, 743–768.
Deng, Yongheng, John M. Quigley, and Robert Van Order, 2000, Mortgage terminations,
heterogeneity and the exercise of mortgage options, Econometrica 68, 275–307.
Downing, Chris, Richard Stanton, and Nancy Wallace, 2005, An empirical test of a two-factor
mortgage valuation model: How much do house prices matter?, Real Estate Economics
33, 681–710.
Dridi, Ramdan, Alain Guay, and Eric Renault, 2007, Indirect inference and calibration of
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models, Journal of Econometrics 136, 397 – 430.
Duarte, Jeﬀerson, Francis A. Longstaﬀ, and Fan Yu, 2007, Risk and return in ﬁxed-income
arbitrage: Nickels in front of a steamroller?, Review of Financial Studies 20, 769–811.
69

Duﬃe, Darrell, and Kenneth J Singleton, 1993, Simulated moments estimation of Markov
models of asset prices, Econometrica 61, 929–52.
Dunn, Kenneth B., and John McConnell, 1981, Valuation of GNMA mortgage-backed securities, Journal of Finance 36, 599–616.
Dunn, Kenneth B., and Chester S. Spatt, 2005, The eﬀect of reﬁnancing costs and market
imperfections on the optimal call strategy and the pricing of debt contracts, Real Estate
Economics 33, 595–617.
Dynan, Karen, 2012, Is a household debt overhang holding back consumption?, Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity pp. 299–362.
Epstein, Larry, and Stanley Zin, 1989, Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior
of consumption growth and asset returns I: A theoretical framework, Econometrica 57,
937–969.
Favilukis, Jack, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2011, The Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk-Sharing in General
Equilibrium, NBER Working Paper Series No. 15988.
Fernandez-Villaverde, Jesus, and Dirk Krueger, 2011, Consumption and saving over the life
cycle: How important are consumer durables?, Macroeconomic Dynamics 15, 725–770.
Gabaix, Xavier, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Olivier Vigneron, 2007, Limits of arbitrage:
Theory and evidence from the mortgage-backed securities market, The Journal of Finance
62, 557–595.
Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson, 2002, The 6d bias and the equity-premium puzzle, in
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001, Volume 16 NBER Chapters . pp. 257–330 (National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc).
Gallant, A. Ronald, and George E. Tauchen, 1996, Which moments to match, Econometric
Theory 16, 657–681.
Gerardi, Kristopher, Harvey Rosen, and Paul Willen, 2010, The impact of deregulation and
ﬁnancial innovation on consumers: The case of the mortgage market, Journal of Finance
65, 333–360.
Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko, and Albert Saiz, 2008, Housing supply and housing
bubbles, Journal of Urban Economics 64, 198 – 217.
Gomes, Francisco, and Alexander Michaelides, 2005, Optimal life-cycle asset allocation: Understanding the empirical evidence, Journal of Finance 60, 869–904.
Gourieroux, C, A Monfort, and E Renault, 1993, Indirect inference, Journal of Applied
Econometrics 8, S85–118.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Jonathan A. Parker, 2002, Consumption over the life cycle,
Econometrica 70, 47–89.
70

Greenspan, Alan, and James Kennedy, 2008, Sources and uses of equity extracted from
homes, Oxford Review of Economic Policy 24, 120–144.
Gross, David B., and Nicholas S. Souleles, 2002, Do liquidity constraints and interest rates
matter for consumer behavior? Evidence from credit card data, The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117, 149–185.
Guerrieri, Veronica, and Guido Lorenzoni, 2011, Credit crises, precautionary savings, and
the liquidity trap, NBER Working Papers 17583 National Bureau of Economic Research,
Inc.
Guiso, Luigi, and Paolo Sodini, 2013, Household ﬁnance: An emerging ﬁeld, in Milton Harris
George M. Constantinides, and Rene M. Stulz, ed.: Handbook of the Economics of Finance
SET, vol. 2, Part B of Handbook of the Economics of Finance . pp. 1397 – 1532 (Elsevier).
Guvenen, Fatih, Serdar Ozkan, and Jae Song, 2012, The nature of countercyclical income
risk, NBER Working Papers 18035 National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Hall, Robert E., 1988, Intertemporal substitution and consumption, Journal of Political
Economy 96, 339–357.
Hansen, Lars P., 1982, Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators,
Econometrica 50, 1029–1054.
Hansen, Lars Peter, John Heaton, Junghoon Lee, and Nikolai Roussanov, 2007, Intertemporal substitution and risk aversion, , vol. 6, Part 1 of Handbook of Econometrics . pp. 3967
– 4056 (Elsevier).
He, Chao, Randall Wright, and Yu Zhu, 2012, Housing and liquidity, Working Paper, University of Wisconsin.
Heaton, John C., and Deborah J. Lucas, 1996, Evaluating the eﬀects of incomplete markets
on risk-sharing and asset pricing, Journal of Political Economy 104, 443–487.
Hennessy, Christopher A., and Toni M. Whited, 2005, Debt dynamics, Journal of Finance
60, 1129–1165.
Hurst, Erik, and Frank Staﬀord, 2004, Home is where the equity is: Mortgage reﬁnancing
and household consumption, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 36, 985–1014.
Jeske, Karsten, Dirk Krueger, and Kurt Mitman, 2011, Housing and the macroeconomy:
The role of bailout guarantees for government sponsored enterprises, Discussion paper
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti, 2013, Household leveraging and deleveraging, NBER Working Papers 18941 National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Kaplan, Greg, and Giovanni L. Violante, 2011, A model of the consumption response to ﬁscal
stimulus payments, NBER Working Papers 17338 National Bureau of Economic Research.
71

Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2010, Did securitization
lead to lax screening? Evidence from subprime loans, Quarterly Journal of Economics 125,
307–362.
Khandani, Amir E., Andrew W. Lo, and Robert C. Merton, 2009, Systemic Risk and the
Reﬁnancing Ratchet Eﬀect, MIT Sloan Working Paper.
Koijen, Ralph S.J., Otto Van Hemert, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2009, Mortgage timing,
Journal of Financial Economics 93, 292–324.
Laibson, David, 1997, Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 443–477.
, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman, 2003, A debt puzzle, in Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund Strother
Phelps . p. 228 (Princeton University Press).
, 2007, Estimating discount functions with consumption choices over the lifecycle,
NBER Working Paper.
Landvoigt, Tim, 2013, Aggregate implications of the increase in securitized mortgage debt,
Unpublished paper, Stanford University.
, Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider, 2012, The housing market(s) of San Diego,
Working Paper 17723 National Bureau of Economic Research.
Longstaﬀ, Francis A., 2004, Optimal recursive reﬁnancing and the valuation of mortgagebacked securities, NBER Working Paper Series No. 10422 University of California.
Lustig, Hanno, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2005, Housing collateral, consumption insurance, and risk premia: An empirical perspective, Journal of Finance 60, 1167–1219.
, 2010, How much does household collateral constrain regional risk sharing?, Review
of Economic Dynamics 13, 265–294.
Lynch, Anthony W., 1996, Decision frequency and synchronization across agents: Implications for aggregate consumption and the equity premium, Journal of Finance 51, 1479–
1498.
Mayer, Christopher J., Tomasz Piskorski, and Alexei Tchistyi, 2010, The ineﬃciency of
reﬁnancing: Why prepayment penalties are good for risky borrowers, NBER Working
Paper Series No. 16586 Columbia University.
Meghir, Costas, and Luigi Pistaferri, 2004, Income variance dynamics and heterogeneity,
Econometrica 72, 1–32.
Mian, Atif R., Kamaleshand Rao, and Amir Suﬁ, 2013, Household balance sheets, consumption, and the economic slump, Chicago Booth Working Paper.

72

Mian, Atif R., and Amir Suﬁ, 2010, House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the
U.S. Household Leverage Crisis, American Economic Review, forthcoming, avaliable at
http://ideas.repec.org/p/nbr/nberwo/15283.html.
Midrigan, Virgiliu, and Thomas Philippon, 2011, Household leverage and the recession,
Working Paper 16965 National Bureau of Economic Research.
Parker, Jonathan A., and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, 2009, Who bears aggregate ﬂuctuations and how?, American Economic Review 99, 399–405.
Piazzesi, Monika, and Martin Schneider, 2009, Inﬂation and the price of real
assets, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staﬀ Report 423, available at
http://ideas.repec.org/p/ﬁp/fedmsr/423.html.
, and Selale Tuzel, 2007, Housing, consumption and asset pricing, Journal of Financial Economics 83, 531–569.
Rios-Rull, Jose-Victor, and Virginia Sanchez-Marcos, 2008, An aggregate economy with
diﬀerent size houses, Journal of the European Economic Association 6, 705–714.
Roussanov, Nikolai, 2010, Diversiﬁcation and its discontents: Idiosyncratic and entrepreneurial risk in the quest for social status, Journal of Finance 65, 1755–1788.
Saiz, Albert, 2010, The geographic determinants of housing supply, The Quarterly Journal
of Economics 125, 1253–1296.
Sinai, Todd, and Nicholas S. Souleles, 2005, Owner-occupied housing as a hedge against rent
risk, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 763–789.
Smith, A A, Jr, 1993, Estimating nonlinear time-series models using simulated vector autoregressions, Journal of Applied Econometrics 8, S63–84.
Stanton, Richard, 1995, Rational prepayment and the valuation of mortgage-backed securities, Review of Financial Studies 8, 677–708.
Storesletten, Kjetil, Chris Telmer, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Cyclical dynamics in idiosyncratic
labor market risk, Journal of Political Economy 112, 695–717.
, 2007, Asset pricing with idiosyncratic risk and overlapping generations, Review of
Economic Dynamics 10, 519–548.
Tauchen, George, and Robert Hussey, 1991, Quadrature based methods for obtaining approximate solutions to nonlinear asset pricing models, Econometrica 59, 371–396.
Telyukova, Irina A., 2013, Household need for liquidity and the credit card debt puzzle,
Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Vissing-Jørgensen, Annette, 2002, Limited stock market participation and the elasticity of
intertemporal substitution, Journal of Political Economy 110, 825–853.
73

, 2007, Household ﬁnance: The liability side, Focus Session Introduction, Gerzensee
European Summer Symposium on Financial Markets.
, and Orazio P. Attanasio, 2003, Stock-market participation, intertemporal substitution, and risk-aversion, American Economic Review 93, 383–391.
Wachter, Jessica A., and Motohiro Yogo, 2010, Why do household portfolio shares rise in
wealth?, Review of Financial Studies 23, 3929–3965.
Weil, Philippe, 1990, Non-expected utility in macroeconomics, Quarterly Journal of Economics 105, 29–42.
Woodward, Susan E., and Robert E. Hall, 2010, Consumer confusion in the mortgage market:
Evidence of less than a perfectly transparent and competitive market, American Economic
Review 100, 511–15.

74

