                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               DO MANAGERS DO GOOD WITH OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY?

                                           Ing-Haw Cheng
                                            Harrison Hong
                                             Kelly Shue

                                        Working Paper 19432
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19432


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2013




Hong acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation through grant SES-0850404.
Wethank Jeremy Stein, Vicente Cuñat, Uday Rajan, E. Han Kim, Amy Dittmar, Nadja Guenster
and seminarparticipants at the Swedish Institute for Financial Research, St. Gallen, the Berkeley-
ECGI Conferenceon CSR, U of Texas at Dallas, 2013 Meetings of the American Finance Association,
2013 UC Davis-CalPERSSustainability Symposium and Gamma Foundation Conference for helpful
comments. Online appendixavailable at http://www.dartmouth.edu/~icheng/. The views expressed
herein are those of the authorsand do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Ing-Haw Cheng, Harrison Hong, and Kelly Shue. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Managers Do Good with Other People's Money?
Ing-Haw Cheng, Harrison Hong, and Kelly Shue
NBER Working Paper No. 19432
September 2013
JEL No. D03,G02,G10,G3,G39

                                         ABSTRACT

We find support for two key predictions of an agency theory of unproductive corporate social
responsibility. First, increasing managerial ownership decreases measures of firm goodness. We
use the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut to increase after-tax insider ownership. Firms with moderate levels
of insider ownership cut goodness by more than firms with low levels (where the tax cut has no
effect) and high levels (where agency is less of an issue). Second, increasing monitoring reduces
corporate goodness. A regression discontinuity design of close votes around the 50% cut-off finds
that passage of shareholder governance proposals leads to slower growth in goodness.


Ing-Haw Cheng                                   Kelly Shue
100 Tuck Hall                                   University of Chicago
Tuck School of Business                         Booth School of Business
Dartmouth College                               5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Hanover, NH 03755                               Chicago, IL 60637
ing-haw.cheng@tuck.dartmouth.edu                kelly.shue@chicagobooth.edu

Harrison Hong
Department of Economics
Princeton University
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
hhong@princeton.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19432
1.      Introduction
Milton Friedman (1970), in a biting op-ed for the New York Times, declared that the only social
responsibility of corporations is to make money. His view regarding spending on corporate
social responsibility (CSR) is one of agency problems, managerial perks and pet projects. In
other words, managers are doing good with other people’s money. A contrasting popular
view of the business case for corporate goodness is that firms do well by doing good. Firm
goodness spending generates a halo effect that increases firm profits and insulates firms from
risks associated with litigation or regulation.1
     Despite the many papers that have been written on this topic, it is difficult to draw causal
conclusions regarding the motives for corporate goodness spending because of a lack of a clear
identification strategy. Notably, the large literature on “doing well by doing good” explores
the correlation between firm performance and CSR and concludes in favor of the profit thesis.
Evidence from experiments and field studies also suggest that there are potential halo effects
from being charitable or good (see, e.g., Elfenbein, Fisman, and McManus, 2012; List, 2006).
However, altruistic managers may invest in CSR to protect stakeholders such as employees or
the broader community, in ways that do not directly contribute to shareholder wealth. As
Tirole (2001) points out, a stakeholder instead of shareholder maximization paradigm can very
quickly lead to mission creep and agency perils.
     Indeed, recent research on the thesis of doing well by doing good finds that market reactions
to increased goodness announcements are mixed, consistent with the idea that some forms of
goodness may be value destroying (Kruger, 2013). Even more troubling, using financial shocks
such as the bursting of the Internet bubble and the credit crisis of 2007, Hong, Kubik, and
Scheinkman (2011) show that the correlation between performance and goodness is related to
omitted variables bias in the form of heterogeneity in firm financial constraints.
   1
     The thesis of “doing well by doing good” has long been advanced in the management literature and is reviewed
in Benabou and Tirole (2010) and Heal (2005). A number of theories implicitly rely on the idea that firms are
well-positioned to deliver warm-glow feelings (Becker, 1974; Andreoni, 1989) to consumers. For instance, Besley
and Ghatak (2005) models strategic complementarities involving goodness in the production function. Baron
(2001) models strategic deterrence of regulation through the use of corporate goodness. Goodness may also pay
by improving employee efficiency, reducing conflicts among stakeholders, mitigating litigation risk, deterring
potential regulation, signaling product quality, and improving investor and consumer relations by preventing
product or capital market boycotts by socially responsible consumers or investors.




                                                       1
       Yet, the stakes in this debate have never been higher. Anecdotal evidence suggests that
some firms, especially large corporations, invest hundreds of millions of dollars annually on
energy conservation projects, employee and community development programs, or other al-
truistic endeavors.2 Many institutional investors are increasingly adopting socially responsible
factors, also known as “environmental, social and governance” (ESG) factors, in their portfolio
choices. For example, the United Nations Principles of Responsible Investing (UNPRI) has
institutions that manage around 1.5 trillion dollars globally as signatories. The ESG movement
tends to make the argument for socially responsible investing on the basis of a combination of
the business case for corporate goodness and moral principles.
       In this paper, we provide a first attempt to identify whether there is an agency motive for
CSR. Namely, we test the two key predictions of an agency theory in which managers engage in
unproductive CSR as a way to enjoy private benefits. These two key predictions typically emerge
from most variants of agency models in which low managerial ownership stakes and imperfect
monitoring lead to managers who maximize a combination of private benefits and firm profits.
Our novel perspective here is that agency problems need not simply manifest themselves as
managerial selfish perks, as has traditionally been framed since Jensen and Meckling (1976),
but also as managerial altruism or social preferences (see, e.g., Fehr and Schimdt, 1999; Charness
and Rabin, 2002).
       The first and most basic prediction is that increasing the ownership stakes of a manager
leads to a reduction in firm goodness. Since managerial ownership stakes regulate the degree of
agency conflicts between the manager and shareholders, these models predict that larger stakes
lead to less of an agency conflict and lower unproductive CSR spending. The second prediction
is that an increase in monitoring leads to less firm goodness. Monitoring is costly and is a
substitute for larger managerial ownership stakes, so increasing monitoring through improved
governance yields the same comparative statics as increasing managerial stakes.
       We measure corporate social responsibility using the most comprehensive scores in the
literature, the Kinder, Lydenberg and Domini (KLD) scores of CSR. KLD scores are developed
   2
    Hong, Kubik, and Scheinkman (2011) provide some figures, including $100 million for global education
programs and energy conservation by Intel, $160 million to community and employee philanthropic programs
and earmarked billions more for the development of eco-friendly products by General Electric, and Google’s 1%
program to invest 1% of its profits in philanthropic and non-profit interests. In addition, firms may switch to
greener and more costly production processes or voluntarily choose to pay living wages to employees.


                                                      2
by a for-profit company, akin to a credit rating agency. The scores measure firm-level social
responsibility along the lines of community relations, product characteristics, environmental
impact, employee relations, and diversity.3 KLD scans public databases, such as those on
employee strikes and Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) violations, and uses a team of
analysts to measure these and other social responsibility dimensions of firm production. We
explain in Section 4 why these scores are a reasonable, albeit imperfect, proxy for socially
responsible expenditures. We also show that KLD scores are correlated with firm donation
dollars but offer a more informative measure of corporate goodness. Admittedly, we are not
trying to break new ground in this paper in terms of measuring CSR. Our analysis uses KLD
scores as the left-hand side dependent variable as opposed to a right-hand side control variable,
as has predominantly been the case in the literature. Therefore, noisiness in our left-hand side
variable will raise standard errors but should not bias our estimates.
      Where we try to break new ground in the CSR literature is to more cleanly identify a motive
for CSR. To test our first prediction, we expand on Chetty and Saez (2005) and Chetty and
Saez (2010), who argue that the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Act of 2003 (commonly known
as the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut) raised the effective ownership stakes of managers and insiders
by cutting the highest statutory dividend tax rate from 35% to 15%. The 2003 Dividend Tax
Cut was largely unanticipated and led to a surge in dividend payouts, which they argue was a
result of insiders substituting away from perk projects towards dividends after their effective
ownership stakes increased. Consistent with their agency perspective, evidence from Poterba
(2004), Auerbach and Hassett (2006) and Auerbach and Hassett (2007) point to higher equity
prices as a result of the tax cut.
      Our work also helps fill a gap in the existing 2003 Dividend Tax Cut literature: lack of
direct evidence of cuts in perk spending along with the rise in dividend payouts. Given the
debate over whether the higher dividend payouts were due to firms simply substituting from
share repurchases to dividends, evidence on cuts in perk spending during the post-2003 years
would be extremely informative. By examining how the tax cut affected firm goodness, we shed
light on a motive behind CSR and also shed light on whether agency was a force in the rise in
  3
    Beginning in 2010, KLD scores were re-tooled into what are now known as MSCI ESG scores, after MSCI
acquired RiskMetrics in 2009.



                                                  3
dividends post-2003. It is important to highlight that our analysis does not test whether all or
average CSR is unproductive. Instead, we test whether the the extra marginal dollar spent on
CSR is a form of perk spending by exploring how KLD scores change following the tax cut.
   To identify the effect of the tax cut on CSR, we test a canonical agency model that predicts
that the sensitivity of firm perk spending to the dividend tax cut should be a non-monotonic
function of pre-tax insider ownership levels. In general, the dividend tax cut increases the effec-
tive ownership stake of management because each share’s claim to after-tax profits increases.
If the marginal dollar spent on goodness is unproductive and the result of agency conflicts,
then the tax cut should lead to an average decline in any unproductive goodness. However, the
dividend tax cut has a very small effect on effective managerial ownership if ex-ante managerial
share ownership is very low. When managers own close to zero percent of the firm, even a
large dividend tax cut will not change their incentives. At the same time, managers with very
high levels of ownership are likely to have incentives that are already closely aligned with those
of shareholders. These high ownership managers spend very little on inefficient goodness to
begin with, so there is little scope to cut agency-motivated goodness following a dividend tax
cut. Hence, the model predicts that managers with intermediate firm ownership stakes should
respond more to a dividend tax cut than managers with very low or very high ownership stakes.
   Consistent with this prediction, we find that firms’ goodness scores fell on average after
the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut, and that the scores of medium insider ownership firms fell by
relatively more. We employ a differences-in-differences methodology that flexibly allows for the
effect of the tax cut to vary through time in order to capture its long-run dynamic effects. We
split firms into ownership terciles based on 2001 and 2002 executive ownership data. From
2003 through 2004, average goodness among the medium ownership firms fell more compared
to both high and low ownership firms. Relative to low ownership firms, medium ownership
firms’ goodness scores fell more by 0.14-standard deviations of their 2002 distribution. Relative
to high ownership firms, medium ownership firms’ goodness scores fell more by 0.22-standard
deviations. These effects are statistically significant at the 10% and 1% levels, respectively. By
the end of 2006, the difference-in-difference with high ownership firms widens to 0.29-standard
deviations, although the difference-in-difference with low ownership firms attenuates to 0.10-
standard deviations.


                                                4
   The non-monotonicity with respect to ex-ante managerial ownership is central to the identi-
fication strategy of the first prediction. It rules out that our findings are driven by (1) changes
in firm goodness around the tax cut that are common across all firms, and (2) changes in corpo-
rate goodness around the tax cut that are monotonic with respect to insider ownership or other
correlated variables. The only alternative time pattern that we cannot rule out would have to
separately affect changes in goodness scores of medium as opposed to low and high ownership
firms specifically at the time of the tax cut. However, one may be concerned that the stronger
response among medium ownership firms is spuriously generated through the functional form
of a linear regression using a lucky grouping of tercile breakpoints. To address this concern, we
consider a number of additional analyses, including fitting non-parametric local polynomials
to better capture the shape of the response. Overall, we find robust evidence in favor of this
non-monotonicity.
   To test the second prediction that improved monitoring leads to a decline in unproductive
CSR, we exploit a regression discontinuity (RD) experiment using close proxy contests regard-
ing shareholder-initiated governance proposals. The identifying assumption is that close votes
around the 50 percent cut-off are random in terms of whether a governance proposal is passed
and represent plausibly exogenous shocks to the monitoring of managers. We build on earlier
work, which finds that, while shareholder proposals are non-binding, close votes around the 50%
cut-off lead to discontinuously substantial changes in the implementation of governance propos-
als (Ertimur, Ferri, and Stubben, 2010; Thomas and Cotter, 2007). Our analysis builds most
closely on Cuñat, Gine, and Guadalupe (2010), which uses a vote share RD approach to show
that passage of shareholder proposals increase firm value. Cuñat, Gine, and Guadalupe (2010)
also shows that the passage of shareholder proposals can improve governance through channels
other than through changes in governance provisions, such as by empowering shareholders.
   We find that firms in which shareholder proposals narrowly pass experience significantly
slower growth in goodness scores than firms in which the proposals narrowly fail. Indeed,
the economic magnitudes are sizeable. We find that firms that just failed to pass proposals
experienced greater annual growth of KLD scores in the year of the vote than those that just-
passed: the difference in the change in KLD scores is around 0.6. This difference in growth
rates for firms around the cut-off is one-third of a standard deviation of the dependent variable,


                                                5
an effect that is statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
       Overall, improvements in managerial incentives and governance lead to a reduction in firm
goodness, implying that the marginal dollar spent on goodness is a result of agency problems.
We emphasize that our results apply to marginal rather than average goodness spending. Some
goodness may be productivity-enhancing, but on the margin, managers over-invest in goodness
due to agency problems, and, as a result, reduce goodness in response to shocks that make
them care more about shareholder wealth.



2.        Model
We consider the following stylized two-period agency model following Chetty and Saez (2010).
The manager can decide how to spend the firm’s cash Γ at t = 0: invest K in a productive
project that yields f (K) net profits for shareholders at t = 1, invest G in a corporate goodness
project that gives the manager private benefits of g(G) at t = 1, or pay out dividend D at
t = 0. We assume that f and g are positive, strictly increasing and concave functions, with
f (0) = g(0) = 0.4 The function g is a reduced form that captures any managerial private
benefits generated by G.
       We are interested in whether any observed changes in goodness in response to the Dividend
Tax Cut and shareholder voting are consistent with the model’s predicted response of G, and
for brevity refer to G as goodness spending going forward. It is worth noting at the outset
that we allow for productive goodness spending to be included in K, whereas G captures any
unproductive goodness spending. If managers adjust measures of total goodness in response to
shocks such as the Dividend Tax Cut or the passage of shareholder proposals in a manner con-
sistent with the model’s comparative statics about G, then managers had invested in goodness
to the point where marginal goodness spending was unproductive.
       The fraction of insider ownership is denoted by α and is treated as an exogenous parameter.
The manager’s ownership stake represents his claim to a fraction of the payouts from the firm,
   4
    We follow the convention of Chetty and Saez (2010) in writing the model in terms of net profits and in
assuming that the manager returns the capital G used for investment in private benefits during period 1. The
results thus do not depend on the capital G being burned up, although one may also assume that it is without
changing any predictions. Details of the model are discussed in the Online Appendix.



                                                     6
which is reduced by the dividend tax rate τ .5 We also assume that shareholders monitor the firm
by increasing the manager’s weight on firm payouts relative to private benefits by an amount
η. The parameter r is the discount rate (there is no uncertainty in this model). The manager
maximizes a linear combination of after-tax payouts from production and his private benefits
from goodness spending, subject to the constraint that his spending on capital and goodness
equal his cash on hand: Γ = K + G + D. More specifically, the manager’s problem is given by:
                                                          
                                             f (K) + Γ − D     g (Γ − K − D)
                  max α (1 − τ ) (1 + η) D +                 +               .
                  K,D≥0                          1+r                1+r

       Let ω = α(1 − τ )(1 + η) denote the effective ownership stake of the manager in the firm.
It increases with the insider ownership stake (α), decreases with the dividend tax rate (τ ) and
increases with the amount of monitoring (η). Our identification strategies focus on these three
parameters. Since increasing η is the same as decreasing τ , we assume for simplicity in this
exposition that η is zero. We further assume g(G) = BG, which simplifies the intuition, and
that B < (1 − τ )r, which ensures that there are both dividend and non-dividend-paying firms
in equilibrium. In the Online Appendix, we derive the model under more general conditions.
       A decrease in the dividend tax rate τ increases the effective ownership stake ω of the
manager. A basic implication of the model is then that the dividend tax cut raises the marginal
cost of goodness spending and leads to less goodness spending: ∂G/∂τ ≥ 0. As we will discuss
shortly, the dividend tax cut leads to strictly less goodness spending among a subset of firms
where management owns a moderate amount of the shares. The average goodness spending
across the ownership distribution will thus fall after the tax cut.
       Overall, an increase in ω means that the manager makes better decisions for shareholders
and should invest less in his pet projects. This implication is verified by comparing corporate
goodness measures before and after the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut. However, this implication
consists of a single difference and is difficult to cleanly test because concurrent changes to firm
conditions (e.g., time trends or changes in other government policies or macro conditions) may
spuriously drive the relationship between the Dividend Tax Cut and the subsequent decline in
   5
    The model assumes that production and capital stock are paid out to shareholders as dividends in period
1. Our results remain similar if the firm instead pays out a fixed portion using dividends and the remainder
through share repurchases. We also assume that the corporate tax rate is zero as it will not affect our analysis.



                                                       7
corporate goodness. We state it here simply to confirm that the aggregate trend supports the
agency perspective.
   Therefore, we exploit a more nuanced prediction of the agency model. The first prediction
centers on how the extent to which managers cut goodness spending following the tax cut should
vary according to the ex ante insider ownership level α. The model predicts that managers who
have an intermediate level of ownership will cut more goodness relative to those with higher
and lower levels of ownership.
   To see why, consider the following three cases. A firm with zero insider ownership, α = 0,
invests nothing at all in productive capital (K = 0), pays no dividends in period t = 0, and
invests everything in goodness (G = Γ). The sensitivity of ω, the effective ownership stake, to
the dividend tax rate τ is proportional to α. When α is zero, managers will be very insensitive
to the tax cut and will not decrease their goodness spending.
                                                                                  B
   Medium insider ownership firms, or those with α ∈ (0, ᾱ) for ᾱ =           (1−τ )r
                                                                                        ,   do not pay
dividends in period t = 0, and have an interior solution for capital and goodness spending
given by α (1 − τ ) f 0 (K) = B and G = Γ − K > 0. They cut goodness in response to the tax
cut as it makes the after-tax marginal return on capital more attractive, and substitute this
towards productive investment K. In the extreme case where a discrete tax cut is large enough
to induce the manager to start paying dividends in period t = 0, goodness spending is reduced
to zero.
   High insider ownership firms, or those with α ∈ (ᾱ, 1], are invested the first-best level of
capital K ∗ , defined as the solution to f 0 (K ∗ ) = r. All remaining cash is paid out as dividends
in period t = 0, since the after-tax risk-free rate is higher than the return on goodness, B.
Firms with extremely high ownership stakes do not have large agency problems, so there is
little scope for reducing G relative to firms with intermediate levels of ownership, since G = 0.
   Therefore, medium ownership firms will cut goodness more than high ownership and zero
ownership managers. Under mild regularity conditions on f , we show that medium ownership
managers also cut goodness in response to a tax cut more than managers with positive yet lower
ownership levels, so that the effect is not limited to a comparison to zero ownership managers
who are at a corner solution. We also show that the prediction holds when considering a broader
class of increasing and concave functions f and g. The intuition is the same: the marginal effect


                                                 8
of the tax cut on effective ownership is proportional to share ownership, and thus is lower for
managers with lower ownership. High ownership managers have little goodness spending to
cut; therefore, medium ownership managers are the most sensitive to the tax cut. We provide
all details in the Online Appendix for the interested reader. We summarize with:

Prediction 1. In response to a dividend tax cut, medium ownership managers cut goodness G
more than low ownership managers and high ownership managers.

   We empirically test this prediction using a difference-in-differences approach comparing
the change in goodness following the Dividend Tax Cut across firms with different ex-ante
managerial ownership stakes. We exploit the non-monotonicity in the relationship between
insider ownership and how aggressively firms should cut goodness in response to the dividend
tax cut.
   When testing Prediction 1, we assume that ownership stakes α are exogenous in some short
horizon. That is, when the Dividend Tax Cut passed, the firm did not have sufficient time to
re-contract and adjust ownership levels. An additional caveat is that we ignore the possibility
that firms can repurchase shares in lieu of paying dividends. We follow Chetty and Saez (2005)
in assuming that frictions exist which lead firms to pay out at least part of their cash flows
through dividends. In practice, over three-quarters of the firms in our sample do pay dividends
and other firms may be affected by the tax cut because they anticipate paying dividends in the
future. Investigation of why firms pay dividends when an alternative payout option exists is
outside the scope of this paper.
   Our approach also provides a complementary test of the real effects of the Dividend Tax Cut
by examining whether it induced firms to alter the composition of their investments. Examining
whether total investment (K plus G) responds to the Dividend Tax Cut suffers from the fact
that total investment mixes together both productive and unproductive investments, and that
the tax cut affects these two types of investments differently. Hence, our analysis can be thought
of as an out-of-sample test for whether the rise in dividend payouts following the 2003 Dividend
Tax Cut was in fact due to a reduction in agency problems.
   A substitute for giving the manager a larger effective ownership stake is to engage in costly
monitoring, which can be modeled with a parameter η. As monitoring η increases, the manager


                                                9
puts less weight on his pet projects and more weight on profits. As such, a second prediction of
our model is that improvements in monitoring or governance of firms should reduce goodness
spending.

Prediction 2. An increase in the governance parameter η leads firms to decrease their corporate
goodness G.

     We empirically test this prediction using a regression discontinuity approach focusing on
close governance proxy votes. The RD design allows us to estimate the effect of quasi-random
changes in governance on corporate goodness.
     With these two predictions in hand, we turn to the empirical analysis. Note that this model
is highly stylized and cannot speak to the magnitude of reactions with respect to shifts in
the incentives or governance parameters. We use the model to generate qualitative directional
guidance.



3.      Data
Our study uses data from four sources. Both quasi-experiments rely on ratings of corporate
social responsibility from the Kinder, Lydenberg, Domini, & Co. (KLD) database. Both exper-
iments also use stock prices and shares outstanding from the Center for Research in Security
Prices (CRSP) and accounting variables from CompuStat. KLD’s coverage of begins in 1991;
our analysis uses KLD information from 1991 to 2012. Following Hong, Kubik, and Scheinkman
(2011), we focus on five dimensions of firm goodness documented by KLD: community activities,
diversity, employee relations, environmental policies, and the social benefits of their products.
KLD reports for each firm its number of strengths and concerns across these five dimensions.
As pointed out by Hong, Kubik, and Scheinkman (2011), principal components analysis places
roughly equal weights across these five dimensions. We therefore construct a firm’s goodness
score by aggregating the total number of CSR strengths and subtracting the total number of
CSR concerns across these five dimensions. By aggregating these scores, we show below that
this does a better job of picking up firm goodness than any of the individual measures alone,
as each individual measure can be noisy.


                                               10
       KLD also documents issues associated with human rights, corporate governance, and whether
the business itself is controversial. Most human rights scores are only available during a select
few years in the 1990’s, so we do not include them; in general, we only include scores that
have been consistently rated by KLD every year from 1991 through 2009.6 We do not include
corporate governance as this may be directly related to insider ownership, which we use to form
our portfolios. Whether the business or industry is controversial is a firm fixed effect and thus
not applicable to our analysis which focuses on changes in goodness over time.
       For the quasi-experiment using the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut, we use data on top-five total
executive share ownership from S&P’s ExecuComp database, with dividend data from the
CRSP Monthly File (aggregated to an annual frequency) and other firm variables from CRSP
and CompuStat. To be included in our sample, a firm must be in the S&P 500 in the year
2001 or 2002 and have inside share ownership data from ExecuComp. We focus on S&P
500 firms as KLD began a staggered expansion of their sample universe in 2001, which had
previously included the S&P 500 and Domini 400 Social index constituents (which overlapped
significantly), and we do not wish to introduce this selection issue into our analysis. All together,
we have 503 firms, which is slightly more than 500 because of turnover in the S&P 500 index.
       For the quasi-experiment involving close governance votes, our data on proxy contests for
governance proposals comes from Riskmetrics, which covers all shareholder-initiated proposals
at S&P 1500 firms from 1997 to 2011. The data includes detailed voting records for 5,262
governance-related proposals in areas such as anti-takeovers measures, compensation oversight,
board structure, and auditing. Riskmetrics provides data on the type of proposal, the share-
holder proponent, the recommendation of the board of directors, and the percentage of votes
in favor of the proposal.7
   6
    KLD changed their ratings methodology significantly beginning in 2010. We deal with this in Section 6.
   7
    The Riskmetrics Shareholder Proposals dataset contains information on the number of votes in favor for
each proposal as a percentage of all votes for and against (excluding abstentions and broker-nonvotes), rounded
to the nearest percentage point. Because we are interested in votes very close to the 50 percent cutoff and
would benefit from more precise vote share data, we supplement our main data with more detailed information
about the exact number of votes for, against, and abstained using two additional data sources also provided by
Riskmetrics: Voting Analytics and Voting Results.




                                                      11
4.     Measuring Corporate Goodness
We begin our empirical analysis by stating the advantages and disadvantages of our left-hand
side variable, the KLD score, as a measure of firm goodness. The disadvantage is that, like
most ratings produced by commercial firms, there is a black-box aspect to the KLD score.
Ideally, one would like to have data on dollar amounts spent on corporate social responsibility.
Direct donations are one obvious measure, but these amounts can be small in comparison to
expenditures on cleaner production technologies or employee benefits and living wages. For
example, Google announced a plan to spend 1% of its profits on the development of socially
responsible products. This 1% figure for Google dwarfs the direct donations numbers for Google
and other firms.
     There is mounting evidence in the literature that the equal-weighted KLD scores are indeed
informative of corporate social responsibility. First, Chatterji, Levine, and Toffel (2009) find
that KLD scores capture the past environmental performance of firms and also forecast the
future environmental performance of these firms reasonably well. Environmental performance
is the most straightforward of the categories to cross-validate, as the authors can reference
EPA fines and whether a firm is mentioned on hazardous waste lists. It is more difficult for
researchers to independently validate other dimensions of social performance, and this is what
KLD was designed to do.
     Second, we provide some anecdotal evidence for the timeliness of KLD scores in picking up
the social responsibility of firms. In Figure 1, we plot the KLD scores for Apple and Google
through time. We also plot the equal-weighted KLD scores for firms in the S&P 500. First,
consider Apple. Apple is rated as one of the most socially responsible firms from 1991-1994. It
scores range from a high of 6 to a low of 4 during this period. The average S&P 500 score during
this period is between zero and 1. However, in 1996, Apple’s KLD score falls dramatically to
1 and remains substantially lower than its previous average for most of the remaining sample.
The drop coincides with Steve Jobs returning as CEO and taking control of Apple in 1996. The
company was also nearing bankruptcy during this period. Steve Jobs famously decided to cut
all of Apple’s corporate social responsibility programs. He subscribed to the view that the only
responsibility of a corporation is to make and sell great products for society, and presumably


                                               12
earn its shareholders a lot of money in the process (Greenfield, 2011).
      Google went public in 2004, and its first score is 1. But there is a jump in scores in
subsequent years, as Google announced its 1% profit-for-social responsibility program soon
after going public (Strom and Helft, 2011). The mantra of Google’s founders is “don’t be evil,”
and Google’s KLD scores seem to be correlated with both the public image and programs that
Google promote. The important take-away from both of these cases is that the KLD scores
reflect not only the differences between these two companies, but also changes in firm goodness
over time.
      Third, in analysis which we omit for brevity, we gather donation data from the Chronicles
of Philanthropy for approximately 100 large firms each year, chosen from Fortune magazine’s
list of top revenue-producing firms in the US. The sample covers 2000-2011. Donations data
covers cash donations as well as product donations (e.g., donating drugs if the company is
in the pharmaceutical industry). We find, for this limited sample, that equal-weighted KLD
scores predict donations well in annual levels. The median firm in our sample donates around
30-40 million dollars a year. A regression of the logarithm of donations on KLD scores yields a
coefficient of 0.0728 with a statistical significance level of around 5%. Firm-level annual changes
in KLD scores are also positively correlated with annual changes in giving, but this relationship
is weaker and insignificantly different from zero. The examples of Apple and Google above
illustrate that KLD scores can change quite dramatically when there are changes in management
or investment strategy and suggest that KLD scores capture more timely variation in overall
firm CSR behavior than do donations dollars alone.8
      Fourth, KLD scores are widely used by socially responsible investment (SRI) funds to screen
out irresponsible companies from their indexes. SRI funds typically own stocks with the highest
KLD scores within an industry. Additionally, Hong and Kostovetsky (2012) find that money
managers of non-SRI funds who have, on net, contributed towards Democratic candidates in
elections, and whose political values are thus likely to favor social responsibility, tilt their
portfolios toward firms with the highest KLD scores within industries. In follow-up work,
DiGiuli and Kostovetsky (2011) find that firms with Democratic CEOs are also more likely
  8
    Indeed, Card, Hallock, and Moretti (2010) point to donations by company employees as being more impor-
tant than donations by the corporations themselves.



                                                   13
to have higher KLD scores. In sum, KLD scores, while imperfect, are correlated with and
informative about corporate social responsibility.



5.     Prediction 1: The 2003 Dividend Tax Cut and CSR
To test Prediction 1, we compare changes in corporate goodness scores before and after the
2003 Dividend Tax Cut across portfolios of firms with different tiers of managerial ownership.
We focus on firms in the S&P 500 in 2001 and 2002, just before the tax cut was enacted in
2003. In both 2001 and 2002, we compute the fractional insider share ownership for the top
five executives and take an average over both years in order to smooth temporal irregularities.
     Following Chetty and Saez (2005), we focus on share holdings rather than option holdings
for a few reasons. First, most options are not dividend protected, so that the effect of the
Dividend Tax Cut is ambiguous (Lambert, Lanen, and Larcker, 1989). Second, firms grant
options rather than shares for a host of reasons other than to improve managerial incentives,
including tax treatment, strategic management of financial constraints and even accounting
manipulation. The manipulation motive is especially pronounced during the early 2000’s when
we measure insider ownership in light of the number of options-related scandals during this
period. A number of papers show that, during the period of 1996-2002, firms which granted
large amounts of options were more likely to engage in back-dating by retroactively granting
options when the firm’s stock price was at a temporary low and before a sharp reversal (e.g.,
Lie, 2005). Hence, option grants may not predict better alignment between managers and
shareholders in the same way as insider ownership stakes of shares.
     Table 1 provides summary statistics for our firms. In Panel A, for the ranking period of
2001-2002, we report summary statistics for firms by low, medium and high ownership portfolios
based on tercile breakpoints. The median fractional ownership in each portfolio is 0.001, 0.003
and 0.021, with tercile breakpoints of 0.002 and 0.006 dividing a distribution that reaches a
maximum of 0.297. Unconditionally, the median fractional ownership stake was 0.3%, which
translates to $27.8M in dollar ownership.
     Panel B reports statistics on goodness scores for the pre-period of 1999-2002, while Panel
C reports the analogous statistics for the post-period of 2003-2006. Prior to the Dividend Tax


                                               14
Cut, there were dividend increases or initiations in 11.7% of firm-years from 1999 through 2002.
After the Dividend Tax Cut in 2003 through 2006, this fraction was 21.1%. In other words,
firms significantly increased dividends after the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut, consistent with Chetty
and Saez (2005).9
       Turning to firm goodness scores, we find strong empirical support for the basic implication
of our agency model: a dividend tax cut should lead to a decline in goodness. The goodness
score, defined as total strengths minus concerns, significantly drops on average after the 2003
Dividend Tax Cut. The mean score is 0.657 in the pre-period and is 0.333 in the post-period,
which represents a drop of 14% of one standard deviation in pre-period goodness scores. Firm
goodness decreased in 24% of firm-years in the pre-period compared to 31% in the post period.
In other words, the decline in goodness was spread across many firms.
       To address the possible endogeneity of concurrent changes or time trends driving this de-
crease in goodness, we use a difference-in-differences approach to test Prediction 1, that the
magnitude of the change in goodness in response to the Dividend Tax Cut should be largest for
firms with intermediate levels of managerial ownership and smaller for firms with low or high
levels of managerial ownership.
       Figure 2 plots the time series of goodness scores from 1999 through 2006 for the three
portfolios sorted by managerial ownership. The figure reveals that from 1999 to 2002, medium-
ownership firms had goodness scores similar to those of low and high-ownership firms, with
slightly higher scores in the 2000-2002 period. From 2003 onwards, that gap narrows substan-
tially, which suggests there may be an effect from the tax cut. However, the figure itself is
inconclusive for two reasons. First, unobserved heterogeneity correlated with insider ownership
such as size may be driving the changes rather than insider ownership itself. Second, there are
time trends in the data, with goodness scores declining for all groups throughout this period.
       We use regression analysis to tease out any effects more formally. In order to allow our
estimates to capture long-run changes in goodness, we form an annual panel of firm goodness
scores from four years prior to the tax cut to four years after the tax cut, including the year
of the tax cut itself: 1999-2006. We allow for the effect of the tax cut to vary each year and
   9
    Our dividend increase and initiation definitions follow that of Chetty and Saez (2005). For four firm-years
observations with KLD scores, there was insufficient data to assess whether the firms increased dividends.



                                                      15
examine whether the cumulative effect of the tax cut for low and high ownership firms differs
systematically from that of medium ownership firms. We estimate the following specification
via OLS:

                                    X                            X                     
 goodnessit = αi + βt +                      γs LowOwni × 1{t=s} +   δs HighOwni × 1{t=s}                    (1)
                                   s6=2002                            s6=2002
                         X                                X                        
                    +             ξs LowM ktCapi × 1{t=s} +   λs HighM ktcapi × 1{t=s} + uit ,
                        s6=2002                                  s6=2002


where αi are a series of firm fixed effects, βt are a series of year effects, LowOwni (HighOwni )
is an indicator for whether firm i is in the low (high) ownership tercile j during 2001-2002,
LowM ktCapi (HighM ktCapi ) is an indicator for whether firm i is in the low (high) market
capitalization tercile j during 2001-2002, and 1{t=s} represent indicators for whether year t
equals s. We allow for the effect of the tax cut to vary heterogeneously through time by the
market capitalization tercile of the firm since it is well-known that fractional insider ownership
is negatively correlated with firm size. Flexible controls for firm size also help to soak up any
potential variation associated with firms of different sizes attracting more or less scrutiny from
investors in response to the tax cut. We take tercile 2 (medium) as the omitted reference tercile
for both ownership and market capitalization. We take 2002, the year before the tax cut, as
the omitted reference year (i.e., there is no β2002 term). Note that the level effects for the
ownership and market capitalization are subsumed into the firm fixed effects. Firm fixed effects
also control for any time-invariant industry or firm characteristics across firms.10
    The coefficients {βt } represent the difference in goodness measured at the end of year t
relative to goodness measured at the end of 2002, the year just prior to the tax cut, for medium
ownership firms (who are also in the medium market capitalization tercile). The coefficients
{γt } represent the differences-in-differences of goodness at the end of year t minus goodness at
the end of 2002 for low ownership firms minus medium ownership firms. Finally, the coefficients
{δt } represent the differences-in-differences of goodness at the end of year t minus goodness at
the end of 2002 for high ownership firms minus medium ownership firms.
    The model predicts that γt > 0 and δt > 0 for t ≥ 2003. We can examine the assumption of
  10
     Our specification is similar to that used in the literature evaluating the effect of job displacement or job
training programs on earnings, for example in Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (1994).


                                                        16
no pre-trend differences by testing whether γt = δt = 0 for t < 2002. We cluster standard errors
by firm, which allows for heteroskedasticity across firms and within-firm serial correlation in
uit .
        The first set of columns in Table 2 presents the results of this regression. We find strong
empirical support for Prediction 1 of our agency model. Although the immediate change in
goodness in 2003 is muted, the differences become larger through time. Medium ownership firms
see scores fall throughout the tax cut period, as evidenced by the negative βt coefficients after
the tax cut. More importantly, this decrease in goodness is γ2004 = 0.32 more than the decrease
in goodness for low ownership firms, a difference-in-difference that is statistically significant at
the 10% level and represents a 0.14-standard deviation decrease in medium ownership firms’
2002 KLD scores.11 High ownership firms cut δ2004 = 0.49 goodness points less (0.22-standard
deviations) over this period, an effect statistically significant at the 1% level.
        These effects are largely persistent. The difference-in-difference for low ownership firms mi-
nus medium ownership firms from the end of 2002 through the end of 2006 remains positive, with
γ2006 = 0.23, or 0.10-standard deviations. Over this same period, the difference-in-difference for
high ownership firms minus medium ownership firms is δ2006 = 0.64, or 0.29-standard deviations,
which is statistically significant at the 1% level.
        Table 2 also shows that there were few significantdifferences between the firms prior to the
tax cut. The γt and δt coefficients are insignificant before 2002. These results are highlighted
in Figure 3, which plots the sequence of γt and δt coefficients, scaled by the standard deviation
of KLD scores among medium ownership firms in 2002, through time along with their 95%
confidence bands. In general, there are few differences across the ownership terciles before the
tax cut. To summarize, corporate goodness declines on average following the Dividend Tax
Cut, but goodness declines the most among medium ownership firms.


5.1.        Robustness

An alternative explanation for this pattern would need to explain both the divergence of medium
ownership firms’ goodness scores from high and low ownership firms, as well as the fact that
  11
    We compute economic significance throughout this section by scaling coefficients by the cross-sectional
standard deviation of KLD scores among medium ownership firms in 2002, which is 2.22.


                                                    17
this divergence appears during the time of the tax cut. The non-monotonicity of the predicted
effect is particularly helpful in identifying the effects of the model, as a monotonic pattern in
which higher ownership firms always cut more would be easier to rationalize with alternative
time trend stories or with an omitted variable correlated with ownership.
   However, non-linearities may appear spuriously due to the functional form of equation (1).
Furthermore, the unobservability of the functional form of the manager’s utility function makes
it difficult to pin down exactly where non-linearities with respect to ex-ante managerial own-
ership should occur. As such, we consider a number of additional analyses to verify that this
non-linear response: 1) is not specific to our use of tercile groupings, 2) holds non-parametrically
across the distribution of ownership, 3) survives placebo tests, and that 4) our standard errors
are appropriately sized to measure the probability of a Type I error.
   First, the second set of columns in Table 2 examines whether our results hold across an
expanded set of quintile ownership portfolios rather than terciles. If our model’s prediction
holds in the data, we should see even larger effects when comparing medium ownership firms
to high and low ownership firms at further extremes. To test this, we first form portfolios
based on quintiles of ownership, and then modify equation (1) so that the quintile 3 represents
the medium ownership portfolio, quintile 1 (the lowest) represents the low ownership portfolio,
and quintile 5 (the highest) represents the high ownership portfolio. We then add a full set
of interactions between year effects and indicators for portfolio 2 and portfolio 4, although we
omit reporting these effects for brevity. The differences-in-differences between low and medium
ownership firms from 2002 through 2004 and 2005 were γ2004 = 0.43 and γ2005 = 0.49, or 0.19 and
0.22 standard deviations, respectively, and are significant at the 10% level. The effects between
high and medium ownership were even larger, cumulating to a total difference-in-difference of
δ2006 = 0.77, or 0.35-standard deviations, from 2002 through 2006.
   Second, we check that our results hold non-parametrically by fitting the relationship between
changes in KLD and the percentile ranking of a firm’s ex-ante managerial ownership using local
polynomial regression techniques (see Fan and Gijbels, 1996 for background and an extensive
review). Figure 4 plots, for each year t, the fitted relationship between the change in KLD
from 2002 to t against the percentile ranking of ownership for each firm in our sample. Local
polynomial smoothers involve many choices by the econometrician in terms of the kernel used,


                                                18
its bandwidth, and the order of the polynomial, that trade off bias in the estimated conditional
expectation with its variance. We plot results for four sets of choices, starting with the baseline
of a local linear regression with an Epanechnikov kernel set at the data-driven “rule-of-thumb”
(ROT) optimal constant bandwidth outlined in Fan and Gijbels (1996, Section 4.2).12
       Overall, the plots show that, from 2003 onwards, a substantial U-shape develops in the
previously-flat distribution of the change in KLD scores over the baseline year of 2002. An
analysis that first residualizes changes in KLD scores and ownership percentiles against size
deciles in a semi-parametric version of equation (1) also reveals a U-shape.
       Third, we scramble the tax cut year but maintain the same ownership portfolio assignment
methodology, with the idea that we should only observe results in 2003. We estimate equation
(1) assuming counterfactual “placebo tax cuts” in every year before 2003. In general, because
our goodness scores go back to 1991 and we examine the evolution of goodness across four-
year pre- and post-periods, we are able estimate equation (1) assuming different counterfactual
tax cut years beginning with 1995. For each one of these counterfactual experiments, we form
ownership portfolios by averaging fractional ownership in the two years before the counterfactual
tax cut year and estimate equation (1). Table 3 reports these results. We find no effects for
any placebo tax cut year before 2003.
       Fourth, we scramble our ownership portfolio assignment (within true tax cut year of 2003)
to assess the likelihood that random portfolio assignment among the firms in our sample would
have generated our results. If our standard errors are properly constructed, random portfolio
assignment should only lead to rejections of the null hypothesis at the 5% confidence level
with probability 0.05. However, Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004) find evidence that
serial correlation leads to excessive Type I errors relative to the prescribed size of the test in
difference-in-differences estimates when using traditional OLS standard errors. One solution
recommended to handle this size distortion is the use of clustered standard errors. We follow
their paper to check for whether there is any evidence of a size distortion in our tests of γt 6= 0
and δt 6= 0 by estimating equation (1) with 10,000 bootstrapped samples where portfolios
  12
    The optimal bandwidth is determined for each year t. We also check our results using bandwidths of 75%
and 125% of the optimal bandwidth. Fan, Gasser, Gijbels, Brockmann, and Engel (1997) show the optimality
of the Epanechnikov kernel, although we have also checked our results using Gaussian and biweight kernels.
Finally, we check our results using a local cubic regression with constant ROT bandwidth. Fan and Gijbels
(1995) and Ruppert and Wand (1994) show that it is optimal to use odd-ordered polynomials.


                                                   19
of ownership are randomly assigned. We form 10,000 random samples by drawing random
vectors of firm goodness scores, with replacement, from our observed sample, where one vector
represents observed goodness scores for one firm through time. For each random sample, 503
such vectors are drawn, which corresponds with the sample size of our main analysis. We then
randomly assign ownership portfolios among these vectors, estimate equation (1), and tabulate
the fraction of rejections at the 5% significance level for each coefficient for our 10000 random
samples. Table 4, Panel A reports the results. We find that our actual rejection rates are
very close to 5% and conclude that random portfolio assignment would have rejected the null
hypothesis at the 5% confidence level only 5% of the time.13
       Panel B performs a second robustness check suggested by Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan
(2004) by averaging goodness scores in the two years pre-tax-cut (2001-2002) and two years
post-tax-cut (2003-2004) for each firm. Then we compare the average change across terciles of
ownership. This averaging is a very conservative way to address the serial correlation problem.
We find that, although statistical significant is more limited, medium ownership firms reduce
goodness more relative to the low and high ownership terciles.



6.       Prediction 2: Close Governance Votes and CSR
We now test Prediction 2 of our agency model: corporate goodness should decline following
improvements in firm governance. In general, correlations between governance and goodness
may reflect the influence of a third unobserved factor instead of a causal relationship. We isolate
the causal effect of changes in governance on goodness using a regression discontinuity approach
focusing on close governance proxy votes. The assumption is that firms close to either side of
the 50% vote share cutoff for passage are identical, except that firms are sharply more likely
to pass a governance measure when the vote share in favor of a proposal slightly exceeds 50%.
We use these close votes to generate random assignment of governance among firms around the
cut-off and test whether firms in which these proposals just passed experienced slower growth
in goodness scores than firms in which the proposals just failed.
  13
    As in Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004), we also perform this analysis where we do not sample with
replacement and thus are simply assigning portfolios randomly among the 503 firms in our sample for 10000
replications. Results are nearly identical.


                                                     20
   Implicit in our RD design is the assumption that the 50% cut-off generates meaningful
exogenous variation in governance. Shareholder proposals are non-binding, so firms are not
legally obligated to implement proposals that receive with majority support. However, boards
face strong pressure to honor the voting cutoff. For example, Institutional Shareholder Services,
the leading provider of corporate governance ratings and advice for institutional investors,
recommends that investors vote to remove all existing board members (in a voting process that
can be binding) if the board fails to act on a shareholder proposal that received the support of
a majority of shares outstanding in the previous year.
   The impact of the 50% cutoff on governance has also been established empirically in previous
work by Cuñat, Gine, and Guadalupe (2010), who use close votes to estimate the effect of
governance on firm value. They find a small but significant effect on firm value. They further
estimate that passing a proposal around the discontinuity leads to a discrete 31% increase
in the probability of implementation (measured as the change in the number of anti-takeover
provisions the firm has in place). We replicate and confirm their findings in later tables.
Moreover, narrowly passing a proposal also leads to an increase in the probability of proposing
and passing future shareholder-initiated governance proposals. Hence, passing the proposal can
affect governance through more than just passing a new governance provision. For example,
shareholders seem to become more empowered and are more likely to be activist in the future.
   In related work, Ertimur, Ferri, and Stubben (2010) find, using data from an earlier period,
that passing a proposal increases the probability of implementation by 27% and that the effect
of passing proposals on implementation has steadily increased over time, although the statistical
significance of the upward trend is weak. Thomas and Cotter (2007) also look at implementation
rates and show that over the 2002-2004 period, implementation rates for proposals with greater
than 50% of vote share sharply increased over time.
   Using these earlier studies as our backdrop, we apply this RD design to examine the relative
growth rates of KLD scores around the 50% vote share cut-off. The agency perspective predicts
lower growth rates to the right of the cut-off (firms with improved governance) compared to
firms just to the left of the cut-off. We restrict our analysis to shareholder initiated, governance-
related proposals, which have the dual advantages of being directly targeted at managerial
agency problems and of being heavily contested, resulting in a higher density of vote shares


                                                 21
close to the 50 percent vote share cutoff. We also exclude proposals that directly target CSR.
In theory, one could use close votes on proposals that directly seek to increase CSR to measure
the effect of CSR on firm value. However, proposals that directly target CSR overwhelmingly
receive weak shareholder support, with insufficient observations near the cutoff for passage for
estimation. Therefore, we instead study how exogenous improvements in governance affect
CSR investment.14 We also distinguish between different subcategories of governance proxy
proposals, following the categorization developed by Cuñat, Gine, and Guadalupe (2010).
       First, we empirically support the validity of our design. The RD assumes that vote shares
near the cutoff are not manipulated. Previous research by Listokin (2008) and Smith (2013)
has shown that vote shares of management sponsored proposals may indeed be manipulated.
However, the same research suggests that vote shares of shareholder sponsored proposals (which
are the only types of proposals studied in this paper) are not subject to the same manipulation.
This is because management can influence the voting behavior of shares held by brokers in the
case of management sponsored proposals but not in the case shareholder sponsored proposals.
We support these findings by plotting the distribution of vote shares in Figure 5. The x-axis
represents vote share in excess of the passage cutoff of 50%. Therefore, x = 0 is the location of
the discontinuity. The distribution of vote shares around the cut-off is smooth, suggesting that
outcomes to either side of the cut-off are likely to be random as opposed to being manipulated.
       In all, we have 5,262 governance-related shareholder proposals spanning the 1997-2011 time
period. In our baseline analysis, we exclude proposals targeted at limiting managerial compen-
sation because our model predictions with respect to these proposals are ambiguous. While
improvements in governance are expected to reduce perk spending, limits on compensation
may lead managers to substitute toward perk spending and private benefits. After removing
proposals targeted at compensation, we are left with 3853 proposals. 157 of these are within 1
percentage point of the 50% cutoff, 545 are within 5 percentage points, and 1044 are within 10
percentage points. For our RD analysis, we use an optimal bandwidth around the discontinuity
point to appropriately downweight votes that are farther away from the cutoff.
       In Table 5, we further support the validity of the RD design by showing that firms on either
  14
    In our sample, a regression discontinuity using close votes for proposals directly focused on CSR yields noisy
and insignificant estimates.



                                                       22
side of the regression discontinuity do not differ significantly in terms of ex-ante characteristics.15
We use a local linear regression discontinuity estimation in the style of Imbens and Lemieux
(2007) by fitting local linear trends in vote share on either side of the regression discontinuity
using the optimal bandwidth for each ex-ante outcome. We determine the optimal bandwidth
around the discontinuity point using kernel methods developed in Imbens and Kalyanaraman
(2009). KLD is the KLD score of firms in the year before the shareholder proposal is voted
on. Change in KLD is KLD in t − 1 minus KLD in t − 2. The others ex-ante outcomes are
firm characteristics measured in t − 1. In general, there are no significant jumps and firms
appear comparable on either side of the boundary. This supports the RD assumption that
firms near the vote share discontinuity point are similar on all dimensions except that firms
just to the right of the discontinuity point are discretely more likely to experience improvements
in governance.
       Next, we estimate the effect of governance changes on measures of firm goodness using the
same RD estimation method. Table 6 estimates our dependent variable of interest – the change
in KLD scores (t + 1) − (t) around the regression discontinuity. We again follow Imbens and
Lemieux (2007) and estimate the jump by fitting local linear trends in vote share on either
side of the regression discontinuity using the optimal bandwidth. The first column in Panel A
represents our baseline estimate. We find that improvements in governance lead firms to reduce
their annual growth in corporate goodness by 0.6. Given that the standard deviation of the
growth rate in corporate goodness is 1.6, this represents an economically significant decline of
one-third of a standard deviation. The other columns in Panel A show that the estimates are
robust to alternative bandwidth selections.
       This discontinuity can be seen in Figure 6, where we plot the smoothed values for these
changes around the cut-off. We look at votes between 40% (bounded by -10 on the x-axis)
and 60% (bounded by the +10 on the x-axis). Indeed, there is an apparent jump in the KLD
change to the left of the cut-off compared to the right. The magnitude is comparable to the
one estimated in Table 6 and the magnitude of the jump at the vote share cutoff is significantly
different from zero with a p-value of 0.035.
  15
    To increase power, we include all proposals (including compensation-related proposals) in our sample. The
results do not change if we limit the sample to non-compensation proposals.



                                                     23
   In Panel B of Table 6, we look at how the effect of narrowly passing a proposal varies de-
pending on the type of proposal. As previously discussed, compensation-related proposals seek
to limit managerial pay. Board-related proposals target the membership and committee roles of
the board of directors, for example, mandating an increase in the number of independent direc-
tors. Riskmetrics governance provisions measure a set of formal governance provisions measured
by Riskmetrics, most of which relate to anti-takeover defenses. Voting-related proposals seek
to increase the voting rights of shareholders. Of the 1062 proposal votes which are within 10%
of the cutoff, 26% are compensation-related, 6% were board-related, 49% were Riskmetrics
governance provision-related proposals, 14% were voting-related, and the remainder were other
types of votes.
   In general, analyses using sub-categories of proposals lead to noisy estimates that are not
significant. The lower statistical significance is not uncommon for regression discontinuity
designs which heavily weight the smaller set of observations in which the vote share in favor
of each sub-category of proposal is very close to the cut-off. Nevertheless, the results suggest
that our baseline estimates are not driven by only one particular kind of governance proposal.
We find that narrowly passing board, Riskmetrics governance provisions, and voting related
proposals leads to substantial, albeit noisily estimated, declines in the growth rate of goodness
(all estimates exceed one-third of a standard deviation the growth rate of the goodness score).
Meanwhile, narrowly passing compensation-related proposals lead to increases in goodness,
consistent with the idea that managers may substitute toward goodness as a form of perk
spending when their compensation is cut.
   In Table 7, we support the robustness of our baseline results. The KLD ratings methodology
was modified significantly in 2010. This should not bias our results because the ratings change
should not differentially affect firms to the left and right of the 50% vote share cutoff. Neverthe-
less, we present results using alternative measures of goodness, which offer great continuity over
time. The first column in the top panel measures KLD as a standardized z-score, calculated
using all firms rated in each year. The second column measures KLD using subcategories of
goodness that have been consistently rated over time. The third column measures KLD de-
meaned among all firms rated in each year. The last column uses the baseline KLD score, but
with controls for the logarithms of firm assets, market cap, return, and total compensation in


                                                24
the year of the shareholder proposal vote. Controlling for additional covariates is non-standard
in RD estimation because the cutoff itself should generate random variation. Nevertheless, we
find that the inclusion of additional covariates does not affect the results substantively.
       In the second row, for columns (1) and (2), we consider two placebo tests for discontinuities
in changes in goodness scores: at a placebo cutoff equal to the median of vote shares conditional
on the vote share being less than the true cutoff and greater than the true cutoff, respectively.
Reassuringly, both of these placebo estimates are insignificant and closer to zero in comparison
to the estimated 0.64 point decline in goodness estimated using the true vote share cutoff.
       Finally, in columns (3) and (4) of the second panel, we empirically support the assumption
that narrow passage of shareholder proposals leads to improvements in governance. We focus
on shareholder proposals that seek to alter formal governance provisions that are measured by
Riskmetrics in their governance ratings. Most of these proposals seek to remove anti-takeover
defenses. The threat of takeovers may provide a disciplining role on managers (Bertrand and
Mullainathan, 2003), so the removal of anti-takeover defenses likely represents an improvement
in governance. We measure the quality of governance provisions using the entrenchment index,
developed in Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferrell (2009).16 Consistent with previous findings in Cuñat,
Gine, and Guadalupe (2010), Ertimur, Ferri, and Stubben (2010), and Thomas and Cotter
(2007), we find that narrow passage of shareholder proposals significantly reduces entrenchment
and therefore correspond to improvements in governance.
       An important consideration when interpreting the results of the regression discontinuity is
that not all shareholders necessarily wish to improve governance,17 so narrow passage of a subset
of shareholder proposals may not push executives toward firm value creation. In this analysis,
we implicitly assume that the average governance-related shareholder proposal around the cutoff
  16
     There is debate in the literature regarding best practices in terms of measuring governance provisions.
Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferrell (2009) focus on the six governance provisions that are most predictive of firm value:
staggered boards, limits to shareholder bylaw amendments, poison pills, golden parachutes, and supermajority
requirements for mergers and charter amendments. These are the same six provisions that are most frequently
referenced in our sample of shareholder proposals. Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003) develop an earlier measure
of governance provisions (GIM index) that represents the sum of 24 possible governance provisions. We also
test whether narrow passage of shareholder proposals affect the GIM index and find similar results, but which
are insignificantly different from zero.
  17
     For instance, Barber (2007) and Heinkel, Kraus, and Zechner (2001) point out that institutions such as
CalPERS pursue social activism by pushing firms to adopt CSR, and that this activism is not necessarily
consistent with shareholder value maximization.



                                                       25
is intended to reduce agency problems. We believe this assumption is valid because of previous
work, e.g., Cuñat, Gine, and Guadalupe (2010) showing that, on average, proposals near the
vote share cutoff increase firm value. Moreover, while some shareholders may seek objectives
other than value maximization, it is less likely that a significant fraction of pivotal shareholders
would vote to reduce value-enhancing corporate goodness (which would be necessary to explain
our results). Nevertheless, we caution readers that we are measuring a local average treatment
effect which may mask heterogeneity in the goals of specific shareholder proposals.
       We also caution that the magnitude of our regression discontinuity measure may be specific
to our sample period, even if the qualitative direction of our results hold more generally. Most of
the close votes in our sample occur between 2008 and 2011. Following the financial crisis, there
were many shareholder-initiated proposals. During this contentious period, management may
have been particularly responsive to improvements in governance as represented by shareholder
proposals. As a result, one may not wish to extrapolate the magnitude of our measure too
aggressively into other time periods.
       Finally, it is important to note that our model takes a simple, reduced form, view of how
agency problems can motivate unproductive CSR: goodness increases the manager’s private
benefits, so managers will spend less on goodness when ownership stakes increase or gover-
nance improves. However, along the lines suggested by Zwiebel (1996) and Kuhnen and Zwiebel
(2008), goodness spending may also be a way for management to entrench themselves by curry-
ing favor with other stakeholders such as employees who might help managers resist shareholder
discipline. Such an entrenchment motive for goodness is also agency driven but outside our
simple model.18



7.       Conclusion
We find that improvements in managerial incentives and governance lead to a reduction in firm
goodness, implying that the marginal dollar spent on goodness is a result of agency problems.
  18
    It is possible that managers at firms to the left of the vote share cutoff (where proposals just fail) increase
goodness in order to entrench themselves and prevent future shareholder activism while managers to the right
of the cutoff (where proposals just pass) reduce unproductive CSR because of improved monitoring. This
would lead to a decline in goodness across the vote share cutoff that is consistent with an broad agency-related
interpretation CSR, but in a more nuanced way than specified in our model.


                                                        26
It is important to highlight that some forms of goodness investment, not on the margin, may
increase firm value. However, managers overspend on goodness because they wish to do good
with other people’s money. As we alluded to in the introduction, our findings link traditional
agency problems with the burgeoning literature on social preferences and altruism. Much
more work remains to be done on whether this is being driven by social pressure or a purer
altruistic motive, as considered in DellaVigna, List, and Malmendier (2012). The economic
analysis of corporate social responsibility is likely to become even more important in the future,
as society’s concerns about global warming or income inequality are likely to confront the
traditional doctrine of shareholder value maximization.


References
Andreoni, J., 1989, “Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and Ricardian Equivalence,” Journal
  of Political Economy, 97(1), 1447–1458.

Auerbach, A. J., and K. Hassett, 2006, “Dividend Taxes and Firm Valuation: New Evidence,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 96(2), 119–123.

      , 2007, “The 2003 Dividend Tax Cuts and the Value of the Firm: An Event Study,” in Taxing Corporate
  Income in the 21st Century, ed. by A. J. Auerbach, J. Hines, and J. Slemrod. pp. 93–126.

Barber, B., 2007, “Monitoring the Monitor: Evaluating Calpers’ Activism,” Journal of Investing, pp. 66–80.

Baron, D. P., 2001, “Private Politics, Corporate Social Responsibility, and Integrated Strategy,” Journal of
  Economics & Management Strategy, 10(1), 7–45.

Bebchuk, L., A. Cohen, and A. Ferrell, 2009, “What Matters in Corporate Governance?,” Review of Financial
  Studies, 22(2), 783–827.

Becker, G., 1974, “A Theory of Social Interaction,” Journal of Political Economy, 82, 1063–1093.

Benabou, R., and J. Tirole, 2010, “Individual and Corporate Social Responsibility,” Economica, 77, 1–19.

Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan, 2004, “How Much Should We Trust Differences-in-Differences
  Estimates?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1), 249–275.

Bertrand, M., and S. Mullainathan, 2003, “Enjoying the Quiet Life? Corporate Governance and Managerial
  Preferences,” Journal of Political Economy, 111(5), 1043–1075.

Besley, T., and M. Ghatak, 2005, “Competition and Incentives with Motivated Agents,” American Economic
  Review, 95(3), 616–636.

Card, D., K. F. Hallock, and E. Moretti, 2010, “The geography of giving: The effect of corporate headquarters
  on local charities,” Journal of Public Economics, 94(3-4), 222–234.

Charness, G., and M. Rabin, 2002, “Understanding Social Preferences With Simple Tests,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 117(3), 817–869.




                                                     27
Chatterji, A. K., D. I. Levine, and M. W. Toffel, 2009, “How Well Do Social Ratings Actually Measure Corporate
  Social Responsibility?,” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 18(1), 125–169.

Chetty, R., and E. Saez, 2005, “Dividend Taxes and Corporate Behavior: Evidence from the 2003 Dividend Tax
  Cut,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 791–833.

       , 2010, “Dividend and Corporate Taxation in an Agency Model of the Firm,” American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, 2(3), 1–31.

Cuñat, V., M. Gine, and M. Guadalupe, 2010, “The Vote is Cast: The Effect of Corporate Governance on
  Shareholder Value,” NBER Working Papers 16574, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

DellaVigna, S., J. A. List, and U. Malmendier, 2012, “Testing for Altruism and Social Pressure in Charitable
  Giving,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1), 1–56.

DiGiuli, A., and L. Kostovetsky, 2011, “Are Red or Blue Companies More Likely to Go Green? Politics and
  Corporate Social Responsibility,” SSRN Working Paper no. 2084900.

Elfenbein, D. W., R. Fisman, and B. McManus, 2012, “Charity as a Substitute for Reputation: Evidence from
   an Online Marketplace,” Review of Economic Studies, 79(4), 1441–1468.

Ertimur, Y., F. Ferri, and S. R. Stubben, 2010, “Board of directors’ responsiveness to shareholders: Evidence
  from shareholder proposals,” Journal of Corporate Finance, 16(1), 53–72.

Fan, J., T. Gasser, I. Gijbels, M. Brockmann, and J. Engel, 1997, “Local Polynomial Regression: Optimal Kernels
  and Asymptotic Minimax Efficiency,” Annals of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics, 49(1), 79–99.

Fan, J., and I. Gijbels, 1995, “Adaptive Order Polynomial Fitting: Bandwidth Robustification and Bias Reduc-
  tion,” Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 4(3), 213–227.

       , 1996, Local Polynomial Modelling and Its Applications. Chapman & Hall, London.

Fehr, E., and K. Schimdt, 1999, “A Theory of Fairness, Competition and Cooperation,” The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 114(3), 817–868.

Friedman, M., 1970, “The Social Responsibility of Business Is To Increase Its Profits,” New York Times Maga-
   zine, pp. 122–126.

Gompers, P., J. Ishii, and A. Metrick, 2003, “Corporate Governance And Equity Prices,” The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 118(1), 107–155.

Greenfield, R., 2011, “Yes, You Can Think Less of Steve Jobs for Not Being a Philanthropist,” The At-
  lantic Wire, Available: http://www.theatlanticwire.com/technology/2011/08/yes-you-can-think-less-steve-
  jobs-not-being-philanthropist/41885/ [Last accessed: July 2013].

Heal, G., 2005, “Corporate Social Responsibility—Economic and Financial Perspectives,” Geneva Papers, 30,
  387–409.

Heinkel, R., A. Kraus, and J. Zechner, 2001, “The Effect of Green Investment on Corporate Behavior,” Journal
  of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 36(04), 431–449.

Hong, H., and L. Kostovetsky, 2012, “Red and Blue Investing: Values and Finance,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 103(1), 1–19.

Hong, H., J. D. Kubik, and J. A. Scheinkman, 2011, “Financial Constraints on Corporate Goodness,” Working
  papers, Princeton University.



                                                      28
Imbens, G., and T. Lemieux, 2007, “Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide to Practice,” NBER Technical
  Working Papers 0337, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Imbens, G. W., and K. Kalyanaraman, 2009, “Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the Regression Discontinuity
  Estimator,” IZA Discussion Papers 3995, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).

Jacobson, L. S., R. J. LaLonde, and D. G. Sullivan, 1994, “Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers,” American
  Economic Review, 83(4), 685–789.

Jensen, M. C., and W. H. Meckling, 1976, “Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and ownership
  structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 3(4), 305–360.

Kruger, P., 2013, “Corporate Goodness and Shareholder Wealth,” Working papers, University of Geneva.

Kuhnen, C. M., and J. Zwiebel, 2008, “Executive Pay, Hidden Compensation and Managerial Entrenchment,”
  SSRN Working Paper no. 972622.

Lambert, R. A., W. N. Lanen, and D. F. Larcker, 1989, “Executive Stock Option Plans and Corporate Dividend
  Policy,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 24(04), 409–425.

Lie, E., 2005, “On the Timing of CEO Stock Option Awards,” Management Science, 51(5), 802–812.

List, J. A., 2006, “The Behavioralist Meets the Market: Measuring Social Preferences and Reputation Effects
   in Actual Transactions,” Journal of Political Economy, 114(1), 1–37.

Listokin, Y., 2008, “Management Always Wins the Close Ones,” American Law and Economics Review, 10(2),
   159–184.

Poterba, J., 2004, “Taxation and Corporate Payout Policy,” American Economic Review, 94(2), 171–175.

Ruppert, D., and M. P. Wand, 1994, “Multivariate Locally Weighted Least Squares Regression,” The Annals of
  Statistics, 22(3), 1346–1370.

Smith, E. E., 2013, “Do Shareholders Want Less Governance?,” Working papers, New York University.

Strom, S., and M. Helft, 2011, “Google Finds It Hard to Reinvent Philanthropy,” The New York Times, Available:
   http://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/30/business/30charity.html [Last accessed: July 2013].

Thomas, R. S., and J. F. Cotter, 2007, “Shareholder proposals in the new millennium: Shareholder support,
  board response, and market reaction,” Journal of Corporate Finance, 13(2-3), 368–391.

Tirole, J., 2001, “Corporate Governance,” Econometrica, 69(1), 1–35.

Zwiebel, J., 1996, “Dynamic Capital Structure under Managerial Entrenchment,” American Economic Review,
  86(5), 1197–1215.




                                                     29
                                          Table 1: Summary Statistics

Panel A provides summary statistics for the cross-section of S&P 500 firms in 2001-2002 used in our analysis.
For each variable, we first average over the two years 2001-2002 for each firm when possible and then report
summary statistics by terciles of average insider ownership in the cross-section. Panels B and C provide
summary statistics in an annual panel of these firms from 1999 through 2006.

  Variable                                      Mean        SD           Min.      Max.     Median    N
                  Panel A: Ranking Period Cross-Sectional Statistics (Firms, 2001-2002 Average)
  Low Ownership
      Insider Ownership                             0.001      0.000      0.000     0.002   0.001    168
      Market Capitalization ($B)                     31.6       51.4       1.2      366.7    11.0    168
  Medium Ownership                                  0.000      0.000      0.000     0.000   0.000     0
      Insider Ownership                             0.003      0.001      0.002     0.006   0.003    168
      Market Capitalization ($B)                     12.9       23.6       0.5      225.5     7.3    168
  High Ownership                                    0.000      0.000      0.000     0.000   0.000     0
      Insider Ownership                             0.044      0.056      0.006     0.297   0.021    167
      Market Capitalization ($B)                     13.3       31.0       0.6      311.9     5.7    167
                                      Panel B: Pre-Period (Firm-Years, 1999-2002)
  Dividend Increase or Initiation Indicator         0.117      0.321         0       1       0       1826
  Goodness Score (Total Strengths - Concerns)       0.657      2.317        -7       9       1       1829
  Change in Goodness Score < 0 Indicator            0.239      0.427         0       1       0       1829
                                     Panel C: Post-Period (Firm-Years, 2003-2006)
  Dividend Increase or Initiation Indicator         0.211      0.408         0       1       0       1842
  Goodness Score (Total Strengths - Concerns)       0.333      2.437        -7       10      0       1842
  Change in Goodness Score < 0 Indicator            0.309      0.462         0       1       0       1842




                                                        30
                         Table 2: Dividend Tax Cut Difference-in-Differences

This table reports the results from a difference-in-differences estimation in the annual panel where the
dependent variable is the level of the goodness score. The right-hand side variables are firm-specific
fixed effects, year-specific effects, and interaction effects between year effects and indicators for all
ownership portfolios. The first set of columns report results where we group ownership by terciles while
the second set of columns report results where we group ownership by quintiles. Ownership portfolios
are formed based on average ownership in the two-years prior to the shock year. The omitted category is
always the medium ownership portfolio (tercile 2 or quintile 3). We also control for a set of market
capitalization portfolio indicators (tercile or quintile) fully interacted with all year effects. The omitted
year among market capitalization portfolios is the middle portfolio. The omitted year is 2002, and the
coefficients are cumulative changes from the end of 2002 through the end of year t. In the quintile
results, we do not report the interaction effects for ownership portfolios 2 and 4 for brevity. Standard
errors clustered by firm are presented in brackets. */**/*** indicates significant at the 10%, 5% and 1%
levels, respectively.



                                    Terciles                                 Quintiles
                           Year        Interaction Effects         Year         Interaction Effects
                         Effects   Low Own.       High Own.      Effects    Low Own.       High Own.
            Year t:        β(t)        γ(t)           δ(t)         β(t)         γ(t)           δ(t)
             1999         0.074      0.129           0.336        0.113        0.021          0.389
                          [0.47]     [0.68]         [1.90]*       [0.50]      [0.08]         [1.78]*
              2000        0.312      0.063           0.112        0.261       -0.044          0.114
                       [2.67]***     [0.41]          [0.79]      [1.78]*     [-0.20]          [0.70]
              2001       -0.030      0.112           0.123        -0.067       0.045          0.103
                         [-0.34]     [0.99]          [1.33]      [-0.53]      [0.27]          [0.89]
              2003       -0.183      0.095           0.099        -0.158       0.194          0.202
                        [-1.88]*     [0.73]          [0.85]      [-1.07]      [1.07]          [1.31]
              2004       -0.405      0.320           0.489        -0.246       0.427          0.548
                      [-2.88]***    [1.90]*        [3.17]***     [-1.28]     [1.85]*        [2.68]***
              2005       -0.736      0.243           0.590        -0.812       0.485          0.698
                      [-4.35]***     [1.13]        [3.07]***   [-3.24]***    [1.72]*        [2.83]***
              2006       -0.849      0.227           0.635        -0.959       0.368          0.774
                      [-4.32]***     [0.93]        [2.86]***   [-3.52]***     [1.14]        [2.74]***
                 N                    3671                                     3671
         R-Squared                    0.054                                    0.058
             Firms                     503                                      503




                                                     31
                                                     Table 3: Placebo Difference-in-Differences

This table reports the results from a difference-in-differences estimation in the annual panel where the dependent variable is the level of the
goodness score, but where we analyze different placebo shock years. The right-hand side variables are firm-specific fixed effects, year-specific
effects, and interaction effects between year effects and indicators for ownership tercile portfolios. Ownership terciles are formed based on
average ownership in the two years prior to the placebo shock year. The omitted category is always the medium ownership portfolio, tercile 2, and
we include a set of market capitalization tercile portfolio indicators fully interacted with all year effects. The omitted year is the year before the
placebo shock year, and the coefficients are cumulative changes from the end of the omitted year through the end of year t. Standard errors
clustered by firm are presented in brackets. */**/*** indicates significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                     Panel A: Placebo Tax Cut Years 1995-1998

                      Base (t=0):            1994     Base (t=0):           1995     Base (t=0):            1996    Base (t=0):           1997
                      Shock (t=+1):          1995     Shock (t=+1):         1996     Shock (t=+1):          1997    Shock (t=+1):         1998
                            Interaction Effects             Interaction Effects            Interaction Effects            Interaction Effects
                       Low Own.         High Own.      Low Own.          High Own.    Low Own.         High Own.     Low Own.         High Own.
            Year t:        γ(t)               δ(t)         γ(t)              δ(t)         γ(t)               δ(t)        γ(t)              δ(t)
                -3        0.112            -0.130         0.193             0.006        0.016             0.072       -0.072            -0.015
                          [0.52]           [-0.71]        [0.92]           [0.03]        [0.07]            [0.38]      [-0.35]           [-0.08]
                 -2       0.260             0.077         0.247            -0.024       -0.037             0.183       -0.132            -0.256
                          [1.34]            [0.52]        [1.27]           [-0.15]      [-0.19]            [1.07]      [-0.74]           [-1.60]
                 -1       0.129            -0.007         0.072             0.016       -0.232            -0.083        0.027            -0.194
                          [0.82]           [-0.05]        [0.49]           [0.12]       [-1.49]           [-0.68]      [0.22]           [-1.70]*
                +1        0.050             0.003         0.021            -0.033       -0.038             0.014       -0.175            -0.047
                          [0.33]            [0.02]        [0.14]           [-0.27]      [-0.29]            [0.12]      [-1.27]           [-0.39]
                +2        0.063            -0.053         0.050             0.083       -0.158             0.036       -0.087            -0.019
                          [0.32]           [-0.31]        [0.26]           [0.51]       [-0.91]            [0.25]      [-0.49]           [-0.13]
                +3        0.066             0.080        -0.080             0.123       -0.032             0.133        0.286            -0.055
                          [0.29]            [0.39]       [-0.36]           [0.68]       [-0.16]            [0.78]      [1.29]            [-0.29]
                +4       -0.128             0.005        -0.156             0.067        0.139            -0.118        0.234            -0.143
                         [-0.52]            [0.02]       [-0.61]           [0.33]        [0.60]           [-0.58]      [0.94]            [-0.66]
                 N                 3557                            3544                           3468                           3457
         R-Squared                 0.035                           0.027                          0.018                          0.022
             Firms                  478                             486                            484                            492




                                                                           32
                                                         Table 3, Continued

                                             Panel B: Placebo Tax Cut Years 1999-2002

             Base (t=0):             1998     Base (t=0):           1999     Base (t=0):            2000    Base (t=0):           2001
             Shock (t=+1):           1999     Shock (t=+1):         2000     Shock (t=+1):          2001    Shock (t=+1):         2002
                    Interaction Effects             Interaction Effects            Interaction Effects            Interaction Effects
              Low Own.          High Own.      Low Own.          High Own.    Low Own.         High Own.     Low Own.         High Own.
   Year t:         γ(t)               δ(t)         γ(t)              δ(t)         γ(t)               δ(t)        γ(t)              δ(t)
       -3        -0.156            -0.300         0.226            -0.098        0.203             0.109       -0.116             0.125
                [-0.75]            [-1.62]        [1.16]           [-0.56]       [0.92]            [0.62]      [-0.59]           [0.69]
       -2         0.156            -0.243         0.256             0.029       -0.042             0.022       -0.114             0.226
                 [0.97]           [-1.65]*        [1.42]           [0.19]       [-0.23]            [0.15]      [-0.65]           [1.45]
       -1         0.245             0.113        -0.062            -0.066       -0.043             0.066        0.039             0.159
                [1.79]*             [0.92]       [-0.51]           [-0.62]      [-0.29]            [0.61]      [0.31]            [1.40]
       +1         0.081            -0.011         0.229             0.097       -0.056            -0.152       -0.063            -0.085
                 [0.65]            [-0.11]        [1.47]           [0.84]       [-0.44]           [-1.27]      [-0.55]           [-0.88]
       +2         0.307             0.048         0.276             0.002       -0.059            -0.151        0.099             0.062
                 [1.62]             [0.30]        [1.47]           [0.01]       [-0.37]           [-1.10]      [0.60]            [0.41]
       +3         0.316            -0.122         0.195             0.015       -0.065            -0.156        0.118             0.158
                 [1.49]            [-0.64]        [0.95]           [0.08]       [-0.33]           [-0.89]      [0.60]            [0.87]
       +4         0.209            -0.117         0.095             0.035       -0.051            -0.063       -0.040             0.197
                 [0.91]            [-0.57]        [0.40]           [0.17]       [-0.22]           [-0.31]      [-0.17]           [0.89]
        N                  3454                            3418                           3531                           3599
R-Squared                  0.031                           0.040                          0.041                          0.045
    Firms                   499                             493                            509                            502




                                                                   33
                               Table 4: Robustness in Dividend Tax Cut

Panel A presents rejection rates where we repeat our experiment with 2003 as the shock year but
bootstrap placebo treatment portfolios as follows. For each replication, we form a random sample by first
drawing random vectors of firm goodness scores from our primary sample with replacement, where one
vector represents observed goodness scores for one firm through time. For each replication, 503 such
vectors are drawn. We then assign ownership portfolios randomly among these vectors, estimate equation
(1), and tabulate the fraction of rejections at the 5% significance level for each coefficient for 10000 such
replications. Panel B presents the change in goodness scores for firms in ownership Terciles 1 and 3
relative to Tercile 2. For each firm, we average scores in the 2003-2004 period and 2001-2002 period
before computing the change in this average. We then project these changes in the cross-section onto
indicators for low and high ownership portfolios. The coefficients represent the average difference in
these changes relative to Tercile 2, the omitted category. White-heteroskedasticity robust standard errors
are presented in brackets. */**/*** indicates significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

                  Panel A: Rejection Rates for Random Placebo Treatment Groups

                                             Terciles                     Quintiles
                                       Interaction Effects          Interaction Effects
                                       Low            High         Lowest         Highest
                          Year t:     Tercile        Tercile       Quintile       Quintile
                               -3     0.0507         0.0508        0.0515         0.0528
                               -2     0.0502         0.0516        0.0473         0.0509
                               -1     0.0488         0.0506        0.0453         0.0508
                               +1     0.0469         0.0466        0.0518           0.05
                               +2     0.0518         0.0471        0.0504         0.0475
                               +3     0.0478         0.0496        0.0492         0.0529
                               +4     0.0508         0.0507        0.0513         0.0496
                     Replications             10000                         10000


             Panel B: Average Change in Average Scores, 2001-2002 through 2003-2004

                                          Ownership:
                                          Low                 0.161
                                                              [1.14]
                                          High                0.212
                                                             [1.67]*
                                          Constant            -0.209
                                                            [-2.22]**
                                          N                    482
                                          R-Squared           0.006




                                                       34
                          Table 5: Regression Discontinuity Validity Analysis

This table supports the validity of the RD design by showing that firms on either side of the regression
discontinuity do not differ significantly in terms of ex-ante characteristics. We use local linear methods
with an optimal bandwidth to estimate the discontinuous jump in the ex-ante outcome. KLD is the
goodness score of firms in the year before the shareholder proposal is voted on. Change in KLD is the
goodness score in t-1 minus the goodness score in t-2. The others variables are firm characteristics
measured in t-1. Standard errors are presented in brackets. */**/*** indicates significant at the 10%, 5%
and 1% levels, respectively.



                 KLD         Change        Log        Log Market         Firm        Log Total
                             in KLD       Assets         Cap            Return      Compensation
    Pass         0.004        -0.181       -0.322         -0.207        0.0310           0.024
                [0.407]      [0.407]      [0.335]        [0.313]        [0.060]         [0.145]
 Bandwidth       4.946         4.946        4.005          4.481         2.306           3.731
    Obs          4864          4864         5182           5259          5253            4867



                          Table 6: Baseline Regression Discontinuity Analysis

This table estimates the change in KLD scores (t+1) - (t) around the regression discontinuity. We again
follow Imbens and Lemieux (2010) and estimate the jump by fitting local linear trends in vote share on
either side of the regression discontinuity using the optimal bandwidth as well as multiples of the optimal
bandwidth. In Panel B, we present estimates by type of proposals following the categorization in Cunat,
Gine, and Guadalupe (2011). Standard errors are presented in brackets. */**/*** indicates significant at
the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.



                    Panel A: All Non-Compensation Governance Proposals
                  Optimal      75% Optimal 125% Optimal 50% Optimal                      150% Optimal
                 Bandwidth      Bandwidth    Bandwidth     Bandwidth                      Bandwidth
    Pass           -0.635          -0.700       -0.543        -0.771                        -0.440
                 [0.302]**       [0.349]**    [0.349]**      [0.444]*                      [0.251]*
 Bandwidth          4.436           3.327       5.545          2.218                        6.654
    Obs             3412            3412         3412          3412                          3412

                        Panel B: Variation by Proposal Type
                                          Riskmetrics
           Compensation      Board        Governance       Voting                          All Other
                                           Provisions
   Pass       1.052          -1.475          -0.473         -0.432                            -1.811
             [0.581]        [0.927]         [0.371]        [0.592]                           [1.394]
 Bandwidth    4.847           6.51           4.889           5.731                            7.001
    Obs       1316            652             1780            412                              568
                                                    35
                                           Table 7: Robustness

This table supports the robustness of our baseline results. All outcomes are annual changes between
periods (t+1) and period (t). The KLD ratings methodology was modified in 2009. While this change
should not differentially affect firms to the left and right of the 50% vote share cutoff, we present results
using alternative measures of KLD, which offer great continuity over time. The first column in the top
panel measures KLD as a standardized z-score, calculated using all firms rated in each year. The second
column measures KLD using only subcategories of goodness that have been consistently rated over time.
The third column measures KLD demeaned among all firms rated in each year. The fourth column uses
the baseline KLD score, but controls for firm log assets, log market cap, return, and log total
compensation in the year of the shareholder proposal vote. The two placebo cutoffs test for jumps in
changes in KLD scores (t+1) - (t), at a placebo cutoff equal to the median of vote shares conditional on
vote share being less than the true cutoff and greater than the true cutoff. The last two columns in the
lower panel explore whether narrow passage of shareholder proposals directly affects governance, as
measured using the entrenchment index described in Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferrell (2009). Because the
entrenchment index rating methodology changed in 2007, we present results using the index prior to 2007
as well as an annual standardized index rating covering the full sample period. Standard errors are
presented in brackets. */**/*** indicates significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.



                              KLD                                        KLD                 RD with
                                                  KLD
                         standardized                                demeaned by             covariate
                                            adjusted measure
                            annually                                      year               controls
        Pass                 -0.424               -0.595                -0.667                -0.585
                           [0.211]**             [0.307]*             [0.315]**              [0.309]*
    Bandwidth                 3.613                3.49                  4.098                 4.436
       Obs                    3412                 3412                  3412                  3412


                          Placebo:              Placebo:            Entrenchment          Entrenchment
                       Cutoff at Lower       Cutoff at Upper            Index                 Index
                          Median                Median               1997- 2006            1997-2011
        Pass                -0.251                0.157                 -0.481               -0.329
                           [0.324]               [0.301]              [0.199]**            [0.165]**
    Bandwidth                3.813                 4.36                  2.481                2.477
       Obs                   3412                 3412                   1315                 1652




                                                     36
                     Figure 1: KLD Scores for Apple, Google and the S&P 500

This figure plots the KLD score each year for Apple, Google, and the averages score for the S&P 500.




                                        Figure 2: KLD Scores

This figure plots the average KLD score in each ownership tercile portfolio for each year 1999-2006 for
our main sample of firms in the S&P 500 during 2001-2002.




                                                  37
                                                                        Figure 3: Dividend Tax Cut Differences-in-Differences

This figure plots the cumulative difference-in-differences of goodness scores for the low ownership
portfolio minus the medium ownership portfolio in light grey, and high ownership minus medium
ownership in dark grey, from Table 2. The coefficients are scaled by the standard deviation of medium
ownership KLD scores in 2002. 95% confidence bands based on clustered standard errors are plotted as
dashed lines. 2002 is taken as the base reference year (t=0) and 2003 is taken as the shock year (t=+1).

                                                                                Panel A: Tercile Ownership Portfolios

                                                                0.45
                     SDs of 2002 Medium Ownership KLD Scores




                                                                0.35

                                                                0.25

                                                                0.15

                                                                0.05

                                                               -0.05       -3       -2        -1         +1         +2        +3       +4


                                                               -0.15
                                                                                            Event Time, +1=Shock Year

                                                                       Low minus Medium Ownership             High minus Medium Ownership


                                                                                Panel B: Quintile Ownership Portfolios

                                                               0.6
            SDs of 2002 Medium Ownership KLD Scores




                                                               0.5

                                                               0.4

                                                               0.3

                                                               0.2

                                                               0.1

                                                                 0
                                                                         -3        -2        -1          +1         +2        +3       +4
                                                               -0.1

                                                               -0.2

                                                               -0.3
                                                                                            Event Time, +1=Shock Year

                                                                       Low minus Medium Ownership             High minus Medium Ownership



                                                                                                    38
                                            Figure 4: Non-Parametric Analysis of Dividend Tax Cut

This figure plots local polynomial fits of changes in KLD between 2002 and time t relative to ownership percentiles. The black line indicates a local
linear fit using an Epanechnikov kernel with the “rule of thumb” optimal bandwidth of Fan and Gijbels (1996, Section 4.2). The dark grey and
moderate grey lines indicate a fit using a bandwidth of 125% and 75% times this optimal bandwidth, respectively. The light grey line indicates a
local cubic polynomial fit.




                                                                         39
                             Figure 5: Distribution of Vote Shares




             Figure 6: Change in KLD Scores at 50% Vote Share Discontinuity

This figure plots the baseline regression discontinuity result reported in Table 6 Panel A for the
optimal bandwidth. Gray bands reports 90 percent pointwise confidence intervals. Although the
confidence intervals overlap at the cutoff, the difference at the discontinuity is significantly
different from zero with a p-value of 0.035.




                                               40
