                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE CHANGING ROLE OF GOVERNMENT IN FINANCING HEALTH CARE:
                     AN INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVE

                                             Mark Stabile
                                            Sarah Thomson

                                        Working Paper 19439
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19439


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2013




We thank Carolyn Tuohy, the European Health Policy Group, and particularly Janet Currie, for many
helpful comments and advice. We also thank Matthew Townsend, Ellie Hukin and Katie Bates for
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Mark Stabile and Sarah Thomson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Changing Role of Government in Financing Health Care: An International Perspective
Mark Stabile and Sarah Thomson
NBER Working Paper No. 19439
September 2013
JEL No. I1,I13,I18

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper explores the changing role of government involvement in health care financing policy outside
the United States. It provides a review of the economics literature in this area to understand the implications
of recent policy changes on efficiency, costs and quality. Our review reveals that there has been some
convergence in policies adopted across countries to improve financing incentives and encourage efficient
use of health services. In the case of risk pooling, all countries with competing pools experience similar
difficulties with selection and are adopting more sophisticated forms of risk adjustment. In the case
of hospital competition, the key drivers of success appear to be what is competed on and measurable
rather than whether the system is public or private. In the case of both the success of performance-related
pay for providers and issues resulting from wait times, evidence differs both within and across jurisdictions.
However, the evidence does suggest that some governments have effectively reduced wait times when
they have chosen explicitly to focus on achieving this goal. Many countries are exploring new ways
of generating revenues for health care to enable them to cope with significant cost growth. However,
there is little evidence to suggest that collection mechanisms alone are effective in managing the cost
or quality of care.


Mark Stabile
University of Toronto
14 Queen's Park Cres. W.
Toronto, ON M5S 3K9
CANADA
and NBER
mark.stabile@utoronto.ca

Sarah Thomson
Cowdray House
London School of Economics and Political Science
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE UK
S.Thomson@lse.ac.uk
I. Introduction

         A large part of the recent debate over health care reform in the United
States focused on how much government involvement is appropriate in the health
care sector. Nations across the OECD ensure universal access to health care for
their citizens through national or regional risk pooling financed by mandatory
income‐related contributions (premiums). Ensuring universal protection against
the costs of health care and controlling public expenditures requires a significant
degree of national or regional management ‐‐ a common feature across these
countries. Yet no two health systems are identical and OECD countries achieve this
goal in a variety of different ways. Many health systems make substantial use of
market mechanisms, for example, despite having extensive public funding and
regulation.
         This paper explores the changing role of government involvement in health
care financing policy outside the United States. It provides a review of the
economics literature in this area to understand the implications of recent policy
changes on efficiency, costs and quality. Economists and health policy researchers
have written extensively on the differences in health care costs and coverage rates
across countries. In these two areas – share of GDP (gross domestic product) spent
on health and share of people without any form of health coverage – the US has
long been an outlier. However, while there are many similarities across ‘the rest’
of the countries in the OECD there are also substantial differences in policy design.
In addition, significant policy changes in the last ten years have in some cases led
to a degree of convergence with the US. Examples include the introduction of a
universal mandate in the United States, the move towards a competitive health
insurance market in Germany and the Netherlands, and the adoption of market‐
like mechanisms such as activity‐based funding to pay hospitals, selective
contracting, and provider competition.
         To better understand how OECD health systems both differ from and have
converged towards the health system in the United States over the past decade,
and to organize the vast literature on financing health care, we specify three
financing functions present in any health system, whether made explicit or not:
raising revenue for the health system (collection); pooling risk; and purchasing
services (Kutzin, 2001). A fourth dimension – making coverage decisions (whom,
what and how much to cover) – cuts across the three functions, as shown in Figure
1. We use this framework to explore the economic literature on the relationship
between the financing functions and health system performance, drawing on
recent work from the United States when appropriate.
         There are other useful ways of characterizing health systems. For example,
Reinhardt’s taxonomy of the components of health systems distinguishes between
government, not‐for‐profit and for‐profit on the production side and social
insurance, private insurance and no insurance on the financing side (Reinhardt,
2009). We use Kutzin’s framework for the following reasons. First, it allows for a
comparison of any type of health system, and avoids the use of traditional labels
(e.g. ‘tax financed’ or ‘social insurance’). This has the advantage of revealing rather
than obscuring vital similarities and differences between systems in the way that
many classifications do. Second, it enables us to get away from terms such as
‘private’ or ‘public’, shifting the emphasis onto differences in how countries carry
out the functions as opposed to differences in the legal status of the agents


                                                                                     2
responsible for collection, pooling and purchasing. Third, it allows us to focus the
review on functions rather than on tools and goals. While many countries include
equity, for example, among the goals of the system, this goal is affected, under
each function, by the nature of the tools in use. Similarly, taxes and regulation are
widely used tools rather than functions of the health care financing system.
Fourth, the framework highlights how health financing functions are more or less
independent of each other; decisions about how to pool risks and purchase
services can be made irrespective of how revenues are raised.
        The research goals for this paper, then, are to explore the economic
implications of the different ways in which OECD health systems carry out the
financing functions, how policy changes have resulted in more market forces
within these jurisdictions, and the effects of these changes on system efficiency,
costs, and outcomes (quality). We do not review or evaluate the literature
examining the justification for government intervention in the health sector
because the government plays a major role in financing health care in all OECD
countries, including the United States. Also, while we analyze the efficiency and
effectiveness of a number of policy interventions on particular populations, we are
often unable to make claims about the overall welfare implications of government
intervention in the countries we examine.
        Our review reveals that there has been some convergence in policies
adopted across countries to improve financing incentives and encourage efficient
use of health services. In the case of risk pooling, all countries with competing
pools experience similar difficulties with selection and are adopting more
sophisticated forms of risk adjustment. In the case of hospital competition, the key
drivers of success appear to be what is competed on and measurable rather than
whether the system is public or private. In the case of both the success of
performance‐related pay for providers and issues resulting from wait times,
evidence differs both within and across jurisdictions. However, the evidence does
suggest that some governments have effectively reduced wait times when they
have chosen explicitly to focus on achieving this goal.
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows: we begin with a brief
overview of the countries we consider in this review. We then explore the
economics literature outside the United States for each of the financing functions
listed above, examining the consequences of public policy choices made around
financing health care. We review the theoretical literature where it guides
differences between the United States and other jurisdictions, although our focus
is on the empirical economic analysis of health care financing policy choices
internationally. We then summarize the implications of the evidence and offer
some general conclusions.


2. Background information on selected countries

       Although we have no strict criteria for a country’s inclusion in our review,
we restrict our focus to recent literature on health care financing published in
economic journals in English. As a result, a large amount of the work reviewed
here focuses on a small number of countries: Australia, Canada, France, Germany,
Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.



                                                                                      3
        Figure 2 compares the financing mix in these countries and in the United
States in 2011 or the most recent year for which data are available. It shows how
all seven countries use the full range of financing mechanisms. Public finance
(general and earmarked taxes) dominates and its share has grown slightly over
time in all except Germany. The UK relies most heavily on general taxes followed
by Canada and Australia, although the extent of the difference between the
countries is partly an artifact arising from the way in which the data are
presented. Statutory health insurance (SHI) funds (funds that are compulsory and
enforced by law) in most European countries obtain some of their revenue from
other tax sources in addition to payroll taxes. Internationally, health financing
data are broken down by expenditure agent rather than by collection mechanism.
This has the effect of obscuring the true ‘source’ of public revenues for the health
sector. In countries in which purchasers are statutory health insurance funds,
some non‐payroll tax revenue is invisible in international statistics, even when it
may be substantial; in France it accounts for over a third of SHI revenue (Chevreul
et al. 2010). The corollary is that payroll tax revenue may not visible in countries
where central government agencies pool funds and purchase health services; in
the UK it accounted for almost 20% of National Health Service (NHS) revenue in
2007, the latest year for which this figure is available (Boyle 2011).
        OECD data indicate that six out of the seven countries enjoy universal
coverage (Table 1a). The basis for entitlement to statutory coverage varies across
the countries and has changed over time within countries. Entitlement is based on
residence in England, Canada, Australia, and France, while Germany and
Switzerland employ universal mandates. Universally compulsory coverage is a
relatively recent development in France, Germany and Switzerland. Switzerland
introduced compulsory universal coverage in 1996 to address concerns about
unequal access to health insurance, gaps in coverage and rising health expenditure
(Crivelli 2013 in press). Before 2000 statutory health insurance in France was
compulsory for workers and their dependants and voluntary for everyone else;
those who could not afford to pay the fixed (non‐income‐related) contribution for
voluntary coverage relied on locally administered government subsidies
(Chevreul et al. 2010). In 2000 France broke the link with employment and
extended income‐related contributions to all residents, with free access to health
insurance for those with very low incomes. In 2009 Germany introduced
compulsory universal coverage to stem the growing number of uninsured people
(van Ginneken and Busse 2009), but it maintained the link between statutory
coverage and employment.
        Germany is the only OECD country to allow higher earners to opt out of
contributing to the statutory health insurance scheme and be privately covered
instead. Voluntary (private) health insurance plays a range of roles across the
seven countries, as shown in Table 1a. With the exception of the US, however, its
contribution to total spending on health does not exceed 15%. Measured in terms
of contribution to total spending on health, France, Germany and Switzerland have
three of the four largest markets for voluntary health insurance in Europe
(Thomson and Mossialos 2009).
        Collection agents for the dominant public financing mechanism range from
national tax agencies in England, Canada, and Australia and the national social
security agency in France, to individual health insurance funds in Germany and
Switzerland. Almost uniquely in Europe, Swiss health insurance funds are free to


                                                                                  4
set their own contribution rates (Thomson et al. 2009) (Table 1b). In contrast,
contribution rates in France and Germany are determined by central government,
long the norm in France but a recent development in Germany (introduced in
2009) (Ognyanova and Busse 2009). Switzerland is unique in two other ways.
First, it uses community‐rated rather than income‐related contributions to finance
statutory coverage, and these can vary significantly across funds, even in the same
Canton (region). Second, it requires all citizens, including dependent adults and
children, to pay premiums, whereas in France and Germany statutory health
insurance automatically covers dependents at no extra cost to the household.
France also exempts adults with annual taxable incomes below €9,020 from
paying contributions (about 2.3% of the population in 2006) (Chevreul et al.
2010).
         To secure financial protection for low‐income households the Swiss
Cantons operate a system of premium subsidies within parameters defined by the
federal government but with leeway to set eligibility thresholds for subsidies and
to determine the magnitude of subsidies. Until recently, the federal government
used a system of matching grants to encourage Cantons to offer a minimum level
of subsidy. In spite of this, there can be large differences across Cantons in
eligibility for subsidies and household premium costs (Thomson et al., 2013). The
other countries avoid the need for administratively complex and potentially
inequitable subsidies by imposing a national contribution rate and linking
contributions to income.
         As in the US, people in Germany and Switzerland have choice of health
insurer for publicly financed benefits (Table 1b). Insurers compete for enrollees
and are subject to some form of risk adjustment mechanism, to lower their
incentive to select risks.
         In terms of health care delivery, patients in all of the countries can
generally choose their physician and hospital. Gatekeeping (the requirement for a
referral for access to specialist care) is widely encouraged, often through financial
incentives. All seven countries have experimented with different ways of paying
providers. Fee‐for‐service payment of physicians continues to dominate in all
except England, while activity‐based funding through diagnosis‐related groups (a
system which classifies hospital cases/procedures into groups and then assigns
payment prices for these groups, commonly referred to as DRGs) is rapidly
becoming the norm for paying hospitals. Efforts to link provider payment to
performance feature in all except Canada and Switzerland.


3. Generating and Collecting Revenue

       How systems transfer money from individuals to providers has
implications for the efficiency of both the health system and the economy through
employment effects and dead weight loss. It also affects financial protection for
individuals against loss and the pooling of risk and may also affect the rate of
growth of health care costs and the responsiveness of the health system to
changes in economic activity. Publicly financed health care is usually generated via
two collection mechanisms ‐ general taxes and earmarked taxes (often referred to
as social insurance contributions, particularly when levied on wages) – and often
supplemented by user fees. General taxes and social insurance contributions affect


                                                                                   5
the medical sector directly only because of political economy considerations, while
user fees will have direct effects on the medical sector. This section first considers
the relative efficiency of general taxes versus earmarked taxes then looks at user
fees. The major empirical findings are highlighted in Table 2.


General and Earmarked Taxes

        The relative efficiency of different types of taxes used to finance health
systems has been explored in the public finance and health economics literature.
The equity and efficiency properties of general taxation (c.f. Auerbach, 1985) do
not differ depending on whether the money is spent on health or education per se,
although if the level of government that collects revenue differs from the level of
government that provides health coverage there may be equity issues and issues
about whether the level of taxation best meets local demand for the services
required (c.f. Ahmad and Brosio, 2006). Of course, the amount of deadweight loss
associated with any revenue generation will depend on the balance and type of
taxes used to raise the revenue. Once again, standard public finance theory on the
relative deadweight loss of income versus payroll versus consumption taxes apply,
regardless of the good being purchased with the revenue (Sandmo, 1976).
        Economic theory on the relative efficiency of social insurance contributions
versus general taxes suggests that where the contributions are applied to an entire
population or group, without option, and without direct linkage to the benefit
received, the contribution is equivalent to a tax (Blomqvist, 2011). If the
contribution program is directly related to the benefit program, then only the
difference between the contribution required and the value of the benefit received
will be treated as a tax. Although the public finance literature outlines the
inefficiencies inherent in earmarked funding, if contributions are earmarked for
health care there may be political economy reasons (such transparency and
greater protection from political interference) why voters prefer them to taxes
(Mossialos and Dixon, 2002).
        Some systems mandate individuals to obtain coverage through a network
of insurers and may allow insurers to collect some or all of the revenue. In such
cases part or all of the contribution may be levied in the form of a community‐
rated premium rather than as a proportion of income. There may be a single risk
pool or multiple risk pools with or without public subsidy (we turn to this issue in
more detail later). Whether government collection of revenues is superior or
inferior to other mechanisms for ensuring financial security such as mandating
coverage depends on a number of factors (explored in Summers, 1989). First,
mandates and taxes on labor can affect the level of employment and wages. The
extent depends on the supply of and demand for labor and consequent
deadweight loss. Mandates, if they are implemented as benefits per worker, will
operate similar to a lump sum tax. If certain types of employment are exempt
(such as part‐time work) mandates may have large effects on the demand for full‐
time versus part‐time work. Second, health coverage leads to an income effect, the
size of which depends on the individual’s valuation of the health coverage. Third,
the governance of public insurance is subject to the usual political economy
problems of government.



                                                                                    6
       Gruber (2000) provides a simple formalization of this analysis that is useful
for understanding the employment effects. Suppose labor demand, Ld, is given by:

Ld=fd(W+C)

where W is wages and C is insurance cost; and labor supply given by:

Ls=fs(W+αC)

where αC is the monetary value that employees place on health insurance. In this
case α is the valuation of the marginal dollar of health insurance. Then it is the
case that:

W  d   s
    d
C    s

where  d and  s are the elasticities of demand and supply for labor. Gruber notes
that this equation differs from the standard incidence of a tax on labor by the term
 s which “captures the increase in labor supply due to employee valuation of
more expensive insurance” (Gruber, 2000, p. 660).
        Valuations of α<1 may be more likely under publicly provided coverage or
mandates as contributions to the system are typically disconnected from benefits
received. This disconnect occurs whenever redistribution is an important element
of the public insurance arrangement and is minimized if benefits are valued at
their full cost. Where insurance is provided even if individuals do not work, then
the valuation of the benefit (α) will be closer to 0 than if benefits are only available
to workers (depending on any difference in coverage between workers and non‐
workers) and the cost will have a larger negative effect on employment.
        Given that mandated insurance can be less redistributive than publicly
provided coverage, does not necessarily involve centralized revenue collection,
and does not generally involve government provision of insurance or services, it is
arguable that these inefficiencies are smaller for mandates than for publicly
provided insurance. Summers (1989) therefore concludes that mandates are to be
preferred to public provision. On the other hand, transaction costs and the
effectiveness of mandates may be a matter of concern. A variety of other economic
and political factors, including a desire to redistribute through the health
insurance system, may cause systems to deviate from the theoretically superior
outcome.
        Many health systems explicitly or implicitly aim to redistribute income
from higher‐ to lower‐income individuals. The extent of this redistribution is a not
a priori related to the financing mechanism used, although health systems
financed through general tax revenues tend to be more redistributive in practice
than those financed through social insurance contributions and those that are
more privately financed (Wagstaff et al, 1992; Wagstaff, 2010). Payroll
contributions are often capped, unlike income taxes, and if they are progressive
instead of proportional, they tend to have smaller increases in the marginal rate as
they move up the income scale. Another important element of the extent of
redistribution will be the utilization of the system by high‐ versus low‐income


                                                                                      7
individuals. Once differences in access and life expectancy are taken into account,
it may be the case that the marginal dollar allocated to health care is less
redistributive than a dollar allocated to education or income assistance because
higher income individuals are likely to live longer and therefore benefit more from
the publicly financed health care system (Glied, 2008).
        There is a long‐standing debate in the literature on whether health systems
financed through general tax revenues are better able to control health care costs
than those financed through social insurance contributions, and on the
relationship between financing structure and health outcomes. One of the
difficulties with the literature is that characterizing a health system by its primary
source of finance is akin to painting with an extremely large brush. No two tax‐
financed or social insurance‐financed systems are alike; for example, the UK and
Canada are both tax financed, but there are few other similarities. In one recent
study, Wagstaff (2009) uses system changes from general tax financing to social
insurance within OECD countries between 1960 and 2006 to examine whether
social health insurance leads to increased or decreased cost growth. Looking at
changes within countries over time potentially overcomes the problems of
comparisons across very different systems. However, large changes in financing
are somewhat rare, and may be a function of other underlying economic
conditions also related to public spending. To try and account for the fact that
switching is potentially endogenous, these models include both difference‐in‐
difference models and IV models (using lags of the social insurance indicator
variable as an instrument). The findings suggest that there is an increase in health
care costs of 3 to 4 percent associated with a move to social insurance and that
this move is related to a decline in formal sector employment of 8 to 10 percent.
Some of the decline in formal sector employment may simply involve a shift to
non‐formal employment (presumably to avoid the costs associated with social
insurance premiums in formal employment settings) as the estimates on overall
employment levels are smaller and less robust. The study finds no evidence that
the transition to social insurance results in declines in avoidable mortality (deaths
from specific conditions, such as diabetes, which should not occur if timely and
effective care is available). The results are driven by those countries which
transitioned from social insurance to tax financed or vice versa, including
Denmark, Sweden, Italy, and Spain who moved away from social insurance, and a
number of eastern European countries who moved toward it.
        A related paper (Wagstaff and Moreno‐Serra, 2009) uses a similar
methodology to look at a different set of countries and time period. They examine
transitions between one financing structure and another among Eastern European
and Asian countries between 1990 and 2003. These transitions were relatively
large and fast compared to the slower evolution of more developed health care
systems. They find even larger results for the transition from general tax‐financed
to social insurance financing. Their estimates of increases in spending per capita
are in the order of 11 percent, with a 3 percent increase in inpatient admissions
(although average length of stay declined). Once again, there was no evidence of
differences in health outcomes as a result of financing transitions. Wagstaff and
Moreno‐Serra suggest that physicians in these countries saw the transition as an
opportunity to increase resources in the system and therefore their incomes
which may help explain some of the results. They also hypothesize that the
transition to social insurance lead to less integrated systems leaving some people


                                                                                    8
slow to sign up for insurance and others not captured by prevention programs,
both potentially leading to increased overall costs. However, the fact that they find
no overall change in outcomes suggests that the magnitude of these types of
effects must have been fairly small.
        A recent paper by Cylus et al. (2012) explores the relationship between
collection mechanism (tax‐financed versus social insurance) and the relationship
between economic downturns and health care spending. Using OECD data on
within country variations for several European countries, the authors estimate
models of the relationship between changes in GDP and changes in public health
care expenditures. They find that growth in public health care expenditures is
more strongly associated with changes in GDP (positively) in tax‐financed
countries than in countries primarily funded through social insurance
contributions. The results stem from cost shifting and other policy changes in tax
financed‐countries that occurred in economic downturns. While policy responses
to economic crises are clearly possible in social insurance countries as well, cost
shifting (mainly onto users) did not occur to the same extent. The authors
hypothesize that tax‐financed countries are, in general, more susceptible to
government decisions to reduce costs in times of economic crisis.
        Finally, recent work by Baicker and Skinner (2011) models the efficiency of
raising revenues to finance rising health care costs in the US (and elsewhere as
health care costs are rising more quickly than economic growth in many OECD
countries). The authors develop a macroeconomic model that accounts for
increases in health care spending that improve longevity but need to be funded
through increased taxation. In a comparison of raising revenue through increased
marginal tax rates versus less progressive payroll tax, they find substantial
declines in economic growth with the former: an 11 percent decline in GDP
relative to the baseline of no distortionary impact of tax financing. The efficiency
costs are lower when less progressive taxes are used to finance the increase in
costs, although this is associated with lower income individuals paying a larger
share of the overall costs. Not surprisingly, the efficiency cost is also lower when
less revenue is required to achieve the same health gains (increased productivity
of health spending).


Cost Sharing and User Fees

        The third collection mechanism used in a variety of health systems is user
charges or fees (co‐payments and other forms of cost sharing). These generally
consist of some form of positive price charged to the user at the point of service
and from an economic theory point of view can all be modeled as consumer prices
(Schokkaert and Van de Voorde, 2011). User fees generally have two purposes,
first as a mechanism for revenue collection, and second as a mechanism to achieve
a more efficient allocation of resources. Regarding the second, allocative efficiency,
several studies (c.f. Pauly, 1974) have shown that in the presence of moral hazard,
the optimal theoretical solution includes some cost sharing for some services. The
principal problem here is that the individual has information and control over
future health states that the insurer cannot observe. This moral hazard problem
results in the individual consuming excess care and taking less preventative
action. The optimal solution in this case is for the insured individual to retain part


                                                                                    9
of the losses (Pauly, 1974). Others have argued that for non‐elective procedures
cost sharing may lead to inefficient outcomes as individuals place a high value on
the care purchased from insurance payouts when ill. In this setting individuals
purchase insurance not to avoid risk necessarily, but for a claim on additional
income when sick (Nyman, 2003).
        In the case of cost sharing for the purpose of revenue collection, it is not
clear, given the administrative costs involved, and the equity considerations, that
user fees are an optimal means of supplementing taxes and contributions in
developed health systems. Schokkaert and Van de Voorde (2011) note that strict
assumptions about the limitations of public financing mechanisms for the health
care budget are required for user fees to be optimal as a part of the revenue‐
raising basket, namely that that government subsidies remain fixed in the
presence of user fees (i.e. that government funds are not crowded out) and that
the additional revenue is used to increase the quantity or quality of health
services.
        International evidence on the effects of various forms of user fees as a
supplemental collection mechanism is consistent with theory and evidence from
the United States. Evidence from Canada, for example, which examines how
individuals who need to pay out of pocket for prescription drugs use care relative
to those who do not, suggests a negative demand elasticity in the order of those
found in the RAND experiment (around ‐0.2 for prescription drug coverage) and
greater use of publicly financed doctor services (Finkelstein, 2002; Stabile, 2001).
Evidence from Canada that examines increases in user fees for prescription drugs
also finds negative health effects and increased emergency room use for older and
low‐income users (Tamblyn et al., 2001). Evidence from France, where voluntary
health insurance reimburses user fees for publicly financed services, suggests that
voluntary insurance increases utilization and, therefore, publicly financed costs
(Buchmueller et al., 2004). The relationship between out‐of‐pocket prices and
utilization holds in a number of other countries in the OECD and across a broader
spectrum of low‐ and middle‐income countries (Gertler and Hammer, 1997).
Using the introduction of referenced based pricing in parts of Canada as a quasi‐
experiment (where a fee is applied to a user if he/she chooses a drug in the same
class as the reference drug but at a higher cost), Grootendorst and Stewart (2006)
find only modest declines in overall drug expenditure when comparing changes in
expenditures in the province that introduced referenced‐based pricing to those
that did not. However, the authors note that part of the reason for the small
behavioral response found here may be that the policy was either not applicable
or not binding for many users, limiting the potential for savings. There is some
evidence of movement towards strategies that promote efficiency through value‐
based cost sharing (using cost sharing to encourage patients to use medication,
services, and providers that offer better value than other options) rather than
simply applying user fees across the board (Stabile et al, 2013).

        Overall, the evidence summarized above and reported in table 2 reveals
policy changes across countries to improve financing incentives and encourage
efficient use of health services. The evidence suggests that collection mechanisms
alone are not effective in managing health care costs or quality. Some evidence
suggests that financing through social insurance is associated with higher cost
growth over time than financing through general tax revenues, but public


                                                                                 10
spending on health tends to track GDP more closely (particularly in recessions) in
tax‐financed systems than in systems financed through social insurance.


4. Pooling Risk

        This section examines the literature on options for pooling risk and
managing adverse selection and implications for health system efficiency and
costs. The major empirical findings are highlighted in Table 3. Problems with
adverse selection have long been recognized in the health insurance literature.
Individuals with higher expected costs will be more likely to seek more generous
insurance, and insurance providers in a voluntary competitive market will need to
price insurance offerings at costs above the average value of the benefits package
to offset the higher expected costs of both benefits and selection (Cutler and
Reber, 1998). This can result in benefits packages that are unaffordable for many
high‐cost individuals. Risk pooling designed to counter these concerns has been a
primary objective of many health systems. Since information about individuals’
health insurance costs is imperfect and asymmetric, perfect risk adjustment across
individuals is unattainable. Second‐best solutions in the presence of imperfect
information lead to a number of potential problems in practice, including residual
selection, blunted incentives for providers to manage care, a misallocation of
individuals across plans, or a reduction in choice of insurers and type of coverage.
        The theoretical literature on risk pooling offers a number of strategies for
dealing with adverse selection given imperfect information. One obvious solution
is for governments to create a single, mandatory pool or to have multiple pools but
without competition and choice between pools. While the clear upside to these
solutions is the elimination of adverse selection problems, there may also be
efficiency costs due to the uncompetitive nature of the insurance market.
        Governments that wish to preserve universal access to insurance without
using a single pool or eliminating consumer choice of insurer can pursue a set of
alternate strategies to manage risk selection. They can provide subsidies to
individuals ‐ cash transfers, vouchers, tax‐favored treatment, tax credits, etc ‐ to
enable them to purchase high‐cost insurance. van de Ven and Schut (2011) note
that premium subsidies are unlikely to be optimal for three reasons: they reduce
the incentive for efficient purchasing of insurance by high‐risk individuals; they
encourage excess purchase of insurance and the resulting moral hazard effects
(Zweifel and Manning, 2000); and they may create a misallocation of subsides if
the magnitude of the premium is based on elements that are not relevant for the
level of the subsidy (such as differences in efficiency among health insurers or
regional differences in prices). In contrast, risk‐adjusted subsidies, where
payments are based on observable risk factors such as age, sex, and health status,
retain consumer price sensitivity and can be adjusted over time to reflect changes
in consumer risk (van de Ven, 2006). Risk‐adjusted subsidies can be given to
individuals or to insurers. Alternatively, governments can regulate rates and
insurance plan features and then compensate plans for the expected risk pool
after the fact (van de Ven and Ellis, 2000).
        Where subsidies are provided by government to the insurer, individuals
are then charged a community‐rated contribution for insurance that is not based
on their expected costs. van de Ven and Schut (2011) refer to subsidies provided


                                                                                 11
to insurers as risk equalization and note that these are far more common in
practice than subsidies provided to individuals, due to lower transaction costs.
The ultimate success of these risk adjustment mechanisms depends on ability to
determine risk (van de Ven et al., 2000). Glazer and McGuire (2000) show that in
an optimal risk adjustment framework, prices paid to insurers should not only
reflect differences in costs across patients, but also provide incentives for higher
quality care for the types of patients likely to enroll in the plan. Under this type of
framework, risk adjustment payments would overpay insurers relative to
payments based solely on average costs (Glazer and McGuire, 2000).
         Brown et al. (2011) show that firms will respond to risk adjustment models
by a) reducing their screening efforts along the dimensions included in the model
and b) selecting patients conditional on risk adjustment and based on
characteristics not included in the risk adjustment formula. These efforts can
result in increases rather than decreases in the differential payments (the original
payment given to the insurer to cover someone minus the counterfactual costs if
the government had covered the costs for the person) which would be counter to
the objectives of the government in providing the risk adjustment to the insurer.
         The European health systems in this review with competitive health
insurance ‐ Germany and Switzerland ‐ have significantly improved their risk
equalization schemes in the last ten years and now have relatively sophisticated
formulas that include health‐based risk adjusters (Thomson et al, 2013). In spite
of this, insurers’ incentives to select risks can be substantial and there continues to
be (largely circumstantial) evidence of risk selection (van de Ven et al, 2007) and
hence potential inefficiencies in risk pooling.
         Nuscheler and Knaus (2005) investigate the effects of the 1996 German
reforms that allowed for greater competition among sickness funds to test for
evidence of risk selection by company‐based sickness funds. The reforms
increased the number of people switching between sickness funds from around 6
percent pre reform to 10 percent three years after the reform. The paper suggests
that healthier workers had lower switching costs and therefore were more likely
to switch funds (to company‐based funds and regional funds, so switching may not
have been due to targeted selection efforts on the part of company‐based funds
but rather driven by individual selection) and that company‐based funds with
lower premiums enjoyed a healthier pool of enrollees as a result of the reforms.
         The Swiss system also promotes choice for individuals and competition
among health insurance providers. Swiss residents can choose among 35 different
sellers of insurance for the statutory health insurance package (Frank and
Lamiraud, 2009). All individuals are required to obtain statutory coverage and, as
noted above, there is risk equalization run by the state on a Canton by Canton
basis. Colombo (2001) investigates the effects of consumer choice in this context
and finds there is little switching behavior, with only 3.9% of people switching in a
given year. Frank and Lamiraud (2009) show that switching behavior actually
declines as the number of options available in the Swiss context increases.
         Risk selection also can be exacerbated by the functioning of the voluntary
health insurance market when consumer purchasing decisions for the two forms
of insurance are linked. For example, if consumers have strong incentives to
purchase voluntary insurance from the same insurer from whom they purchase
statutory or compulsory coverage (for reasons of convenience or legal
requirement), and if selection is permitted in the voluntary market and desirable


                                                                                    12
for insurers but difficult in the statutory market, then selection in the voluntary
market may affect selection in the statutory market. This could limit consumer
mobility in the statutory market. Swiss citizens are able to purchase
complementary voluntary insurance to cover services excluded from the statutory
benefits package such as some drugs, access to certain physicians and treatment
outside the Canton of residence. Swiss insurers can sell complementary benefits to
individuals that hold statutory coverage with the same insurer. In contrast to
statutory plans, complementary plans are not risk adjusted or community rated.
Paolucci et al (2006) review whether the complementary insurance market can be
used to undermine risk adjustment across a number of jurisdictions (including
Switzerland). They explore how the probability that the voluntary market will be
used for selection in the statutory market varies with the strength of incentives for
risk selection in the statutory market and the strength of the links between
statutory and voluntary insurance and find prima facie evidence that risk
adjustment in the statutory insurance market is hampered through selection in
the voluntary market, particularly in Switzerland.
        Additional evidence by Lehmann and Zweifel (2004) examines a major
Swiss insurance company that also offers a managed care option to better
understand the extent of risk selection versus innovation in explaining the cost
differences between insurance options in the Swiss context. They conclude that
while there is favorable risk selection into lower cost insurance options such as
managed care – selection that is not fully captured by the simple risk adjustment
mechanism – most cost savings are due to contractual innovation on the part of
the managed‐care organization.
        Although the European countries have put in place numerous mechanisms
to allow individuals to move easily from one insurer to another (open enrolment,
full cover of pre‐existing conditions, standardized benefits etc) and to facilitate
insurer competition for members (the option for premium variation and risk
adjustment), there is some evidence of barriers to switching for older and
apparently less healthy people and, in Switzerland, of ‘inertia’ in the face of
multiple insurance options. This suggests two things: first, choice of insurer may
not be as great a stimulus to enhancing efficiency and quality as expected if
insurers only risk losing low‐cost individuals, and therefore do not face incentives
to improve care for higher‐cost individuals but instead compete only for the low
risks. Second, there may be a point beyond which insurance options present
information problems that lead to inertia and loss of value for the consumer. Thus,
the transaction costs of insurer competition may be high for individuals and the
health system.
        The evidence from Germany and Switzerland reviewed above is consistent
with evidence from the US Medicare market. A recent paper by Brown et al.
(2011) investigates differences between traditional Medicare programs for older
people and private “Medicare Advantage” (MA) programs. Despite the fact that
these must be offered at the same price as traditional Medicare programs, and the
fact that the government implemented differential payment to these programs
based on patient risk scores, MA programs have disproportionately enrolled
lower‐cost individuals. Newhouse et al. (2012) also investigate recent steps taken
to reduce favorable selection into MA programs, including improved risk
adjustment through better use of diagnostic information on inpatient and
outpatient claims forms and changes to make it more difficult to leave MA monthly


                                                                                  13
(called a partial enrollment “lock‐in” that kept people in MA for the final nine
months of the year). They conclude that risk selection was greatly reduced,
although not to zero. Therefore, despite government intervention there is still
evidence of some risk selection among insurers in the United States.
        US empirical economic literature on the demand for insurance has
advanced our understanding of who seeks insurance and why over the past
decade. The classical economics literature worked from the premise that buying
insurance is more attractive for riskier individuals. The more likely an individual
is to need care, the more likely he/she is to buy insurance. For a given price,
therefore, sicker individuals are more likely to buy insurance, all else equal. Einav
and Finkelstein (2011) note that competitive pricing responds to the average
insured individual while efficient pricing should be based on the marginal
individual who is less risky than the average individual. Therefore, insurance
prices tend to be too high, leading to under‐insurance in the presence of adverse
selection.
        In recent work, however, Einav, Finkelstein and Levin (2010) find that
there are a number of other dimensions to the demand for insurance beyond risk,
including, importantly, risk aversion. For example, in the US long‐term care
market, they found that in addition to predicted use of long‐term care, individuals
who exhibit more precautionary behavior (through preventative measures such as
seat belt use and getting flu shots) are more likely to buy long‐term care
(advantageous rather than adverse selection), and less likely to use long‐term
care, thereby eliminating adverse selection in this market (Finkelstein and
McGarry, 2006). Fang et al. (2008) also find further evidence of “advantageous”
selection in the US Medigap insurance market, along a number of non‐health or
risk‐related dimensions. Similar results are found in voluntary health insurance
markets in European countries (Bolin et al., 2010). In light of this empirical
evidence, Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010) estimate the efficiency
consequences of selection in the context of a large firm and find only modest
welfare costs from adverse selection. Thus, while all of the studies reported find
evidence of some adverse selection, the extent of this selection, and the presence
of advantageous selection in some cases, suggest that the welfare loss traditionally
associated with adverse selection may be less than previously thought and that
concerns about it may have been overstated.

        In conclusion, the evidence reviewed above and summarized in Table 3
suggests that countries with competing pools experience similar difficulties with
selection and are adopting more sophisticated forms of risk adjustment. The
nature of the market for voluntary insurance can play a role in exacerbating
selection. Recent evidence suggests that more detailed data on use, coupled with
restrictions on ability to change insurer, can significantly mitigate risk selection.


5. Purchasing Services

       All health systems require the purchase of a wide range of goods and
services provided by hospitals, labs, pharmaceutical companies, physicians and
other care givers. The purchasing function may be carried out by government
agencies, insurers, groups of doctors acting on behalf of patients or patients


                                                                                    14
themselves. It involves decisions about what services to buy, from whom, at what
price and under what conditions. Many OECD health systems have experimented
with policies intended to strengthen the purchasing function by moving away
from passive reimbursement of providers. Common tools adopted in recent years
include hospital competition, activity‐based payment for hospital services (or
Diagnosis Related Groups, (DRGs) a system which classifies hospital
cases/procedures into groups and then assigns payment prices for these groups)
and the linking of provider payment to performance and outcomes (pay‐for‐
performance, P4P). We review the literature on recent innovations in hospital
competition and provider payment below, and summarize the empirical literature
in Table 4.


Hospital Competition

        The National Health Service (NHS) in England has, in the last twenty years,
engaged in several experiments to foster patient choice of hospital and encourage
hospital competition. The extent to which hospital competition improves quality
or prices may differ depending on the nature of the market. For a thorough review
of the nature of competition in health care markets and a summary of the recent
research in this area, see Gaynor and Town (2011). In many markets prices are set
by regulators, leading to non‐price competition based on quality. Hospital quality
is inherently hard to measure and has multiple dimensions. Some dimensions,
such as waiting times are relatively easy to measure. Others, such as risk‐adjusted
mortality can be more difficult to quantify. The theoretical effects of competition
under fixed prices are increased quality, with a greater effect where there is a
larger number of firms in the market; quality will also increase as regulated prices
increase (Gaynor and Town, 2011). Propper et al. (2004) and Propper et al. (2008)
argue that in markets with stricter budget constraints (generally where there are
large government purchasers or where purchaser budgets are determined by
governments), prices will be relatively more important and therefore hospitals
will compete on prices instead of on quality. The theoretical effect on quality in
this case is indeterminate and may result in quality below efficient levels.
        Evidence from a variety of reforms in England are generally consistent with
these predictions. In the early 1990s the creation of an internal market through a
purchaser‐provider split allowed District Health Authorities (DHAs) with
responsibility for meeting the health needs of their local population to purchase
services from hospitals. The aim was to make hospitals compete for the business
of DHAs and of groups of GPs who held funds to purchase care for their patients
(“GP fundholders”), thereby improving efficiency and quality. Following a change
of government in 1997, the purchaser‐provider split remained in place and new
geographically defined primary care trusts (PCTs) were set up to purchase
services from primary care providers and hospitals. In the mid 2000s, the
government experimented with a variant of GP fundholding known as practice‐
based commissioning (Bevan and van de Ven, 2010). And in 2013 a new
government established clinical commissioning groups to facilitate purchasing by
groups of GPs.
        Propper et al. (2004) examine the effects of hospital competition on
mortality. They define catchment areas for each hospital, capture the number of


                                                                                 15
hospitals in each area, then weight this measure by the population each area
serves. Their findings suggest that increased hospital competition reduced quality;
hospitals located in areas with more competition had higher death rates than
those in areas with lower levels of competition, controlling for observable
differences in patient and hospital characteristics. The size of the effect is small
but robust. In a follow‐up study, however, Propper et al. (2008) note that where
outcomes are easily observable (wait times), hospitals had to compete on both
price and quality (wait times) and competition led to improvements, but at the
expense of quality measures that are more difficult to observe. Other evidence
reviewed in Bevan and van de Ven (2010) suggests that NHS hospitals increased
productivity and that while wait times appeared to improve under GP fundholding
there did not appear to be much evidence of a reduction in costs.
        The GP fundholder model was in place from 1991 to 1999 when it was
abolished. Dusheiko et al. (2006) use this policy reversal to examine the effects of
supply‐side cost sharing on physician behavior. They find strong evidence that GP
fundholding resulted in a decline in secondary admissions (as would be predicted
by the theory). They find no evidence that the result of this was a substitution of
emergency admissions for elective admissions through a GP. This suggests that
incentivizing the gatekeeping function of GPs does result in less utilization,
potentially resulting in worse care for patients. However, we review other effects
of the reforms below (such as improved wait times for patients who were in GP
fundholder groups) and a complete analysis of the welfare effects of such policies
would need to take into account the combined effects.
        Further reforms in England sought increased patient choice of the location,
time and day of elective surgery to reduce waiting times and improve quality
through competition, with money “following the patient” (DRGs) (Dixon et al,
2010). The reforms, commonly referred to as “Choose and Book”, were slow to get
off the ground. Dixon et al. (2010) report that as of 2008, less than half of GP
referrals for outpatient appointments used the new system. Gaynor et al. (2010)
examine evidence of increased consumer choice through “Choose and Book” and
the introduction of DRGs. Using discharge data and comparing variation in market
structure across hospitals through market concentration, they found that hospitals
competed on quality, resulting in improvements in mortality and length of stay. In
a follow‐up paper (Gaynor et al., 2012) the authors estimate a structural demand
model using data from the same reforms for coronary artery bypass graft (CABG)
surgery. Their estimates confirm that reforms giving patients choice of hospital
increased patient elasticity of demand with respect to service quality. They found
considerable heterogeneity in their estimates, with sicker patients responding
more to the reform, but did not find significant response differences by income
(Gaynor et al., 2012).
        Cooper et al. (2010) also examine the effects of increased competition in
the NHS using a difference‐in‐differences approach with “exposure” to
competition and time as the two differences. They find that while increased
competition among public sector hospitals improved productivity through shorter
length of stay (particularly for pre surgery), competition between public and
private hospitals had the opposite effect, with post‐surgery length of stay
increasing in public hospitals as a result of competition (pre‐surgery lengths of
stay remained relatively unchanged). The authors offer patient selection (less



                                                                                 16
complicated patients being drawn to the private sector) as an explanation for
these differing effects.
        Evidence from Australia also suggests mixed benefits from increased
competition in a context where public and private hospitals are competing for
patients and have multiple payers (both government and private insurance).
Australia has a relatively high share of procedures in private hospitals, at around
30% of all inpatient admissions, and high levels of private insurance coverage, at
around 45% of the population (Palangkaraya and Yong, 2013). In a setting where
public hospitals and private hospitals compete on price and quality, Palangkaraya
and Yong (2013) examine the effects of hospital competition on mortality and
readmissions using hospital discharge data. Their evidence suggests that
competition has mixed effects on quality: a small increase in mortality but a larger
decrease in unplanned readmissions. However, the research setting here does not
allow for quasi‐experimental control for other factors that may be associated with
greater competition, which might bias the results.
        Once again, the evidence from the UK and Australia is consistent with
evidence from the introduction of drug coverage through Medicare Part D in the
United States. Research there suggests that the mechanisms used by government
to purchase prescription drugs, i.e. moving patients from individual purchasers to
members of an insured group, can have strong effects on market outcomes
including lowering optimal prices (in contrast to the standard insurance finding of
an increase in prices). Their findings come from insurers as part of the Medicare
Part D program which bundles insurance with a formulary and group purchasing.
The reasons behind this counter‐intuitive result include the ability of insurance
plans to bundle insurance with formularies and other mechanisms to create
elastic demand. Individuals, unlike insurance plans, are not well informed about
the substitutability of drugs, and doctors are generally not well informed about
negotiated prices. Insurance plans, on the other hand, are able to provide rules
and incentives to take advantage of both of these resulting in lower prices.
(Duggan and Scott Morton, 2010).
        In sum, the literature finds mixed effects of competition on quality. This
may be partly due to differences in quality measures with fairly uniform evidence
on the relationship between quality and wait times and more mixed evidence on
quality measures that are harder to consistently measure such as risk‐adjusted
mortality.


Provider Payment: DRGs and Pay‐For‐Performance

        The introduction of Diagnosis Related Groups to pay for hospital care has
been a major trend across OECD countries. Expressed policy reasons for this move
include increased efficiency, transparency, the ability to increase volumes for
select services, and cost‐containment. A review of the evidence across Europe
suggests that greater use of DRGs led to an increase in admission rates and a
decline in the average length of stay, as would be predicted, suggesting
improvements in quality (Busse et al., 2012). Evidence on the effect of DRGs on
overall system costs, as distinct from per‐unit costs, is more difficult to ascertain,
with some evidence of higher overall costs in France and limited evidence on costs
in the UK and Germany (O’Reilly et al, 2012).


                                                                                   17
         Reform of physician payment has mainly focused on linking payment to
performance and the United Kingdom has experimented more substantially with
P4P than any other European country. P4P was introduced to pay UK GPs in 2003,
with 25% of GP income tied to meeting quality targets in a system known as the
‘Quality and Outcomes Framework’ (QOF) (Gravelle et al, 2008). QOF uses a list of
65 clinical quality indicators for patients in the practice. Payments are linearly
related to the number of patients who achieve the indicators as a ratio of those
suitable for the indicator. When patients are not suitable for the indicator they are
considered “exceptions”. This ensures that quality measures are not applied to
those patients for whom they are not appropriate. However, it also allows GPs to
exclude patients for whom they cannot reach the quality standards. Gravelle et al.
(2008) investigate both the degree to which GPs are meeting quality standards
and the magnitude of exception reporting using GP data from Scotland. The results
suggest that over 90% of practices achieved the highest level of pay for
performance and that these practices exceeded the standard required to maximize
pay. Only 1% of patients seemed inappropriately excepted. However, a follow‐up
study by Gravelle et al. (2010) uses provider level data to test whether physicians
gamed the system to take advantage of the available financial rewards by not only
increasing the number of patients treated successfully but also by decreasing the
number of patients eligible for treatment thereby improving their ratios of treated
patients and improving their financial reward and find evidence of such gaming
behavior.
         In terms of the effects of QOF on patient outcomes, the evidence suggests
mixed success. Campbell et al. (2007) examine the improvements in UK primary
care using a longitudinal cohort study that spans the introduction of pay for
performance and focuses on the management of three major chronic conditions:
asthma, coronary heart disease and type 2 diabetes. While the authors note
improvements in practice quality for all three of these groups over the 1998 to
2005 period, the improvements began before the introduction of QOF and are in
evidence both for those clinical indicators that received financial incentives for
improvement and those that did not. They conclude that QOF is associated only
with a modest acceleration in improvement for asthma and diabetes.
         A second investigation on the effects of QOF on quality of care by Serumaga
et al. (2011) focuses on patients with hypertension. The study compares cohorts
who started treatment in 2000 (several years before the introduction of pay for
performance in the UK) with those who started six months before the introduction
of pay for performance. They conclude that there were no changes in incidence of
adverse outcomes or mortality related to hypertension as a result of the
implementation of pay for performance.
          More recent evidence from a hospital P4P program (Sutton et al., 2012)
uses a difference‐in‐differences framework to examine the changes in mortality
for patients admitted with pneumonia, heart failure and AMI before and after the
introduction of the Advancing Quality program – a hospital based pay for
performance program introduced in the north‐west region of England but not in
the rest of the country. The findings suggest improvements in mortality relative to
the rest of the country and the authors note that in comparison to other programs
that have not found such large results the program had larger bonuses and greater
investment by hospitals in quality‐improvement activities.



                                                                                  18
       The evidence from the UK is reflected in evidence from the US. For
example, in the Medicaid market, Duggan (2004) finds that government contracts
with HMOs to take on Medicaid patients resulted in higher costs per patient with
no corresponding improvement in (infant) health outcomes. A review of the
broader literature on P4P by Rosenthal and Frank (2006) suggests that the
empirical evidence in support of pay‐for‐performance in the US is weak. They note
that among the health care studies reviewed, many show no results. They also
note, however, that many of these studies were small scale interventions that may
not have been picked up by physicians, and that the lack of outcomes here,
therefore, may not be generalizable to larger scale interventions.

        Overall there has been convergence towards more use of market‐like
mechanisms in OECD health systems. These include wide adoption of DRGs to pay
hospitals, attempts to encourage hospital competition and, more recently, greater
efforts to link provider payment to performance. The evidence on hospital
competition (summarized in Table 4) suggests that where outcomes are easily
observable or targeted (such as wait times) hospitals compete on price and quality
(wait times), leading to improved outcomes.


6. Coverage Decisions

       Decisions about whom to cover (breadth), what to cover (scope) and how
much of the cost to cover (depth) may have implications for efficiency, costs, and
quality. In addition to coverage decisions, governments in many jurisdictions are
often able to determine how quickly to provide services. Systems with fixed
budgets or other budget constraint mechanisms for health care provision
generally employ price and non‐price rationing to control access and costs within
the publicly financed system. One of the most common non‐price rationing
mechanisms is to limit access to care through wait lists. Indeed, long waiting times
and care rationed by mechanisms other than price are often expressed concerns in
US policy debates around an increased role for government in the health care
sector (c.f. Esmail, 2009). Here, we focus on coverage breadth and scope and on
waiting times (given the large role it plays in the debate around rationing care), as
we discussed coverage depth in the sub‐section on user fees above. The empirical
evidence reviewed is summarized in Table 5.


Demand For Insurance and Coverage Breadth and Scope

       As all the countries that we review here have universal or nearly universal
coverage, we examine the literature on the demand for insurance that
complements these systems and hence helps define public coverage decisions. We
do not address literature on the demand for insurance that supplements or “tops
up” public coverage here1, with the exception of the subsidies for insurance


1The public finance literature explores the welfare effects of allowing for private
topping up of universal public benefits, comparing the effects of such a system to


                                                                                  19
through tax systems, as it does not relate directly to coverage decisions within the
public system (see Thomson and Mossialos, 2009 and Stabile and Townsend, 2013
for reviews of this literature).
        While doctors and hospital services are universally and uniquely covered
by the provincial health insurance plans in Canada, coverage of other services,
such as pharmaceuticals, dental services, and other non‐hospital or doctor based
care is not universal. These services are covered by a mix of private and public
insurance and public subsidy, depending on province of residence, age, and
income (Stabile, 2001). Several studies have looked at the financing and equity
implications of this mixed public and private coverage, particularly around
prescription drug coverage which has been one of the fasting growing components
of health care costs in Canada over the past few decades (Alan et al, 2005).
        Research on the effects of public drug insurance programs explores the
equity and cost implications of changes in pharmaceutical coverage from age‐
based coverage to income‐based coverage. In British Columbia, prior to 2003 the
government provided coverage for individuals age 65 and older (similar to US
Medicare). In 2003 the province switched from age‐based coverage to an income ‐
based coverage program where the amount of coverage, deductible and cost
sharing varied by family income. The explicit goals of the policy change were a) to
make the provincial drug program more sustainable and b) to increase fairness
and equity within the drug program (Hanley et al., 2008). A review of the equity
consequences of the shift from age to needs‐based coverage suggests that the
coverage change did result in a less regressive drug program in BC in terms of the
out of pocket funds paid for drugs. This change was driven by an increase in the
out‐of‐pocket costs paid by higher income seniors following the policy change.
Although the overall effect was to make the program less regressive, the average
out of pocket costs for low‐income households also increased (Hanley et al., 2008).
        Apart from targeted public drug insurance programs, the government of
Canada provides significant subsidy for the purchase of voluntary health
insurance through the tax code. Like the United States, Canada exempts employer
contributions to health insurance from personal taxable income. The most recent
review of these tax expenditures suggest that they are in the order of $3 billion
annually (Department of Finance Canada, 2011). Research examining the
implications of these subsidies on linking voluntary health insurance to the labor
market suggest that there is a larger impact of the subsidies on the probability
that small firms offer insurance in Canada (as well as the US) and less likely to
affect the decision of larger firms to offer insurance given the other advantages
(large risk pools and administrative efficiencies) available to large firms (Stabile,
2002). The evidence here suggests that in the absence of these subsidies,
complementary drug coverage offered through small firms would decline
significantly (in the order of 50%).
        In addition to subsidizing the purchase of insurance through an employer,
the Canadian system, like the US system, allows for deductions and credits for out
of pocket health care expenditures when these expenditures exceed a certain


one where individuals either choose to participate in the benefit program or opt
out completely. See Currie and Gahvari (2008) for a review of this literature.



                                                                                   20
share of personal income. As with the employer deduction, the subsidy varies with
the individual’s marginal tax rate. Evidence exploring the effects of these subsidies
also confirms significant tax‐price elasticities with respect to all health care
expenditures, and with respect to the purchase of voluntary health insurance
(Smart and Stabile, 2005). There is no evidence, however, that these subsidies
affect the purchase of health insurance on the intensive margin. This is likely
because both insurance premiums and out‐of‐pocket spending are eligible for the
tax credit, leaving the relative price of market health insurance and self insurance
unchanged in Canada (Smart and Stabile, 2005). In sum, the subsidies have
increased coverage rates substantially, but at the cost of significant public revenue
loss and reduced equity.
        Australia has also promoted voluntary private health insurance along with
the public system through the use of tax subsidies through large universal rebates
on private insurance purchases, lifetime community rating based on the age that
insurance is first purchased, as well as tax surcharges on high earners who do not
purchase private insurance. Evidence on the effects of these large subsidies on
insurance take up unsurprisingly finds large increases in private insurance take up
(Hurley et al, 2002) and selection into insurance by individuals who expect to be
heavy users of hospital services (Savage and Wright, 2003). Additionally, the
evidence suggests that the combination of tax subsidies and the effects of private
systems on the health care input costs (both in the short and long run) limit the
potential cost savings for the public sector (Hurley et al., 2002). The authors note
that there is no conclusive evidence from Australia that shows a decline in public
waiting times following the introduction of a parallel private system, nor that
public costs were reduced when the overall cost of the policies are taken into
account.


Economic Evaluation and Coverage Scope

       Many health systems employ health technology assessment (HTA) and
various degrees of economic evaluation (for example, cost effectiveness analysis)
to determine what the publicly financed benefits package should cover. In addition
to considering whether a particular service or treatment should be funded,
assessing bodies can also consider best practices within accepted treatments to
reduce harmful or costly treatment variation. HTA is not, however, unique to
publicly financed insurance – all payers must decide what they will and will not
pay for, and many attempt to elicit best practices from their providers to ensure
quality, safety and efficiency. There is an extensive literature on methods of
economic evaluation (c.f. Drummond et al., 2005, Garber, 2000). Garber (2000),
building on Garber and Phelps (1997), explores the relationship between
economic analysis and decision making by the insurer. Where the decision is
based on the average risk in the population, the insurance company or public
insurer will cover those services with the maximum net benefit. Garber and Phelps
note that only those services whose expected benefits equal or exceed costs will
be insured and these will be included in the premium. In the case of a government
insurer, it is possible that a broader set of costs and benefits will be used in any
economic evaluation, as all costs and benefits to society should be relevant. This
may lead to different decisions about what to cover. The perspective of a


                                                                                  21
managed‐care company, for example, would ignore producer surplus. However,
given that the relevant population for government may not include producers
outside the boundaries of the state this distinction is perhaps not as applicable in
practice (Pauly, 1995 and Garber, 2000).
       Several countries have set up bodies aimed at increasing the use of health
technology assessment. For example, the National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence (NICE) was established in England in 1999 to ensure that treatment
decisions would be based on the best available clinical evidence, and many other
countries have followed suit. However, evidence of the effectiveness of HTA is
limited. Evidence from NICE suggests, for example, that very few appraisals of new
technologies have had a negative outcome (NICE, 2010). Where NICE has
recommended restricting the use of technologies, there have been some savings to
the National Health Service, but part of the cost has been shifted to patients,
limiting overall cost containment (Richards, 2008).



Access to Care and Wait Times

        In the absence of prices as a form of demand control, the optimal wait for
care will be one that balances marginal social costs and marginal social benefits.
Assuming that the longer the wait for inpatient treatment, the lower the total cost
of care in present value terms, then the optimal wait will depend both on total
costs and the nature of the benefit curve – i.e. how the benefit of treatment
changes with delay in being treated. In contrast to a market clearing price, waiting
imposes a cost on the patient by delaying care; it also results in a deadweight loss
as there is lost consumer surplus and no gain to the producer. Gravelle and
Siciliani (2008) note that in the presence of moral hazard some wait time may be
optimal, but the assumptions required for such a result to be welfare increasing
include that the marginal cost of waiting be higher for patients with a smaller
benefit from treatment (Gravelle and Siciliani, 2008). If wait times are required, it
is optimal for those patients who face the greatest gain to receive the shortest wait
and for those with no potential gain to wait an infinite amount of time. However,
in the absence of perfect information, shorter wait times should be offered to
those groups with higher expected gains (Gravelle and Siciliani, 2009). Therefore,
whereas most private insurance schemes impose a uniform cost across all
patients, publicly financed care often imposes wait times that will not be uniform,
and depend instead on the potential gains from treatment and the deadweight loss
of waiting.
        Propper et al. (2002) investigate the relationship between GP fundholding
in England and wait times. GP fundholding allowed some GPs to purchase services
on behalf of their patients as part of a larger set of reforms to encourage hospital
competition and lower wait times (discussed above). All transactions were within
the publicly financed health care system. The authors examine hospital wait times
for over 100,000 elective hospital admissions in England between 1993 and 1997.
They find patients with GP fundholders waited less time, all else equal, than non‐
fundholder patients. The longest reductions in waits were found in those areas
with the longest wait times a priori. They find limited evidence of spillover effects
for non‐fundholder patients or for other areas of practice. They conclude that it


                                                                                  22
was the ability to pay for shorter wait times from within the public system, and
not the ability to choose the hospital for the procedure (fundholders could
purchase services without specifically paying for lower waits) that resulted in
shorter wait times (Propper et al., 2002).
         Siciliani and Martin (2007) also examine the relationship between
increased choice in NHS hospitals (through the policies examined above) and wait
times using data from 120 hospitals between 1999 and 2001. They use similar
measures of market concentration to Propper et al, 2004 (reviewed above) and
find a modest reduction in wait times from increased competition. Their results
also imply that there is an optimal number of hospitals competing with each
another and that once the optimal number is exceeded (between 11 and 14
hospitals in a catchment area) further increases in the number of hospitals
competing can result in increased wait times. The authors do not provide an
explanation for this result, but note that the effect is modest.
         Research by Cooper et al. (2009) also examines how the policies outlined
above as well as increased funding by the UK government affected wait times for
care. They document a steady decline in wait times for hip, knee, and cataract
procedures in the NHS between 2000 and 2007 (after an initial increase in wait
times). As wait times fell, the variation in wait time across socioeconomic status
also fell, improving equity. While the evidence presented is not causal, and the
authors do not try and link particular parts of the UK reforms to the declines in
wait times and improvements in equity, they do claim that “the post 2000
government reforms did not lead to the inequitable distribution of wait times
across groups that many people predicted” (Cooper et al, 2009, p. 5).
         Propper et al. (2010) examine the use of targets in the UK as a tool to
reduce wait times. They exploit the natural experiment generated by the
introduction of targets in the England but not Scotland to identify whether target
setting for wait lists led to a fall in wait times in England. They find a reduction in
waiting times of 13 days on average. While levels of elective care rose to reduce
wait times, they did not find reductions in non‐targeted activity to offset these
changes. They also find no evidence of a fall in patient quality, some evidence of an
increase in the quality of care and of wait list “manipulation” whereby patients
were removed either temporarily or permanently from the list. Overall the
authors conclude that targets successfully lowered wait times in England, with
little evidence of adverse side effects.
         Wait times have been identified as a persistent policy problem in Canada as
well (Wilcox et al., 2007). A few studies have tried to assess the impact of longer
wait times in Canada in terms of health outcomes. A challenge in measuring the
impact of longer waits is that, in addition to any health differences, there may be
non‐health measures such as pain or lost income or leisure that are more difficult
to measure. However, much of the literature focuses on more easily measured
outcomes such as length of stay post surgery, or mortality. One such study
examines patients with hip fractures in Quebec admitted to hospital between
1990 and 1993 (Hamilton et al., 1996). After controlling for patient health and for
both observed and unobserved individual and hospital characteristics, wait time
for surgery had little effect on post‐surgery length of stay or mortality. Studies in
the medical literature looking at open‐heart surgery (Carrier et al., 1993) similarly
find little difference in post‐operative outcomes. However, a study looking at wait
times for admission into hospital through the emergency room (ER) in Canada


                                                                                    23
found that presenting to an ER when there is a longer wait in the ER had a higher
risk of short term death or admission (Guttmann et al., 2011). The authors use a
retrospective cohort study and health administrative data from Ontario to track
patients who were either seen and discharged or left without being seen. They
find an increase in both mortality and admission to hospital among patients who
present during shifts with long mean wait times. However, patients who left
without being seen were not at increased risk of adverse events.
        Australia also experiences issues with wait times and the government has
pushed private insurance through explicit subsidies as both a solution to long wait
times and increased public expenditures (Vaithianathan, 2002). As noted above, a
large number of Australians (45%) hold private insurance coverage in order to
obtain faster and premium service. Johar et al. (2011) explore the extent to which
the decision to purchase insurance in Australia is a function of expected wait
times. Using hospital administrative data they model the effect of expected wait
time for a procedure on the demand for insurance. The authors impute expected
wait times using a variety of health conditions available in administrative data.
Contrary to anecdotal evidence in Australia they find that the demand for
insurance is insensitive to expected waiting times, although they do find that it is
sensitive to wait times for the upper end of the wait time distribution. One
limitation of the study is that the demand for insurance as modeled does not
include a number of possible characteristics of private insurance such as access to
certain doctors. It is also unclear whether perceived long wait times by individuals
before they actually experience illness isn’t the driving factor in people’s decision
to seek insurance. Evidence of the difference in wait times for people with and
without private insurance suggests that privately insured patients receive much
faster care not only in private hospitals but also in public ones (Johar and Savage,
2010).
        There is less evidence that wait times are a problem in Germany, France,
and Switzerland. An international comparison of wait times by Siciliani and Hurst
(2004) suggests that there is some evidence that those countries that do not
report problems with wait times spend slightly more, have higher levels of
capacity as measured by number of hospital beds and doctors per capita, and have
higher levels of inpatient activities. They are also more likely to use DRGs to pay
hospitals (at the time the study was carried out; now most use DRGs) and fee‐for‐
service to pay physicians. They do not find evidence, however, that countries that
do not report high levels of wait times are more productive (as measured by
inpatients per physician).

In sum, the evidence reviewed above and listed in Table 5 suggests that while wait
times are not a problem across all countries, where they are a problem,
governments have been able to reduce them when they have chosen explicitly to
focus on achieving this goal. Efforts to expand coverage beyond hospital and
physician services, or to promote voluntary health insurance through tax
subsidies have been mixed across countries, with some evidence of inefficient use
of tax subsidies and other policies to promote voluntary insurance alongside
publicly financed coverage.




                                                                                  24
7. Implications for health system efficiency, costs, quality


Lessons Learned

        What lessons can we draw from the evidence summarized above and what
questions remained unanswered? In terms of collection, many countries are
exploring new ways of generating revenues for health care to enable them to cope
with significant cost growth. However, there is little evidence to suggest that
collection mechanisms alone are effective in managing the cost or quality of care.
First, the traditional classification of tax‐financed versus social insurance systems
does not determine how countries organize health financing functions to achieve
policy goals. The evidence available on the relationship between financing and
outcomes suggests that health systems financed through social insurance (as
opposed to general tax revenues) tend to be more regressive and have smaller tax
bases. Some evidence suggests that financing through social insurance versus
general tax revenues is associated with higher cost growth over time, although it is
difficult, using such a broad classification, to separate collection mechanisms from
other characteristics more often found in tax‐financed jurisdictions such as budget
and price controls and quasi‐hard budget constraints. Public health care funding
in tax‐based systems tends to track GDP more closely than in countries that collect
funds through social insurance. Perhaps unsurprisingly, many jurisdictions are
moving towards a diversity of funding streams (adding tax‐based funding to social
insurance) to manage health care expenditure growth and maintain universality.
Theory and evidence on cost sharing through standard user fees suggests that for
the purpose of revenue collection it is not clear, given the administrative costs
involved, that user fees are an optimal means of supplementing taxes and
contributions in developed health systems. The evidence on value‐based cost
sharing (using cost sharing selectively to encourage patients to use medication,
services, and providers that offer better value than other options, rather than
simply applying user fees across the board) suggests some efficiency
improvements in use of care.
        European systems with competitive health insurance (historically only
found in countries that use social insurance to finance health care) have multiple
risk pools, which can lead to selection issues and inefficiencies. All have
significantly improved their risk equalization schemes in the last ten years and
many now have relatively sophisticated formulas that include health‐based risk
adjusters. In spite of this, insurers’ incentives to select risks are substantial and
there continues to be (largely circumstantial) evidence of risk selection and hence
potential inefficiencies in risk pooling. In some cases such as Switzerland, the
voluntary insurance market seems to exacerbate risk selection and it would make
sense to segment these markets to avoid this behavior. Recent evidence from the
United States offers two reasons for optimism on this front. The first is that risk
adjustment continues to improve and there is evidence that more detailed data on
use, coupled with restrictions on ability to change insurer, can significantly
mitigate risk selection. As a result, there is likely to continue to be convergence
across countries towards better risk selection strategies. Second, recent empirical
evidence examining insurance choice by individuals in the United States has found
that preferences, in addition to risk, are important determinants of insurance


                                                                                  25
choice, so the welfare implications of adverse selection by individuals in many
markets may be smaller than previously thought.
        Where purchasing is concerned, there has been some convergence among
OECD health systems towards more use of market‐like mechanisms, particularly
the adoption of DRGs to pay hospitals. Some countries have also attempted to
encourage hospital competition and, more recently, a growing number of
countries have tried to link provider payment to performance. The evidence on
hospital competition suggests that where outcomes are easily observable or
targeted (such as wait times) hospitals compete on price and quality (wait times),
leading to improved outcomes. In some cases improvements have been at the
expense of quality measures that are more difficult to observe, suggesting that it
would be useful to have further comparable, well‐defined measures of quality
beyond wait times. However, where prices are set administratively, competition
has improved productivity and quality. DRG payment also appears to have
improved productivity and quality, although its effect on overall system costs is
mixed. There is some evidence (mainly from the United Kingdom) of improved
physician productivity and patient outcomes following the introduction of P4P,
although the evidence also suggests a degree of gaming to maximize financial
incentives.
        A number of the health systems we explore continue to use wait times as a
source of non‐price rationing. The evidence on the effects of wait times on health
outcomes is mixed, with more recent studies finding negative effects on patient
health and readmission rates, and older studies finding little effect on health
outcomes. The United Kingdom in particular, and to some extent Canada, have
significantly reduced wait times by increasing volumes using forms of DRG
funding loosely modeled on US Medicare and through targeted budgets. Wait
times are therefore not inherent in tax‐financed systems but can be fairly
successfully manipulated by policy levers such as targets, DRGs, and non‐price
competition between hospitals.


Unresolved Questions

       Our review has revealed some areas where there is a need for a greater
evidence base. First, while efforts to be more systematic about defining the
publicly provided or mandated benefits package have increased over the past
decade, there is a lack of evidence on how effective these changes have been.
Organizations such as NICE in the United Kingdom, the Canadian Agency for Drugs
and Technologies, the German Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care,
or the French National Health Authority, have emerged in many countries in the
last decade, showing how jurisdictions increasingly recognize the importance of
economic evaluation of best practice and technologies. However, we found little
evidence on the extent to which these bodies have achieved their goals and some
evidence to suggest they struggle with implementation.
       Efforts in systems such as Canada’s to expand coverage beyond hospital
and physician services, or to promote voluntary insurance through tax subsidies
have been mixed. A combination of tax deductions and subsidies has resulted in
high levels of voluntary private insurance coverage for non‐publicly financed
services but these subsidies have led to substantial and poorly targeted tax


                                                                                26
expenditures and continued reliance on the firm as the provider of voluntary
coverage. Attempts to provide public coverage selectively to older people have
also been expensive, while reforms aimed at re‐targeting benefits based on income
have lowered public costs and had some positive redistributive consequences. The
countries we examine therefore provide evidence of the inefficiencies of tax
subsidies and of inefficiencies associated with voluntary insurance alongside
publicly financed coverage, but do not provide particularly helpful evidence on the
efficient mix of public and private finance.
        The past ten to fifteen years have seen high health care cost growth in
many countries, including all those reviewed here, with average health care cost
growth exceeding the average growth in GDP (Haigst and Kotlikoff, 2005). In
considering the success of different health systems in controlling costs, the
evidence suggests that while policies that effectively limit demand through
rationing and fixed budgets appear still to be effective at holding down costs at a
point in time, there has been a discernible shift in policies employed by the
countries we review away from these types of cost containment strategies, and
away from other strategies that simply shift costs to households, towards policies
that focus more on the cost‐benefit ratio and efficiency, such as greater use of
health technology assessment and activity‐based funding with administratively set
prices. While there are high hopes that these strategies will produce a more
efficient use of health care resource and, ideally, control cost growth, further
research is needed to determine the extent to which these policies achieve their
goals.


8. Conclusions

        This review examines the changing role of government in financing health
care outside the United States. It focuses on policy choices made by a number of
OECD countries around four financing functions – raising revenue, pooling risk,
purchasing services, and making coverage decisions. It reviews the evidence of the
effects of these choices on efficiency, costs and quality. In doing so it offers some
insight into how nations with universal or near universal health coverage are
performing as they grapple with having to finance increased health care costs,
seek to avoid risk selection in their insurance pools, and promote efficiency in the
purchase and use of health care services at all levels of the system.
        Each health system has unique attributes that help explain some of the
behavior of providers and patients. Nevertheless, many of the empirical studies
reviewed here offer supporting evidence that crosses jurisdictions. Indeed there
has been some convergence in policies adopted across countries to improve
financing incentives and encourage efficient utilization. In the case of risk pooling,
all countries with competing pools are experiencing similar difficulties with
selection and are adopting more sophisticated forms of risk adjustment. In the
case of hospital competition, the key drivers of success appear to be what is
competed on and measurable rather than whether the system is public or private.
In the case of both the success of pay for performance and issues resulting from
wait times, evidence differs both within and across jurisdictions. However, the
evidence does suggest that a number of governments have effectively reduced
wait times when they have chosen explicitly to focus incentives on achieving this


                                                                                   27
goal.
       While the United States remains an outlier among OECD countries, a
number of policy changes across jurisdictions suggest significant convergence in
the role of the state in financing health care. These changes, coupled with the
introduction of a universal mandate in the United States, suggest that many of the
lessons learned above may apply in the United States as well. Greater government
involvement will not prevent significant innovation in incentives for efficient
purchasing and provision. Nor will it prevent patients from being able to choose
insurer or provider or automatically result in longer wait times for treatment. The
evidence also suggests, however, that further government involvement in the
health care sector without price or volume controls will not necessarily lead to
more use of economic evaluation or to lower growth rates in the cost of care,
consequences many people associate with a greater role for the state.




                                                                                 28
References

Ahmad, Ehtisham, and Giorgio Brosio, eds. Handbook of Fiscal Federalism. Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar Publishing Limited, 2006.
Alan, S., Crossley, T., Grootendorst, P., Veall, M., “Distributional Effects of General
Population Prescription Drug Programs in Canada,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 38(1)
2005, pp. 128‐148.
Auerbach, Alan J. “The Theory of Excess Burden and Optimal Taxation.” In Handbook of
Public Economics, eds. Alan J. Auerbach, and Martin Feldstein, 61‐127. Elsevier, 1985.
Baicker K., and Skinner, J., “Health Care Spending Growth and the Future of US Tax Rates,”
NBER Working Paper 16772, February, 2011.
Bevan, Gwyn, and Wynand van de Ven. “Choice of Providers and Mutual Healthcare
Purchasers: Can the English National Health Service Learn from the Dutch Reforms?”
Health Economics, Policy and Law 5 (2010): 343‐363.
Blomqvist, Ake. “Public Sector Health Care Financing.” In Oxford Handbook of Health
Economics, eds. Sherry Glied, and Peter C. Smith, Chapter 12. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2011.
Bolin, K., D. Hedblom, A. Lindgren and B. Lindgren (2010). Asymmetric information and
the demand for voluntary health insurance in Europe, NBER Working Paper 15689.
Cambridge MA, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Boyle, S. (2011). United Kingdom (England): Health system review. Health Systems in
Transition 13(1): 1‐486.

Brown, Jason, Duggan, Mark, Kuziemko, Ilyana and William Woolston. “How Does Risk
Selection Respond to Risk Adjustment? Evidence from the Medicare Advantage Program,”
NBER Working Paper 16977, April 2011.
Buchmueller, Thomas, Agnes Couffinhal, Michel Grignon, and Marc Peronnin. “Access To
Physician Services: Does Supplemental Insurance Matter? Evidence From France.” Health
Economics 13(7)(2004): 669‐687.
Busse R, Geissler A, Mason A, Or Z, Scheller‐Kreinsen D, Street A. “Diagnosis‐related
groups in Europe (EuroDRG): do they explain variation in hospital costs and length of stay
across patients and hospitals?” Health Economics, 2012 21(Supplement 2), 1‐140.
Campbell, S., Reeves, D., Kontopantelis, E., Middleton, E., Sibbald, B., Roland, M. “Quality of
Primary Care in England with the Introduction of Pay for Performance,” New England
Journal of Medicine, 357(2), 2007, pp.181‐190.
Carrier, M., Pineault, R. Tremblay, N., Pelletier, L. “Outcome of rationing Access to Open
Heart Surgery,” Canadian Medical Association Journal, 1993, I49, pp. 1117‐1122.
Cashin C, Y Chi, P Smith, M Borowitz and S Thomson, eds (2013 in press), Paying for
performance in health care: implications for health system performance and
accountability, Buckingham: Open University Press

Chevreul, K., I. Durand‐Zaleski, S. Bahrami, C. Hernández‐Quevedo and P. Mladovsky
(2010). France: health system review. Health Systems in Transition 12(6): 1‐291.

Colombo, F., “Towards More Choice in Social Protection? Individual Choice of Insurer in
Basic Mandatory Health Insurance in Switzerland,” OECD Labour Market and Social Policy
Occasional Papers No 53, 2001.



                                                                                             29
Cooper, Zack, Alistair McGuire, Simon Jones, and Julian Le Grand. “Equity, Waiting Times,
and NHS Reforms: Retrospective Study.” British Medical Journal 339 (2009): b3264.
Cooper, Z., Gibbons, S., Jones, S., and McGuire, A. (2010). “Does hospital competition save
lives? Evidence from the English NHS patient choice reforms.” Unpublished manuscript,
London School of Economics.
Crivelli, L. Consumer‐driven health insurance in Switzerland, where politics is governed
by federalism and direct democracy. In Private health insurance and medical savings
accounts: history, politics, performance. S. Thomson and E. Mossialos. (eds) Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 2013 in press.
Cullis, John, Philip Jones, and Carol Propper. “Waiting Lists And Medical Treatment:
Analysis and Policies.” In Handbook of Health Economics, eds. Anthony J. Culyer, and
Joseph P. Newhouse, 1201‐1249. Elsevier, 2000.
Currie, Janet and Firouz Gahvari, “Transfer in cash and in‐kind: Theory meets data,”
Journal of Economic Literature, 46(2), 2008, 333‐383.
Cutler, David M., and Sarah J. Reber. “Paying for Health Insurance: The Trade‐Off Between
Competition and Adverse Selection.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (2) (1998):
433‐466.
Cylus, Jonathan, Mladovsky, Philipa, and Martin McKee, “Is there a statistical relationship
between economic crises and government health expenditure growth? An Analysis of
twenty four European countries,” Health Services Research, 47(6) 2012, 2204‐2224.
Department of Finance Canada, Tax Expenditures and Evaluations, 2011, Ottawa, ON:
Queen’s Printer, 2012.
Dixon, Anna, Ruth Robertson, and Roland Bal. “The Experience of Implementing Choice at
Point of Referral: A Comparison of the Netherlands and England.” Health Economics, Policy
and Law 5 (2010): 295‐317.
Drummond, Michael, Mark Sculpher, Greg Stoddart, George Torrance, and Bernie O’Brien.
Methods for the Economic Evaluation of Health Care Programmes. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2005.
Duggan, Mark. “Does contracting out increase the efficiency of government programs?
Evidence from Medicaid HMOs,” Journal of Public Economics, 88, 2004: 2549‐2572.
Duggan, Mark and Fiona Scott Morton. “The Effect of Medicare Part D on Pharmaceutical
Prices and Utilization,” American Economic Review, 100(1), 2010: 590‐607.
Dusheiko, Mark, Hugh Gravelle, Rowena Jacobs, and Peter Smith. “The Effect of Financial
Incentives on Gatekeeping Doctors: Evidence From a Natural Experiment.” Journal of
Health Economics 25 (2006): 449‐478.
Einav, Liran, Finkelstein, Amy and Jonathan Levin. “Beyond Testing: Empirical Models of
Insurance Markets,” Annual Review of Economics, 2, 2010: 311‐336.
Einav, Liran and Amy Finkelstein, “Selection and Asymmetric Information in Insurance
Markets,” NBER Reporter, 3, 2011: 5‐7.
Einav, Liran, Finkelstein, Amy, and Mark Cullen. “Estimating Welfare in Insurance Markets
Using Variation in Prices,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3), 2010: 877‐921.
Esmail, N. “Too Old for Hip Surgery,” Wall Street Journal, February 9, 2009.
Fang, Hanming, Keane, Michael, and Dan Silverman, “Sources of Advantageous Selection:
Evidence from the Medigap Insurance Market,” Journal of Political Economy, 116(2), 2008:
303‐350.



                                                                                          30
Finkelstein, A., “The effect of tax subsidies to employer‐provided supplementary health
insurance: evidence from Canada,” Journal of Public Economics 84(3), 2002: 305‐340.
Finkelstein, Amy and Kathleen McGarry. “Multiple Dimensions of Private Information:
Evidence from the Long‐Term Care Insurance Market,” American Economic Review, 96(4),
2006: 938‐958.
Frank, R. and K. Lamiraud (2009). “Choice, price competition and complexity in markets
for health insurance.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 71(2): 550‐562.
Garber, Alan. “Advances in CE Analysis.” In Handbook of Health Economics, eds. Tony
Culyer and Joseph Newhouse, 181‐222. Elsevier, 2000.
Garber, Alan, and Charles Phelps. “Economic Foundations of Cost‐Effectiveness Analysis.”
Journal of Health Economics 16 (1997): 1‐3.
Gaynor, Martin, Rodrigo Moreno‐Serra, and Carol Propper. “Death By Market Power
Reform, Competition and Patient Outcomes in the National Health Service.” NBER
Working Paper #16164, June 2010.
Gaynor, M., Propper, C., and Seiler, S., “Free to Choose? Reform and Demand Response in
the English National Health Service,” NBER Working Paper 18574, November 2012.
Gaynor, M., and Town, R., “Competition in Health Care Markets,” NBER Working Paper
17208, 2011.

Gertler, P., and Hammer, J. “Strategies for Pricing Public Provided Health Services,” Policy
Research Working Paper 1762, World Bank, Washington, DC, 1997.
Glazer, Jacob and Thomas McGuire, “Optimal Risk Adjustment in Markets with Adverse
Selection: An Application to Managed Care,” American Economic Review, 90(4) , 2000:
1055‐1071.
Glied, Sherry, “Health Care Financing, Efficiency, and Equity in Exploring Social Insurance:
Can a Dose of Europe Cure Canadian Health Care Finance? Flood, C., Stabile, M., and Tuohy,
C.H. eds, McGill‐Queen’s University Press: Montreal, 2008, pp. 37‐58.
Gravelle, H., Sutton, M., Ma, A., “Doctor Behaviour Under Pay For Performance
Contracting: Treating, Cheating and Case Finding?” The Economic Journal, 120 (February)
2010, F129‐F156.
Gravelle, Hugh, David Reeves, Martin Roland, Tim Doran, and Catherine Fullwood. “Should
Physicians be Allowed to Exclude Individual Patients from Pay For Performance Targets?
Analysis of exception reporting in the UK pay for performance scheme.” New England
Journal of Medicine 359 (2008): 274‐284.
Gravelle, Hugh, and Luigi Siciliani. “Optimal Quality, Waits and Charges in Health
Insurance.” Journal of Health Economics 27(3) (2008): 663‐674.
Gravelle, Hugh, and Luigi Siciliani. “Third Degree Waiting Time Discrimination: Optimal
Allocation of a Public Sector Health Care Treatment Under Rationing by Waiting.” Health
Economics 18 (8) (2009): 977‐986.
Grootendorst, P and D Stewart, “Imapct of Reference Pricing on Anti‐Hypertensive Drug
Plan Expenditures,” Health Economics, 15 (735‐742), 2006.
Gruber, Jonathan, “Health Insurance and the Labor Market,” in Handbook of Health
Economics, eds. Tony Culyer and Joseph Newhouse, 645‐706. Elsevier, 2000.
Guttmann, A., Schull, M, Vermeulen, M, Stukel, T., “Association between waiting times and
hsort term mortality and hospital admission after departure from emergency department:
population based cohort study from Ontario, Canada,” BMJ 2011;342:d2983.



                                                                                          31
Hamilton, B., Hamilton, V., and Mayo N., “What are the costs of queuing for hip fracture
surgery in Canada?” Journal of Health Economics, 15(1996) pp. 161‐185.
Hanley, G., Morgan, S. Hurley, J., and van Doorslaer, E. “Distributional Consequences oft he
Transition from Age Based to Income Based Prescription Drug Coverage in British
Columbia, Canada,” Health Economics, 17, 2008, pp. 1379‐1392.
Haigst, C., and Kotlikoff, L., “Who’s Going Broke? Comparing Health Care Costs in 10 OECD
Countries” NBER Working Paper 11833, December 2005.
Hurley J., Vaithianathan, R., Crossley, T. and D. Cobb‐Clark. 2002. “Parallel Private Health
Insurance in Australia: A Cautionary Tale and Lessons for Canada.” Institute for the Study
of Labor Research Paper Series #515.
Johar, M., Jones, G., Keane, M., Savage, E., Stavrunova, O., “Waiting Times for Elective
Surgery and the Decision to Buy Private Health Insurance,” Health Economics 20(S1)
2011, 68‐86.
Johar, M, and Savage, E., “Do Private Patients Have Shorter Waiting Times for Elective
Surgery: Evidence from New South Wales Public Hospitals” Economic Papers, 29(2),
2010, 128‐142.
Kutzin, Joseph. "A Descriptive Framework for Country‐Level Analysis of Health Care
Financing Arrangements." Health Policy 56(3)(2001): 171‐204.
Lehmann, Hansjorg, and Peter Zweifel. “Innovation and Risk Selection in Deregulated
Social Health Insurance.” Journal of Health Economics 23(5) (2004): 997‐1012.
Mossialos, Elias, and Anna Dixon. “Funding Health Care in Europe: Weighing Up the
Options.” In Funding Health Care: Options for Europe, eds. Mossialos et al., 99‐126.
Buckingham: Open University Press, 2002.
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Technology appraisal
recommendation summary [Internet]. National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence; 2010 [cited 2013 Feb 11] Available from:
http://www.nice.org.uk/newsroom/nicestatistics/TADecisionsRecommendationSummar
y.jsp
Newhouse, J., Price, M., Huang, J., McWilliams, J.M., Hsu, J., “Steps to Reduce Favorable Risk
Selection in Medicare Advantage Largely Succeeded, Boding Well For Health Insurance
Exchanges,”, 31(12) December 2012, pp.2618‐2628.
Nuscheler and Knaus, T. (2005). “Risk selection in the German public health insurance
system.” Health Economics 14(12): 1253‐1571.
Nyman, J.A. The Theory of Demand for Health Insurance, Stanford: Stanford University
Press, 2003.
Ognyanova, D. and R. Busse. (2009). Health Fund now operational. Health Policy Monitor
Retrieved 8 September, 2011, from http://www.hpm.org/survey/de/a13/3.
O’Reilly J, Busse R, Häkkinen U, Or Z, Street A, Wiley M (2012). “Paying for hospital care:
the experience with implementing activity‐based funding in five European countries.”
Health Economics, Policy and Law 7(1): 73‐101
Palangkaraya, A., Yong, J. “Effects of Competition on Hospital Quality: An Examination
Using Hospital Administrative Data,” European Journal of Health Economics, 14, 2013,
415‐429.
Paolucci, F., Schut, E., Beck, K., Greß, S., Van de Voorde., C and Zmora, I., “Supplemental
Health Insurance as a Tool for Risk Selection in Mandatory Health Insurance Markets,”
Health Economics, Policy and Law, 2007(2), 173‐192.


                                                                                              32
Pauly, Mark, Valuing Health Care Benefits in Money Terms, in Valuing Health Care: Costs,
Benefits, and Effectiveness of Medical Technologies, F. Sloan, ed. , New York: Cambridge
University Press (1995) 99‐124.
Pauly, Mark V. “Overinsurance and Public Provision of Insurance: The Roles of Moral
Hazard and Adverse Selection.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 88(1) (1974): 44‐62.
Propper, Carol, Bronwyn Croxson, and Arran Shearer. “Waiting Times for Hospital
Admissions: the Impact of GP Fundholding.” Journal of Health Economics 21(2002): 227‐
252.
Propper, Carol, Simon Burgess, and Denise Gossage. “Competition and Quality: Evidence
From the NHS Internal Market 1991‐9.” Economic Journal 118 (2008): 138‐170.
Propper, Carol, Simon Burgess, and Katherine Green. “Does Competition Between
Hospitals Improve the Quality of Care? Hospital Death Rates and the NHS Internal
Market.” Journal of Public Economics 88 (2004): 1247‐1272.
Propper, C., Sutton, M., Whitnall, C., Windmeijer, F., “Incentives and Targets in Hospital
Care: Evidence from a Natural Experiment,” Journal of Public Economics, 94, 2010, 318‐
335.
Reinhardt, U. “What is ‘Socialized Medicine’?: A Taxonomy of Health Care Systems” New
York Times, Economix Blogs, May 8, 2009.
Richards M. Improving access to medicines for NHS patients [Internet]. London:
Department of Health; 2008 [cited 2012 Nov 15] Available from:
http://www.dh.gov.uk/prod_consum_dh/groups/dh_digitalassets/@dh/@en/documents
/digitalasset/dh_089952.pdf
Rosenthal, Meredith and Richard Frank. “What is the empirical basis for paying for quality
in health care?” Medical Care Research and Review, 63(2), 2006: 135‐157.
Sandmo, A. “Optimal Taxation: An Introduction to the Literature,” Journal of Public
Economcis, 6(19760, pp.37‐54.
Savage, E., Wright, D., “Moral Hazard and Adverse Selection in Australian private
hospitals: 1989‐1990,” Journal of Health Economics, 22 (2003), 331‐359.
Schokkaert and Van de Voorde, “User Charges,” In Oxford Handbook of Health Economics,
eds. Sherry Glied, and Peter C. Smith, 329‐353. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011.
Serumaga B, Ross‐Degnan D, Avery A, Elliott R, Majumdar S, Zhang F and Soumerai S
(2011). “Effect of pay for performance on the management and outcomes of hypertension
in the United Kingdom: interrupted time series study.” BMJ 342:d108
Siciliani, Luigi, and Steve Martin. “An Empirical Analysis of the Impact of Choice on
Waiting Times.” Health Economics 16 (2007): 763‐779.
Siciliani, Luigi, and Jeremy Hurst. “Explaining Waiting Times Variations for Elective
Surgery Across OECD Countries.” OECD Economic Studies 38(1)(2004): 96‐122.
Smart, M. and Stabile, M. “Tax Credits, Insurance, and the Use of Medical Care,” Canadian
Journal of Economics, 38(2) 2005, 345‐365.
Summers, Lawrence H. “Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits, American
Economic Review, 1989 (79), pp.177‐183.
Sutton, M., Nikolva, S., Boaden, R., Lester, H., McDonald, R., Roland, M., “Reduced Mortality
with Hospital Pay for Performance in England,” New England Journal of Medicine, 367(19),
2012, 1821‐1828.




                                                                                             33
Stabile, Mark. "Private Insurance Subsidies and Public Health Care Markets: Evidence
From Canada," Canadian Journal of Economics, 34(4) 2001, pp. 921‐942.
Stabile, M., “The Role of Tax Subsidies in the Market for Health Insurance,” International
Tax and Public Finance, 9(1), 2002, pp.33‐50.
Stabile, M., Townsend, M., “Supplementary Private Health Insurance in National Health
Insurance Systems,” University of Toronto mimeo, 2011.
Stabile, M., S. Thomson, Allin, S., Boyle, S., Reinhard, B.,Chevreul, K., Marchildon, G., and
Mossialos, E. . “Containing health care costs in high‐income countries: evidence
from four nations,” Health Affairs 32(4), 2013, pp.643‐652.
Tamblyn, R., et al, “Adverse Events Associated With Prescription Drug Cost‐Sharing
Among Poor and Elderly Persons” Journal of the American Medical Association, 2001,
285(4):421‐429.
Thomson, S., R. Busse, L. Crivelli, W. P. M. M. van de Ven and C. Van de Voorde (2013).
“Statutory health insurance competition in Europe: a four‐country comparison,” Health
Policy, 2013, 109(3), 209‐225.
Thomson, S. and E. Mossialos. Private health insurance in the European Union. Brussels,
European Commission (DG Employment, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities), 2009.
Thomson, S., Foubister, T., and Mossialos, E. Financing Health Care in the European Union.
Copenhagen, WHO Europe on behalf of the European Observatory on Health Systems and
Policies, 2009.
Thomson S, R Osborn, D Squires and M Jun, eds (2012), International profiles of health care
systems, New York: Commonwealth Fund

van Ginneken, E. and R. Busse. (2009). Mandatory health insurance enacted. Health Policy
Monitor Retrieved 8 September, 2011, from http://hpm.org/survey/de/a13/1
van de Ven, Wynand, Konstantin Beck, Carine Van de Voorde, Jurgen Wasem and Irit
Zmora. “Risk Adjustment and Risk Selection in Europe: Six Years Later.” Health Policy, 83
(2‐3) (2007): 162‐179.
van de Ven, Wynand, and Randall P. Ellis. “Risk Adjustment in Competitive Health Plan
Markets.” In Handbook of Health Economics, eds. Anthony J. Culyer, and Joseph P.
Newhouse, 755‐845. Elsevier, 2000.
van de Ven, Wynand, and Frederik T. Schut, “Guaranteed Access to Affordable Coverage in
Individual Health Insurance Markets In Oxford Handbook of Health Economics, eds.
Sherry Glied, and Peter C. Smith, 380‐404. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011.
van de Ven, Wynand, RCJA van Vliet, Frederik T. Schut, EM van Barneveld. “Access to
Coverage for High‐Risks in A Competitive Individual Health Insurance Market: Via
Premium Rate Restrictions or Risk‐Adjusted Premium Subsidies?” Journal of Health
Economics 19 (2000): 311‐339.
van de Ven, Wynand. “The Case for Risk‐Based Subsidies in Public Health Insurance.”
Health Economics, Policy and Law 1 (2006): 195‐199.
Vathianathan, R., “Will Subsidizing Private Health Insurance Help the Public Health
System?” The Economic Record, 78(242) 2002, 277‐283.
Wagstaff, Adam. “Social health insurance reexamined.” Health Economics, 19, 2010: 503‐
17.
Wagstaff, Adam, “Social Health Insurance vs. Tax‐Financed Health Systems – Evidence
from the OECD,” World Bank Policy Research Paper #4821, January 2009.



                                                                                                34
Wagstaff, A. and R. Moreno‐Serra "Europe and Central Asia's great post‐
communist social health insurance experiment: impacts on health sector
outcomes." Journal of Health Economics, 28(2009), pp.322‐340.
Wagstaff, A., van Doorslaer, E., et al, “Equity in the Finance of Health Care: Some
International Comparisons,” Journal of Health Economics, 11 (1992), pp. 361‐387.
Wilcox, S., et al. “Measuring and Reducing Waiting Times: A Cross‐National Comparison of
Strategies,” Health Affairs, 26(4) 2007, pp.1078‐1087.
Zok, K., Anforderungen Reaktionen auf Zusatzbeiträgein der GKV ‐ Ergebnisse einer
Repräsentativ‐Umfrage. WIdO monitor, 2011. 2011(1).
Zweifel, Peter, and Willard G. Manning. “Moral Hazard and Consumer Incentives in Health
Care.” In Handbook of Health Economics, eds. Anthony J. Culyer, and Joseph P. Newhouse,
409‐459. Elsevier, 2000.




                                                                                      35
Figure 1: Conceptualizing the Financing Functions of Health Systems




                                                                  Health services
                                             Providing services
       Governance, regulation, information

                                                                   Cost sharing




                                                                                    The population
                                                                    Coverage
                                              Purchasing care        Choice?




                                                                    Coverage
                                               Pooling funds         Choice?




                                                                   Entitlement?
                                              Collecting funds
                                                                  Contributions




Source: adapted from Kutzin 2001
Figure 2 Breakdown of health financing by expenditure agent



         UK 2011


     France 2011


   Germany 2011


    Canada 2011


   Australia 2010


 Switzerland 2011


         US 2011


                    0%   10%   20%    30%    40%     50%        60%     70%    80%    90%     100%

          General tax     Earmarked tax     Private insurance         Out of pocket   Other

Source: OECD health data 2012




                                                                                                 37
Table 1a Health coverage policy by country, 2013



Coverage           Australia             Canada              England               France               Germany              Switzerland          United States

Breadth:           100% covered by       100% covered by     100% covered by       100% covered by      90% covered by       100% covered by      31.8% covered by
population (%      regionally            regionally          universal program     universal program    public program;      universal private    national program
covered in 2011)   administered          administered        (National Health                           10% covered by       insurance            for 65+ and some
                   universal program     universal program   Service, NHS)                              private insurance                         disabled
                   (Medicare)            (Medicare                                                                                                (Medicare) or low-
                                                                                                                                                  income
                                                                                                                                                  (Medicaid); 53.1%
                                                                                                                                                  covered by private
                                                                                                                                                  insurance; 16%
                                                                                                                                                  uninsured

Scope: benefits    Benefit decisions     Benefit decisions   Benefit decisions     Benefit decisions    Benefit decisions    Benefit decisions    Benefit decisions
                   made by national      made by regional    made at regional      made at national     mainly made at       made at national     made nationally
                   government and        government in       level and informed    level and informed   national level and   level and informed   (Medicare),
                   informed by HTA       conjunction with    by HTA at             by HTA               informed by HTA      by HTA               regionally
                                         doctors and         national level                                                                       (Medicaid) and by
                                         informed by HTA                                                                                          individual insurers
                                                                                                                                                  (private insurance)

Depth: user fees   User fees for         No user fees for    User fees for         User fees widely     User fees for        User fees widely     User fees widely
                   outpatient services   publicly covered    outpatient            applied. No cap on   outpatient           applied. Capped at   applied. No cap on
                   including             benefits. No cap    prescriptions.        user fees.           prescriptions.       CHF 700 CHF          user fees.
                   prescriptions. No     on user fees.       Capped at £104                             Capped at 2%         after deductible.
                   cap on user fees.                         per year for people                        income or 1%
                                                             needing a large                            income for
                                                             number of                                  chronically ill or
                                                             prescription drugs                         low income

VHI role           ~50% buy              ~67% buy            ~11% buy for          ~90% buy or          Cost-sharing +       Majority buy for     Non-covered
                   coverage for          coverage for non-                         receive government   amenities (~20%);    non-covered




                                                                                                                                                                  38
                    private hospital    covered benefits    private facilities   vouchers for cost-   Substitute: 10% opt    benefits and   Medicare benefits
                    costs and non-                                               sharing; some non-   out of SHI system      amenities
                    covered benefits                                             covered benefits     for private coverage
                                                                                                      only

Sources: OECD health data 2012, Thomson et al 2012

Note: HTA = health technology assessment; SHI = statutory health insurance; VHI = voluntary/private health insurance




                                                                                                                                                          39
Table 1b Key health financing functions by country (publicly financed benefits), 2013



Function           Australia          Canada                   England              France                 Germany               Switzerland         United States

Collection

Revenue sources    General tax        Provincial/federal tax   General tax          Employer/employee      Employer/employee     Community-rated     Medicare: payroll
                   revenue;           revenue                  revenue (includes    earmarked income       earmarked payroll     insurance           tax, premiums,
                   earmarked income                            employment-          and payroll tax;       tax; general tax      premiums; general   federal tax
                   tax                                         related              general tax revenue,   revenue               tax revenue         revenue;
                                                               contributions)       earmarked taxes                                                  Medicaid: federal,
                                                                                                                                                     state tax revenue

Contributions      Not applicable     Not applicable           Not applicable       Centrally set;         Centrally set;        Insurers set        Medicare:
                                                                                    dependants             dependants            premiums;           centrally
                                                                                    covered at no          covered at no         dependants must     determined
                                                                                    extra cost             extra cost            purchase own
                                                                                                                                 cover; premium
                                                                                                                                 subsidies set by
                                                                                                                                 Cantons

Pooling

Nature of          National           Non-competing            Non-competing        Non-competing          Competing non-        Competing private   Competing
purchasing agent   government         regional government      regional statutory   regional statutory     governmental non-     insurers            private insurers
                   agency             agencies                 bodies               agencies               profit insurers and
                                                                                                           competing private
                                                                                                           insurers

Risk adjustment    Not applicable     Not applicable           Not applicable       Not applicable         For publicly          For publicly        For publicly
for competing                                                                                              financed benefits     financed benefits   financed benefits
insurers




                                                                                                                                                                     40
Purchasing
services

Patient choice of     Yes; gatekeeping   Yes; gatekeeping       Yes, within a      Yes; gatekeeping     Yes; gatekeeping     Yes; some plans      Usually; some
primary care          required           incentivized in some   region;            incentivized         incentivized         incentivize          plans incentivize
provider                                 regions                gatekeeping                                                  gatekeeping          gatekeeping
                                                                required

Patient choice of     Yes                Yes, through GP        Yes                Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Usually
hospital

Primary care and      Private: FFS       Private:               Private: mix of    Private: FFS         Private: FFS         Private: most FFS    Private: most
ambulatory                               FFS/capitation/mixed   capitation, FFS                                              but some             FFS, some
specialist provider                                             and P4P; salary                                              capitation           capitation
payment                                                         for a minority

Hospital payment      Public beds        Public and private     Public: mainly     Public and private   Public beds (50%),   Public varies by     Private non-profit
                      (67%): global      non-profit: global     DRGs and service   non-profit: mainly   private non-profit   Canton: global       (70%), public
                      budgets + DRGs     budgets + DRGS in      contracts          DRGs and grants      (33%), private for   budgets, per diem,   (15%), private for
                                         some provinces                                                 profit: global       DRGs                 profit: per diem +
                      Private: FFS                                                                      budgets + DRGs                            DRGs

P4P                   Primary care and   No                     Primary care and   Primary care,        Primary care         No                   Primary care,
                      hospitals                                 hospitals          ambulatory                                                     ambulatory
                                                                                   specialists and                                                specialists and
                                                                                   hospitals                                                      hospitals

Sources: Cashin et al in press, Thomson et al 2012

Note: DRG = diagnosis‐related group; FFS = fee‐for‐service; P4P = pay for performance




                                                                                                                                                                    41
42
Table 2: Selected empirical papers reviewed: Raising Revenue

Author          Title                Time         Country          Findings
                                     Period       Covered
                                     1960‐2006    OECD             Adopting SHI (vs tax
                                                  countries        financing) increases
                                                                   per capita health
                                                                   spending; reduces the
                “Social Health                                     formal sector share of
                Insurance vs.                                      employment & total
                Tax‐Financed                                       employment; has no
                Health Systems –                                   impact on amenable
                Evidence from                                      mortality; but
                the OECD,” World                                   performs worse for
Wagstaff,       Bank Policy                                        breast cancer among
2009            Research Paper                                     women
                "Europe and          1990‐2004    Central and      Adopting SHI (from
                Central Asia's                    Eastern          tax financed)
                great post‐                       Europe &         increased national
                communist social                  Central Asia     health spending and
                health insurance                  (28 countries)   hospital activity rates,
                experiment:                                        but did not lead to
                impacts on health                                  better health
Wagstaff and    sector outcomes."                                  outcomes
Moreno‐         Journal of Health
Serra, 2009     Economics
                Finkelstein, A.,     1991‐1994     Canada          Reducing tax subsidy
                “The effect of tax                                 to employer‐provided
                subsidies to                                       health insurance (HI)
                employer‐                                          decreased coverage
                provided                                           by one fifth
                supplementary
                health insurance:
                evidence from
                Canada,” Journal
Finkelstein,    of Public
2002            Economics
                "Private             1994‐1996     Canada          Removing tax
Stabile, 2001   Insurance                                          exemptions to




                                                                                              43
               Subsidies and                                     employer provided HI
               Public Health                                     would cause levels of
               Care Markets:                                     supplemental HI to
               Evidence From                                     decline by roughly 20
               Canada,"                                          per cent.
               Canadian Journal
               of Economics
               “Access To          1998        France            Individuals with
               Physician                                         insurance: have more
               Services: Does                                    physician visits than
               Supplemental                                      those without, but are
               Insurance                                         no more likely to visit
               Matter? Evidence                                  a specialist.
Buchmueller    From France.”
et al., 2004   Health Economics
                                   Not         Review article:   User fees are
                                   reported    multiple          important in co‐
                                               countries,        financing health care
                                               mostly non‐       but should not be the
                                               OECD              primary means of
               Strategies for                                    finance, and should
               Pricing Public                                    not be applied
               Provided Health                                   uniformly ‐ or the
Gertler and    Services,” Policy                                 wealthy will benefit
Hammer,        Research Working                                  and the poor will
1997           Paper                                             suffer
                                   1994‐2000   Canada            The apparently
               “Impact of                                        modest program
               Reference Pricing                                 savings attributable to
               on Anti‐                                          Reference Pricing
               Hypertensive                                      (RP) can be traced
Grootendorst   Drug Plan                                         back to the design of
and Stewart,   Expenditures,”                                    the policy i.e. factors
2006           Health Economics                                  other than RP
               Prescription Drug   Not         Review article:   Increased cost sharing
               Cost Sharing:       reported    multiple          is associated with
               Associations with               countries incl.   lower rates of drug
Goldman et     medication and                  USA, Europe &     treatment, worse
al., 2007      medical                         Canada            adherence among




                                                                                           44
             utilization and                            existing users, and
             spending and                               more frequent
             health,” Journal of                        discontinuation of
             the American                               therapy
             Medical
             Association
                                   1993‐1997   Canada   Adopting cost‐sharing
                                                        decreased use of
             “Adverse Events                            essential & less
             Associated With                            essential drugs,
             Prescription Drug                          increased rate of
             Cost‐Sharing                               serious adverse
             Among Poor and                             events & emergency
             Elderly Persons”                           department visits, in
             Journal of the                             elderly persons and
Tamblyn et   American Medical                           welfare recipients
al., 2001    Association




                                                                                45
Table 3: Selected empirical Papers Reviewed: Pooling Risk
Author           Title               Time          Country       Findings
                                     Period        Covered
                                     1992‐2001     Germany &     Consumers changing
                                                   The           sickness funds
                                                   Netherlands   depends strongly on
                                                                 economic incentives,
                “Free Choice of                                  especially with regard
                Sickness Funds in                                to the extent of
                Regulated                                        financial risk sickness
                Competition:                                     funds have to bear
                Evidence from                                    and to the extent
                Germany and the                                  premiums or
Gress et al.,   Netherlands,”                                    contribution rates can
2002            Health Policy                                    differ.
                                     1995 ‐       Germany        Success of company‐
                                     2000                        based sickness funds
                "Risk selection in                               originates in
                the German                                       incomplete risk
                public health                                    adjustment and the
Knaus and       insurance                                        negative correlation
Nuscheler,      system." Health                                  between health status
2005            Economics                                        and switching costs
                                     1996 to      Switzerland    Holding SI decreases
                                     2005                        propensity to switch,
                                                                 but is not significant
                                                                 when self‐assessed
                “The influence of                                health is "very good";
                supplementary                                    to the contrary,
                health insurance                                 holding an SI contract
                on switching                                     significantly reduces
                behaviour:                                       propensity to switch
                evidence from                                    when the individual's
Dormont et      Swiss data.”                                     subjective health
al., 2009       Health Economics                                 status deteriorates
Frank and        “Choice, price      1997‐2000    Switzerland    As the number of
Lamiraud,       competition and                                  choices grow
2009            complexity in                                    responsiveness to




                                                                                           46
                   markets for                                      price declines
                   health                                           allowing large price
                   insurance.”                                      differentials to persist
                   Journal of                                       holding
                   Economic                                         constant plan and
                   Behavior &                                       population
                   Organization                                     characteristics
                                                    Belgium,        Health Insurers (HI) /
                                                    Germany, the    provider collective
                                                    Netherlands &   negotiation in
                                                    Switzerland     Belgium, Germany
                   "Statutory health                                and Switzerland curbs
                   insurance                                        HI’s’ ability to
                   competition in                                   influence quality and
                   Europe: a four‐                                  costs. Despite Dutch
                   country                                          HI’s access to
                   comparison",                                     efficiency‐enhancing
                   Health Policy                                    tools, data and
                                                                    capacity constraints
                                                                    and stakeholder
Thomson et                                                          resistance limit their
al., 2013                                                           use.
                                        2000–2006   Belgium,        Despite risk
                                                    Germany,        adjustment systems’
                                                    Israel, the     improvement, all five
                                                    Netherlands     countries show
                   “Risk Adjustment                 &Switzerland    increasing risk
                   and Risk                                         selection, which
                   Selection in                                     increasingly becomes
                   Europe: Six Years                                a problem, in
van de Ven et      Later.” Health                                   particular in Germany
al., 2007          Policy                                           and Switzerland
                   “Supplemental        2000‐2008   Switzerland     Combining universal
                   Health Insurance                                 access and consumer
                   as a Tool for Risk                               choice of HI’s is
                   Selection in                                     implemented.
                   Mandatory                                        Challenge: create
Paolucci et al.,   Health Insurance                                 integrated delivery
2006               Markets,” Health                                 systems for high‐




                                                                                               47
                Economics,                                     quality care in
                Policy, Law                                    response to
                                                               consumers’
                                                               preferences
                                    1997 ‐2000   Switzerland   The managed care
                                                               plans benefit from
                                                               risk selection effects.
                                                               In the case of the
                 “Innovation and                               Health Maintenance
                Risk Selection in                              Organization (HMO)
                Deregulated                                    plan, however, the
                Social Health                                  pure innovation effect
                Insurance.”                                    may account for as
Lehmann and     Journal of Health                              much as two‐third of
Zweifel, 2004   Economics                                      the cost advantage.
                                    1994 ‐       USA           Firms reduce
                                    2006                       selection along
                                                               dimensions included
                “How Does Risk                                 in the risk‐adjustment
                Selection                                      formula, while
                Respond to Risk                                increasing selection
                Adjustment?                                    along excluded
                Evidence from                                  dimensions.
                the Medicare                                   Government’s
                Advantage                                      differential payments
Brown et al.,   Program,” NBER                                 rise after risk
2011            Working Paper                                  adjustment.
                “Steps to Reduce    2003 ‐       USA           Policies—an
                Favorable Risk      2008                       improved risk
                Selection in                                   adjustment formula
                Medicare                                       and a prohibition on
                Advantage                                      monthly
                Largely                                        disenrollment by
                Succeeded,                                     beneficiaries—largely
                Boding Well For                                succeeded in reducing
                Health Insurance                               favorable selection in
Newhouse et     Exchanges,”                                    Medicare Advantage.
al., 2012       Health Affairs
Colombo, F,     “Towards More       1996 ‐       Switzerland   Measures to improve




                                                                                         48
2001   Choice in Social    2000   switching should be
       Protection?                accompanied by
       Individual Choice          interventions to foster
       of Insurer in              competition on
       Basic Mandatory            quality and efficiency
       Health Insurance           rather than on risk
       in Switzerland,”           selection. Promoting
       OECD                       increase in switching
                                  rates might otherwise
                                  come at a higher price
                                  than the benefits.




                                                            49
Table 4: Selected empirical Papers Reviewed: Purchasing Services
Author           Title               Time          Country         Findings
                                     Period        Covered
                 “Doctor             2004‐2006     UK              Differences in
                 Behaviour Under                                   reported disease rates
                 Pay For                                           between providers,
                 Performance                                       and differences in
                 Contracting:                                      exception rates both
                 Treating,                                         between and within
                 Cheating and                                      providers, suggest
                 Case Finding?”                                    gaming
Gravelle et al., The Economic
2010             Journal
                                     2000 ‐        Australia       Hospitals facing
                                     2005                          higher competition
                                                                   have lower unplanned
                “Effects of                                        admission rates.
                Competition on                                     However, competition
                Hospital Quality:                                  is related negatively
                An Examination                                     to hospital quality
                Using Hospital                                     when measured by
                Administrative                                     mortality, albeit the
Palangkaraya,   Data,” European                                    effects are weak and
A., Yong, J.    Journal of Health                                  barely statistically
2013            Economics                                          significant.
                “Quality of          1998 ‐        UK              Introduction of pay
                Primary Care in      2005                          for performance was
                England with the                                   associated with a
                Introduction of                                    modest acceleration
                Pay for                                            in improvement for
                Performance,”                                      diabetes and asthma
                New England                                        but not for coronary
Campbell et     Journal of                                         heart disease
al., 2007       Medicine
                “Effect of pay for   2000 ‐        UK              Pay for performance
                performance on       2007                          had no discernible
Serumaga et     the management                                     effects on processes of
al., 2011       and outcomes of                                    care or on




                                                                                             50
                   hypertension in                           hypertension related
                   the United                                clinical outcomes.
                   Kingdom:                                  Generous financial
                   interrupted time                          incentives may not be
                   series study.” BMJ                        sufficient to improve
                                                             quality of care and
                                                             outcomes for
                                                             hypertension and
                                                             other common
                                                             chronic conditions
                   “Reduced             2006 ‐    UK         Pay for performance
                   Mortality with       2010                 was associated with a
                   Hospital Pay for                          clinically significant
                   Performance in                            reduction in mortality
                   England,” the
                   New England
Sutton et al.,     Journal of
2012               Medicine
                                        1989 ‐    USA        HMO enrolment and
                                        2000                 the resulting switch
                   “Does contracting                         from fee‐for‐service to
                   out increase the                          managed care was
                   efficiency of                             associated with a
                   government                                substantial increase in
                   programs?                                 government spending
                   Evidence from                             but no corresponding
                   Medicaid HMOs,”                           improvement in infant
                   Journal of Public                         health outcomes
Duggan, 2004       Economics
                   “What is the         1975 ‐    USA        There is little
                   empirical basis      2004                 evidence to support
                   for paying for                            the effectiveness of
                   quality in health                         paying for quality.
Rosenthal          care?” Medical
and Frank,         Care Research
2006               and Review
                    “Paying for         1990s &   England,   Activity‐based
O’Reilly et al.,   hospital care: the   2000s     Finland,   funding has been
2012               experience with                France,    associated with an




                                                                                       51
                  implementing                     Germany &     increase in activity, a
                  activity‐based                   Ireland       decline in length of
                  funding in five                                stay and/or a
                  European                                       reduction in the rate
                  countries.” Health                             of growth in hospital
                  Economics, Policy                              expenditure in most
                  and Law                                        of these countries
                                       Mid‐1970s   UK & the      Effectively
                                       ‐ 2010      Netherlands   implementing the
                                                                 fully competitive
                                                                 Dutch model requires
                                                                 preconditions to be
                  “Choice of                                     fulfilled: a good risk
                  Providers and                                  equalization system,
                  Mutual                                         an effective
                  Healthcare                                     competition policy, an
                  Purchasers: Can                                adequate system of
                  the English                                    product classification
                  National Health                                and medical pricing
                  Service Learn                                  and transparent
                  from the Dutch                                 consumer information
Bevan and         Reforms?” Health                               on the HI products
van de Ven,       Economics, Policy                              and on the quality of
2010              and Law                                        health care providers.
                                       1990s       UK            Creation of an internal
                                                                 or quasi‐market,
                                                                 separating purchaser
                                                                 from provider and
                                                                 encouraging
                                                                 competition among
                                                                 providers, had
                  “Competition,                                  minimal effect, partly
                  Cooperation or                                 because of retention
                  Control? Tales                                 of central control and
                  from the British                               partly inadequate
                  National Health                                understanding of
Le Grand,         Service,” Health                               professional
1999              Affairs                                        motivations
Propper et al.,   “Does                1990s       UK            Greater competition is




                                                                                           52
2004              Competition                                   associated with higher
                  Between                                       death rates,
                  Hospitals                                     controlling for patient
                  Improve the                                   mix and other
                  Quality of Care?                              characteristics of the
                  Hospital Death                                hospital and
                  Rates and the                                 catchment. However,
                  NHS Internal                                  the estimated impact
                  Market.” Journal                              of competition is
                  of Public                                     small
                  Economics
                                      1991‐1999   UK            Relationship between
                                                                competition and AMI
                                                                mortality (as a
                                                                measure of quality) is
                                                                negative. We also find
                                                                that competition
                                                                reduced waiting
                                                                times. Indication is
                                                                that hospitals in
                                                                competitive markets
                  “Competition and                              reduced unmeasured
                  Quality: Evidence                             and unobserved
                  From the NHS                                  quality in order to
                  Internal Market                               improve measured
Propper et al.,   1991‐9.”                                      and observed waiting
2008              Economic Journal                              times.
                  “The Effect of      1991‐1999   England       The abolition of
                  Financial                                     fundholding increased
                  Incentives on                                 ex‐fundholders’
                  Gatekeeping                                   admission rates for
                  Doctors:                                      chargeable elective
                  Evidence From a                               admissions
                  Natural
                  Experiment.”
Dusheiko et       Journal of Health
al., 2006         Economics
Dixon et al.,     “The Experience     1990s –     England and   Similar challenges
2010              of Implementing     2000s       the           have been faced.




                                                                                          53
                 Choice at Point of            Netherlands   Although changes
                 Referral: A                                 have the potential to
                 Comparison of                               generate
                 the Netherlands                             improvements and
                 and England.”                               benefits (eg.
                 Health Economics,                           convenience, certainty
                 Policy and Law                              and choice for
                                                             patients and efficiency
                                                             gains ) they have also
                                                             generated problems
                                                             during
                                                             implementation
                                                             including GP
                                                             resistance
                                      2003 ‐   UK            Effect of competition
                                      2007                   is to save lives
                                                             without raising costs.
                                                             Patients discharged
                 Death By Market                             from hospitals located
                 Power Reform,                               in markets where
                 Competition and                             competition was more
                 Patient Outcomes                            feasible were less
                 in the National                             likely to die, had
                 Health Service.”                            shorter length of stay
Gaynor et al.,   NBER Working                                and were treated at
2010             Paper                                       the same cost
                                      2003 ‐   UK            Demand elasticity
                                      2008                   increases with choice,
                 “Free to Choose?                            and there is
                 Reform and                                  substantial
                 Demand                                      heterogeneity in
                 Response in the                             consumer response.
                 English National                            More severely ill
                 Health Service,”                            patients become more
Gaynor et al.,   NBER Working                                sensitive to quality of
2012             Paper 18574                                 care post‐reform.
Duggan and       “The Effect of       2001 ‐   USA           Part D substantially
Scott Morton,    Medicare Part D      2006                   lowered the average
2010             on                                          price and increased




                                                                                       54
                Pharmaceutical                                    the total utilization of
                Prices and                                        prescription drugs by
                Utilization,”                                     Medicare recipients.
                American                                          The magnitude varies
                Economic Review                                   across drugs.
                “What Factors        2008         Australia       Earnings of GPs are
                Influence the                                     lower (vs. specialists)
                Earnings of                                       because GPs work
                General                                           fewer hours, are more
                Practitioners and                                 likely to be female, are
                Medical                                           less likely to
                Specialists?                                      undertake after‐hours
                Evidence from                                     or on‐call work, and
                The Medicine in                                   have lower returns to
                Australia:                                        experience.
                Balancing
                Employment and
Cheng et al,    Life Survey,”
2012            Health Economics
                "“Does hospital      2002 ‐       England         Post‐reforms
                competition save     2008                         mortality fell (i.e.
                lives? Evidence                                   quality improved) for
                from the English                                  patients living in more
                NHS patient                                       competitive markets.
                choice reforms"
Cooper et al,   LSE working
2010            paper
                                     1989 –       Australia       When the endogeneity
                “Moral Hazard        1990                         of the insurance
                and Adverse                                       decision is accounted
                Selection in                                      for, the extent of
                Australian                                        moral hazard can
                private hospitals:                                substantially increase
Savage, E.,     1989‐1990,”                                       the expected length of
Wright, D.,     Journal of Health                                 a hospital stay by a
2003            Economics                                         factor of up to 3


Table 5: Selected empirical Papers Reviewed: Coverage Decisions




                                                                                             55
Author            Title               Time         Country     Findings
                                      Period       Covered
                                      1993 ‐       UK          Patient waiting time
                  “Waiting Times      1997                     reductions were
                  for Hospital                                 secured where
                  Admissions: the                              doctors paid for their
                  Impact of GP                                 patients’ care, but not
                  Fundholding.”                                where doctors chose
Propper et al.,   Journal of Health                            hospitals only and did
2002              Economics                                    not pay.
                                      1999 –       England     More choice is
                                      2001.                    significantly
                                                               associated with lower
                                                               waiting times at the
                                                               sample mean (five
                                                               hospitals) although
                                                               the effect is modest,
                  “An Empirical                                also some evidence
                  Analysis of the                              that this improves
                  Impact of Choice                             with more choice (i.e.
                  on Waiting                                   more than 11
Siciliani and     Times.” Health                               hospitals in
Martin, 2007      Economics                                    catchment).
                                      1997‐ 2007   England     Waiting times for
                                                               patients having
                                                               elective hip
                                                               replacement, knee
                  “Equity, Waiting                             replacement, and
                  Times, and NHS                               cataract repair in
                  Reforms:                                     England reduced, as
                  Retrospective                                did variation in
Cooper et al.,    Study.” British                              waiting times across
2009              Medical Journal                              socioeconomic groups
                  “Incentives and     1997 ‐       England &   The English policy of
                  Targets in          2004         Scotland    setting targets for
                  Hospital Care:                               elective care waiting
                  Evidence from a                              times achieved its
Propper et al.,   Natural                                      objectives: the length
2010              Experiment,”                                 of time patients




                                                                                         56
                  Journal of Public                           waited fell and
                  Economics                                   admissions for
                                                              elective care rose.
                                      2000 ‐   Australia,     England has achieved
                                      2005     Canada,        the most sustained
                                               England, New   improvement, linked
                                               Zealand, &     to major funding
                                               Wales          boosts, ambitious
                                                              waiting‐time targets,
                                                              and a rigorous
                                                              performance
                                                              management system.
                                                              While supply‐side
                                                              strategies are used in
                                                              all five countries, New
                  “Measuring and                              Zealand and parts of
                  Reducing Waiting                            Canada have also
                  Times: A Cross‐                             invested in demand‐
                  National                                    side strategies (use of
                  Comparison of                               clinical criteria to
Wilcox et al.,    Strategies,”                                prioritize access to
2007              Health Affairs                              surgery)
                  “What are the       1990 ‐   Canada         Pre‐surgery delay (for
                  costs of queuing    1993                    hip fracture) has little
                  for hip fracture                            effect on either
                  surgery in                                  post‐surgery length of
                  Canada?” Journal                            stay in hospital and
Hamilton et       of Health                                   inpatient mortality
al., 1996         Economics
                  “Outcome of         1991 ‐   Canada          Pre‐surgery wait
                  rationing Access    1992                    (elective open‐heart
                  to Open Heart                               surgery) had no effect
                  Surgery,”                                   on patient outcome
                  Canadian Medical                            after surgery.
Carrier et al.,   Association
1993              Journal
                  “Association        2003 ‐   Canada         Presenting to an
Guttmann et       between waiting     2007                    emergency
al., 2011         times and short                             department during




                                                                                         57
                term mortality                    shifts with longer
                and hospital                      waiting times,
                admission after                   reflected in longer
                departure from                    mean length of stay, is
                emergency                         associated with a
                department:                       greater risk in the
                population based                  short term of death
                cohort study                      and admission to
                from Ontario,                     hospital in patients
                Canada,” BMJ                      who are well enough
                                                  to leave the
                                                  department
                                   2000s    USA   Recent advances in
                                                  empirical models of
                                                  insurance have
                                                  yielded insights into
                                                  the nature of
                                                  consumer
                                                  heterogeneity and the
                                                  possibility that certain
                                                  kinds of welfare
                “Beyond Testing:                  losses from
                Empirical Models                  asymmetric
Einav,          of Insurance                      information, at least
Finkelstein     Markets,” Annual                  in some insurance
and Levin,      Review of                         markets, may be
2010            Economics                         modest.
                “Multiple          1995 ‐   USA   Insurance markets
                Dimensions of      2000           may suffer from
                Private                           asymmetric
                Information:                      information even
                Evidence from                     absent a positive
                the Long‐Term                     correlation between
                Care Insurance                    insurance coverage
Finkelstein     Market,”                          and risk occurrence
and McGarry,    American
2006            Economic Review
Fange et al.,   “Sources of        1991 ‐   USA   Evidence of
2008            Advantageous       2002           advantageous




                                                                             58
                Selection:                                     selection in the
                Evidence from                                  Medigap insurance
                the Medigap                                    market. Its sources
                Insurance                                      include income,
                Market,” Journal                               education, longevity
                of Political                                   expectations, financial
                Economy                                        planning horizons,
                                                               and cognitive ability.
                                     2004     Austria,         Correlation between
                Asymmetric                    Belgium,         risk and insurance
                information and               Denmark,         was negative, but no
                the demand for                France,          evidence of
                voluntary health              Germany,         heterogeneous risk‐
                insurance in                  Greece, Italy,   preferences as an
Bolin et al.,   Europe,” NBER                 Spain, Sweden,   explanation
2010            Working Paper                 & Switzerland
                                     2004     USA              Find adverse selection
                                                               in employer provided
                                                               HI, however estimate
                “Estimating                                    that the quantitative
                Welfare in                                     welfare implications
                Insurance                                      associated with
                Markets Using                                  inefficient pricing in
Einav,          Variation in                                   the particular
Finkelstein     Prices,” Quarterly                             application are small,
and Cullen,     Journal of                                     in both absolute and
2010            Economics                                      relative terms.
                                     N/A      USA & Israel     While private
                                              (review of       information about
                                              other studies)   risk plays an
                                                               important role in
                                                               insurance demand in
                “Selection and                                 USA, another
                Asymmetric                                     dimension of
                Information in                                 heterogeneity ‐ risk
Einav and       Insurance                                      aversion ‐ may be just
Finkelstein,    Markets,” NBER                                 as important, or even
2011            Reporter                                       more so.
Alan et al.,    “Distributional      1969 ‐   Canada           While program effects




                                                                                         59
2005             Effects of General   1996                    are muted when there
                 Population                                   are high deductibles, a
                 Prescription Drug                            non‐senior
                 Programs in                                  prescription drug
                 Canada,”                                     subsidy is more
                 Canadian Journal                             redistributive than an
                 of Economics                                 equal‐cost
                                                              proportional income
                                                              transfer, partly
                                                              because of differential
                                                              private HI coverage
                                                              by income.
                                      2000 ‐   Canada         Pharmaceutical
                                      2004                    financing became less
                                                              regressive after the
                                                              policy change. Results
                                                              suggest that if the
                 “Distributional                              public financing of
                 Consequences of                              pharmaceuticals were
                 the Transition                               maintained or
                 from Age Based                               increased, a change
                 to Income Based                              from age‐based to
                 Prescription Drug                            income‐based
                 Coverage in                                  eligibility can
                 British Columbia,                            unambiguously
Hanley et al.,   Canada,” Health                              improve equity in
2007             Economics,                                   finance
                                      1986 ‐   Canada         Evidence of greater
                                      2000                    tax price elasticities
                                                              (vs. traditional point‐
                 “Tax Credits,                                of‐service price
                 Insurance, and                               elasticity estimates),
                 the Use of                                   but no evidence tax
                 Medical Care,”                               subsidy affects HI
Smart and        Canadian Journal                             demand on the
Stabile, 2005    of Economics                                 intensive margin
                 “The Role of Tax     1995     Canada & USA   Tax subsidies
                 Subsidies in the                             encourage the
Stabile, 2002    Market for Health                            provision of HI in




                                                                                        60
                Insurance,”                               smaller firms.
                International Tax                         Removal of them
                and Public                                would cause the HI
                Finance                                   level in small (but not
                                                          larger) firms to
                                                          decline significantly.
                                     1995 ‐   Australia   Very limited cost
                                     2001                 savings; public system
                                                          wait times unlikely to
                                                          reduce; regulation
                                                          complex; independent
                                                          system of private
                “Parallel Private                         finance not possible;
                Health Insurance                          quality plays a key
                in Australia: A                           role in driving the
                Cautionary Tale                           dynamics between the
                and Lessons for                           public and privately
                Canada.” Institute                        financed sectors; clear
Hurley et al,   for the Study of                          policy objectives are
2002            Labor Research                            essential
                                     2004 ‐   Australia   Expected waiting time
                                     2005                 does not increase the
                                                          probability of buying
                                                          insurance but a high
                “Waiting Times                            probability of
                for Elective                              experiencing a long
                Surgery and the                           wait does. On average,
                Decision to Buy                           waiting time has no
                Private Health                            significant impact on
Johar et al.    Insurance,”                               insurance.
2011            Health Economics
                 “Do Private         2004 ‐   Australia   Private patients have
                Patients Have        2005                 shorter waiting times,
                Shorter Waiting                           and tend to be
                Times for                                 admitted ahead of
                Elective Surgery:                         their listing rank,
                Evidence from                             especially for
Johar and       New South Wales                           procedures that have
Savage, 2010    Public Hospitals”                         low urgency levels.




                                                                                    61
Economic Papers




                  62
