NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PORTFOLIO CHOICE WITH ILLIQUID ASSETS
Andrew Ang
Dimitris Papanikolaou
Mark Westerfield
Working Paper 19436
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19436
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013

We thank Andrea Eisfeldt, Will Goetzmann, Katya Kartashova, Leonid Kogan, Francis Longstaff˙,
Jun Liu, Chris Mayer, Liang Peng, Eduardo Schwartz, Dimitri Vayanos, Pietro Veronesi, and seminar
participants at the Bank of Canada, Oxford, LBS, the Paci˝c Northwest Finance Conference, Texas
A&M, UCI, University of Florida, UNC, USC, the USC-UCLA-UCI Finance Day, and the Q-group
meetings for comments and helpful discussions. We thank Sarah Clark for providing data on illiquid
assets for calibration. Ang acknowledges funding from Netspar and the Program for Financial Studies.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Andrew Ang, Dimitris Papanikolaou, and Mark Westerfield. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Portfolio Choice with Illiquid Assets
Andrew Ang, Dimitris Papanikolaou, and Mark Westerfield
NBER Working Paper No. 19436
September 2013
JEL No. G11,G12
ABSTRACT
We present a model of optimal allocation over liquid and illiquid assets, where illiquidity is the restriction
that an asset cannot be traded for intervals of uncertain duration. Illiquidity leads to increased and
state-dependent risk aversion, and reduces the allocation to both liquid and illiquid risky assets. Uncertainty
about the length of the illiquidity interval, as opposed to a deterministic non-trading interval, is a primary
determinant of the cost of illiquidity. We allow market liquidity to vary from `normal' periods, when
all assets are fully liquid, to 'illiquidity crises,' when some assets can only be traded infrequently. The
possibility of a liquidity crisis leads to limited arbitrage in normal times. Investors are willing to forego
2% of their wealth to hedge against illiquidity crises occurring once every ten years.
Andrew Ang
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway 413 Uris
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
aa610@columbia.edu
Dimitris Papanikolaou
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
d-papanikolaou@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Mark Westerfield
Foster School of Business
University of Washington
Box 353226
Seattle, WA 98195-3226
mwesterf@uw.edu

1

Introduction

Many financial assets are illiquid, and this lack of liquidity can often be traced to difficulty in finding
a counterparty with whom to trade. In several markets, appropriate counterparties need to have
specialized abilities and capital which are in limited supply. Importantly, the waiting time until the
next opportunity to trade is uncertain.1 Further, systematic variation in the level of market liquidity
is possible as financial intermediaries receive negative shocks and withdraw from market making. In
this paper, we investigate the effects of this illiquidity and illiquidity risk on asset allocation.
We develop a tractable model of illiquidity. An illiquid asset can only be traded contingent on
the arrival of a randomly occurring trading opportunity – a liquidity event – modeled as an i.i.d.
Poisson process. We interpret these random trading times as the reduced-form outcome of a search
process to find an appropriate counterparty (e.g. Diamond, 1982). Since the illiquid asset cannot be
traded for an uncertain period of time, the investor is exposed to risk that cannot be hedged. The
model nests the special case of Merton (1971) when the trading opportunities arrive continuously.
Illiquidity risk affects the portfolio choice problem in two ways. First, liquid and illiquid wealth
are imperfect substitutes. The investor’s immediate obligations – consumption or payout – can only
be financed through liquid wealth. If the investor’s liquid wealth drops to zero, these obligations
cannot be met until after the next liquidity event. Thus, the investor reduces her allocation to
both the liquid and illiquid risky assets in order to reduce the probability that a state with zero
liquid wealth – as opposed to only zero total wealth – is reached. This increase in effective risk
aversion corresponds to real-world situations where investors or investment funds are insolvent, not
because their assets under management have hit zero, but because they cannot fund their immediate
obligations. The resulting underinvestment in illiquid assets relative to the Merton benchmark is
substantial.2 Second, since the investor’s ability to fund intermediate consumption depends on her
liquid wealth, fluctuations in the share of illiquid assets in the portfolio induce endogenous timevarying risk aversion.
We extend our baseline model of illiquidity to include time-varying arrival rates of liquidity events.
Specifically, we allow for infrequently occurring illiquidity crises. There are two distinct regimes. The
1

Examples include structured credit products, private equity and venture capital; small equity and bond issues, or
large real estate and infrastructure projects. In some of these markets, the waiting time until the next opportunity
to trade is uncertain because the number of participants is small. In other cases, for instance in private equity and
venture capital limited partner investments, the time of exit and re-investment is stochastic and depends on the IPO
or M&A markets.
2
A standard calibration indicates that if the expected time between liquidity events is once a year, the investor
should cut her investment in the illiquid asset by 33% relative to an otherwise identical but fully liquid asset. Further,
the investor should be prepared for large, skewed changes in the relative value of illiquid to liquid holdings in her
portfolio.

1

first regime represents ‘normal’ times, where all assets are fully liquid, as in the Merton benchmark.
The second regime represents a ‘drying up’ of liquidity – a liquidity crisis – where now one of the
risky assets becomes illiquid and can only be traded at infrequent intervals. This model is thus
applicable to a wide range of assets that are normally liquid, but are subject to occasional market
freezes.3
The possibility of a liquidity crisis leads to limited arbitrage in normal times. We consider the
case in which there are two perfectly correlated securities with different Sharpe ratios. In a portfolio
choice model without illiquidity risk, this case presents an arbitrage opportunity; the investor takes
positions of plus or minus infinity in the two different assets. When one asset is illiquid, the investor
allocates a finite amount – and will not use leverage – in the ‘arbitrage’ trades, even in normal times.
While both securities are fully liquid during normal times, ‘arbitrage’ trades entail a hidden cost
because in the event of a crisis they become imperfect substitutes. The inability to immediately
de-lever at the onset of a crisis implies that potential arbitrageurs avoid leverage in normal times.
Hence, investment in apparent arbitrage opportunities is limited by the wealth of arbitrageurs, even
when realizing the arbitrage involves no short positions.
We derive the risk premium associated with a systematic liquidity crisis.4 Following an approach
similar to the ICAPM Merton (1973), we examine the investor’s marginal value of wealth, taking
the prices of other risky assets as given. A transition from the liquid into the illiquid state raises
the marginal value of liquid wealth, implying a negative risk premium. Hence, assets that pay off in
the onset of a liquidity crisis earn lower risk premia. For typical parameter values, the investor is
willing to pay 0.5% to 2% per annum over the actuarial probability of a crisis to receive liquid funds
at the onset a deterioration of market liquidity. Hence, our model provides a theoretical justification
of empirical specifications of the stochastic discount factor that load on measures of illiquidity.
Finally, we explore the determinants of the cost of illiquidity by varying the baseline model.
First, we compute portfolio policies and the utility cost of illiquidity in a version of our model
without intermediate consumption. We confirm that the sub-optimal diversification that results
from infrequent trade is not sufficient by itself to generate large utility costs of illiquidity. Absent
the motive to smooth intermediate consumption, the effect of illiquidity on portfolio policies and
3
For example, Brunnermeier (2009), Gorton (2010), Tirole (2011), and others have highlighted market freezes as a
stylized fact of the 2008-2009 financial crisis. This is not simply a question of a seller reducing prices to a level where a
buyer is willing to step in. As Tirole (2011) and Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov (2012) comment, there were no bids,
at any price, representing “buyers’ strikes” in certain markets where whole classes of investors simply exited previously
liquid markets.
4
This ‘illiquidity risk premium’ refers to the risk premium of an Arrow-Debreu security that pays off at the onset
of a liquidity crisis. This risk premium is distinct from the ‘illiquidity premium’, defined as the price discount of an
illiquid security.

2

welfare is minimal. Second, we compare welfare and portfolio policies between our setting and a
version of our model with a deterministic rebalancing interval. The effect of illiquidity on portfolio
choice is dramatically larger when the length of the illiquidity period is uncertain. Third, we verify
that our quantitative results are not driven by the possibility that the investor reaches states with
zero liquid wealth – and thus infinite marginal utility – by allowing the investor to pay a fixed cost
to transact immediately. Last, we disentangle the effect of preference parameters; we find that the
utility cost of illiquidity is highest for agents that unwilling to substitute across time (low elasticity
of intertemporal substitution) but are willing to substitute across states (low risk aversion).

2

Illiquidity in Asset Markets

We motivate and quantify our notion of illiquidity based on a number of stylized facts, and we
contrast our model with previous approaches in the literature.
Stylized Fact 1 Most asset classes are illiquid, in the sense that trading is infrequent.
Table 1 shows that most assets markets are characterized by long times between trades, low
turnover, and trade in over-the-counter markets in which it is difficult to find counterparties. Except
for ‘plain vanilla’ fixed income securities and public equities, investors need to wait for indeterminate
periods before they can rebalance illiquid assets, and sometimes the time between liquidity events
can extend to decades. Even within the fixed income and public equity markets, there are subclasses that are illiquid. For instance, while the public equity market has a turnover well over 100%,
corporate bonds have a turnover around 25-35%. The average municipal bond trades only twice
per year; the entire market has a turnover of less than 10% per year. Further, transactions times
for many over-the-counter equities, such as those traded on the pinksheet or NASDAQ OTC-BB
markets, are often longer than a week with a turnover of approximately 35%.
In real estate markets, the typical holding period is 4-5 years for residential housing and 8-11 years
for institutional real estate.5 Institutional infrastructure horizons are typically 50 years or longer,
and there can be periods of 40-70 years between sales for investments in art. While the time between
transactions may not be a true measure of liquidity for an investor desiring to trade, investors in many
of these markets face long waits to find appropriate counterparties after the decision has been made
to sell or buy assets, particularly for assets that have very idiosyncratic features in private equity,
real estate, infrastructure, and fine art markets. Levitt and Syverson (2008) report, for example, a
5

The holding periods for residential housing are conservative as there has been a well documented decrease in
residential mobility since the 1950s (see Fischer (2002)).

3

typical time to sale between 110-135 days after initial listing of a house. The standard deviation of
the time to sale is even larger than the mean and Levitt and Syverson note that some houses never
sell. Lastly, typical holding periods for venture capital and private equity portfolios are 3 to 10 years.
Even though the investment horizon is nominally fixed, partnerships often return investor’s money
prior to the partnership’s formal 10-year end. Further, these times are stochastic. For example, in
private equity, the median investment duration is 4 years with 16% returned before 2 years and 26%
returned after 6 years (see e.g. Lopez-de Silanes, Phalippou, and Gottschalg, 2010).6
In most of these markets, illiquidity is characterized by the need to find counterparties to trade.
Our notion of illiquidity in which an illiquid asset can only trade when there is a liquidity event –
when an appropriate counterparty is found – puts us squarely in the tradition of Diamond (1982).
A number of authors have used models with search frictions to consider the impact of illiquidity
risk. Duffie, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2005, 2007) consider risk-neutral and CARA utility cases and
restrict asset holdings at two levels: zero and one. In Vayanos and Weill (2008), agents can only go
long or short one unit of the risky asset. Gârleanu (2009) and Lagos and Rocheteau (2009) allow for
unrestricted portfolio choice, but Gârleanu considers only CARA utility and Lagos and Rocheteau
focus on showing the existence of equilibrium with search frictions. In contrast to these models, we
focus on the investors’ portfolio choice problem with CRRA and Epstein-Zin utility, which allows us
to consider more general preference specifications that allow for wealth effects.7 An alternative, and
equally plausible, micro-foundation for our notion of liquidity can be found in models with adverse
selection. For instance, Daley and Green (2012, 2013) show that adverse selection can generate
significant delays in trading times and time-varying costs of liquidity.
Our notion of liquidity is conceptually distinct from two other common conceptualizations previously studied in the portfolio choice literature. The first is the idea that many assets are expensive to
trade: securities are partially marketable and can be traded at posted prices, but with transactions
costs (e.g. Constantinides (1986); Grossman and Laroque (1990); Vayanos (1998); Lo, Mamaysky,
and Wang (2004)). In these models, liquidity can always be generated by paying a cost. This notion of liquidity is not necessarily realistic in settings such as specialized securitized bond products,
private equity, large institutional real estate projects, and infra-structure projects; buyers will not
immediately transact even at prices close to zero because the necessity of due diligence by lawyers
6

The turnover from trade of private equity investments on the secondary market is much lower. While data on
private equity portfolio turnover is not typically reported. Kensington, a Canadian private equity fund, reports a 2%
turnover in 2008. Alpinvest, a large private equity fund-of-funds reports flows that imply a turnover of approximately
6%. This compares with typical turnover of over 70% for mutual funds (Wermers, 2000).
7
Our work also relates to models with unhedgeable human capital risk (e.g. Heaton and Lucas, 2000; Santos and
Veronesi, 2006). An important distinction is that our illiquid asset is infrequently traded, unlike human capital which
is never traded.

4

and accountants, regulatory approval, transfer of title, etc. inject a waiting time. Our results imply
that this uncertain waiting time plays an important role in portfolio decisions.
The second type of liquidity studied in portfolio choice allows assets to be freely traded at posted
prices, but only in limited quantities (e.g. Longstaff (2001)) or at deterministic times (e.g. Kahl,
Liu, and Longstaff (2003); Koren and Szeidl (2003); Schwartz and Tebaldi (2006); Longstaff (2009);
De Roon, Guo, and Ter Horst (2009); Dai, Li, Liu, and Wang (2010)). In these models, trade can
always be generated at a known rate simply by waiting.8 Similarly, the margin-based asset pricing
literature (e.g. Gârleanu and Pedersen (2011)) develops models with differential borrowing costs and
portfolio constraints but then allows for continuous trade within those constraints. In contrast, we
show that illiquidity risk endogenously leads to portfolio constraints, like not taking short positions
in illiquid or potentially illiquid assets.
Stylized Fact 2 Illiquid asset classes are large.
The illiquid asset markets listed in Table 1 are large and rival the size of the public equity market.
For instance, the market capitalization of NYSE and NASDAQ is approximately $17 trillion. The
estimated size of the residential real estate market is $16 trillion and the estimated size of the (direct)
institutional real estate market is $9 trillion.9 Further, the share of illiquid assets in many investors’
portfolios is very large. Kaplan and Violante (2010) show that individuals hold the majority of
their net wealth in illiquid assets, with 91% and 81% of households’ net portfolios tied up in illiquid
positions, mostly housing, taking median and mean values, respectively. High net worth individuals
in the U.S. allocate 10% of their portfolios to “treasure” assets like fine art, jewelry, and the share of
treasure assets rises to almost 20% in other countries.10 The share of illiquid assets in institutions’
portfolios has also dramatically increased over the last 20 years. Pension funds increased their
holdings in illiquid (“other”) asset classes from 5% in 1995 to close to 20% in 2010, as reported in
8

The only other model that features random opportunities to trade is Rogers and Zane (2002), who solve a model
with random trading opportunities and no liquid risky asset using asymptotic expansions near the Merton benchmark
1/λ → 0. However, Rogers and Zane do not prove that these expansions are valid. In contrast to Rogers and Zane, we
solve the ODEs characterizing the investors’ problem numerically and intentionally consider realistic cases where 1/λ
is large, as is the case for many illiquid asset markets (see Table 1). The behavior of the model as 1/λ → 0 can be very
different from the Merton benchmark. In particular, even as 1/λ → 0, the investor is still trading on a set of measure
zero, hence would never take a short position in either liquid or illiquid wealth.
9
NYSE and NASDAQ market capitalizations are approximately $12 trillion and $5 trillion as of July 2012 from
nyxdata.com and nasdaqtrader.com. The estimated size of the U.S. residential real estate market is at December
2011 and is estimated by Keely, van Ark, Levanon, and Burbank (2012), down from a peak of $23 trillion in 2006.
The estimate of the U.S. institutional real estate market is by Florance, Miller, Spivey, and Peng (2010), with the
institutional real estate market losing $4 trillion from 2006 to 2010. The direct real estate market dwarfs the traded
REIT market, with the FTSE NAREIT All Equity REITs Index having a total market capitalization of approximately
$500 billion at the end of June 2012.
10
Reported in “Profit or Pleasure? Exploring the Motivations Behind Treasure Trends,” Wealth Insights, Barclays
Wealth and Investment Management, 2012.

5

the “Global Pension Asset Study 2011” by Towers Watson. Data from the National Association of
College and University Business Officers (NACUBO) show that the (dollar-weighted) average share
of illiquid “alternatives” in university endowment portfolios rose from 25% in 2002 to 52% in 2010.
Our model is especially relevant to an institutional setting. The largest endowments hold large
amounts of illiquid assets in their portfolios, with endowments over $1 billion holding 60% in alternatives. Harvard University is an example of an institution that experienced the effects of illiquidity
risk over 2008 and 2009 and much of its illiquid endowment could not be sold to meet cash needs.11
Harvard invested a large fraction in illiquid securities because it considered itself a long-horizon
investor. However, Harvard also had intermediate consumption needs. Our results imply that the
primary determinant of the cost of illiquidity is the uncertainty of the illiquidity period interacted
with the need to smooth consumption from the endowment. Our certainty equivalent calculations
are quantitatively useful for investors to take into account the effect of illiquidity on risk-return
trade-offs.
Stylized Fact 3 Normally liquid asset classes sometimes become illiquid.
An important feature of feature of financial markets is that sometimes liquidity dries up in
markets that are normally liquid. For instance, Krishnamurthy et al. (2012) document that in the
market for money market funds, a usually liquid market, there were instances of “buyers’ strikes”
during the recent financial crisis, where investors were unwilling to trade at any price. Anderson
and Gascon (2009) note that the commercial paper market froze not only in the 2008-2009 financial
crisis, but it also froze in 1970 when the Penn Central railroad collapsed. In both cases, the Federal
Reserve stepped in to help restore liquidity.
These illiquidity crises occur regularly in many asset markets.12 Other examples include the
previously mentioned repo market (Gorton and Metrick, 2012); residential and commercial mortgagebacked securities (Gorton, 2009; Acharya and Schnabl, 2010; Dwyer and Tkac, 2009); structured
credit (Brunnermeier, 2009); and the auction rate security market (McConell and Saretto, 2010),
11
In 2008, Harvard University held close to two-thirds of its portfolio in illiquid assets. Its endowment shrank from
$37 billion to $26 billion from June 2008 to June 2009 due to the financial crisis. Since the endowment contributed
over one-third of all revenues to the university, Harvard University experienced severe liquidity problems. Harvard
University solved its liquidity problems by stopping capital projects and issuing debt. Most of this debt was taxable
(not tax-exempt) debt that was not collateralized by the assets in the endowment or other University fixed assets.
In the process, it more than doubled its leverage ratio from 9% to 20%. Harvard University did not hold a liabilitymatching portfolio in the sense of Merton (1993) and it also needed cash to meet substantial collateral calls on (negative)
swap positions. (See Munk, N., “Rich Harvard, Poor Harvard,” Vanity Fair, August 2009 and Ang, A., “Liquidating
Harvard,” Columbia Business School case.) Our model can be extended to allow for the need to fund existing liabilities.
Since many illiquid assets often do not generate cashflows prior to termination, taking into account liabilities only makes
the effects of illiquidity risk on asset allocation more severe.
12
Practitioners refer to these events as “liquidity black holes.” See (Taleb, 1997; Persaud, 2001; Morris and Shin,
2010).

6

which became illiquid in 2008 and is still frozen in 2013.13 Borio (2004) notes that liquidity also
dries up during periods of severe market distress: the Latin American debt crisis in the 1980s, the
Asian emerging market crisis in the 1990s, Russian default crisis in 1998 (see also Elul, 2008), and
of course the financial crisis over 2008-2009. Major liquidity crises have occurred at least once every
ten years, many occurring in tandem with large downturns in asset markets.
We extend our baseline model to allow for infrequent illiquidity crises which has one normal
regime, where all assets are liquid, and a regime representing a liquidity crisis, where the illiquid asset
can only be traded at infrequently occurring liquidity events. In our model, investors underinvest
in arbitrage opportunities during normal times because they carry illiquidity risk if a liquidity crisis
arrives. Other models also generate limited arbitrage, like (e.g. Shleifer and Vishny, 1997; Gromb
and Vayanos, 2002), but in these models arbitrageurs underinvest in arbitrage opportunities because
demand shocks to other investors can push prices further away from fundamentals. Limited arbitrage
occurs in our setting, in contrast, due to the risk of a market freeze. At the onset of a liquidity crisis,
arbitrageurs cannot reduce leveraged positions to prevent states with zero consumption. Hence they
are unwilling to employ leverage in normal times, and arbitrage activity is limited by their wealth.
Last, our model provides a theoretical framework to study the pricing of liquidity risk. Recent
empirical work has documented that several measures of liquidity are priced in the cross-section of
asset returns (e.g. Pastor and Stambaugh, 2003; Acharya and Pedersen, 2005; Sadka, 2006; Korajczyk
and Sadka, 2008). Specifically, stocks with heterogenous exposure to various measures of market
liquidity earn different average stock returns, often controlling for their own level of liquidity. To
the extent that these empirical measures of liquidity are correlated with the difficulty of finding a
counterparty to trade, our model provides a framework to quantify the magnitude of this liquidity.
In the spirit of Merton’s ICAPM, we derive the magnitude of this risk premium directly from the
first order conditions of an optimizing investor faced with the possibility of a liquidity crisis. Relative
to Acharya and Pedersen (2005), who also propose a theoretical model with liquidity risk, the cost
of illiquidity is endogenous in our model.

3

The Baseline Model

We start by formulating a baseline model of illiquidity.
13

As noted by the SEC, “Report on the Municipal Securities Market,” July 31, 2012: in 2008, the auction rate
securities (ARS) market totaled approximately $200 billion; in February 2008, the market froze because there were no
bidders in the primary auctions, where floating interest rates are set. As there was no secondary market, thousands
of customers were unable to sell their ARS holdings. In 2011, there were no new issues of ARS. Other intermediated
fund vehicles also became more illiquid during this time: hedge funds, for example, imposed ‘gates’ provisions that did
not allow for investors to withdraw capital (see Ang and Bollen, 2010).

7

3.1

Information

The information structure obeys standard technical assumptions. There exists a complete probability
space (Ω, F, P) supporting the vector of two independent Brownian motions Zt = (Zt1 , Zt2 ) and an
independent Poisson process (Nt ). P is the corresponding measure and F is a right-continuous
increasing filtration generated by Z × N .

3.2

Assets

There are three assets in the economy: a risk-free bond B, a liquid risky asset S, and an illiquid
risky asset P . The riskless bond B appreciates at a constant rate r:
dBt = r Bt dt

(1)

The second asset S is a risky asset whose price follows a geometric Brownian motion with drift µ
and volatility σ:
dSt
= µ dt + σ dZt1 .
St

(2)

The first two assets B and S are liquid and holdings can be rebalanced continuously. The third asset
P is an illiquid risky asset; its fundamental value evolves according to a geometric Brownian motion
with drift ν and volatility ψ:
p
dPt
= ν dt + ψρ dZt1 + ψ 1 − ρ2 dZt2 ,
Pt

(3)

where ρ captures the correlation between the returns on the two risky assets.
The illiquid asset P differs from the first two assets B and S because it can only be traded
at stochastic times τ , which coincide with the arrival of a Poisson process with intensity λ. The
parameter λ captures the severity of the illiquidity friction; the expected time between liquidity
events is 1/λ. When a trading opportunity arrives, the investor can trade at the price Pt without
any other frictions.14
In addition, the illiquid asset P cannot be pledged as collateral. Investors can issue non-state
contingent debt by taking a short position in the riskless bond B; however, they cannot issue risky
debt using the illiquid asset as collateral. If investors were allowed to do so, they could convert the
illiquid asset into liquid wealth and thus implicitly circumvent the illiquidity friction. Our assumption
14

There are some similarities with models with jump component in prices, as in Liu, Longstaff, and Pan (2003).
However, a key difference between our setting and their jump-diffusion framework is that in our model, risk aversion
is time-varying and depends on the share of illiquid assets in the portfolio. Since portfolios drift away from optimal
diversification, our model features variation in investment and consumption policies even when returns are i.i.d.

8

is motivated by the difficulty of finding a counterparty who is willing to lend cash using illiquid assets
as collateral.15 Alternatively, we could re-interpret P as the fraction of illiquid wealth that cannot
be collateralized. This interpretation is similar to the portfolio constraints analyzed in Gârleanu and
Pedersen (2011).16 The key difference is that we introduce an additional stochastic trading friction
on the non-collateralizable portion of wealth, namely that it can be traded only infrequently.

3.3

The Investor

The investor has CRRA utility over sequences of consumption, Ct , given by:

Z ∞
C 1−γ
dt ,
E
e−βt
1−γ
0

(4)

where β is the subjective discount factor and γ > 1.17
Our assumption of an infinite horizon for the investor is conservative; any effects of illiquidity
are magnified with finite horizons. For instance, if opportunities to trade arise every 10 years, on
average, then an investor with a one-year horizon views the illiquid asset as a very unattractive asset.
Thus, the portfolio weights, effects on consumption policies, and certainty equivalent compensations
for bearing illiquidity risk should all be viewed as conservative bounds for finite-horizon investors.
The agent’s wealth has two components, liquid and illiquid wealth. Liquid wealth includes the
amount invested in the liquid risky asset and the risk-free asset. Illiquid wealth, which equals the
amount invested in the illiquid asset, cannot be immediately consumed nor converted into liquid
wealth. The joint evolution of the investor’s liquid, Wt , and illiquid wealth, Xt , is given by:
dWt
dIt
= (r + (µ − r) θt − ct ) dt + θt σdZt1 −
Wt
Wt
p
dXt
dIt
=νdt + ψρdZt1 + ψ 1 − ρ2 dZt2 +
.
Xt
Xt

(5)
(6)

The agent invests a fraction θ of her liquid wealth into the liquid risky asset, while the remainder
15

For instance, Krishnamurthy et al. (2012) find evidence suggesting that money market mutual funds, which are
the main providers of repo financing, were unwilling to accept private asset-backed securities as collateral between the
third quarter of 2008 and the third quarter of 2009. Even when illiquid assets like real estate, private equity, and
even art can be used as collateral, an investor cannot borrow an amount equal to the whole value of the illiquid asset
position and thus our decomposition into liquid and illiquid assets is still valid.
16
In the case of real estate, we could interpret the illiquid asset P as the fraction of the value of the property that
cannot be used as collateral against a mortgage or a home equity line. Our interpretation assumes that the amount
that the asset can be collateralized does not vary over time and that the constraint is always binding. We could extend
the model to allow the investor to endogenously choose the amount of collateralized borrowing every period, up to a
limit. This model is equivalent to a hybrid model of infrequent trading and transaction costs, with similar qualitative
effects, as we see in Section 5.3.
17
The γ = 1 (log) case is qualitatively similar to the γ > 1 case. Quantitatively, the results for the log case can actually
be more extreme because the low level of risk aversion results in a very high percentage of wealth invested in risky
assets in the benchmark Merton economy. We discuss variation in risk aversion in Section 5.4, and a characterization
of the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation in the log case is available from the authors on request.

9

(1 − θ) is invested in the bond. Following Dybvig and Huang (1988) and Cox and Huang (1989),
we restrict the set of admissible trading strategies, θ, to those that satisfy the standard integrability
conditions. All policies are appropriately adapted to Ft . The agent consumes out of liquid wealth,
so liquid wealth decreases at rate ct = Ct /Wt . When a trading opportunity arrives, the agent can
transfer an amount dIτ from her liquid wealth to the illiquid asset.
Finally, we assume the standard discount rate restriction, as in the Merton two-risky-asset model,



 
 !

µ−r 2
ν−r
ν−r 2
1−γ
µ−r
+
β > (1 − γ)r +
− 2ρ
,
(7)
2γ(1 − ρ2 )
σ
σ
ψ
ψ
and that the illiquid asset has at least as high a Sharpe ratio as the liquid asset,
ν−r
µ−r
≥
.
ψ
σ

4

(8)

The Solution to the Baseline Model

Markets are not dynamically complete, hence we use dynamic programming techniques to solve the
investor’s problem. First, we establish some basic properties of the solution. Then, we compute the
investor’s value function and optimal portfolio and consumption policies.

4.1

The Value Function

The agent’s value function is equal to the discounted present value of her utility flow,
Z ∞

−β(s−t)
F (Wt , Xt ) = max Et
e
U (Cs )ds .
{θ, I, c}

(9)

t

Problem 1 (Baseline) The investor performs the maximization in (9), subject to the two intertemporal budget constraints (5) and (6), with re-balancing (dIt 6= 0) only when the Poisson process
Ntλ jumps.
Our first step is to establish that the investor does not use leverage – that liquidity risk eliminates
any willingness by the investor either to short the illiquid asset or to fund long purchases of the illiquid
asset using a net short position in liquid wealth:
Proposition 1 Any optimal policies in Problem 1 will have W > 0 and X ≥ 0 a.s.
Thus, without loss of generality, we restrict our attention to solutions with Wt > 0 and Xt ≥ 0.
Our second step is to establish bounds on (9). The value function is bounded below by the
problem in which the illiquid asset does not exist, and it is bounded above by the problem in which
the entire portfolio can be continuously rebalanced: the Merton one- and two-stock problems. Third,
10

the utility function is homothetic and the return processes have constant moments, and so it must
be the case that F is homogeneous of degree 1 − γ:
F (W, X) = (W + X)1−γ H (ξ) ,

where

ξ≡

X
.
X +W

(10)

Thus, the investor’s value function can be represented as a power function of total wealth times a
function H(ξ) of the fraction of her portfolio held in illiquid assets, ξ.
Our fourth step is to characterize the value function at the instant when the agent can rebalance
between her liquid and illiquid wealth. When the Poisson process hits and the agent rebalances
her portfolio, the value function may discretely jump. Denote the new, higher, value function as
F ∗ (Wt , Xt ), so that the total amount of the jump is F ∗ − F . At the Poisson arrival, the agent is free
to make changes to her entire portfolio, and thus
F ∗ (Wt , Xt ) =

max
I∈[−Xt ,Wt )

F (Wt − I, Xt + I).

(11)

Since F ∗ must also be homogeneous of degree 1 − γ, there exists a function H ∗ such that F ∗ =
(W + X)1−γ H ∗ (ξ). Since trading the illiquid asset is costless when a liquidity event arrives, the
investor rebalances her portfolio so that the ratio of illiquid to total wealth equals ξ ∗ = arg max H(ξ);
hence, H ∗ is a constant function and equal to H(ξ ∗ ).
We can now solve the Baseline investor’s problem:
Proposition 2 (Baseline) In Problem 1, the investor’s value function can be written as in (10),
where H(ξ) exists and is finite, continuous, and concave for ξ ∈ [0, 1). H(ξ) obtains its maximum
for some ξ ∈ [0, 1). Define H ∗ = maxξ H(ξ) and ξ ∗ = arg maxξ H(ξ). When a trading opportunity
occurs at time τ , the trader selects Iτ so that

Xτ
Xτ +Wτ

= ξ ∗ . In addition, H(ξ) is characterized between

liquidity events by

1 1−γ
∂H(ξ)
c
(1 − ξ)1−γ − β H(ξ) + λ (H ∗ − H(ξ)) + H(ξ) A(ξ, c, θ) +
B(ξ, c, θ)
0 = max
c, θ
1−γ
∂ξ

1 ∂ 2 H(ξ)
+
C(ξ,
c,
θ)
.
(12)
2 ∂ξ 2
where the functions A, B, and C are defined as


1
A(ξ, c, θ) ≡ (1 − γ) r + (1 − ξ)((µ − r)θ − c) + ξ(ν − r) − γ ξ 2 ψ 2 + (1 − ξ)2 σ 2 θ2 + 2ξ(1 − ξ)ψρσθ
2

B(ξ, c, θ) ≡ ξ(1 − ξ) ν − (r + (µ − r)θ − c) + γψθρσ(2ξ − 1) + γθ2 σ 2 (1 − ξ) + γψ 2 ξ

C(ξ, c, θ) ≡ ξ 2 (1 − ξ)2 θ2 σ 2 + ψ 2 − 2ψθρσ
(13)

The investor’s value function has two parts. The first part (W + X)1−γ captures the effect of
total wealth on the continuation utility. The second component H(ξ) captures the effect of wealth
11

composition between liquid and illiquid wealth. We hold total wealth constant and plot the function
H(ξ) in Panel A of Figure 1. We can interpret H(ξ) as a composition penalty function: the investor
has an optimal portfolio composition ξ ∗ that she returns to whenever she is able to re-balance.
Between liquidity events, she experiences a welfare loss for two reasons as her portfolio composition
deviates from the optimum. First, there is the standard effect from lack of optimal diversification.
Second, there is an asymmetric effect arising from the fact that consumption is funded by liquid
wealth only. Examining the slope of H(ξ) as ξ → 1, we see that this second effect is behind the main
mechanism in our model.

4.2

Imperfect Substitutability of Liquid and Illiquid Wealth

In our model, liquid and illiquid wealth are imperfect substitutes. Illiquid wealth can be used to fund
consumption only after the next trading time t = τ . In contrast, liquid wealth can fund consumption
both before and after τ . To quantify this non-substitutability, consider a fictitious market that lets
the investor exchange one unit of illiquid wealth for q units of liquid wealth. Between liquidity events,
the investor would be indifferent in participating in this fictitious market as long as
q=

FX
.
FW

(14)

When the investor has the opportunity to rebalance, q = 1. Between liquidity events, the relative
price q differs from one, depending on whether the investor has too much, or too little illiquid
wealth X relative to her desired allocation. In Panel B of Figure 1 we see that the relative price of
illiquid wealth rapidly declines as the investor’s allocation to illiquid assets ξ increases. When the
illiquid endowment is large X  W , liquid wealth W is only used to fund immediate consumption,
while illiquid wealth is used to fund future consumption. In this case, variation in liquid wealth
becomes unimportant for long-run consumption and the value function becomes separable in X and
W . Hence, even though liquid and illiquid wealth may be correlated, that correlation becomes a
secondary concern for portfolio allocation.

4.3

Parameter Values

In our numerical solutions, we select our parameter values so that the liquid asset can be interpreted
as an investment in the aggregate stock market. We set the parameters of the liquid asset to be
µ = 0.12, σ = 0.15, and set the risk-free rate to be r = 0.04. Table 2 shows that this set of parameters
closely matches the performance of the S&P500 before the financial crisis.18 We work mostly with
18

The mean of the S&P500 including 2008-2010 falls to 0.10 and slightly more volatile, at 0.18, but our calibrated
values are still close to these estimated values.

12

the risk aversion case γ = 6, which for an investor allocating money between only the S&P500 and
the risk-free asset paying r = 0.04 produces an equity holding close to a classic 60% equity, 40%
risk-free bond portfolio used by many institutional investors.
For most of our analysis, we take a conservative approach and set the parameters of the illiquid
asset, ν = 0.12 and ψ = 0.15, to be the same as those of the liquid asset. This has the advantage
of isolating the effects of illiquidity rather than obtaining results due to the higher Sharpe ratios of
the illiquid assets. Further, even for individual funds this assumption is not unrealistic, at least for
some illiquid asset classes.19 These parameters imply that our illiquid asset can be interpreted as
any composite investment with the same Sharpe ratio as public equities, for example a composite
illiquid risky bond investment. Further, to isolate the effect of illiquidity, in the baseline case we
assume that the two risky assets are uncorrelated, ρ = 0; we explore the effect of correlation by
subsequently varying ρ between 0 and 1.
Regarding the severity of the illiquidity friction, we take a baseline case of λ = 1, implying
on average one year between transactions. For comparison, individual private equity, buyout, and
venture capital funds can have average investment durations of approximately four years, which
corresponds to λ = 1/4; an appropriate horizon for a single large real estate investment by institutions
is 10 years (λ = 1/10) (see e.g. Table 1). Since λ is an important parameter, we take special care to
show the portfolio and consumption implications for a broad range of λ. The economics behind the
solution are immune to the particular parameter values chosen.

4.4

Optimal Portfolio Policies

In this section we characterize the investor’s optimal asset allocation and consumption policies. Even
though the investment opportunity set is constant, the optimal policies vary over time as a function
of the amount of illiquid assets held in the investor’s portfolio.
Participation
Before characterizing the optimal allocation, we first show the sufficient conditions for the investor
to have a non-zero holding of the illiquid asset:
19
Kaplan and Schoar (2005), Driessen, Lin, and Phalippou (2008) and Phalippou and Gottschalg (2009), for example,
estimate private equity fund alphas, with respect to equity market indexes, close to zero. Table 2 shows that the reported
returns on a composite illiquid investment in private equity, buyout, and venture capital has similar characteristics to
equity. For example, over the full sample (1981-2010), the mean log return on the illiquid investment is 0.11 with a
volatility of 0.17. This is close to the S&P500 mean and volatility of 0.10 and 0.18, respectively, over that period. Table
2 shows that the returns on liquid and illiquid investments are even closer in terms of means and volatilities before the
financial crisis.

13

Proposition 3 An investor prefers holding a small amount of the illiquid asset to holding a zero
position if and only if
ν−r
µ−r
≥ρ
.
ψ
σ

(15)

The condition for participation is identical to the Merton two-asset case and depends only on the
mean-variance properties of the two securities. Somewhat surprisingly, the degree of illiquidity λ does
not affect the decision to invest a small amount in the illiquid asset because of the infinite horizon
of the agent: a trading opportunity will eventually arrive where the illiquid asset can be converted
to liquid wealth and eventual consumption. However, even though the conditions for participation
are the same as the standard Merton case, the optimal holdings of the illiquid and liquid assets are
very different, as we show below.
Illiquid Asset Holdings
Illiquidity induces underinvestment in the illiquid asset relative to the Merton case. In Table 3,
we present the investor’s optimal rebalancing point ξ ∗ along with the long-run average level illiquid
portfolio holdings E[ξ] for different values of λ. For comparison, and in an abuse of notation, we
report the consumption and portfolio policies for an investor able to continuously trade one (λ = 0)
and two (λ = ∞) risky assets. The optimal holding of illiquid assets at λ = 1 upon arrival of a
liquidity event is 0.37, which is lower than the optimal two-asset Merton holding at 0.60.
In addition to underinvestment in the illiquid asset, the inability to trade implies that the investor’s portfolio can deviate from optimal diversification for a long time. Panel C of Figure 1 plots
the stationary distribution of an investor’s holding of the illiquid asset, ξ. For most of the time – the
20% to 80% range – the share of wealth allocated in illiquid securities is 0.36 to 0.45, while the 1%
to 99% range is 0.30 to 0.65. Furthermore, the distribution of portfolio holdings is positively skewed,
since illiquid wealth grows faster on average than liquid wealth since only the latter is used to fund
consumption. As a result of this skewness, the investor chooses a rebalancing point lower than the
mean of the steady-state distribution of portfolio holdings, that is, ξ ∗ < E [ξt ].
The degree of skewness is increasing in the illiquidity of the investment. When λ = 1, the mean
holding is 0.41, compared to a rebalancing value of 0.37, while the distribution of portfolio holdings
has a standard deviation of 6.3% and normalized skewness coefficient of 1.9. In the case when the
investor can trade once every four years on average (λ = 4), the standard deviation of the investor’s
illiquid holdings increases to 12% and the skewness increases to 2.3.

14

Liquid Asset Holdings
In addition to under-investment in the illiquid asset, illiquidity affects the investment in the liquid
asset. The allocation to the liquid risk asset as a fraction of the investor’s liquid holdings is equal to




FW
ψ
FW X Xt
µ−r
−
+ρ
−
.
(16)
θt =
σ2
FW W Wt
σ
FW W Wt
The allocation to the liquid asset as a function of her total wealth is equal to θ (1 − ξ). There are
two aspects of the optimal policy that merit attention.
First, even in the case where the liquid and illiquid asset returns are uncorrelated, ρ = 0, the
allocation to the liquid asset differs from the Merton benchmark due to time-varying effective risk
aversion. In Panel C of Figure 1, we compare the curvature of the investor’s value function with
respect to liquid wealth −FW W W/FW to that of a Merton investor. For low values of allocation to
illiquid assets, ξ, the two behave in a similar fashion: as the share of liquid wealth W declines in
the investor’s total wealth W + X, so does the investor’s aversion to gambles in W . However, when
the investor’s liquid wealth becomes sufficiently low, the two lines diverge, since liquid wealth is no
longer viewed as a substitute for illiquid wealth. The investor in our problem becomes much more
averse to taking gambles in terms of liquid wealth than a Merton investor. Further, her effective risk
aversion not only increases but it varies over time as a function of her current allocation to illiquid
assets, ξ.
Second, in the case where the liquid and illiquid asset are correlated, ρ 6= 0, the investor hedges
changes in the value of illiquid wealth. The hedging demands depend on the correlation between
the liquid and illiquid asset returns, ρ, and the elasticity of substitution between liquid and illiquid
wealth, −FW X X/FW W W . In Panel E of Figure 1 we plot the second component for the demand
for the liquid risky asset, −FW X X/FW W W , and contrast it to the term corresponding to a Merton
investor for the case of ρ = 0.6. For low values of X relative to total wealth the two lines are very
similar, whereas they diverge dramatically as X increases relative to W . In our model, the term
−FW X X/FW W W converges to zero rather than minus infinity in the Merton case, implying zero
hedging demand at the limit. The hedging motive disappears when illiquid securities comprise the
majority of the agent’s portfolio since illiquid assets are not a substitute for liquid wealth. In this
case, the investor chooses the allocation in liquid assets to smooth consumption rather than hedging
fluctuations in her illiquid portfolio.
Panel F of Figure 1 plots the agent’s optimal allocation to the liquid risky asset as a function
of her current allocation in illiquid assets ξ. The agent partially compensates for the risk of being
unable to trade the illiquid asset for a long period of time by underinvesting in the liquid risky asset.

15

In Table 3 we summarize the average long-run holdings in the liquid risky asset for different degrees
of illiquidity 1/λ. Illiquidity negatively impacts the allocation to the liquid risky asset, but less so
than the illiquid asset. In the case where λ = 1, the investor reduces her allocation in the liquid
risky asset from 60% in the Merton benchmark to 56%, compared to a reduction from 60% to 37%
for the illiquid security.
Effect of Correlation
To study the effect of correlation on portfolio policies, we focus on the interesting case when the
two securities have different Sharpe ratios – for this comparison, we set the expected return of the
illiquid asset to ν = 0.2. In the Merton case where both assets are fully liquid: varying ρ from zero
to one leads to large swings in portfolio allocations. As ρ approaches one, the investor takes large
offsetting positions in the two assets that tend to plus or minus infinity. In Panel G of Figure 1 we
compare the target allocation ξ ∗ as a function of the correlation coefficient. We see that the effect
of correlation is significantly muted relative to the Merton benchmark. The investor never shorts
the liquid risky asset even when the correlation approaches one. From the investor’s perspective,
the liquid and illiquid asset are imperfect substitutes, since only the former can be used to fund
short-term consumption. This imperfect substitutability decreases the desire to use the liquid risky
asset to hedge price changes in the illiquid asset.

4.5

Consumption

The investor’s optimal consumption choice satisfies
U 0 (C) = FW (W, X).

(17)

In the short run, consumption is funded by liquid assets. Hence, the investor equates the marginal
utility of consumption with the marginal value of liquid, rather than total wealth. Using the form
for the value function (10), the ratio of consumption to liquid wealth equals


0

c = (1 − γ)H(ξ) − H (ξ)ξ

− 1
γ

(1 − ξ)−1 .

(18)

Panel H of Figure 1 plots the agent’s optimal consumption to total wealth ratio, c(1 − ξ), as a
function of the current allocation in illiquid assets ξ. The investor always consumes a lower fraction
of her total wealth than the two-asset Merton benchmark. Further, in contrast to the Merton
benchmark, the consumption to wealth ratio is time-varying, since the marginal value of liquid
wealth varies with the current allocation to the illiquid security.

16

The investor’s consumption policy sheds further light on the behavior of the marginal value of
liquid wealth FW . When the share of illiquid assets in the portfolio is small, the share of total
wealth consumed is insensitive to portfolio composition ξ; the investor smooths lifetime consumption
by consuming a higher fraction of liquid wealth today as ξ increases. In contrast, as the share of
illiquid assets ξ increases towards one, her marginal value of liquid wealth increases, leading to a
lower consumption to total wealth ratio.
In Table 3 we compute the average consumption rate E[c(1 − ξ)] for different values of λ. As
we vary the expected time until the next trading opportunity 1/λ from 1 week (1/λ = 1/50) to 10
years, the fraction of total wealth consumed per year declines from 8.8% to 5.9%. Interestingly, when
the average length of the illiquidity period is sufficiently long (λ ≤ 1/4), the investor consumes a
lower fraction of her total wealth than an investor who is unable to trade the second asset at all.
The presence of illiquidity risk constrains how an investor can fund consumption since consumption
must be met out of liquid wealth, the greater the proportion of illiquid assets or the longer the times
between liquidity events, the lower the optimal consumption.

4.6

The Cost of Illiquidity

To quantify the cost of illiquidity, we compute the fraction of initial wealth α the investor would be
willing to give up at the instant of the liquidity event, in order to be fully able to trade the illiquid
asset
KM 2 ((Wt + Xt )(1 − α))1−γ = (Wt + Xt )1−γ H(ξ ∗ ).

(19)

The left hand side of equation (19) is the value function of a Merton investor able to invest in two
risky securities. We refer to α as the utility or certainty equivalent cost of illiquidity.
In Table 3 we compute the certainty equivalent cost of illiquidity for different values of λ. The
cost of illiquidity can be substantial. Even when the investor can trade on average once a week
(λ = 50), she would be willing to forego 1.8% of her total wealth in order to make the second asset
fully liquid. For higher degrees of illiquidity, the cost increases substantially; an investor trading an
asset with an average of 10 years between trades (λ = 0.1), such as institutional real estate, would
be willing to give up 22% of her total wealth in order to be able to continuously trade the illiquid
asset. Here, we should emphasize that α is a conservative estimate of the cost of illiquidity. Since
H(ξ ∗ ) ≥ H(ξt ), the investor would be willing to pay at least a fraction α at any point between
liquidity events. Replacing H(ξ ∗ ) with its long-run average E[H(ξt )] would lead to higher costs.

17

5

Determinants of the Cost of Illiquidity

In this section we explore the key determinants of the cost of illiquidity. First, we separate the cost
due to suboptimal diversification from the inability to fund consumption; we show that smoothing
consumption is more important than maintaining optimal diversification. Second, we disentangle
the effect of illiquidity from illiquidity risk by comparing our setup to a model with deterministic
periods of illiquidity; we find that the uncertainty about the frequency of trade magnifies the cost
of illiquidity. Third, we verify that our results are not driven by the fact that marginal utility is
infinite in the extreme states where liquid wealth – and consumption – drops to zero, by allowing
the investor to pay a fixed cost to transact immediately. Last, we explore the impact of preference
parameters, disentangling the effect of the coefficient of risk aversion from the elasticity of intertemporal substitution; the cost of illiquidity is highest for investors who are willing to substitute across
states but not across time.

5.1

The Effect of Consumption Smoothing

Illiquidity impedes consumption smoothing and optimal diversification. To separate these two effects,
we consider an investor who only values consumption at some future stochastic terminal date τ
Problem 2 (No Intermediate Consumption) The investor maximizes
Fnc (Wt , Xt ) = max Et [U (Cτ̂ )] ,

(20)

{θ, I}

where τ̂ is a stochastic retirement time that is exponentially distributed according to a Poisson process
with arrival rate δ subject to the budget constraints given by
dWt
dIt
= (r + (µ − r) θt ) dt + θt σdZt1 −
,
Wt
Wt

(21)

and equation (6), with Ct = Wt + Xt . Re-balancing (dIt 6= 0) occurs only when the Poisson process
Ntλ jumps.
The following proposition characterizes the solution to Problem 2
Proposition 4 (No Intermediate Consumption) In Problem 2, the investor’s value function
can be written as Fnc (W, X) = (W +X)1−γ Hnc (ξ), where Hnc (ξ) exists and is finite, continuous, and
concave for ξ ∈ [0, 1]. Hnc (ξ) obtains its maximum for some ξ ∈ [0, 1]. When a trading opportunity
occurs at time τ , the trader selects Iτ so that

Xτ
Xτ +Wτ

18

∗ , where H ∗ and ξ ∗ are defined as in
= ξnc
nc
nc

Proposition 2. In addition, Hnc (ξ) is characterized for t ≤ τ̂ by
 

1
∂Hnc (ξ)
∗
0 = max δ
− Hnc (ξ) + λ (Hnc
− Hnc (ξ)) + Hnc (ξ) A(ξ, 0, θ) +
B(ξ, 0, θ)
θ
1−γ
∂ξ

1 ∂ 2 Hnc (ξ)
C(ξ, 0, θ) .
(22)
+
2 ∂ξ 2
where the functions A, B and C are defined in (13).
The differential equation characterizing the solution to the problem without intermediate consumption is similar to our baseline model, up to a difference in the discount rate. To facilitate
comparison with the baseline case, we consider the case where the investor’s effective rate of impatience is equal to our baseline calibration, δ = β.
In Table 4, we compute optimal policies and utility costs across different levels of illiquidity 1/λ.
Absent the motive to smooth intermediate consumption, the effects of illiquidity are quantitatively
small. The illiquidity cost in terms of certainty equivalent wealth is below 40 basis points across all
values of λ. Even for an average time between liquidity events of 10 years, the optimal holdings in the
illiquid asset are 0.52, compared to 0.59 for the Merton case. This compares to 0.05 in Table 3 with
intermediate consumption for the same average times between liquidity events. Thus, the inability
to fully smooth consumption across states is the primary determinant of the cost of illiquidity, which
confirms our intuition in Section 4.2.

5.2

Stochastic Versus Deterministic Trading Opportunities

To disentangle the effect of the length of the illiquid period from the uncertainty over its duration,
we consider the case where the agent is allowed to rebalance her portfolio at fixed intervals, spaced
T periods apart. The investor’s problem is
Problem 3 (Deterministic Liquidity) The investor maximizes (9), subject to the budget constraints (5) and (6), with re-balancing (dIt 6= 0) only at the deterministic times τ = 0, T, 2T, . . . .
The following proposition characterizes the solution to Problem 3:
Proposition 5 (Deterministic Liquidity) For Problem 3, the investor’s value function can be
written as FT (t, W, X) = (W + X)1−γ HT (t, ξ), where HT (t, ξ) exists and is finite, continuous, and
concave in ξ for ξ ∈ [0, 1). HT (t, ξ) obtains its maximum in ξ for some ξ ∈ [0, 1). We have HT (τ, ξ) =
maxξ lim↓0 HT (τ + , ξ), and we define ξT∗ = arg maxξ lim↓0 HT (τ + , ξ) with τ = 0, T, 2T, ..., the
repeated trading times. At t = τ , the investor selects Iτ so that
20

Xτ
Xτ +Wτ

= ξT∗ .20 The function HT (t, ξ)

The limit statement reflects the fact that the value function is continuous in ξ but not in t at t = τ : at t = τ + ,
ξ is a state variable, and so H(τ + , ξ) is discretely less than H(τ, ξ), except for ξ = ξT∗ .

19

is characterized by

1 1−γ
∂HT (t, ξ)
0 = max
c
(1 − ξ)1−γ − βHT (t, ξ) +
+ HT (t, ξ) A(ξ, c, θ)
c, θ
1−γ
∂t

∂HT (t, ξ)
1 ∂ 2 HT (t, ξ)
C(ξ, c, θ) .
+
B(ξ, c, θ) +
∂ξ
2
∂ξ 2

(23)

where the functions A, B and C are defined in (13).
Table 5 computes the optimal policies and the utility cost of illiquidity for different lengths of
the illiquidity period. In contrast to the case with stochastic trading opportunities (see Table 3),
varying the length of the deterministic illiquidity period has only a small effect on optimal policies.
For example, when the time until the next trade is known in advance, varying the expected time
until the next liquidity date from 1/50 to 10 years leads to a drop in the fraction of total wealth
consumed per year from 8.9% to 8.4%. Similarly, the effects on welfare are small and are relative
insensitive to the length of the illiquidity period; the utility cost of illiquidity varies between 1.1%
(1/50 years) to 2.8% (10 years).
Comparing Table 5 to Table 3, we conclude that the uncertainty regarding the opportunity
to trade is a major component of the cost of illiquidity. When the trading intervals are known
in advance, lengthening the intervals of non-trading has a small impact on investor utility. The
investor’s main concern is to avoid states of the world where her liquid wealth – and therefore her
consumption – drops to zero before the next opportunity to trade. If the investor can trade at
deterministic intervals, this state can be avoided with probability one by investing an appropriate
amount into the riskless asset and consuming a constant fraction. That is, the investor can hedge
against deterministic illiquidity. Illiquidity risk represented by stochastic non-trading intervals –
the unknown time until the next liquidity event – is unhedgeable and induces large portfolio choice
effects.

5.3

Introducing Costly Liquidity

Our model can be interpreted as a setting where the cost of transacting is infinite, except at times
when the Poisson process hits, in which case it is equal to zero. Effectively, we are assuming that
sometimes there is no available counterparty with which to trade, at any price. However, this
assumption may be extreme: often, in addition to a decentralized market, there are certain trading
partners that are always available, but at a cost. Here, we explore a hybrid of our baseline model and
a model with transaction costs. Specifically, the investor has two options if she wants to rebalance
her portfolio, she can i) wait for the arrival of the Poisson process, just like the baseline model, or
ii) pay a cost and rebalance freely. To keep the model as close to the baseline model, we assume
20

that this fixed fee is independent of the trading amount and scales with the investor’s total wealth.
Alternatively, we can interpret the trading cost as giving the investor the option to pay a fee to
temporarily increase her probability of trade from λ to infinity.
Problem 4 (Fixed Transaction Cost) The investor maximizes (9), subject to the budget constraints (5) and (6), with re-balancing (dIt 6= 0) only when the Poisson process Ntλ hits or upon the
payment of a fixed fraction κ of total wealth W + X.
The following proposition characterizes the solution to Problem 4:
Proposition 6 (Fixed Transaction Cost) In Problem 4, the investor’s value function can be
written as Ff c (W, X) = (W + X)1−γ Hf c (ξ), where Hf c (ξ) exists and is finite, continuous, and
 
concave in ξ ∈ ξ, ξ . Define Hf∗c and ξf∗c as in Proposition 2. When ξ hits the boundaries [ξ, ξ], the
 
τ
trader pays κ(W + X) and selects Iτ so that XτX+W
= ξf∗c . In the no-trade region, ξ ∈ ξ, ξ , Hf c (ξ)
τ
solves



1 1−γ
∂H(ξ)
c
(1 − ξ)1−γ − β H(ξ) + λ Hf∗c − H(ξ) + H(ξ) A(ξ, c, θ) +
B(ξ, c, θ)
c, θ
1−γ
∂ξ

1 ∂ 2 H(ξ)
(24)
+
C(ξ, c, θ) .
2 ∂ξ 2

0 = max

where the functions A, B and C are defined in (13) and the boundaries of the no-trading region,
[ξ, ξ], solve H(ξ) = H(ξ) = (1 − κ)1−γ Hf∗c .
Table 6 computes the optimal policies and the utility cost of illiquidity for different levels of
illiquidity λ and transaction cost κ. Comparing Table 6 to Table 3, we see that, the availability of
the option to freely trade upon payment of the cost κ dampens the effect of illiquidity. For example,
in the case where λ = 1, varying the level of the fixed cost from infinite to 1% of total wealth, the
utility cost falls from 6.7% to 2.9%. In contrast to our baseline model, here the investor has the
option to trade at will; hance she trades only when her illiquid allocation ξ exits the inaction region
[ξ, ξ], that is, only when the cost of illiquidity is high. Doing so allows the investor to eliminate the
occurrence of states when her liquid wealth – and therefore her consumption – drops to zero. This
option is exercised more frequently if the probability of otherwise finding a counterparty, λ, or the
exercise cost κ, is low.
In the last row of each panel in Table 6 , we compute optimal policies and the utility cost of
illiquidity in the case where λ = 0. Doing so allows us to compare our baseline setup with a pure
transaction costs model. Our baseline model and the pure transaction costs model lead to similar
qualitative predictions as our model – the investor trades infrequently. As a comparison of the utility
21

costs across the two models, an investor facing liquidity events arriving on average once a year (λ = 1)
would be willing to pay a fraction κ = 2.6% of her total wealth to an intermediary each time to
transact freely.
We conclude that endowing that investor with the option to trade at will, though at a cost, lowers
the cost of illiquidity. If investors have access to a market maker who is able to absorb the illiquid
asset for a fee, this hybrid model is more appropriate. However, in many situations, liquidity is not
always available, even at a cost. Adverse selection or search frictions may lead to the inability to
trade immediately at any price. In the financial crisis, many markets experienced liquidity freezes
where no transactions were possible at any price (see Tirole (2011)). In these cases, our baseline
model is more appropriate than transaction costs notions of illiquidity.

5.4

Intertemporal Substitution and Risk Aversion

The curvature of the value function is an important determinant of the cost of illiquidity. In particular, the investor fears the probability that she reaches states with very low liquid wealth for two
reasons. First, states with low liquid wealth are states with low consumption, and the investor likes
to smooth consumption across states; the coefficient of risk aversion captures the magnitude of this
preference. Second, in states where liquid wealth is low relative to total wealth, the investor faces
a steeply increasing consumption profile. The agent dislikes these states because she wants to have
smooth consumption paths over time; the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS) governs this
preference. A feature of time-separable preferences is that these two effects are linked. To investigate
these two motives separately, we consider the case where the agent has recursive preferences.
Problem 5 (Epstein-Zin) The investor maximizes
Z ∞ 
 
Fez (Wt , Xt ) = max Et
f Cs , Fez (Ws , Xs ) ds ,
{θ, I, c}

(25)

t

where the aggregator f is defined following Duffie and Epstein (1992) as
!
C 1−ζ
β
f (C, J) ≡
− (1 − γ) J ,
1 − ζ ((1 − γ)J) γ−ζ
1−γ

(26)

subject to the budget constraints (5) and (6), with re-balancing (dIt 6= 0) only when the Poisson
process Ntλ jumps.21
The following proposition characterizes the solution to Problem 5
21

See Duffie and Epstein (1992) for more details. Here, β is the subjective discount rate, γ is the coefficient of risk
aversion and ζ is the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution. The case of power utility corresponds to
γ = ζ.

22

Proposition 7 (Epstein-Zin) For Problem 5, the investor’s value function can be written as Fez (W, X) =
(W + X)1−γ Hez (ξ), where Hez (ξ) exists and is finite, continuous, and concave for ξ ∈ [0, 1). Hez (ξ)
∗ and ξ ∗ as in Proposition 2. When a trading
obtains its maximum for some ξ ∈ [0, 1). Define Hez
ez

opportunity occurs at time τ , the trader selects Iτ so that

Xτ
Xτ +Wτ

∗ . In addition, H (ξ) is
= ξez
ez

characterized by




 ζ−γ
β
1−γ
1−ζ
1−ζ
0 = max
c
(1 − ξ)
(1 − γ)Hez (ξ)
− (1 − γ)Hez (ξ) + λ (Hez ∗ − Hez (ξ))
c, θ
1−ζ

∂Hez (ξ)
∂ 2 Hez (ξ)
+Hez (ξ) A(ξ, c, θ) +
B(ξ, c, θ) +
C(ξ, c, θ) .
(27)
∂ξ
∂ξ 2
where the functions A, B and C are defined in (13).
To quantify the impact of risk aversion and the elasticity substitution on portfolio policies, we
compute optimal policies and utility costs for different preference parameters and levels of illiquidity
1/λ. We show the results in Table 7. In Panel A, we vary the coefficient of risk aversion γ and the
likelihood of trading λ, holding the EIS fixed. As risk aversion increases, the investor’s policies (ξ ∗ ),
her rate of consumption out of liquid wealth (c), and the fraction of her liquid wealth invested in the
liquid asset (θ) all converge to the frictionless benchmark. For instance, in the case where λ = 10, an
investor with a risk aversion of γ = 3 allocates 80% of her total wealth to the illiquid asset, compared
to 118% for a Merton investor. In contrast, if the investor had a risk aversion of γ = 15, she would
allocate only 22% of her total wealth to the illiquid asset, compared to 24% for a Merton investor.
An investor with high risk aversion chooses to invest less in risky assets, hence for her, the cost of
illiquidity is small. Indeed, as we see in Panel A.ii, the utility cost of illiquidity decreases with risk
aversion.
In Panel B, we vary the elasticity of intertemporal substitution 1/ζ and the likelihood of trading
λ, holding risk aversion fixed. The elasticity of intertemporal substitution has a quantitatively small
impact on portfolio policies. As we see in Panels B.i and B.iv, varying the EIS from 1.5 to 1/6
has essentially no impact on the allocation to the liquid asset, and a small impact on the allocation
to the illiquid asset. However, as we see in Panel B.iii, varying the EIS has an impact on the
investor’s optimal consumption policy. When the investor’s desire to smooth consumption across
states increases (EIS = 1/6), her optimal fraction of wealth consumed declines faster with λ than
when her elasticity of substitution is high. Hence, we find that low EIS magnifies the utility cost of
illiquidity to the investor, as we see in Panel B.ii.
We conclude that the utility cost of illiquidity is higher for agents with low inter-temporal elasticity of substitution and low risk aversion. Holding portfolio allocations constant, the cost of illiquidity
is higher for more risk averse agents that are also reluctant to substitute across time. However, this
23

utility cost depends on the fraction of wealth invested in illiquid securities, and the amount of investment in the illiquid risky asset is decreasing in risk aversion.

6

Liquidity Crises

Here, we extend the model to a setting where financial markets are normally liquid, but transition
to infrequent liquidity crises. These liquidity crises are temporary, and they adversely affect the
liquidity of otherwise liquid securities. We consider two applications of the extended model. First,
we show that the possibility of a deterioration in market liquidity leads to limited arbitrage in normal
times. Second, using the investor’s marginal value of wealth, we derive the price of illiquidity risk.

6.1

A Model With Systematic Liquidity Risk

The level of market liquidity depends on two states, St ∈ {I, L}. In state L, corresponding to
‘normal’ times, all assets are perfectly liquid, as in the Merton benchmark. In state I – the ‘crisis’
state – the investor needs to wait for the arrival of a trading opportunity to trade the now illiquid
asset P , as in the model in Section 3. The state of market liquidity, St , follows a continuous-time
Markov process with transition probability matrix between time t and t + dt given by


1 − χL dt
χL dt
P =
.
χI dt
1 − χI dt

(28)

Hence, the frequency and average duration of a liquidity crisis are χI and 1/χL respectively.
The investor’s problem is
Problem 6 (Liquidity Crises) The investor maximizes (9) subject to the budget constraints (5)
and (6). The state of the economy (St ∈ {I, L}) evolves as in (28). If St = L, trade in both assets
is continuous; if St = I, the investor can re-balance (dIt 6= 0) only when the Poisson process Ntλ
jumps.
Our first result is that even in normal times, S = L, the investor will not short the potentially
illiquid asset or have a short position in liquid wealth:
Proposition 8 Any optimal policies in Problem 6 will have W > 0 and X ≥ 0 a.s. for both S = I
and S = L.
The possibility of a liquidity crisis affects portfolio policies in normal times. The transition from
liquid to illiquid is a surprise event and occurs without the opportunity to re-balance. Consequently,
the portfolio restrictions from the illiquid state – see Proposition 1 – also apply in the liquid state.
The following proposition characterizes the solution to Problem 6:
24

Proposition 9 (Liquidity Crises) For Problem 6, the investor’s value function can be written as
FLC (W, X, S) = (W + X)1−γ HLC (ξ, S), where HLC (ξ) exists and is finite, continuous, and concave
in ξ for ξ ∈ [0, 1). HLC (ξ) obtains its maximum for some ξ ∈ [0, 1). The function HLC is given by
(
HI (ξ), S = I
HLC (ξ, S) =
,
(29)
HL∗ , S = L
where the function HI (ξ) satisfies the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation

1 1−γ
c
(1 − ξ)1−γ − βHI (ξ) + λ (HI∗ − HI (ξ)) + χL (HL∗ − HI (ξ))
0 = max
c, θ
1−γ

∂HI (ξ)
1 ∂ 2 HI (ξ)
+HI (ξ)(1 − γ)A(ξ, c, θ) +
B(ξ, c, θ) +
C(ξ,
c,
θ)
,
∂ξ
2 ∂ξ 2

(30)

and the functions A, B and C are defined in (13). The constants HL∗ and HI∗ solve




c
θ
1
1−γ
1−γ
∗
I
∗
∗
c
(1 − ξ)
− β HL + χ (HI (ξ) − HL ) + A ξ,
,
HL
0 = max
c, θ,ξ
1−γ
1−ξ 1−ξ
(31)
HI∗

= max HI (ξ)

(32)

ξ

∗ , ξ ∗ } maximize (30) and (31) respectively. The policy ξ ∗ maxiThe policies {c∗I , θI∗ } and {c∗L , θL
L
I

mizes (32).
In this case, the investor’s value function depends not only on her wealth composition ξ, but
also on the condition of market liquidity. In normal times, S = L, the investor can freely rebalance
between both risky assets and thus the function HL (ξ) is a constant. During a liquidity crisis,
S = I, the investor’s problem is similar to the problem analyzed in Section 3, and, therefore, her
value function HI depends on the ratio of illiquid to total wealth ξ. When a liquidity crisis occurs,
the investor is constrained to hold her current allocation to the now illiquid security until the next
opportunity to trade. Hence, the investor’s optimal portfolio holdings in the liquid state are affected
by the possibility of a liquidity crisis.
In Figure 2, we compare portfolio policies across regimes for different values of the frequency,
χI , average duration 1/χL and severity 1/λ of liquidity crisis. As we see, the investor reduces her
allocation in illiquid asset not only during a crisis, but also during normal times. Similarly, the
investor reduces her consumption rate in both regimes. Both of these effects are increasing in χI ,
1/χL and 1/λ. In addition, the investor holds fewer liquid risky assets, but only during the liquidity
crisis; her portfolio allocation in liquid risky assets is the same as the Merton benchmark in normal
times, assuming the two assets S and P are uncorrelated.
In summary, the possibility of a liquidity crisis leads to underinvestment in assets that are cur25

rently fully liquid but whose liquidity can dry up during a crisis. The same mechanism leads to
limited arbitrage, which we explore below.

6.2

Limits to Arbitrage

In the absence of any trading friction, the existence of two perfectly correlated securities with different Sharpe ratios implies an arbitrage opportunity. Faced with this arbitrage, the investor should
construct a zero-investment portfolio that has a positive payoff, and take an infinite position in this
strategy. In our setting, the investor is reluctant to fully invest in arbitrage opportunities that involve
potentially illiquid securities – even if both securities are currently fully liquid and taking advantage
of this arbitrage involves no short positions in risky assets.
Corollary 10 (Limits to Arbitrage) If |ρ| = 1 and

ν−r
ψ

6=

µ−r
σ

∗
the investor’s portfolio policies θL

and ξL∗ are finite and satisfy
µ−r
χI HI0 (ξL∗ )
ν−r
−ρ
=−
ψ
σ
ψ HL∗ (1 − γ)

(33)

ξL∗ ∈ [0, 1)

(34)

∗
θL
=

µ−r
ψ
− ρ ξL∗
2
γσ
σ

(35)

Limits to arbitrage arise naturally in our setting. On the event of a crisis, the investor is not
able to continuously rebalance her position. Hence, even if both securities are currently fully liquid,
undertaking the arbitrage exposes the investor to illiquidity risk. In equation (33), the investor
will increase her holdings of the illiquid asset until the marginal welfare loss in the illiquid state –
determined by HI0 (ξL∗ ) – times the probability of that state occurring is proportional to the difference
in the Sharpe ratios between the liquid and illiquid assets. Examining the investor’s allocation to
the liquid asset (35), we see two components: the first part depends on the Sharpe ratio of the liquid
risky asset; the second part hedges fluctuations to her wealth due to the investment in the potentially
illiquid security. Since ξL∗ is finite, her overall portfolio is not riskless.
The arbitrageur’s investment in this apparent arbitrage opportunity is limited by her wealth.
The investor will never take a levered position in the illiquid asset during a liquidity crisis – see
proposition 1 – since doing so would lead to states with zero consumption. The inability to reduce
leverage at the onset of a liquidity crisis – since the illiquid asset cannot be traded immediately
– dissuades her from leveraging her potentially illiquid investment in normal times, as we see in
equation (34). Consequently, the amount of resources the agent commits to an ‘arbitrage opportunity’
will be bounded above by her level of wealth, leading to limited arbitrage.
26

To quantify the magnitude of limited arbitrage in our setting, we compute the optimal portfolio
∗ and ξ ∗ in a setting with an arbitrage opportunity. We assume the two risky assets are
policies θL
L

perfectly correlated, |ρ| = 1, and we set the mean return to the potentially illiquid asset to be two
percentage points higher than the mean return of the liquid asset, ν = 0.14. As we see in Figure 3,
the leverage constraint (34) is not binding. Even when the severity of the liquidity crisis is small –
the potentially illiquid asset can be traded on average once a month – the investor only allocates 95%
of her wealth into the potentially illiquid security; as the severity of the crisis increases to 1/λ = 2
years, the investor allocates just 60% of her wealth in the apparent arbitrage. An increase in the
frequency, or the average duration of a crisis has similar qualitative results.
We conclude that the possibility of a liquidity crisis leads to limited arbitrage in normal times.
Our mechanism is distinct from existing models; limits to arbitrage arise even in a state of the world
where all securities are fully liquid, there are no transaction costs, and riskless profits are possible.
To the extent that there is a negative relation between the degree of aggressiveness in arbitrageurs’
strategies and the degree of mispricing, our model suggests that mispricing is worse in markets where
liquidity crises are more likely, last longer, and are more severe.

6.3

The Pricing of Illiquidity Risk

A model with systematic liquidity crises allows us to quantify the illiquidity risk premium, that is,
the expected return differential between two liquid securities with heterogeneous return exposure to
illiquidity crises. Using an approach similar to Merton’s ICAPM, we derive the price of the risk of
a liquidity crisis. To compute this risk premium, we examine the effect of a rise of illiquidity on the
investor’s marginal value of liquid wealth FW taking the processes governing asset returns as given.
During normal times, that is, in the liquid state S = L, the investor’s marginal value of wealth
process πt ≡ FW evolves according to
FW (W, X, I) − FW (W, X, L)
dπt
= [. . . ] dt + [. . . ] dZt1 + [. . . ] dZt2 +
πt
FW (W, X, L)

∗
ξ=ξL

dNtI ,

(36)

where NtI is a Poisson count process such that dNtI = 1 at the onset of a liquidity crisis, S = I.
The last term in (36) corresponds to the increase in the investor’s marginal utility at the onset of a
financial crisis. This term determines the market price of illiquidity risk.
The marginal utility process (36) provides a theoretical justification for empirical specifications
of the stochastic discount factor (SDF) that include measures of systematic illiquidity risk (e.g.
Pastor and Stambaugh, 2003; Sadka, 2006; Korajczyk and Sadka, 2008). In particular, several of
the illiquidity measures considered in the literature are likely to be correlated with an increase in

27

the difficulty of finding counterparties to trade. For instance, Korajczyk and Sadka (2008), show
comovement among several measures of liquidity; these measures include the average turnover in the
stock market. A more direct test of the SDF (36) would include the common component of illiquidity
measures across asset markets. Hu, Pan, and Wang (2012) provide some empirical evidence along
these lines.
To quantify the magnitude of the illiquidity risk premium, we introduce a derivative security in
zero net supply that allows the investor to hedge a deterioration in market liquidity, which we call
illiquidity protection. By purchasing illiquidity protection, the investor pays an annual premium
equal to χ̂I in order to receive a cash payment of $1 dollar in the event of a liquidity crisis. The
following corollary computes the cost of illiquidity insurance that would induce zero demand for the
derivative security
Corollary 11 The annual premium for liquidity protection is equal to
χ̂I = χI

FW (W, X, I)
FW (W, X, L)

(37)

∗
ξ=ξL

Corollary 11 shows that the cost of illiquidity insurance is equal to the probability of a liquidity
crisis, times the increase in the marginal value of liquid wealth on the event of a crisis. Since liquid
wealth becomes more valuable during a liquidity crisis than normal times, the investor is willing
to pay a higher rate that the objective probability χI to obtain some protection against a liquidity
crisis.
The illiquidity risk premium is related to the utility cost of illiquidity. In Panel A of Figure 4 we
compare the risk premium χ̂I − χI of a liquidity crisis across different values of χI , χL and λ. We
see that the investor is willing to pay a substantial premium over the subjective probability χI in
order to obtain liquidity during a crisis. For example, the investor would be willing to pay an excess
premium of 80 bps per year to obtain liquidity on the event of a once in a decade liquidity crisis
(χI = 0.1), with average duration of two years (χL = 0.5), during which liquidity events arrive on
average once a year (λ = 1).
In Panel B of Figure 4, we compute the utility cost of a liquidity crisis, defined as the fraction
of total wealth the investor would pay ex-ante to eliminate the possibility of a crisis. Even though
illiquidity crises are temporary, they still lead to substantial utility costs. For instance, the investor
would be willing to forgo 2% of her wealth to eliminate the possibility of a once in a decade liquidity
crisis (χI = 0.1), with average duration of two years (χL = 0.5), during which the investor can
rebalance on average once a year (λ = 1). Comparing Panels A and B, we see that the illiquidity
risk premium is related to the utility cost of illiquidity. Changes in the model specification or
28

parameters that amplify the utility cost of illiquidity – for instance those considered in Section 5 –
also lead to a higher illiquidity risk premium.
The risk premium of the security offering illiquidity protection helps us understand differences in
average return among similar, liquid securities, that have different price behavior during a liquidity
crisis. A classic example is the swap-treasury spread. Both securities are very liquid and have
similar exposures to interest rate and credit risk; yet, swaps have been historically priced cheaper
than treasuries. This difference in price could be due to their differential price reaction to changes
in the level of market illiquidity. For instance, during the flight-to-quality episodes that followed the
financial crisis of 2008, the swap spread increased and stayed high for some time. Similar behavior
was observed for mortgage spreads, especially for the riskiest parts of the mortgage market. Our
model provides a framework to understand the spread differential during a liquidity crisis, by relating
the price of illiquidity risk to the marginal utility of financial market participants.

7

Conclusion

We study the effect of illiquidity risk on portfolio choice by extending the Merton (1971) framework to
allow for infrequent and stochastic trading opportunities. Relative to the Merton economy, Illiquidity
leads to a large reduction in the allocation to both illiquid and liquid assets, lower consumption rates
and time-varying effective relative risk aversion. There are two main drivers of these results. First,
consumption is financed through liquid assets. Investors care about both liquid and illiquid wealth,
and as illiquid wealth becomes larger, the investor endogenously acts in a more risk-averse fashion
fearing states with low liquid wealth. Second, the fact that the duration of the illiquidity period is
uncertain greatly amplifies the cost of illiquidity. In contrast to models with deterministic trading
dates, the investor cannot hedge against the likelihood that her liquid wealth – and therefore her
intermediate consumption – drops to zero.
We study the pricing of liquidity crises by allowing the risk of illiquidity to vary over time.
Motivated by the behavior of many asset markets that exhibit periodic pronounced periods during
which liquidity “dries up” , we extend the model to allow for multiple liquidity regimes. We consider
the case where all assets are fully liquid during normal times, but there exist temporary regimes
during which the illiquid asset can be traded only infrequently. Our model allows for the possibility
of ‘arbitrage opportunities’ which occur when all assets are perfectly liquid, but agents do not take
advantage of them due to the possibility that liquidity will evaporate. Our calibration implies that
agents would be willing to pay an illiquidity risk premium of 2% to insure against illiquidity crises
occurring once every ten years.

29

A
A.1

Proofs and Derivations
Proof of Proposition 1

Consumption is out of liquid wealth only and the illiquid asset cannot be pledged, so Wt ≤ 0 implies zero consumption
before the next trading day, leaving the objective function (4) at −∞. For |ρ| < 1, Xt < 0 implies that under any
admissible investment and consumption policy, there is a positive probability that at the next trading time Wτ +Xτ ≤ 0,
violating limited liability, implying zero consumption, and leaving the objective function (4) at −∞. For ρ = 1, Xt < 0
is ruled out by assuming that the illiquid asset has a weakly higher Sharpe ratio than the liquid asset (8). For ρ = −1
the investor invests positive amounts in the illiquid asset Xt and the liquid risky asset.

A.2

Proof of Proposition 2

The value function is bounded below by the problem in which the illiquid asset does not exist, and it is bounded above
by the problem in which the entire portfolio can be continuously rebalanced: the Merton one- and two-stock problems.
Hence, there exist constants KM 1 and KM 2 such that
KM 1 W 1−γ ≤ F (W, X) ≤ KM 2 (W + X)1−γ ≤ 0.

(38)

Combining (38) and (10) yields that H(ξ) exists and is finite for ξ ∈ [0, 1). The arguments in the proof of proposition 1
are sufficient to show that H(1) = −∞. Concavity of H(ξ) on ξ ∈ [0, 1) follows from Lemma 12 (below), and continuity
on ξ ∈ [0, 1] from inspection. That H(ξ) obtains its maximum for some ξ ∈ [0, 1) follows from concavity, continuity,
and H(1) = −∞.
Lemma 12 H(ξ) is concave on ξ ∈ [0, 1).
Proof. Define Q = X + W to be total wealth, and let {Q0 , X01 } and {Q0 , X03 } be two initial values with the
associated optimal policies {C 1 , π 1 } and {C 3 , π 3 } where π = θW . For κ ∈ (0, 1), we consider a middle initial value
{Q0 , X02 = κX01 +(1−κ)X03 } and the associated (possibly optimal) policies {C 2 = κC 1 +(1−κ)C 3 , π 2 = κπ 1 +(1−κ)π 3 },
which are feasible because of the linearity of the budget constraint. From (5) and (6), we have
p
dQt = [rQt + (µ − r)πs + (ν − r)Xt − Ct ] dt + [πs σ + ψρXt ] dZt1 + ψXt 1 − ρ2 dZt2
(39)
for any time t. Thus, from the construction of our initial values and optimal policies, we have Q2t = κQ1t + (1 − κ)Q3t .
Next, consider the objective function
Z ∞

Z τ

∗
E
e−βt U (Ct ) = E
e−βt U (Ct )dt + e−βτ Q1−γ
H
(40)
τ
0

0

Because U (C) is increasing and concave, we have U (Ct2 ) > κU (Ct1 ) + (1 − κ)U (Ct3 ). From Jensen’s inequality and
R ∞

R ∞

1−γ
1−γ
1−γ
H ∗ < 0, we have Q2τ
H ∗ > κQ1τ
H ∗ + (1 − κ)Q3τ
H ∗ . Thus, E2 0 e−βt U (Ct ) > κE1 0 e−βt U (Ct ) + (1 −
R

∞
κ)E3 0 e−βt U (Ct ) , and so the value function is concave in X for fixed Q. Since ξ = X
, this is sufficient to show
Q
that the value function is concave in ξ for fixed Q, so H is concave.
To continue, we observe that the principal of optimality implies the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation between
rebalancing times:

1
0 = max
(cW )1−γ − βF + FW W (r + (µ − r)θ − c) + FX Xν
(41)
c, θ
1−γ

1
1
+λ (F ∗ − F ) + FW W W 2 θ2 σ 2 + FXX X 2 ψ 2 + FW X W Xψσρθ
2
2
and substituting in (10) yields the stated ODE. A standard verification argument completes the proof.

A.3

Proof of Proposition 3

An investor prefers holding a small amount of the illiquid asset to holding a zero position if and only if FX (W, X =
0) ≥ FW (W, X = 0).
We begin by showing that ν−r
− ρ µ−r
≤ 0 implies FX (W, X = 0) ≤ FW (W, X = 0).
ψ
σ
Assume that we have {W0 , X0 = }, which gives rise to an optimal portfolio policy in number of shares equal to
t
ζt = θtSW
along paths for t ∈ [0, τ ], where τ is the next trading time. {W0 , X0 = } also gives rise to a consumption
t

30

policy Ct along those same paths. Then, total discounted wealth at the next trading time equals
Z τ
−rτ
e
(Wτ + Xτ ) = W0 +  +
e−rt [ζt (µ − r)St + (ν − r)Xt − Ct ] dt
0
Z τ
Z τ
h p
i
−rt
e−rt ψ 1 − ρ2 Xt dZt2
e
[ζt σSt + ψρXt ] dZt1 +
+
0

0

Now consider the starting point {Ŵ0 = W0 + , X̂0 = 0} and use the previous consumption policy state-by-state
t
(feasible because consumption is out of liquid wealth). The portfolio policy is now ζ̂t = ζt + ψρX
. Then,
σSt


e−rτ Ŵτ + X̂τ

=



Z τ
ψρXt
W0 +  +
e−rt ζt (µ − r)St +
(µ − r) − Ct dt
σ
0
Z τ
e−rt [ζt σSt + ψρXt ] dZt1 .
+
0

The drift in the second ({Ŵ0 = W0 + , X̂0 = 0}) minus the drift in the first ({W0 , X0 = }) equals
Z τ
h
i
µ−r
e−rt ψρXt
− (ν − r)Xt dt,
σ
0
− (ν − r) ≥ 0. Thus, the second initial condition produces higher expected wealth and lower
which is positive if ψρ µ−r
σ
volatility, path by path, with a possibly sub-optimal portfolio and consumption strategy. Since the value function at
rebalancing (F ∗ ) is increasing and concave, this proves that ρ µ−r
− ν−r
≥ 0 implies F (W0 + , 0) ≥ F (W0 , ).
σ
ψ
µ−r
ν−r
Next we will show that ψ − ρ σ ≥ 0 implies FX (W, X = 0) ≥ FW (W, X = 0). Consider a deviation in which a
trader starting with {W0 , 0} is able to move an amount  into X, and then withdraws it at the next trading day. This
results in higher utility if


Xτ
,
0 ≤ −FW (W0 , 0) + E e−βτ FW (Wτ , 0)
X0
with Wt following the optimal portfolio and consumption policies (as a function of Wt ) for Xt = 0. Plugging in the
value function at X = 0, we obtain
"
#

−γ
Wτ
Xτ
1 ≤ E e−βτ
.
W0
X0
Direct calculation show that this is true if

A.4

ν−r
ψ

− ρ µ−r
≥ 0, and hence FX (W, X = 0) ≥ FW (W, X = 0).
σ

Sketch of Proof for Propositions 4, 5, 7, and 9

The characterization of the value function in each of these economies closely follows the characterization in the baseline
(Problem 1) economy. Each value function is bounded above and below (analogously to equation by economies in which
the illiquid asset is fully liquid and in which the illiquid asset does not exist. Concavity and the other properties of
the H(·) functions can be observed using arguments analogous to those in the proof of Proposition 2. The HamiltonJacobi-Bellman equation follows from the principal of optimality, and a standard verification theorem can be used to
complete the characterizations. The solution to the model with fixed transaction costs follows standard arguments.
See Stokey (2008) for a textbook treatment.

A.5

Proof of Proposition 8

The arguments in the proof of Proposition 1 are sufficient to show that for |ρ| < 1, the objective function is at −∞ if
either W ≤ 0 or X < 0 for S = I. For S = L, we observe that the state will shift to S = I without the possibility of
re-balancing; as a result, if either W ≤ 0 or X < 0, the objective function in the liquid state is also equal to −∞. For
ρ = 1, X < 0 is ruled out by (7). For ρ = −1 the investor invests positive amounts in the illiquid asset Xt and the
liquid risky asset.

31

A.6

Proof of Corollary 10

∗
∗
In the liquid state, the investor’s optimal portfolio policies θL
and ξL
satisfy the first order conditions
∗ 2
∗
0 =HL∗ (1 − γ)(µ − r) − HL∗ (1 − γ) γ θL
σ − HL∗ γ (1 − γ) ρ ψ σ ξL
∗
∗
∗
0 =χI HI0 (ξL
) + HL∗ (1 − γ)(ν − r) − HL∗ γ (1 − γ) ψ 2 ξL
− HL∗ (1 − γ)γρψθL
σ

Setting ρ = 1, dividing the first equation by σHL∗ (1 − γ) and the second by ψHL∗ (1 − γ), and then subtracting the first
equation from the second leads to (33) and (35) with ρ = 1. Setting, ρ = −1, dividing the first equation by σHL∗ (1 − γ)
and the second by ψHL∗ (1 − γ), and then adding the first equation from the second leads to (33) and (35) with ρ = −1.

A.7

Proof of Corollary 11

Consider a derivative security Y that pays a fixed rate of return κ when the aggregate state S switches from L to
I. Denoting by dNtI the Poisson count process that denotes the arrival of a liquidity crisis, the price of this security
evolves according to
dYt
= (r + µY − κ χI ) dt + κdNtI .
Yt
The investor is indifferent between participating in the market for security Z and her current portfolio policy as long
as the excess return µY is equal to


dYt dFW
µY dt = −cov
,
Yt FW
= κ χI

∗
∗
∗
)
HI0 (ξL
)(1 − γ) + ξL
HL∗ (1 − γ) − HI (ξL
dt,
∗
HL (1 − γ)

(42)

where we have used the investor’s marginal value of wealth process (36). There exists a fictitious probability measure
Q under which the security Y has an expected excess return equal to zero,


dYt
EtQ
= (r + µY − κ χI + κχ̂I ) dt = r dt
Yt
rearranging, using (42) and solving for the risk-neutral crisis probability χ̂I yields
χ̂I = χI

∗
∗
∗
)
HI0 (ξL
)(1 − γ) − ξL
HI (ξL
FW (W, X, I)
,
= χI
∗
FW (W, X, L)
HL (1 − γ)

Under that measure, the present value of the expected payments p has to equal the expected payoff in the event of a
liquidity crisis
Z τ
h
i
EtQ
e−r(s−t) pds = EtQ e−r(τ −t)
Z ∞ t
Z ∞
⇒
e−(r+χ̂I )(s−t) pds =
e−(r+χ̂I )(τ −t) χ̂I dτ
t

τ

⇒ p = χ̂I

32

References
Acharya, V. V. and L. H. Pedersen (2005). Asset pricing with liquidity risk. Journal of Financial Economics 77 (2),
375–410.
Acharya, V. V. and P. Schnabl (2010). Do global banks spread global imbalances? the case of asset-backed commercial
paper during the financial crisis of 2007-09. IMF Economic Review 58 (1), 37–73.
Anderson, R. G. and C. S. Gascon (2009). The commercial paper market, the fed, and the 2007-2009 financial crisis.
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review (Nov), 589–612.
Ang, A., V. Bhansali, and Y. Xing (2010). Taxes on tax-exempt bonds. Journal of Finance 65, 565–601.
Ang, A. and N. P. Bollen (2010). Locked up by a lockup: Valuing liquidity as a real option. Financial Management 39 (3), 1069–1096.
Ang, A. and R. C. Green (2011). Lowering borrowing costs for states and municipalities through commonmuni. Policy
paper, The Hamilton Project, Brookings Institution.
Ang, A., A. Shtauber, and P. C. Tetlock (2012). Asset pricing in the dark: The cross section of otc stocks. Working
paper, Columbia University.
Bao, J., J. Pan, and J. Wang (2011). The illiquidity of corporate bonds. Journal of Finance 66, 911–946.
Beeferman, L. W. (2008). Pension fund investment in infrastructure: A resource paper. Occasional paper no. 3,
Pensions and Capital Stewardship Project, Labor and Worklife Program, Harvard Law School.
Bitsch, F., A. Buchner, and C. Kaserer (2010). Risk, return, and cash flow characteristics of infrastructure fund
investments. EIB Papers 15, 106–136.
Borio, C. (2004). Market distress and vanishing liquidity: Anatomy and policy options. Working paper, Bank of
International Settlements.
Brunnermeier, M. K. (2009). Deciphering the liquidity and credit crunch 2007-2008. Journal of Economic Perspectives 23 (1), 77–100.
Case, K. E. and R. J. Shiller (1989). The efficiency of the market for single-family homes. American Economic
Review 79, 125–137.
Collett, D., C. Lizieri, and C. Ward (2003). Timing and the holding periods of institutional real estate. Real Estate
Economics 31, 205–222.
Constantinides, G. M. (1986). Capital market equilibrium with transaction costs. Journal of Political Economy 94 (4),
842–62.
Cox, J. C. and C. Huang (1989). Optimal consumption and portfolio policies when asset prices follow a diffusion
process. Journal of Economic Theory 49 (1), 33 – 83.
Dai, M., P. Li, H. Liu, and Y. Wang (2010). Market closure and the liquidity premium puzzle. Working paper.
Daley, B. and B. Green (2012). Waiting for news in the market for lemons. Econometrica 80 (4), 1433–1504.
Daley, B. and B. Green (2013). News and liquidity in markets with asymmetrically-informed traders. Working paper.
De Roon, F. A., J. Guo, and J. R. Ter Horst (2009). Being locked up hurts. Working paper.
Diamond, P. A. (1982). Aggregate demand management in search equilibrium. Journal of Political Economy 90 (5),
881–94.
Driessen, J., T.-C. Lin, and L. Phalippou (2008). A new method to estimate risk and return of non-traded assets from
cash flows: The case of private equity funds. NBER Working Paper 14144, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Inc.
Duffie, D. and L. G. Epstein (1992). Stochastic differential utility. Econometrica 60 (2), 353–94.

33

Duffie, D., N. Gârleanu, and L. H. Pedersen (2005). Over-the-counter markets. Econometrica 73 (6), 1815–1847.
Duffie, D., N. Gârleanu, and L. H. Pedersen (2007). Valuation in over-the-counter markets. Review of Financial
Studies 20 (6), 1865–1900.
Dwyer, G. P. and P. Tkac (2009). The financial crisis of 2008 in fixed-income markets. Journal of International Money
and Finance 28 (8), 1293–1316.
Dybvig, P. H. and C. Huang (1988). Nonnegative wealth, absence of arbitrage, and feasible consumption plans. Review
of Financial Studies 1 (4), 377–401.
Elul, R. (2008). Liquidity crises. Business Review 2, 13–22.
Fischer, C. S. (2002). Ever-more rooted americans. City & Community 1 (2), 177–198.
Fisher, J. D. and M. S. Young (2000). Institutional property tenure: Evidence from the ncreif database. Journal of
Real Estate Portfolio Management 6, 327–338.
Florance, A. C., N. G. Miller, J. Spivey, and R. Peng (2010). Slicing, dicing and scoping the size of the u.s. commercial
real estate market. policy paper, CoStar Group.
Frans M. Dieleman, W. A. V. C. and M. C. Deurloo (2000). The geography of residential turnover in twenty-seven
large us metropolitan housing markets, 1985-95. Urban Studies 37, 223–245.
Gârleanu, N. and L. H. Pedersen (2011). Margin-based asset pricing and deviations from the law of one price. Review
of Financial Studies 24 (6), 2980–2022.
Gârleanu, N. B. (2009). Pricing and portfolio choice in illiquid markets. Journal of Economic Theory 144 (2), 532–564.
Goetzmann, W. N. (1993). Accounting for taste: Art and the financial markets over three centuries. American
Economic Review 83, 1370–1376.
Gorton, G. (2009). Information, liquidity, and the (ongoing) panic of 2007. American Economic Review 99 (2), 567–72.
Gorton, G. and A. Metrick (2012). Securitized banking and the run on repo. Journal of Financial Economics 104 (3),
425–451.
Gorton, G. B. (2010). Questions and answers about the financial crisis. NBER Working Paper 15787, National Bureau
of Economic Research, Inc.
Gromb, D. and D. Vayanos (2002). Equilibrium and welfare in markets with financially constrained arbitrageurs.
Journal of Financial Economics 66 (2-3), 361–407.
Grossman, S. J. and G. Laroque (1990). Asset pricing and optimal portfolio choice in the presence of illiquid durable
consumption goods. Econometrica 58 (1), 25–51.
Hansen, K. A. (1998). Seasonality of moves and duration of residence. Current population report p70-66, Household
Economic Studies, Census Bureau.
Heaton, J. and D. Lucas (2000). Portfolio choice and asset prices: The importance of entrepreneurial risk. Journal of
Finance 55 (3), 1163–1198.
Hu, X., J. Pan, and J. Wang (2012). Noise as information for illiquidity. Working paper, NBER.
Kahl, M., J. Liu, and F. A. Longstaff (2003). Paper millionaires: how valuable is stock to a stockholder who is restricted
from selling it? Journal of Financial Economics 67 (3), 385–410.
Kaplan, E. H. (1997). Snapshot samples. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences 31, 281–291.
Kaplan, G. and G. L. Violante (2010). How much consumption insurance beyond self-insurance? American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (4), 53–87.
Kaplan, S. N. and A. Schoar (2005). Private equity performance: Returns, persistence, and capital flows. Journal of
Finance 60 (4), 1791–1823.

34

Keely, L., B. van Ark, G. Levanon, and J. Burbank (2012). The shifting nature of U.S. housing demand: The U.S.
housing market is growing again – but not as we knew it. Working paper, Demand Institute.
Korajczyk, R. A. and R. Sadka (2008). Pricing the commonality across alternative measures of liquidity. Journal of
Financial Economics 87 (1), 45–72.
Koren, M. and A. Szeidl (2003). Portfolio choice with illiquid assets. CEPR Discussion Papers 3795, C.E.P.R. Discussion
Papers.
Krishnamurthy, A., S. Nagel, and D. Orlov (2012). Sizing up repo. NBER Working Paper 17768, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc.
Lagos, R. and G. Rocheteau (2009). Liquidity in asset markets with search frictions. Econometrica 77 (2), 403–426.
Levitt, S. D. and C. Syverson (2008). Market distortions when agents are better informed: The value of information
in real estate transactions. The Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (4), 599–611.
Ling, D. C., G. Marcato, and P. McAllister (2009). Dynamics of asset prices and transaction activity in illiquid markets:
The case of private commercial real estate. Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 39, 359–383.
Liu, J., F. A. Longstaff, and J. Pan (2003). Dynamic asset allocation with event risk. Journal of Finance 58 (1),
231–259.
Lo, A. W., H. Mamaysky, and J. Wang (2004). Asset prices and trading volume under fixed transactions costs. Journal
of Political Economy 112 (5), 1054–1090.
Longstaff, F. A. (2001). Optimal portfolio choice and the valuation of illiquid securities. Review of Financial Studies 14 (2), 407–31.
Longstaff, F. A. (2009). Portfolio claustrophobia: Asset pricing in markets with illiquid assets. American Economic
Review 99 (4), 1119–44.
Lopez-de Silanes, F., L. Phalippou, and O. Gottschalg (2010). Giants at the gate: On the cross-section of private
equity investment returns. MPRA Paper 28487, University Library of Munich, Germany.
McConell, John, J. and A. Saretto (2010). Auction failures and the market for auction rate securities. Journal of
Financial Economics 97, 451–469.
Merton, R. C. (1971). Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time model. Journal of Economic
Theory 3 (4), 373–413.
Merton, R. C. (1973). An intertemporal capital asset pricing model. Econometrica 41 (5), 867–87.
Merton, R. C. (1993). Optimal investment strategies for university endowment funds. In Studies of Supply and Demand
in Higher Education, NBER Chapters, pp. 211–242. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Metrick, A. and A. Yasuda (2010). The economics of private equity funds. Review of Financial Studies 23, 2303–2341.
Miller, N. G., L. Peng, and M. A. Sklarz (2011). The economic impact of anticipated house price changes–evidence
from home sales. American Economic Review 39, 345–378.
Morris, S. and H. S. Shin (2010). Liquidity black holes. Review of Finance 8, 1–18.
Pastor, L. and R. F. Stambaugh (2003). Liquidity risk and expected stock returns. Journal of Political Economy 111 (3),
642–685.
Persaud, A. (2001). Liquidity black holes. Working paper, State Street Bank.
Phalippou, L. and O. Gottschalg (2009). The performance of private equity funds. Review of Financial Studies 22 (4),
1747–1776.
Rogers, L. and O. Zane (2002). A simple model of liquidity effects. In K. Sandmann and P. Schoenbucher (Eds.),
Advances in Finance and Stochastics: Essays in Honour of Dieter Sondermann, pp. 161–176. Springer, Berlin.

35

Sadka, R. (2006). Momentum and post-earnings-announcement drift anomalies: The role of liquidity risk. Journal of
Financial Economics 80 (2), 309–349.
Santos, T. and P. Veronesi (2006). Labor income and predictable stock returns. Review of Financial Studies 19 (1),
1–44.
Schwartz, E. S. and C. Tebaldi (2006). Illiquid assets and optimal portfolio choice. NBER Working Papers 12633,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Shleifer, A. and R. W. Vishny (1997). The limits of arbitrage. Journal of Finance 52 (1), 35–55.
Skaterschivkov, S. (2006). Skate’s Art Investment Handbook. KunstAM GmBH.
Stokey, N. L. (2008). The Economics of Inaction: Stochastic Control Models with Fixed Costs. Princeton University
Press.
Taleb, N. (1997). Dynamic Hedging. John Wiley, New York.
Tirole, J. (2011). Illiquidity and all its friends. Journal of Economic Literature 49 (2), 287–325.
Vayanos, D. (1998). Transaction costs and asset prices: A dynamic equilibrium model. Review of Financial Studies 11 (1), 1–58.
Vayanos, D. and P.-O. Weill (2008). A search-based theory of the on-the-run phenomenon. Journal of Finance 63 (3),
1361–1398.
Wermers, R. (2000). Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into stock-picking talent, style, transactions
costs, and expenses. Journal of Finance 55 (4), 1655–1703.
Winchell, W. B. (2010). A brief history of the private equity secondary market. Working paper, Partner Ventures.

36

Table 1: Holding Periods and Turnover of Various Asset Classes
Annualized
Turnover

References

Within seconds

over 100%

Turnover can be computed from NYSE and NASDAQ
data at nyxdata.com and nasdaqtrader.com,
respectively.

OTC (Pinksheet)
Equities

Within a day, but
many stocks over a
week

∼35%

Ang, Shtauber, and Tetlock (2012).

Corporate Bonds

Within a day

25-35%

Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011).

Municipal Bonds

∼6 months, with 5%
of
muni
bonds
trading
more
infrequently
than
once per decade

< 10%

Holding period statistics computed from an updated
version of the dataset from Ang, Bhansali, and
Xing (2010) and summarized in Ang and Green
(2011). Turnover numbers from the SEC Report on
Transactions in Municipal Bond Securities, 2004.

Private Equity

Funds last for 10
years; the median
investment duration
is 4 years; secondary
trade before exit is
relatively unusual.

< 10%

Private equity contracts are described by Metrick
and Yasuda (2010); for duration see Lopez-de Silanes
et al. (2010). For estimates of “secondaries” in private
equity see http://lavca.org/2012/07/19/lp-profilean-interview-with-maureen-downey-pantheon/ and
Winchell (2010).

Residential
Housing

4-5 years, but ranges
from
months
to
decades

4-6%

For median duration in residences see Hansen (1998)
and Case and Shiller (1989), with Miller, Peng, and
Sklarz (2011) comments on the range. Turnover
numbers are computed by Frans M. Dieleman and
Deurloo (2000).

Institutional Real
Estate

8-11 years

∼7%

See Fisher and Young (2000) and Collett, Lizieri, and
Ward (2003) for holding periods and Ling, Marcato,
and McAllister (2009) for turnover.

Institutional
Infrastructure

50-60 years for initial
commitment, some
as long as 99 years

Negligible

Beeferman (2008), Bitsch, Buchner, and Kaserer
(2010).

Art

40-70 years

< 15%

For holding periods see Goetzmann (1993) and
Kaplan (1997). Turnover can be inferred from the
size of the art market estimated by Skaterschivkov
(2006) and estimated annual art sales.

Asset Class

Typical
between
Transactions

Public Equities

Time

37

Table 2: Liquid and Illiquid Asset Returns
1981Q3 – 2010Q2

Equity

1981Q3 – 2006Q4

Mean

Stdev

Corr

Mean

St Dev

Corr

0.103

0.182

1.000

0.125

0.157

1.000

0.103
0.092
0.133
0.109

0.229
0.134
0.278
0.165

0.629
0.267
0.557
0.674

0.110
0.097
0.143
0.117

0.231
0.110
0.286
0.159

0.605
0.010
0.548
0.623

Illiquid Assets
Private Equity
Buyout
Venture Capital
Illiquid Investment

The table reports summary statistics on excess returns on liquid and illiquid assets. Liquid equity returns are
total returns on the S&P500. Data on private equity, buyout, and venture capital funds are obtained from
Venture Economics and Cambridge Associates. We construct annual horizon log returns at the quarterly
frequency. We compute log excess returns using the difference between log returns on the asset and yearon-year rollover returns on one-month T-bills expressed as a continuously compounded rate. The column
“Corr” reports the correlation of excess returns with equity. The illiquid investment is a portfolio invested
with equal weights in private equity, buyout, and venture capital and is rebalanced quarterly.

Table 3: The Baseline Model
Avg. Rebalancing
Interval (1/λ)
0
1/50
1/10
1/4
1/2
1
2
4
10
∞

Optimal

Illiquidity
∗

Average policies

Rebalance (ξ )

Utility cost

E[ξ]

E[c(1 − ξ)]

E[θ(1 − ξ)]

0.593
0.535
0.493
0.475
0.442
0.373
0.251
0.132
0.048
-

0.018
0.028
0.036
0.045
0.067
0.103
0.165
0.222
-

0.593
0.541
0.511
0.485
0.461
0.409
0.299
0.212
0.214
-

0.089
0.088
0.087
0.086
0.083
0.081
0.075
0.069
0.059
0.070

0.593
0.583
0.578
0.571
0.568
0.558
0.546
0.536
0.489
0.593

The table displays the effect of illiquidity on portfolio choice and welfare in the baseline model. The long-run
average policies are computed using a long simulation of 10,000 years. The cases E(T ) = 0 and E(T ) = ∞
correspond, with some abuse of notation, to the Merton one- and two-asset cases respectively. The table is
computed using the following parameter values: γ = 6, β = 0.1, µ = ν = .12, r = .04, σ = ψ = .15, and
ρ = 0.

38

Table 4: The Model Without Intermediate Consumption
Avg. Rebalancing
Interval (1/λ)

Optimal

Illiquidity
∗

Average policies

Rebalance (ξ )

Utility cost

E[ξ]

E[θ(1 − ξ)]

0.593
0.557
0.547
0.544
0.535
0.527
0.523
0.520
0.518
-

0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.003
0.003
0.003
0.004
-

0.593
0.555
0.546
0.543
0.534
0.526
0.523
0.518
0.516
-

0.593
0.580
0.578
0.576
0.574
0.571
0.567
0.563
0.555
0.593

0
1/50
1/10
1/4
1/2
1
2
4
10
∞

The table displays the effect of illiquidity on portfolio choice and welfare in the case without intermediate
consumption, see Section 5.1 for more details. The cases E(T ) = 0 and E(T ) = ∞ correspond, with some
abuse of notation, to the Merton one- and two-asset cases respectively. The long-run average policies are
computed using a long simulation of 10,000 years. The table is computed using the following parameter
values: γ = 6, β = 0.1, µ = ν = .12, r = .04, σ = ψ = .15, and ρ = 0.

Table 5: The Model With Deterministic Liquidity
Rebalancing
Interval (T )
0
1/50
1/10
1/4
1/2
1
2
4
10
∞

Optimal

Illiquidity
∗

Average policies

Rebalance (ξ )

Utility cost

E[ξ]

E[c(1 − ξ)]

E[θ(1 − ξ)]

0.593
0.575
0.555
0.532
0.516
0.494
0.488
0.455
0.448
-

0.011
0.013
0.016
0.019
0.022
0.024
0.025
0.028
-

0.593
0.579
0.559
0.542
0.522
0.512
0.501
0.481
0.464
-

0.089
0.089
0.088
0.088
0.087
0.087
0.086
0.085
0.084
0.070

0.593
0.589
0.585
0.579
0.576
0.575
0.574
0.573
0.571
0.593

The table displays the effect of illiquidity on portfolio choice and welfare in the case where trading
opportunities arrive deterministically, see Section 5.2 for more details. The cases E(T ) = 0 and E(T ) = ∞
correspond, with some abuse of notation, to the Merton one- and two-asset cases respectively. The long-run
average policies are computed using a long simulation of 10,000 years. Unless otherwise noted, we use the
following parameter values: γ = 6, β = 0.1, µ = ν = .12, r = .04, σ = ψ = .15, and ρ = 0.

39

Table 6: Allowing for Costly Liquidity
A. Frequency Cost Paid

B. Optimal Rebalance (ξ ∗ )

C. Illiquidity Utility Cost

/
λ κ

1%

5%

10%

20%

1%

5%

10%

20%

1%

5%

10%

20%

50
10
4
2
1
1/2
1/4
1/10
0

0.000
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.007
0.034
0.063
0.101
0.131

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.006
0.023
0.046
0.077

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.004
0.014
0.033
0.059

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.003
0.009
0.021
0.046

0.535
0.505
0.496
0.483
0.460
0.435
0.418
0.405
0.395

0.535
0.505
0.496
0.483
0.454
0.409
0.367
0.332
0.302

0.535
0.505
0.496
0.483
0.451
0.397
0.341
0.291
0.248

0.535
0.505
0.496
0.483
0.446
0.38
0.308
0.242
0.193

0.017
0.024
0.025
0.026
0.029
0.034
0.039
0.043
0.046

0.017
0.024
0.025
0.026
0.034
0.040
0.053
0.065
0.078

0.017
0.024
0.025
0.026
0.037
0.043
0.061
0.081
0.102

0.017
0.024
0.025
0.026
0.038
0.048
0.073
0.103
0.135

D. Average Policies
E[c(1 − ξ)]

E[ξ]

E[θ(1 − ξ)]

/
λ κ

1%

5%

10%

20%

1%

5%

10%

20%

1%

5%

10%

20%

50
12
4
2
1
1/2
1/4
1/10
0

0.542
0.518
0.507
0.502
0.500
0.499
0.495
0.492
0.490

0.509
0.509
0.507
0.502
0.484
0.479
0.477
0.478
0.476

0.509
0.509
0.507
0.501
0.481
0.471
0.455
0.468
0.475

0.509
0.508
0.501
0.491
0.477
0.451
0.434
0.425
0.471

0.088
0.088
0.087
0.087
0.086
0.086
0.085
0.084
0.084

0.088
0.088
0.087
0.087
0.086
0.085
0.084
0.083
0.082

0.088
0.088
0.086
0.086
0.085
0.084
0.084
0.081
0.079

0.088
0.087
0.086
0.085
0.084
0.083
0.082
0.078
0.073

0.585
0.581
0.578
0.574
0.569
0.566
0.564
0.562
0.550

0.581
0.577
0.575
0.574
0.557
0.558
0.550
0.541
0.536

0.578
0.576
0.575
0.573
0.551
0.552
0.541
0.521
0.509

0.577
0.575
0.572
0.570
0.551
0.550
0.528
0.511
0.489

The table reports the optimal policies and the utility cost of illiquidity for different levels of illiquidity λ
and transaction cost κ, in the hybrid model with transaction costs. See Section 5.3 for more details. The
long-run average policies are computed using a long simulation of 10,000 years. The table is computed using
the following parameter values: γ = 6, β = 0.1, µ = ν = .12, r = .04, σ = ψ = .15, and ρ = 0.

40

41

6

10

1.5

0.593
0.493
0.475
0.442
0.373
0.246
0.132
0.047
-

3

0.356
0.336
0.291
0.285
0.280
0.192
0.101
0.035
-

0.593
0.501
0.495
0.433
0.391
0.244
0.114
0.026
-

0.593
0.500
0.490
0.439
0.398
0.245
0.121
0.038
-

0.593
0.499
0.489
0.441
0.383
0.248
0.129
0.045
-

15

0.593
0.493
0.475
0.442
0.373
0.251
0.131
0.048
-

6

0.237
0.220
0.201
0.199
0.197
0.149
0.075
0.025
-

i. Optimal Rebalance

2/3

1.185
0.799
0.666
0.530
0.409
0.289
0.178
0.061
-

i. Optimal Rebalance

3

0.010
0.019
0.036
0.040
0.077
0.139
0.177
-

2/3

0.109
0.114
0.132
0.172
0.256
0.295
0.325
-

3

10

0.020
0.031
0.035
0.041
0.051
0.106
0.158
-

0.005
0.021
0.030
0.035
0.041
0.073
0.116
-

15

0.129
0.117
0.117
0.114
0.110
0.105
0.093
0.088
0.090

3

10

0.090
0.086
0.086
0.082
0.081
0.080
0.075
0.068
0.070

0.074
0.072
0.064
0.068
0.072
0.069
0.065
0.061
0.062

iii. E(c(1 − ξ))

6

3

0.023
0.027
0.039
0.047
0.093
0.154
0.203
-

0.026
0.029
0.040
0.052
0.100
0.161
0.216
-

ii. Utility cost

1.5

0.029
0.037
0.041
0.067
0.103
0.165
0.222
-

6

0.109
0.108
0.108
0.108
0.107
0.103
0.103
0.099
0.118

0.096
0.095
0.095
0.094
0.093
0.089
0.084
0.078
0.088

0.092
0.089
0.089
0.089
0.088
0.083
0.077
0.069
0.076

iii. E(c(1 − ξ))

B. Inverse Elasticity of intertemporal substitution – ζ

0.029
0.037
0.041
0.067
0.107
0.165
0.222
-

ii. Utility cost

6

A. Risk aversion – γ

0.090
0.087
0.087
0.086
0.085
0.080
0.074
0.065
0.070

0.069
0.068
0.065
0.065
0.065
0.063
0.060
0.057
0.058

15

0.593
0.573
0.572
0.569
0.561
0.542
0.534
0.508
0.593

1.185
1.122
1.113
1.097
1.076
1.069
1.045
1.020
1.185

3

10

0.356
0.349
0.349
0.343
0.335
0.331
0.332
0.328
0.356

0.593
0.572
0.571
0.569
0.558
0.544
0.534
0.510
0.593

0.593
0.572
0.571
0.568
0.558
0.545
0.534
0.511
0.593

iv. E(θ(1 − ξ))

0.593
0.572
0.571
0.561
0.552
0.548
0.544
0.539
0.593

iv. E(θ(1 − ξ))

6

0.593
0.572
0.571
0.568
0.557
0.545
0.534
0.511
0.593

0.237
0.255
0.238
0.234
0.233
0.224
0.225
0.222
0.237

15

The table shows the effect on welfare and portfolio choice of preference parameters – the coefficient of relative risk aversion γ and the inverse
of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution ζ. See Section 5.4 for more details. The long-run average policies are computed using a long
simulation of 10,000 years. Unless noted otherwise, the table is computed using the following parameter values: ζ = 6, γ = 6, β = 0.1,
µ = ν = .12, r = .04, σ = ψ = .15, and ρ = 0.

∞
10
4
2
1
1/2
1/4
1/10
0

λ

∞
10
4
2
1
1/2
1/4
1/10
0

λ

Table 7: The Effect of Preference Parameters on Optimal Policies and Welfare

42

1

H (ξ)

Baseline Model

0.25 ξ ∗ 0.5
ξ
Merton

0.75

E. Substitutability between
Illiquid and Liquid Wealth
−FW X X/FW W W

H

∗

1

0.25 ξ ∗ 0.5
ξ
1

1

as Fraction of Liquid Wealth

0.75

Merton (2 assets)

as Fraction of Total Wealth

0

0.5

1

0.75

F. Optimal Allocation
to the Liquid Risky Asset

0.25 ξ ∗ 0.5
ξ

−1

0

1

2

0

2

4

6

8

10

0.2

0.4

θ (Merton)

θ Liquid Asset

0

0.75

ρ

0.8

1

1

ξ (Merton)

ξ Illiquid Asset

0.6

G. Effect of Correlation
on Portfolio Holdings

0.25 ξ ∗ 0.5
ξ

C. Distribution of Illiquid Holdings

Merton

0.75

0.25 ξ ∗ 0.5
ξ
Merton One Asset

1

ξ

Merton Two Assets

as Fraction of Liquid Wealth

0.75

H. Optimal Consumption

Baseline Model

0.25 ξ ∗ 0.5

−FW W /FW (W )

as Fraction of Total Wealth

0

0.1

0.2

0

2

4

6

8

D. Value Function Curvature
with respect to Liquid Wealth

Panel A plots the value function. The vertical solid gray line corresponds to the value of the optimal rebalancing point ξ ∗ . Panel B plots the relative price of illiquid wealth q.
Panels C and D plot the curvature of the value function with respect to liquid wealth −FW W W /FW , and the elasticity of substitution in the value function between liquid and
illiquid wealth, FW X X/FW W W , respectively. The solid lines represents the case where λ = 1. The dotted lines correspond to the Merton case. Panel E plots the stationary
X
distribution of allocation to the illiquid asset as a fraction of total wealth, ξ = X+W
. We obtain the stationary distribution using a long simulation of 10,000 years. Panels F
and G displays the optimal allocation to the liquid assets and consumption policy, respectively. The gray horizontal line corresponds to the allocation to the risky asset in the
one- and/or two-asset Merton economy. Panel H examines the effect of correlation on risky asset holdings. We plot the optimal allocations to the liquid risky asset θ and the
illiquid risky asset ξ as a fraction of total wealth at the rebalancing time, both as a function of ρ. The remainder is allocated to the riskless asset. For this Panel only we use
ν = 0.2. Unless noted otherwise, all figures use γ = 6, β = 0.1, µ = ν = .12, r = .04, λ = 1, σ = ψ = .15, and ρ = 0.

−1

−0.8

−0.6

−0.4

−0.2

0

−18

0.75

0

−16

0.25 ξ ∗ 0.5
ξ

0.5

−14

B. Relative Price of Illiquid Wealth
q

1

− log (−H)

A. Value function

Figure 1: Model Solution

Figure 2: Optimal Policies Across Liquidity Regimes

% of total wealth

A. Allocation to the Illiquid Asset

60

60

60

50

50

50

40

40

40

0.05

0.1

0.15

1

0.2

1.5

2

0

Duration - 1/χL

Frequency - χI

0.5

1

1.5

2

Severity - 1/λ

% of total wealth

B. Allocation to the Liquid Asset

60

60

60

58

58

58

56

56

56

0.05

0.1

0.15

1

0.2

1.5

0

2

Duration - 1/χL

Frequency - χI

0.5

1

1.5

2

Severity - 1/λ

% of total wealth

C. Consumption Policy

9

9

9

8.8

8.8

8.8

8.6

8.6

8.6

8.4

8.4

8.4

8.2

8.2

8.2

8

8
0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

Frequency - χI
Liquid state

1

1.5
Duration - 1/χL

Illiquid state

2

8

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

Severity - 1/λ

Merton benchmark (2 assets)

The figure compares portfolio (Panels A and B) and consumption (Panel C) policies across the liquid (solid
line) and illiquid (dotted line) regimes for different frequency (χI ), average duration (1/χL ), and severity
(1/λ) of liquidity crises. Unless noted otherwise, the curves are plotted with the following parameter values:
γ = 6, β = 0.1, µ = ν = .12, r = .04, σ = ψ = .15, ρ = 0, χI = 0.1, χL = 1/1.5 and λ = 1

43

Figure 3: Limits to Arbitrage
A. Allocation to the Illiquid Asset (% of total wealth)

100

100

100

80

80

80

60

60

60

0.05

0.1

0.15

1

0.2

1.25 1.5 1.75

2

0

Duration - 1/χL

Frequency - χI

0.5

1

1.5

2

Severity - 1/λ

B. Allocation to the Liquid Asset (% of total wealth)

150

150

150

130

130

130

110

110

110

−5

−5

−5

−20

−20

−20

−35

−35

−35

0.05

0.1 0.15 0.2
Frequency - χI

1 1.25 1.5 1.75 2
Duration - 1/χL

0

0.5

1

1.5

Severity - 1/λ

ρ = −1

ρ=1

The figure compares portfolio policies of liquid assets (Panel A) and illiquid assets (Panel B) in the liquid
regime in the case of an apparent arbitrage opportunity. We vary the frequency (χI ), average duration
(1/χL ) and severity (1/λ) of liquidity crises. Unless noted otherwise, the curves are plotted with the
following parameter values: γ = 6, β = 0.1, µ = .12, ν = .14, r = .04, σ = ψ = .15, χI = 0.1, χL = 1/1.5
and λ = 1

44

2

Figure 4: Liquidity Risk Premium and the Welfare Cost of Illiquidity
A. Liquidity risk premium

2
χ̂I − χI (%)

χ̂I − χI (%)

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0.25

0.15

Fre
q

uen

cy

1

0.1

(χ
I)

0.05 0

1
0.5
0
2

2
0.2

1.5

1.8

1.5

Du

λ
- 1/
y
t
i
er
Sev

0.5

2
1.6

rat

ion

1

1.4

1.2

- 1/
χ

1 0

L

1.5

0.5

y
erit
Sev

λ
- 1/

3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0.25

Welfare cost (%)

Welfare cost (%)

B. Welfare cost of illiquidity

2
0.2
0.15

Fre
q

uen

cy

1

0.1

-χ
I

0.05 0

3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
2

1.8

1.5

Du

λ
- 1/
ity
r
e
Sev

rat

0.5

2
1.6

ion

1

1.4

1.2

- 1/
χ

L

1 0

1.5

0.5

y
erit
Sev

λ
- 1/

The figure shows the risk premium associated with liquidity insurance χ̂I −χI (Panel A) and the welfare cost
of illiquidity (Panel B) for different frequency (χI ), average duration (1/χL ) and severity (1/λ) of liquidity
crises. Unless noted otherwise, the curves are plotted with the following parameter values: γ = 6, β = 0.1,
µ = ν = .12, r = .04, σ = ψ = .15, ρ = 0, χI = 0.1, χL = 1/1.5

45

