                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    LIVING WITH THE TRILEMMA CONSTRAINT:
              RELATIVE TRILEMMA POLICY DIVERGENCE, CRISES, AND
                  OUTPUT LOSSES FOR DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

                                          Joshua Aizenman
                                              Hiro Ito

                                        Working Paper 19448
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19448


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2013




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.The financial support of faculty research funds of Portland
State University is gratefully acknowledged

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Joshua Aizenman and Hiro Ito. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Living with the Trilemma Constraint: Relative Trilemma Policy Divergence, Crises, and Output
Losses for Developing Countries
Joshua Aizenman and Hiro Ito
NBER Working Paper No. 19448
September 2013
JEL No. F31,F36,F41,O24

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the potential impacts of the degree of divergence in open macroeconomic
policies in the context of the trilemma hypothesis. Using an index that measures the relative policy
divergence among the three trilemma policy choices, namely monetary independence, exchange
rate stability, and financial openness, we find that emerging market countries have adopted trilemma
policy combinations with the least degree of relative policy divergence in the last fifteen years. We also
find that a developing or emerging market country with a higher degree of relative policy divergence
is more likely to experience a currency or debt crisis. However, a developing or emerging market
country with a higher degree of relative policy divergence tends to experience smaller output losses
when it experiences a currency or banking crisis. Latin American crisis countries tended to reduce
their financial integration in the aftermath of a crisis, while this is not the case for the Asian crisis
countries. The Asian crisis countries tended to reduce the degree of relative policy divergence in the
aftermath of the crisis, probably aiming at macroeconomic policies that are less prone to crises. The
degree of relative policy divergence is affected by past crisis experiences – countries that experienced
currency crisis or a currency-banking twin crisis tend to adopt a policy combination with a smaller
degree of policy divergence.


Joshua Aizenman
Economics and SIR
USC
University Park
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043
and NBER
aizenman@usc.edu

Hiro Ito
Portland State University
1721 SW Broadway, Suite 241
Portland, Oregon 97201
ito@pdx.edu
1. Introduction
         Managing policies in an economic turbulence is a challenging task, especially when the
world economy is highly integrated and markets are intertwined with each other. History is full
of episodes where monetary regimes ends abruptly, as we have witnessed in the collapse of the
Bretton Woods system in the early 1970s or in the financial crises many emerging market
economies experienced in the 1980s and 1990s. These abrupt endings of regimes often involve
crises or some sort of financial turbulence. No matter what forms of international monetary
systems or regimes replace the old ones, countries end up adopting a combination of three policy
goals: monetary independence, exchange rate stability, and financial openness, with different
degrees of attainment in each. That is, a powerful hypothesis called the “impossible trinity,” or
the “trilemma” dictates open macro policy management. Countries may choose any two, but not
all, of the three policy goals to their full extent, or adopt a combination of intermediate degrees
of all of the three policy goals.
         Theory and empirical evidence tell us that each one of the three trilemma policy choices
can be a double-edged sword as recognized by a significant amount of recent literature.1 To
make the matter more complicated, the effect of each policy choice can differ depending on what
other policy choice it is paired with. For example, exchange rate stability can be destabilizing
when paired with financial openness, yet be stabilizing if paired with greater monetary autonomy.
         Furthermore, countries rarely face the stark polarized binary choices as often envisioned
by policy makers and researchers. In Mundell’s (1963) textbook trilemma triangle, portrayed in
Figure 1, each of the three sides represents the full implementation of each of the three policy
goals. We can locate the Euro system or the gold standard at the corner that represents the full
attainment of financial openness and exchange rate stability while the Bretton Woods system can
be placed at the corner of full exchange rate stability and full monetary independence. When a
country adopts a policy combination of intermediate levels for all the three policy choices, such a
policy combination would be located somewhere inside the trilemma triangle. Intriguingly,
measuring empirically the three policy trilemma choices, their weighted sum adds up,
statistically, to a constant [see Aizenman, et al. (2012) and Ito and Kawai (2012)]. Thus,
achieving a higher trilemma policy goal is traded off by a drop in the weighted sum of the other
two trilemma policies. Obviously, different combinations of the three policies have different
macroeconomic effects. A key question is, how can the location of a country’s policy
combination in the trilemma triangle affect its macroeconomic performance, especially in terms
of avoiding traumatic economic turbulence such as financial crises?
         Against this backdrop, we first construct a metric that measures the degree of divergence
among the three trilemma policies relative to the global trend. With this index, we evaluate the
patterns of divergence of trilemma policy combinations in the last four decades. In Section 3, we

1
  As for monetary independence, refer to Obstfeld, et al. (2005), Shambaugh (2004), and Frankel et al. (2004). On
the impact of the exchange rate regime, refer to Ghosh et al. (1997), Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2003), and
Eichengreen and Leblang (2003). The empirical literature on the effect of financial liberalization is surveyed by
Henry (2006), Kose et al. (2006), Prasad et al. (2003), and Prasad and Rajan (2008).

                                                         1
implement a series of empirical exercises to examine the impact of the degree of trilemma
relative policy divergence on macroeconomic performance, namely the probability of the onset
of a currency, banking, and debt crisis, and also the output losses from these different types of
crises. We also compare the degree of relative policy divergence and trilemma policy
arrangements in the Latin American crisis countries during 1980s and in the Asian crisis
countries during the 1990s and identify commonalties and differences between these crisis
periods. In Section 4, we focus on the endogenous nature of the degree of relative policy
divergence and how it can be affected by past crisis experiences. In Section 5, we summarize the
main findings of the paper.



2. Divergence of the Trilemma Policy Choices

2.1 Why Does the Extent of Relative Policy Divergence Matter?
        While there are only three kinds of polarized policy combinations among the three
trilemma policies, i.e., the three vertexes in the triangle in Figure 1, once intermediate levels for
each policy are allowed, there can exist an infinite number of open macro policy combinations.
Until recently, researchers have tended to focus on debating the merits and demerits of polarized
monetary regimes. Fischer (2001) argued the unstable nature of intermediate exchange rate
regimes, pointing out that such regimes are more prone to experience a crisis in a financially
globalized world. Frankel (1999), while admitting that regimes with “corner solutions” can be
simple and transparent in showing government commitment to maintaining a regime, argued that
avoiding intermediate regimes is not always the best solution for countries, especially developing
ones. Willett (2003) argued that the issue is not so much about whether polarized or intermediate
regimes are more or less stable. Rather, that the issue of whether macroeconomic conditions of
an economy are consistent with its monetary regime is more important. The crises that occurred
among emerging market countries in the 1980s and 1990s, and the Global Financial Crisis of
2008-09 to a similar extent, have raised questions about the global trend of financial
liberalization, leading researchers to debate the merits and demerits of greater financial openness.
        Despite the debate, regimes with corner solutions are more of a rarity. In other words,
most countries often operate “somewhere inside the triangle.” For example, some countries
implement partial financial integration while trying to retain control over exchange rate
movement as well as monetary policy autonomy. This sort of clustering of the three policies
inside the trilemma triangle, or the “middle-ground convergence,” has been a characteristic of
emerging market countries (EMG) in recent decades as Aizenman, Chinn, and Ito (2012) have
shown. Aizenman, et al. have also found that in recent years such middle-ground convergence
has been more evident among Asian EMGs.
        By adopting such converged policy combinations, these countries may have been trying
to dampen the negative effects that may arise from adopting polarized policy regimes.
Interestingly, the period when EMG’s middle convergence started becoming more evident

                                                  2
coincides with the time when some of these economies began accumulating sizable international
reserves (IR), probably trying to buffer the trade-off arising from the trilemma, again a more
evident trend among Asian EMGs.2
        A key question is how the location within the trilemma triangle affects macroeconomic
performance, especially when we focus on the risk of experiencing a financial crisis. Before
exploring this question, however, we need to raise another important issue. That is, even if
certain open macro policy combinations were found to affect the likelihood of a country
experiencing a crisis and its output cost, such correlations may not be merely a function of the
country’s own macroeconomic policies.
        A country’s open macro policies need to be evaluated in a greater context, compared with
policies adopted by other countries. For example, a fixed exchange rate regime must have
different effects on the economy depending on whether or not most other countries also adopt
fixed exchange rate regimes as they did during the Bretton Woods period. As another example,
the consequence of liberalizing the financial market by a country differ between the 1960s, when
most countries had closed financial markets, and recent years when many countries have been
moving toward full financial liberalization.
        Anecdotally, countries tended to adopt monetary regimes prevalent in other countries,
making the types of monetary regimes across countries correlated with each other. Such
correlated behavior can be sometimes global as was the case of the Gold Standard during the pre-
WWII era or the Bretton Woods system, other times regional such as the Euro system, or
clustered around similar income levels such as the middle-ground convergence observed among
emerging market economies in recent years. When many countries tend to adopt similar
monetary regimes, such a herding behavior tends to create externalities, lowering the cost of a
country following such a global or regional trend, or the “mean behavior.” Conversely, herding
behavior in arranging monetary regimes may also raise the opportunity cost of deviating from it,
unless the country that deviates from the “mean behavior” is well-equipped with healthy
fundamentals or solid institutions including well-functioning financial markets. In this sense, one
could argue that the pursuit of forming a monetary union by some European countries is more
sustainable only if these countries are equipped with appropriate levels of institutional
development and good fundamentals.3 Hence, it is important to evaluate the combinations of
open macro policies in a global context or in comparison to other countries.
        In this paper, we will focus particularly on the impact of a triad policy combination on
the likelihood of a financial crisis as well as on the output losses once a financial crisis arises. By
financial crisis, we mean three kinds of financial crises, namely currency, banking, and debt
crises. While it may not be difficult to consider the relationship between the degrees of relative
policy divergence and their impact on currency crisis, the link between them and their impact on

2
  Aizenman, et al. (2010) empirically show that pursuing greater exchange stability can be increasing output
volatility for developing economies, but that can be mitigated by holding a larger amount of international reserves
than the threshold of about 20% of GDP.
3
  Furthermore, it means the current crisis situation faced by some of the Euro countries can be explained by their
weak fundamentals and institutional development.

                                                          3
banking or debt crises may not sound straightforward. However, both the probability of
occurrence and the output losses of banking or debt crises can be direct functions of the triad
policy coordination.
        As for a banking crisis, the recent European experience makes it clear that a choice of a
monetary regime can affect the likelihood and the cost of experiencing a banking crisis. In the
case of the Euro crisis, participating in the monetary union had made it easier for certain
countries such as Ireland, Spain, and Cyprus to experience a surge in capital flows in an
unsustainable fashion. Such capital influx ended by sowing the seeds for the ongoing banking
and debt crises in these countries. The situation could have been different and less costly if these
countries had not participated in the fixed exchange rate arrangement, as it rids countries with
highly open financial markets of monetary independence.
        The debt crisis in emerging market economies during the 1980s and 1990s and in
Southern Europe, including Greece, can be explained in the context of the trilemma. For
emerging market economies, the predominant global trend for financial liberalization had
converted the trilemma into the dilemma between pursuing greater monetary autonomy (with
more flexible exchange rates) and greater exchange rate stability (with less monetary autonomy).
Facing the “original sin” (Eichengreen and Hausmann, 1999), many emerging market economies
had chosen the path of greater exchange rate stability while the inevitably weaker monetary
independence made these economies more vulnerable to external shocks.
        Thus, not only for currency crises, but also for banking and debt crises, how the three
trilemma policies are coordinated by individual countries and where they stand in the global
context can be an important factor.

2.2 Measure of relative policy divergence and Its Patterns
        In order to gage how much convergence or divergence is taking place among the three
trilemma policy choices in a global context, we construct the “measure of divergence” in the
triad policies. For that, we use the “trilemma indexes” introduced by Aizenman, Chinn, and Ito
(2010, 2012).
        The trilemma indexes measure the degree of achievement in each of the three policy
choices for more than 170 economies from 1970 through 2010.4 The monetary independence
index (MI) is based on the correlation of a country’s interest rates with the base country’s interest
rate. The index for exchange rate stability (ERS) is an invert of exchange rate volatility, i.e.,
standard deviations of the monthly rate of depreciation, using the exchange rate between the
home and base economies. The degree of financial integration is measured by the Chinn-Ito
(2006, 2008) capital controls index (KAOPEN). 5
         Using these indexes, we define the “measure of relative policy divergence” as below:

                          _       1             _       1                    _       1       (1)

4
    The indexes are available at http://web.pdx.edu/~ito/trilemma_indexes.htm.
5
    Refer to Aizenman, et al. (2012), and the Trilemma website for the details of construction of the indexes.

                                                             4
where _                 for X = MI, ERS, and KAOPEN, and                is cross-country average of X in year
t.6,7 By definition,    is a geometric mean of three dimensions of the Trilemma variable of
country i at time t from the prevailing average choices, reflecting the relative divergence of the
country’s policies from the vector        ,     ,            >

Long-run Trends
        Figure 2 illustrates the average of dit for different subgroups of countries based on income
levels. We can make several interesting observations based on this figure. For the last two
decades, advanced economies tended to have two combinations of distinctive policies. The Euro
country group has the highest degree of relative policy divergence among the country groups
(opting for high degrees of exchange rate stability and financial integration), followed by the
group of non-Euro advanced economies (opting for high degrees of monetary independence and
financial integration). Higher income countries may be able to afford to have divergent policy
combinations.
        The group of emerging market economies has had the lowest degree of policy divergence
in the last two decades. Since the beginning of the 1980s, developing economies, whether or not
emerging markets, have had relatively stable movement in the degree of policy convergence
except for the mid-1990s when both subgroups of developing economies experienced a drop in
the degree of policy divergence. During the crisis years of 1982 (the debt crisis), 1997-98 (the
Asian financial crisis), and 2008-09 (the global financial crisis), the policy convergence measure
tends to rise around the times of the crises.8
        It would be interesting to see if there are any regional characteristics in the formation of
triad open macro policies. As we have discussed, externality can play a role in concerting policy
decision makings among neighboring countries in a region, while possibly increasing the cost of
shying away from regional policy coordination. Furthermore, there can be a regional economic
integration such as in the case of the East Asian supply chain network or a monetary policy
arrangement as in the case of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC). Hence, a comparison among
geographical groups of countries should shed light on the differences in the characteristics of

6
    The cross country average ( X t ) is the sample average of X including both industrialized and developing countries
for year t.
7
  One could argue that if the extent of the three trilemma policy choices are linearly related as theoretically predicted,
the above formula for d does not have to contain all the three indexes – it would need only any two of the three
trilemma indexes. However, we do not assume the linearity too strictly, i.e., the linearity does not have to hold every
single year. In other words, we assume that there is some room for policy choices to deviate from the trilemma
constraint. In fact, policy makers sometimes intentionally or unintentionally challenge the constraint of the trilemma
by implementing a policy combination that is not consistent with the trilemma hypothesis. Before aborting the fixed
exchange rate arrangement for the Thai baht, Thai policy makers attempted to challenge the trilemma by pursuing
both greater monetary independence and exchange rate stability without imposing capital controls. Also, holding a
massive amount of IR may allow countries to deviate from the constraint of the trilemma in the short run.
8
  To see what is driving the trajectories in Figure 2, looking at the group mean of the ratios of each of the three
indexes to its cross-country mean (i.e., X it   with X for monetary policy independence (MI), exchange rate stability
                                             Xt
(ERS), and financial openness (KAOPEN)) is helpful. For that, refer to Aizenman and Ito (2012).

                                                            5
triad open macro policies among countries. Figure 3 illustrates the averages of the policy
dispersion measure (dit) for different regional country groups, focusing on Latin American and
Asian economies.
        Interestingly, since the late 1990s, a period coinciding with the Asian Crisis period, the
degree of relative policy divergence has been persistently small among all regional groups.9 This
policy convergence among developing economies may reflect the great moderation, but the
convergence seems to be still in place in the last few years of the sample, coinciding with the
years of the global financial crisis. Additionally, despite their high levels of relative policy
divergence in the 1980s, emerging market economies in Asia have been experiencing lowest
levels of relative policy divergence in the last decade.10

Behavior of d around the Time of a Crisis
        Let us observe the behavior of the measure of policy dispersion around the time of a
financial crisis. Figures 4-6 show the development of the cross-country average of the degree of
relative policy divergence (d) for different subsamples of countries for currency, banking, and
debt crises, respectively.11 The average of the relative policy divergence measure across
countries that experiences a particular type of crisis is illustrated over the period from three years
before the first year of the crisis through three years after it (i.e., [t0 – 3, t0 + 3]). In each figure,
Panel (a) shows the development of the subsample averages of d for IDC, LDC, and EMG.12
Panel (b) shows the development of the averages of d for the crisis countries that experienced
positive output losses as a result of a crisis (top), and those which experienced output gains (i.e.,
output losses < 0) (bottom).13 Panel (c) compares the development of the d for the crisis
countries with “high” IR holdings with those with “low” IR holdings, while “high” IR holdings
means that the level of IR holdings (as a share of GDP) is higher than the annual cross-country
median (of all the countries in the entire sample, including crisis and non-crisis economies) as of
the year before the crisis occurrence (t0 – 1).
        In all three kinds of crises, there is a hump shape of development for d around the first
year of the crisis, while the peak occurs at the first year for currency crisis (t0); a year after the
onset of a banking crisis (t0+1); and a year before the onset of a debt crisis (t0+1). In the cases of


9
  This is also true for the group of middle-eastern or North African countries (not reported).
10
   Asian emerging market economies (and countries in the middle-east, though not reported) experienced high levels
of relative policy divergence from the beginning of the 1980s through the early 1990s. This is partly because Latin
American countries, many of which went through debt crises, retrenched financial openness around the same period,
dragging down the average and making the financial liberalization efforts by Asian emerging market countries
especially distinctive.
11
   The methods for identifying the three types of crises are explained in Appendix 1.
12
   The emerging market countries (EMGs) are defined as the countries classified as either emerging or frontier
during the period of 1980-1997 by the International Financial Corporation plus Hong Kong and Singapore.
13
   As we explain later, output losses are defined as the cumulative sum of the differences between actual and trend
real GDP over the four-year period (i.e., [t0, t0+3]. The trend real GDP is based on HP-filtered real GDP series over
the twenty-year-long pre-crisis period [t0 – 20, t0 – 1]. Based on whether the cumulative sum is positive or negative,
a crisis is defined to involve output losses or gains. In a sense, the existence of output losses is based on “output
losses in ex post,” not strictly as of the first year of the crisis.

                                                          6
currency and banking crises, if the crisis involves output losses, the measure of relative policy
divergence tends to stay at high levels during the first and second years of the crisis. In the case
of the debt crisis, countries that did not experience output losses, experience a peak in d in the
year before the onset of the crisis. This may imply that these countries could avoid output losses
by preemptively implementing stabilization measures that end up raising the degree of policy
divergence.
         For the currency or banking crisis countries, if they hold low levels of IR, there is a
distinct rise in d at the onset of the crisis and a distinct fall afterwards. If these countries are high
IR holders, the peak occurs in the second year of the crisis. This generalization is more apparent
for the high IR holding countries with output losses (not reported). These findings may suggest
that if a country experiences a currency or banking crisis without holding high levels of IR, the
country needs to implement policies that raise d, whereas d would rise more slowly for high IR
holders.
         It is harder to generalize the movement of d for debt crisis countries. Panel (c) shows that
holding higher levels of IR seems to allow a crisis country to raise d prior to the onset of a crisis.
However, those debt crisis countries that experience a peak in d prior to the onset of a crisis tend
to be the ones that experience output losses, which tend to be contrary to the case of currency or
banking crises countries. Those with high IR holdings tend to lower the level of d around the
time of the crisis, unlike among currency or banking crisis countries.
         There is a limit to what one can infer from observing unconditional means of the measure
of relative policy divergence around the time of a crisis. Furthermore, while d can be a policy
variable, it can be also endogenously affected by the development of general economic
conditions. These issues are important especially when one looks into the relationship between d
and the crisis. In order to deal with these issues, we continue with an econometric evaluation of
the degree of relative policy divergence. Specifically, we examine the effect of policy
divergence, d, on the probability of crisis onsets, and whether and to what extent policy
divergence influences the size of output losses that arise with the crises.

3. Empirical Analysis
3.1 Probability of Crisis Occurrence
       We first estimate the probability of different types of crises to examine whether and to
what extent the degree of relative policy divergence affects the likelihood of a crisis occurrence.
The crises we examine are: currency, banking, and debt crisis. The identification methods for
each of the crises are explained in Appendix 1.
       For each type of the crisis, we assign the value of one to a binary variable yt when
country i experiences the onset of a crisis in year t, and zero, otherwise.14 We hypothesize the
probability that a crisis will occur, Pr(yt = 1) is a function of a vector of characteristics associated
with observations in year t, or Xt, and the parameter vector β, with the control variables in X

14
  We only focus on the onset of a crisis, that is, the first year of the crisis. This means that we do not investigate the
persistence of a crisis situation if it lasts longer than one year.

                                                            7
lagged one year to avoid endogeneity issues. Using the panel data composed of more than 100
countries for the period 1970 – 2010, the log of the following function is maximized with respect
to the unknown parameters through non-linear maximum likelihood.

         ln L   i 1  yt ln F  ' X t   1  yt ln1  F  ' X t 
                        m
                                                                                                    (2)

where m indicates the number of countries times the number of observations for each country
and the function F(.) is the standardized normal distribution.
        The following variables are included in the characteristics vector Xt. The choice of the
variables is based on the past literature, except for the ones related to the degree of trilemma
policy convergence.

Variables included in the estimation:
Relative income to the U.S. – Countries’ per capita income levels from the Penn World Table
(PWT) are normalized as a ratio to the U.S. per capita income level.
International reserves (IR) holding – IR excluding gold as a ratio to GDP .
Per capita Output growth – The growth rate of GDP per capita (in local currency).
Private credit growth – The change (first-difference) in the ratio of private credit creation to
GDP.
Net Debt inflows – The ratio of (external debt liabilities– external debt assets) to GDP. The
original data are from Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007 and updates).
Gross external financial exposure – The ratio of (total external assets + total external liabilities)
to GDP, included as deviations from the five-year average of the ratios. After the global financial
crisis, in addition to net capital flows or investment positions, gross capital flows have been
pointed as potential destabilizing factors.15 The data are based on Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007
and updates).
Real exchange rate overvaluation – It is defined as deviations from a fitted trend in the real
exchange rate. The real exchange rate is calculated using the exchange rate between country i
and its base country (in the sense of Aizenman, et al., 2011), and the CPI of the two countries.
Higher values of this variable indicate the real exchange rate value is lower, i.e., appreciated,
than its time trend.
Exchange rate stability (ERS) and Financial openness (KAOPEN) – Both are from the trilemma
indexes of Aizenman, Chinn, and Ito (2012).



15
  See Borio and Disyatat (2011), Obstfeld (2012a, b), Bruno and Shin (2012) for the argument on how gross
external financial exposure matters for financial and economic stability. However, it must be noted that gross
external financial exposure may also mean a higher level of ability to diversify risk, which may work as a stabilizing
fact.

                                                             8
Triad Relative policy divergence Measure – The aforementioned measure of triad relative
policy divergence dit is included.
Standard deviations of the Triad Relative policy divergence Measure – The standard deviations
of the above dit over five years from t–5 through t–1 are included to examine the impact of the
stability level of the trilemma policy combinations.
Other crises – The dummies for the other types of crises that occur either concurrently (t) or in
the previous year (t–1) are also included.
Contagion – To see the impact of other crises in the same geographical region, we also include
a variable that represents the effect of regional contagion. The variable to be included is defined
as:
                            PK
         Contagionin,t    j K  CDin,t                                                    (3).
                            j 1
                            j i

         CDni,t is a crisis dummy for type n crisis (i.e., currency, banking, or debt).  jk is the
weight based on GDP in PPP for country j ( j  i ) in region K. Hence, the variable Contagionn is
the weighted sum of the dummy variables for the countries in the region country i belongs to,
excluding the weighted dummy of country i itself.16 The basic assumptions are that the more
countries in the same geographical region experience crises, the more likely it is for country i to
experience a crisis, and that the contagious effect is larger for bigger economies.
        We apply the above probit estimation model to the full sample that includes both
industrialized and developing countries, the sample of industrialized countries (IDC), the sample
of developing countries (LDC), and a subsample of emerging market countries (EMG). The
baseline estimation results are reported in Table 1, which reports the marginal effects of the
explanatory variables assuming variables take mean values (except for the dummy variables).17,18

3.2 Estimation Results – The Determinants of Crisis Occurrences
      We make observations of the estimations mainly for the samples of developing and
emerging market economies.



16
   The regions we consider are: West hemisphere (i.e., North and South Americans), East and Southeast Asia and the
Pacific, South Asia, Europe (including both Western, Eastern, and Central Europe), and Sub-Saharan Africa,
Middle East and North Africa.
17
   The variables that are persistently insignificant and therefore dropped from the estimation include: trade openness
measured by the sum of export and import values as a ratio to GDP; the dummy for countries’ engagement in both
internal and external armed conflicts; the dummies for commodity exporters and manufacturing exporters; the
degree of fiscal procyclicality, which is measured by the correlation between HP-detrended output and government
expenditure; the dummy for the existence of the deposit insurance; volatility of the TOT income shocks; and the
dummy for hyperinflation (with the annual rate of inflation exceeding 40%).
18
   In the estimation for debt crisis, the estimation results for the full or IDC sample are not reported because there is
no debt crisis data for industrialized countries in our sample period (that ends in 2010).

                                                            9
Currency crisis:
        Most of the explanatory variables turn out to be qualitatively consistent with the findings
in the literature (such as Kaminsky and Reinhart, 1999; Kaminsky et al., 1998; Glick and
Hutchison, 2001; and Kaminsky, 2003) though statistical significance varies by the sample group.
Countries with real appreciation (compared to its time trend) tend to experience a currency crisis,
though significantly only for the group of industrialized countries. Rapid growth in private credit
creation (as a ratio to GDP) leads to a currency crisis especially for emerging market countries.
Not surprisingly, externally indebted countries tend to experience a currency crisis. However,
despite the prevalent strong belief, IR holding does not affect the probability of the onset of a
currency crisis.
        Among developing countries, a country experiencing a banking crisis concurrently or in
the previous year tends to experience a twin crisis with currency crisis; banking crisis increases
the probability of a currency crisis by 10-12 percentage points. Debt crisis, however, does not
seem to lead to a twin crisis with currency crisis.
        Regional contagion is also found to affect the probability of a currency crisis. The more
countries experience either a currency or banking crisis in the same region, the more likely it is
for a country to experience a currency crisis, although debt crisis does not have such a contagion
effect.
        Among the variables of our focus, interestingly, developing or emerging market countries
that pursue more divergent triad policies from the global trend (as of a year prior to the crisis) are
more likely to experience a currency crisis although the opposite impact is found for
industrialized countries while the degree of triad policy stability does not matter for any of the
subsamples. The positive impact of a greater relative policy divergence on the likelihood of a
currency crisis occurring among developing countries may mean that it involves some
opportunity cost for these economies to adopt a combination of open macro policies that deviates
from the global trend, which may explain why many developing economies have tended in
recent years to either adopt triad policies with middle-ground convergence, or hold a massive
amount of international reserves, or both. Contrarily, for industrialized countries, a combination
of diverse policies might help countries avoid experiencing a currency crisis, though its effect is
only marginally significant. This may suggest that industrialized countries can afford to pursue a
higher degree of relative policy divergence with their established policy credibility.

Banking crisis:
       Generally, the banking crisis estimations also yield results qualitatively consistent with
other studies on the same subject (such as Aizenman and Noy, 2012; Demirgüç-Kunt and
Detragiache, 1998); von Hagen and Ho, 2007; Joyce, 2011; and Duttagupta and Cashin, 2011),
though with varying levels of statistical significance.
       Unlike in the currency crisis estimation, IR holding now lowers the probability of a
banking crisis occurrence among developing and emerging market countries. Developing or
emerging market countries with faster credit growth tend to experience banking crisis, though


                                                 10
that is not the case for industrialized countries. While the extent of real exchange rate
overvaluation does not matter, the degree of exchange rate stability marginally increases the
probability of the onset of a banking crisis for emerging market economies. Greater external
financial exposure does increase the probability of a banking crisis for developing countries.
        Banking crisis is also found to be contagious. For the group of developing or emerging
market economies, if other economies in the same region experience a banking crisis, that could
cause a banking crisis in the home country. Also, we again have evidence for the twin crisis of
currency and banking.
        Neither the degree of triad relative policy divergence nor the degree of instability of the
triad policies affects the probability of bank crisis occurrence for any of the subsamples.

Debt crisis:
        Not surprisingly, the more indebted externally a country is, the more likely it is to
experience a debt crisis. While greater external financial exposure does not contribute to the
probability of a debt crisis, a country pursuing greater exchange rate stability tends to experience
a debt crisis. This result may suggest that countries with fixed exchange rate regimes experience
moral hazard in their debt financing; a fixed exchange rate policy may induce over-borrowing in
hard currency. It may also be possible that a country with a fixed exchange rate tends to
procrastinate its policy adjustments even when macroeconomic conditions require an adjustment
(usually devaluation) of its currency, letting the peg duration increase the political cost of
devaluation. These findings are consistent with the negative impact of IR holding on the
probability of a debt crisis occurrence.
        Currency crisis in the same region could also lead to an occurrence of a debt crisis. The
significantly negative sign on the debt crisis contagion variable is somewhat puzzling. However,
that may mean that once a country in the same geographical proximity, especially an
economically larger one, experiences a debt crisis and goes through some form of rescheduling,
that may calm down the sovereignty bond market for other countries with similar income levels
in the region.
        Again, a higher degree of triad relative policy divergence tends to lead to debt crisis. The
stress that may arise from implementing divergent policy combinations may force countries to
experience a debt crisis. The instability of the triad policy combination also matters but only with
marginal statistical significance.

Impact of IR holding
        We now investigate if the impact of the degree of triad policy convergence on the
probability of crisis occurrence can be conditional on another factor, IR holding. In Aizenman
and Ito (2012), we provided evidence that having a large amount of international reserves can
help lessen the output-volatility-increasing effect of a higher degree of policy divergence.




                                                 11
        We reestimate the probit model while dividing the sample into two groups: one
composed of country-year’s with IR holding higher than the annual median (as of t-1) and the
other of IR holding lower than the median.
        In the estimation results (not reported), the coefficient on the relative policy divergence
variable becomes insignificant for the high IR holding sample across all samples, but it continues
to be significant for the low IR holding regime for the currency crisis estimation for both
developing and emerging market groups. Furthermore, the magnitude of the marginal effect
becomes larger for the low IR holding regime compared to the full sample case shown in Table 1.
Thus, as we find in Aizenman and Ito (2012), a higher amount of IR holding does help lessen the
effect of trilemma relative policy divergence on the probability of experiencing a currency crisis.

3.3 The Determinants of Output Losses from Crises
        Now that we know that developing countries with greater relative policy divergence are
more exposed to the risk of experiencing either currency or debt crisis, we examine whether and
to what extent the degree of relative policy divergence affects output losses that arise once a
crisis does break out.

How to Measure Output Losses
          First, we need to clarify how to measure output losses accompanying a crisis. As
Angkinand (2008) and Kapp and Vega (2012) show, there is no ‘perfect’ method of estimating
the size of output losses associated with economic crises. Each method has its own strengths and
weaknesses. Hence, we use the widely used method of measuring the size of crisis-driven output
losses based on the oft-cited series of papers by Laeven and Valencia (2008, 2010, 2012).
          In this method, output losses refer to the cumulative sum of the differences between
actual and trend real GDP over the four-year period that starts in the first year of a crisis period
(i.e., [t0, t0+3]). The trend real GDP for the output loss estimation is a counterfactual path of real
GDP, which we obtain by applying an HP filter to the real GDP series (in natural log) over the
twenty-year-long pre-crisis period [t0 – 20, t0 – 1].19 Using the pre-crisis trend growth rate, we
extrapolate the trend after the first year of the crisis period. One merit of this method is that there
is no need to identify the “recovery period,” which can be controversial, and therefore that the
duration over which the differences between actual and trend real GDP are summed is fixed as
four years [t0, t0+3] for all the countries. Fixing the duration of the period for which the size of
output losses is measured makes the output losses comparable across different crisis episodes,
although ignoring the timing of real recovery could also be a drawback of this methodology.
          In Laeven and Valencia’s papers, negative values for the output losses (i.e., output “gains”
associated with financial crises) are replaced with zeros. However, we do not make such
conversions because it is not uncommon for a crisis economy to experience output gains,

19
  When the trend growth over the 20-year period is found to be negative, which happens to some chronically crisis-
prone countries or former Soviet-satellite states (due to their short data series and crisis experiences around the time
of independence from the Soviet rule), we use the HP-filter trend for the entire sample period.

                                                           12
especially when it experiences a currency crisis (that usually involves large-scale currency
depreciation).
        Appendix 2 presents the summary statistics of the output loss measures for different types
of crises including twin crises.20 It must be noted that higher values of the variables indicate
higher levels of output losses.
        As the tables in Appendix 2 show, the size of output losses that accompany crises varies
widely across crises. Not only does the size of crisis-driven output costs vary, but also a crisis
may not necessarily lead to output losses; it could lead to output gains. As Aziz, et al. (2000) and
Gupta, et al. (2000) show, currency crises do not necessary cause a contractionary effect on the
economy through negative balance sheet effects, because currency depreciation could improve
trade competitiveness. A banking crisis could end up having expansionary effects on the
economy if the stability of the financial system is swiftly restored by government authorities’
recapitalization efforts. A debt crisis could leave an expansionary effect if sovereignty debt is
smoothly rescheduled or the crisis country receives some forms of rescue funds or internationally
coordinated ‘haircuts’ from IMF or other international organizations. Hence, it is worthwhile
investigating what factors would lead a crisis country to experience different degrees of output
losses.
        Now, we estimate the determinants of output losses while focusing on the impact of the
degree of trilemma policy divergence. We continue to use most of the candidate explanatory
variables we used for the probit analysis, but sample the observations differently.21 Instead of
running estimations on annual, panel data, we run event-study estimations for a sample of crisis
episodes. That will reduce the number of observations significantly.
        The right-hand-side variables such as relative income, per capita GDP growth rate,
IR/GDP holding, real exchange rate overvaluation, exchange rate stability (ERS), financial
openness (KAOPEN), and credit growth are, again, included as of t0-1, i.e., a year before the
onset of a crisis, unless mentioned otherwise. We also include the dummy for the existence of the
deposit insurance system as of t0-1.22
        We focus on the variable for trilemma relative policy divergence (d) and also include it as
of the year before the onset of a crisis (t0-1). To examine the impact of twin crises, we also
include the dummies for the two other types crises in the estimation.23
        Tables 2 reports the estimation results for different samples: the full sample, and the LDC
and EMG subsamples. Due to the small sample size and resultant weakness in the estimation
results, we do not report or discuss the estimation results for the subsample of industrialized
countries.

20
   A twin crisis is identified when one type of crisis occurs while another type occurs in the immediate previous year
(t0–1), the same year (t0), or the immediate following year (t0+1).
21
   We do not include the dummies for contagion of crises due to the lack of theoretical rationale.
22
   For the deposit insurance dummy, we use the data from the dataset compiled by Demirgüç-Kunt, et al. (2005). We
also update the data and expand the scope of country coverage by using the information from the website of the
International Association of Deposit Insurers (IADI) and other national governmental agencies in charge of deposit
insurance.
23
   The dummies for the other types of crises take the value of one when they occur in t0-1, t0, or t0+1.

                                                          13
Estimation Results:
         Again, most of the findings are qualitatively consistent with other studies though there
are a few exceptions. The variable for IR holding has the negative sign, but it is only significant
for industrialized countries (not reported), which is somewhat odd considering their better
accessibility to international financial markets. A country that enters a currency or debt crisis
with real exchange rate appreciation tends to experience larger output losses. The more
externally indebted it is, the larger output losses an emerging market economy would face once it
experiences a currency or banking crisis. Interestingly, (de jure) financial openness seems to
contribute to larger output losses especially for an emerging market economy that experiences a
currency crisis. This finding is consistent with the oft-argued belief that financial liberalization
can be harmful for developing, especially middle-income, countries (such as Kaminsky and
Schmukler, 2002). Only the twin crisis with the combination of currency and banking crises
involves larger output losses than solo crises. Deposit insurance systems are helpful in reducing
the size of output losses for both banking and debt crises.24
         As for trilemma policy divergence, its level per se (d as of a year before the occurrence of
a crisis) does reduce the output losses arising from currency or banking crisis for developing and
emerging market countries, though its impact is insignificant for the banking crisis estimations.
This finding can be somewhat contradictory to the previous probit estimation results that a higher
value of d increases the probability of an onset of currency crisis (and debt crisis). Now, we find
that once a crisis occurs, a higher d can help reduce the size of accompanying output losses. How
do we reconcile these ostensibly contradictory results, in the case of currency crisis?
         Figures 8 and 9 may help us solve the “puzzle” regarding the role of the trilemma policy
divergence. These figures show that the averages of deviations from the world mean of MI, ERS,
and KAOPEN, i.e., _                   ,      _                 , and        _                    for the countries
that experience either currency or banking crisis. These deviations are used to calculate the
degree of triad relative policy divergence (i.e.,
           _    1          _     1              _    1 ).
        With these figures, we can observe the behavior of each of the three trilemma policies
around the time of a crisis. We also comparable figures for the subsamples of crises which entail
output losses and those which do not.
        We can make several interesting observations from these figures.
 Not surprisingly, currency crisis makes countries reduce the level of exchange rate stability.
    But those crisis countries with higher levels of exchange rate stability tend to experience
    larger output losses.
 Countries “fight” currency crisis by retaining greater monetary independence.

24
  Trade openness is found to be persistently insignificant, and therefore, is dropped from the estimation. The
dummies for commodity exporters (i.e., countries that are either or both of major food and fuel exporters) and
manufacturing exporters are also found insignificant. The dummies for the debt crisis of 1982, the Asian financial
crisis of 1997-98, and the global financial crisis of 2008-10 are also included, but not reported.

                                                         14
    Currency crisis does not affect financial openness, though countries with more open financial
     accounts tend to experience larger output losses.
 Those currency crisis countries which do not experience output losses are the ones that
     actively intervened with greater monetary independence in the year before the onset of a
     crisis. That is true especially for emerging market countries.
 Some emerging market countries may implement capital controls in the years leading to the
     onset of a crisis, which may allow the countries to retain greater monetary independence
     while maintaining the level of exchange rate stability.
 In the case of banking crisis, the characteristics of monetary independence between crisis
     countries with and without output losses are opposite to the case of currency crisis. Those
     countries that actively raise the level of monetary independence end up experiencing output
     losses. This may indicate that active interventions by the monetary authorities may have
     ended up creating moral hazard among financial institutions. In such an environment, once a
     banking crisis occurs, a sudden contraction of credit could lead to a severe contraction of
     output. Conversely, those countries which avoid experiencing output losses exercise
     monetary independence once the crisis occurs (i.e., t0 +1 and t0 +2), mitigating credit
     constraint and thereby avoiding contraction of output.
 The behavior of exchange rate stability among banking crisis countries is similar to the case
     of currency crisis.
 As was the case with currency crisis, more financially open countries tend to experience
     output losses. And once they do, emerging market countries tend to lower the level of
     financial openness.
         So, what do these all mean? First, when developing countries face a situation with
pressure for market corrections, they often try to fight the amounting pressure by retaining
greater monetary independence. They do so while trying to both retain stability in the exchange
rate movement and maintain the level of financial openness. However, such an effort forces the
economy to face even greater pressure because the attempts to preemptively stabilize the
economy without changing the other open macro policies could challenge the constraint of the
trilemma. Hence, the action of fighting the pressure for market corrections itself would lead the
country to experience a currency crisis, which is essentially a self-fulfilling prophecy.
         Second, although the action of fighting market pressure with greater monetary
independence itself causes the country to experience a crisis, it could also help reduce the level
of output losses once the crisis occurs. By trying to achieve a higher “latitude” in the level of
monetary independence, once a currency crisis occurs, the crisis country’s monetary
independence falls rapidly, but the higher “latitude” its monetary independence falls from, the
smaller degree of currency devaluation is needed – see the panels for MI and ERS in the middle
row of Figure 9. Hence, a country that lowers the level of monetary independence from a higher
“latitude,” tends to experience a smaller degree of disruption in its exchange rate stability (as




                                                15
seen in the bottom row in Figure 9), making the disturbance in the financial sector smaller and
thereby the output cost smaller.25
         In the case of banking crisis, the extent of triad relative policy divergence does not affect
the probability of the crisis. But the size of crisis-driven output losses can be smaller if the crisis
country enters the crisis with higher level of d, which is essentially again a reflection of a higher
level of monetary independence.
         What do we learn from these findings?
         First, there is no question that pursuing a policy combination that yields lower d would be
better because it reduces the probability of experiencing a crisis (especially for currency and debt
crises). Second, if there is a rational country that is aware that pursuing a policy combination that
involves a higher d could lead to a crisis, it could still implement such a policy combination, if it
is necessary, so that it could end up experiencing smaller output losses even once a crisis does
occur. In other words, by “causing” a crisis, the country may be able to “defuse” the negative
impact of a crisis so that it could experience a crisis with smaller output losses.

Asymmetry between Crises with Output Losses and Those with Output ‘Gains’:
         As the summary statistics of output losses in Appendix 2 show, a financial crisis does not
necessarily lead to output losses; it can lead to output ‘gains.’ We wonder if there is any
asymmetry between the case where a crisis involves output losses and the case where a crisis
leads to output gains.
         To examine the asymmetry, we modify our estimation exercise on the determinants of
output losses. Instead of having the dependent variable of output losses as a variable that can
take both positive and negative values, we will have the dependent variable that shows either
only output losses or output gains. That is, when we focus on the determinants of only output
losses, we assign zeros to the dependent variable if a crisis episode involves negative values for
output losses (i.e., output gains). For the estimation on the determinants of output ‘gains,’ we
assign zeros to the dependent variable if a crisis episode involves positive values for output
losses (i.e., output losses). In either case, because the dependent variable is bounded by zero, we
will use the Tobit regression model. With the two sets of regression results, we will compare the
estimated coefficients between the output loss estimations and the output gain estimations to see
if there is any asymmetry between the two.
         The regression results (not reported) show some asymmetrical effects on output losses
and gains.
         The first variable to note is the one for international reserves holding. While it is found to
increase output gains across the three types of crises, it does not have any (negative or loss-
reducing) effect on output losses. Larger external debt would increase output losses arising from
currency crisis, but it would not affect output gains. Credit growth would help increase output
losses for currency or banking crisis, but it does not have any impact on output gains.

25
 This explanation is applicable especially when the country does not alter the extent of financial openness in the
midst of a financial crisis as we observe in Figure 9.

                                                         16
        Interestingly, the degree of relative policy divergence is found to contribute negatively to
output losses in both currency and banking crises while it does not affect output gains. Hence,
the degree of triad relative policy divergence is especially important when a country is
experiencing output losses that accompany a currency or banking crisis. The loss reducing effect
we find in this exercise is consistent with what we discussed with Figure 9.

3.4 Discussions – What Do the Estimation Results Tell Us about the Experiences in Latin
    America and Asia?
         Now, we examine what we can learn from the estimation results as well as the actual
crisis experiences. For that, we take a look at the two big crisis episodes in the 1980s and 1990s,
namely the Latin American debt crisis in the early 1980s and the Asian crisis of 1997-1998.
         Figure 11 shows the averages of d around the crisis period for the groups of Latin
American and Asian countries.26 The year of a crisis onset (year 0 in the graph) differs between
the sample groups, and also among the countries within the Latin American group. For each of
the Latin American countries, “Year 0” indicates the year when the crisis is the most severe
among the years: 1981, 1982, and 1983.27 For the Asian countries, “Year 0” is always 1997. The
figure illustrates the sample average of d over the period from five years before (t0 – 5) through
five years after the crisis year (t0 + 5).
         From the figure, we can see that Latin American countries tend to have higher d in the
period prior to the crisis compared to the Asian counterpart. Second, for this group of crisis
countries, the relative policy divergence variable increases over the post-crisis period. Third, for
the Asian group, d rises rapidly when the crisis breaks out, making it look more like countries are
increasing the level of relative policy divergence in response to the occurrence of a crisis. Fourth,
unlike the Latin American counterparts, d drops in the second year after the crisis and remains at
relatively low levels afterwards.
         The fact that d remains at relatively lower levels in the post-crisis period may suggest that
Asian countries have possibly adopted policy combinations that would help reduce the likelihood
of repeating a crisis. As far as the post-crisis period is concerned, Asian crisis countries appear
more crisis-proof than Latin American countries in the 1980s.
         As the previous empirical exercise shows that the positive correlation between the degree
of policy dispersion and the likelihood of a currency crisis can become weaker if a country holds
a large amount of IR. In other words, by increasing the amount of IR holding, Asian countries
have more room for more diverse policy combinations without facing the risk of greater output
volatility.



26
   The “Latin America” crisis countries include: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Columbia, Costa Rica, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Honduras, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela. The “Asian” crisis countries include: Indonesia,
Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thailand.
27
   The year with the “most severe crisis” is identified when one of the years 1981, 1982, and 1983 is the starting year
for different types of crises that occur in consecutive years, or the year when a twin or triple crisis occurs.

                                                          17
       Figure 12 shows the sample averages of mean deviations for each of the three trilemma
policy indexes, i.e., : _         ,   _           , and     _               for both groups.
This figure allows us to see how the movement in the three trilemma indexes is driving the
results we saw in Figure 11.
        According to Figure 12, while both Latin American and Asian countries experienced the
crisis with relatively high levels of financial openness, Latin American countries significantly
reduced the level of financial openness in the post-crisis period. Asian crisis countries also did
reduce the level of financial openness, but only by a lesser degree to the level comparable to the
world average. Both groups experienced a fall in the level of exchange rate stability, but the
extent of the fall is greater for Asian countries. Asian crisis countries have maintained stable
levels of monetary independence throughout the pre- and post-crisis period while Latin
American counterparts moderately increase the level of monetary independence a year before the
crisis year through the post-crisis period.
        Due to the way the variable d is constructed, if any of the three indexes is far from the
value of one, that would tend to raise the value of d. Given that, we can observe that Asian crisis
countries have maintained relatively low levels of d because they tend to be “conformists” to the
world trend in terms of monetary independence and financial openness. Despite the oft-discussed
anecdote, Asian crisis countries have maintained relatively low levels of exchange rate stability,
that allowed these countries to have more conformist trilemma policy combinations.
        Latin American countries in the post-crisis period in the 1980s tended to have
combinations of three distinct policies. They retained high (i.e., more-than-average) levels of
monetary independence with lower exchange rate stability. Most importantly, these countries
decided to seclude themselves from international financial markets. Such policy response,
ironically, may have left the economies exposed to a crisis-prone state – though there are surely
other factors that contributed to keeping the economies prone for crisis.
        Given these findings, what makes Asia different the most is that, despite the turbulent
experience of the Asian crisis, Asian countries have decided not to move away from the global
trend of financial liberalization. As Aizenman, et al. (2011) show, these economies seem to have
decided to learn how to surf on the waves of financial globalization rather than run away from
them.


4. Endogeneity and the Determinants of the Degree of Trilemma Policy Divergence
        The hump shape of the measure of relative policy divergence we have observed in the
previous figures as well as its policy reactions to crisis situations suggest that the measure of
relative policy divergence itself can be endogenously affected by the experience of crises.
        The tendency of avoiding “corner solutions” in open macro policy coordination may well
be a result of past crisis experiences, as exemplified by emerging market countries that have
reduced the level of relative policy divergence in recent decades, especially in the aftermath of



                                                18
the Asian crisis. These countries may have decided to take policy options that lead to smaller d’s
as a response to their own crisis experiences.
        Here, we test the hypothesis that experiencing more crises would make countries tend to
adopt more converged combinations of trilemma policies. For that, we implement the following
estimation:

            d it   0   1d it 1  Z it '   CRISISi (t 5|t 1)   it                      (3)


where dit is the measure of relative policy divergence and Zit is a vector of control variables, that
include relative income as of t, IR holding as of t -1, trade openness (the sum of exports and
imports as a share of GDP) as of t, the share of i’s economy in the world (based on current U.S.
dollars) as of t, and the dummies for manufacturing exporters and the countries in the European
Monetary Union (EMU). 28 CRISISi(t-5|t-1) is a vector of the numbers of crisis occurrences
indicating how many times each of the three types of crises, i.e., currency, banking, and debt
crises, occurred in the five pre-crisis years (i.e., from t-5 through t-1). We are interested in the
coefficient  to examine whether the frequency of crises in the (relatively immediate) past
would affect the degree of relative policy divergence (d). If our hypothesis is held, the estimated
coefficient ˆ should be significantly negative, suggesting that countries with frequent crisis
experiences tend to reduce the degree of trilemma policy divergence.
        Table 3 reports the estimation results for the full sample and the subsamples of
industrialized, developing and emerging market countries. It turns out that the estimated
coefficient on the dummy for past currency crisis occurrences is persistently, significantly
negative. The more times a country experiences a currency crisis in the past five years, the more
likely it is to reduce the extent of triad policy convergence, which supports our hypothesis,
though the correlation is not found for banking or debt crisis.
        When we extend the model by including the number of crisis occurrences in the times t–
10 through t–6, in addition to those for the times t–5 through t–1, the results are still found to be
robust while none of those crisis occurrences from t–10 through t–6 turned out to be significant
contributors (not reported).
        Now that we find that the extent of triad relative policy divergence can be affected by the
existence of past crisis experience, we take a closer look at this issue. By using the following
estimation model, we examine the autoregressive effect of past crisis experiences.

     dit   0   1dit 1  Zit ' 
                            i  n C ,t  n  t  n  CRISISi ,t  n   i  n TC ,t  n  t  n  TWCRISISi ,t  n    it
                                 10                                             10                                                     (4)


28
  The dummy for ERM countries is assigned for the countries and years that corresponds to participation in the
ERM (i.e., Belgium, Germany, France, Ireland, Italy, and Luxembourg from 1979 on; Spain from 1989; U.K. only
for 1990-91; Portugal from 1992; Austria from 1995; Finland from 1996; and Denmark and Greece from 1999) or
ERM II (Estonia, Lithuania, and Slovenia from 2004; and Cyprus, Latvia, Malta, and Slovak Rep. from 2005).

                                                                     19
where CRISISi,t-n is a vector of the dummies for the onsets of the three different types of crises
from t–1 through t–10. We also assume that policy makers would put more weight on recent
crisis episodes when making policy decisions. t  n indicates the weight policy makers would
place on the crisis episode in year t–n while we assume that the weight diminishes by 5% every
year, i.e., that the memory of a crisis among policy makers “depreciates” at the annual rate of
5%.29 TWCRISISi,t-n is a comparable vector of the dummies for the three types of twin crises:
TWCRISISCB (currency and banking crisis), TWCRISISCD (currency and debt), and TWCRISISBD
(banking and debt). We run the estimation model of equation (4) first without TWCRISIS and
then with TWCRISIS. We focus on the autoregressive estimates,  C and TC .
        The upper half of Table 4 reports only significant autoregressive estimates (with the
regressive weights) for the crisis dummies, i.e., ˆc . It must be noted that the estimation model
does not include the twin crisis dummies.
        From the table, we can confirm that the degree of triad relative policy divergence can be
affected by past crisis experiences. Developing countries on average tend to reduce the extent of
relative policy divergence two years after experiencing (the onset of) a currency crisis.
Considering that the average duration of a currency crisis for developing countries is about 2
years (see A-Table 1 in Appendix 2), we can infer that countries tend to reduce d once the
currency crisis ends. Emerging market countries tend to reduce d five years after experiencing a
banking crisis, that is two years after the average duration of a banking crisis of three years. They
also tend to reduce d eight years after experiencing a debt crisis, that is three and a half years
after the average duration of a banking crisis of 4.5 years.
        What about the impact of twin crisis? The bottom half of Table 4 displays estimates only
the estimated coefficients of the (weighted) autoregressive dummies for twin crises that are
included in the estimation model along with the (weighted) autoregressive singular crisis
variables though the estimates for the latter are not reported. Given the inclusion of the
autoregressive singular crisis dummies, the estimates on the twin crisis dummies should be
regarded as representing the marginal effect of past twin crises.
        From the table, we can see that if a developing country experiences a currency-banking
twin crisis, it tends to reduce its degree of relative policy divergence three years later (while the
average duration of the currency-banking crisis is about three years). If it experiences a currency-
debt twin crisis, the country tends to lower its degree of relative policy divergence four years
after the crisis occurrence, but raise it again in the seventh year.30 If it experiences a banking-
debt twin crisis, the country tends to raise its degree of relative policy divergence nine years
after the crisis occurrence.


29
     Hence,  t  n takes the value of one for the immediate previous year (i.e., t–1), then t  2  0.95 for t–2,
t 2  0.90 for t–3, and so forth.
30
     The average duration of a currency-debt crisis is 3.16 for LDCs and 3.77 for EMGs.

                                                               20
        As we have discussed several times, an occurrence of a crisis does not necessarily mean
that the crisis would involve output losses. Policy makers may end up taking no action if the
crisis does not leave any damage or output losses to their economy.
        Hence, we modify the estimation model as follows. Instead of looking at the (regressive)
impacts of past crises, we examine the impacts only for the crises that accompany output losses.
Now, the estimation equation becomes:


dit   0   1dit 1  Zit '   i  n COL,t  n  t  n CRISISi ,t  n  OLi ,t  n 
                                         10

                                                                                                        (5)
                              i  n TWOL,t  n  t  n TWCRISISi ,t  n  TWOLi ,t  n   it .
                                    10




The CRISISi,t-n dummy is interacted with the dummy for positive output losses (OLi,t-n). That is, if
the accumulated output losses (we used in the previous section) are positive, we assign the value
of one for OL. In tranquil years or crisis times with no ex post output losses, the term
 CRISISi ,t n  OLi ,t n  takes the value of zero. The term TWCRISIS i ,t n  TWOLi ,t n  can be
interpreted similarly with TWOLi,t-n denoting the dummy for positive output losses that
accompany a twin crisis.
        Again, the upper half of Table 5 reports the impact of an onset of a crisis accompanying
output losses in ex post on the degree of triad relative policy divergence when we estimate
equation (5) without the dummies for twin crises with output losses. The lower half of the table
reports the ‘marginal’ impacts of twin crises with output losses.
        Developing countries would raise its degree of relative policy divergence in the year
immediately after an onset of a currency crisis that would lead to output losses, but it is followed
by reductions in d in the second and fifth years. The immediate rise in d may reflect stabilization
efforts taken by the currency crisis country as we have discussed previously. Compared to the
previous case with just the dummies for crises (the upper half of Table 4), the absolute
magnitude of the estimated coefficients on the currency crisis from t–2 is larger and d gets
reduced twice instead of just once, indicating that countries may reduce the level of d when they
experience a currency crisis and output losses.
        The results for the marginal effects of twin crises with output losses are reported in the
bottom half of Table 5 and cast interesting contrasts with the comparable part of Table 4.
Developing countries would respond to an onset of a currency-banking crisis faster (in the
second and third years instead of just the third year) when a crisis takes place in a way that
involves output losses. Emerging market countries would reduce the d more significantly when
they experience a currency-banking crisis with output losses. The negative response to a
currency-debt crisis is greater when they experience output losses as well. Overall, the currency-
banking crisis seems to lead to a largest fall in d among developing and emerging market
countries if the crisis involves output losses, and the size of fall is larger for the group of
emerging market countries.


                                                                    21
5. Conclusion

        We have examined the impact of open macro policies on economic performance from the
perspective of the powerful Macro Trilemma hypothesis – a country may not simultaneously
attain monetary independence, exchange rate stability, and financial openness. In this paper, we
shed light on the impact of relative trilemma policy divergence. Specifically, we measured how
far a country’s trilemma policy combination differs from the world trend, and evaluated the
impact of this policy divergence on economic stability.
        We find a wider variation in the degree of relative policy divergence across countries
among different income levels and also geographical groups. Industrialized countries, most
notably the Euro countries, tend to adopt more diverse trilemma policy combinations since the
early 1990s. In the last 15 years or so, emerging market countries have adopted trilemma policy
combinations with the smallest degree of policy divergence. Given that emerging market
countries has achieved a relatively stable output performance, lower levels of relative policy
divergence may have been one of the key reasons for to it.
        To investigate that, we formally tested the effect of the degree of relative policy
divergence on the probability of crisis occurrences and on crisis-driven output losses. We have
found that a developing or emerging market country with a higher degree of relative policy
divergence is more likely to experience currency or debt crises. However, for industrialized
countries, a higher degree of relative policy divergence tends to reduce the probability of
currency or banking crises. We also found that by holding large volumes of IR, developing
countries could avoid facing the correlation between a wider relative policy divergence and a
higher level of likelihood of experiencing a crisis. The tendency for emerging market countries
to have smaller policy dispersion in recent years as well as to hold massive amounts of
international reserves may merely reflect these countries’ precautious motive to avoid
experiencing another crisis, especially in the aftermath of the Asian crisis of the late 1990s.
When we investigated the impact of relative policy divergence on the output losses that arise
from a crisis, we found that a developing or emerging market country with a higher degree of
relative policy divergence tends to experience smaller output losses once it experiences a
currency or banking crisis.
        The findings from the two sets of empirical results may appear contradictory, especially
for the case of a currency crisis. However, we think that having a larger degree of relative policy
divergence in the years before the onset of a crisis can be a result of stabilization measures. If
such efforts are made without changing the other two policies, it would increase the pressure for
market corrections, thereby increasing the probability of a crisis. Once a crisis occurs, the larger
the pre-crisis policy efforts are, the more pressure would be defused, so that its output cost would
be smaller.
        When we examined the development of trilemma policies around the crisis period for the
groups of Latin American crisis countries in the 1980s and the Asian crisis countries in the 1990s,
we found that these two groups of countries have gone through distinctly different policy
developments around the time of the crisis. The biggest difference between the two groups of

                                                22
crisis countries is that Latin American crisis countries tended to close their capital accounts in
the aftermath of a crisis, while that is not the case among the Asian crisis countries. Furthermore,
the Asian crisis countries tended to reduce the degree of relative policy divergence in the
aftermath of the crisis, which possibly means that they decided to adopt open macro policies that
are less prone to a crisis. That decision has been paired with a strong incentive to hold a great
amount of international reserves. By observing how crisis-prone conditions can be perennial for
emerging market economies (as occurred in Latin American countries), Asian economies,
including those which did not experience a crisis (China), seem to become a cautious
implementer of open macro policies. In the highly integrated world economy, this decision is no
surprise to anyone.
         Lastly, we also investigated the endogenous nature of the degree of policy divergence.
Countries may respond to crisis experiences by changing the degree of relative policy divergence
if it were expected to affect the probability of experiencing a crisis. Naturally, we may presume
that the more frequently a country experienced crises, the lower the degree of relative policy
divergence it would want to pursue. We found empirical evidence that the number of crisis
experiences does tend to reduce the degree of policy divergence. Developing countries tend to
reduce the degree of relative policy divergence especially when they experienced a currency
crisis or a currency-banking crisis, and that tendency can be even stronger when the crisis
accompanies output losses.




                                                 23
References

Abiad, A., R. Balakrishnan, P. K. Brooks, D. Leigh, and I. Tytell, 2009. “What’s the Damage? Medium-term Output
          Dynamics After Banking Crises,” IMF Working Papers 09/245, Washington, D.C.: International Monetary
          Fund.
Angkinand Prabha, A. P. 2008. “Output Loss and Recovery from Banking and Currency Crises: Estimation Issues,”
          Mimeo, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1320730.
Aizenman, J., and H. Ito. 2012. “Trilemma Policy Convergence Patterns and Output Volatility.” North American
          Journal of Economics and Finance, Volume 23, Issue 3, December 2012, Pages 269–285 (December 2012).
Aizenman, J., M.D. Chinn, and H. Ito. 2012. “The ‘Impossible Trinity’ Hypothesis in an Era of Global Imbalances:
          Measurement and Testing.” University of Wisconsin-Madison Working Paper. Forthcoming in Review of
          International Economics.
Aizenman, J., M.D. Chinn, and H. Ito. 2011. “Surfing the Waves of Globalization: Asia and Financial Globalization
          in the Context of the Trilemma,” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, vol. 25(3), p. 290 –
          320 (September).
Aizenman, J., M. D. Chinn and H. Ito. 2010. The Emerging Global Financial Architecture: Tracing and Evaluating
          the New Patterns of the Trilemma's Configurations, Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 29,
          No. 4, p. 615-641.
Aziz, J., F. Caramazza and R. Salgado. 2000. “Currency Crisis: In Search of Common Elements.” IMF Working
          Paper WP/00/67 (March)
Babbel, D. F. 1995. “Insuring Sovereign Debt Against Default,” World Bank Discussion Paper Series, Washington,
          D.C.: World Bank.
Beim, D. and C. Calomiris. 2001. Emerging Financial Markets. New York: McGraw-Hill/Irwin Publishers.
Borio, C. E. V. and P. Disyatat. 2011.”Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis: Link or No Link?” BIS Working
          Paper No. 346 (May 1).
Bruno, V. and H. S. Shin. 2012. “Capital Flows, Cross-Border Banking and Global Liquidity,” Princeton Working
          Paper.
Chinn, M. D. and H. Ito. 2008. A New Measure of Financial Openness. Journal of Comparative Policy Analysis,
          Volume 10, Issue 3 (September), p. 309 - 322.
Chinn, M. D. and H. Ito, 2006. What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls, Institutions, and
        Interactions, Journal of Development Economics, Volume 81, Issue 1, Pages 163-192 (October).
Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Detragiache, E., 1998. The determinants of banking crises in developing and developed
         countries. IMF Staff Papers 45, 81–109.
Duttagupta, Rupa and Cashin, Paul, (2011), Anatomy of banking Crises in Developing and Emerging Market
         Countries, Journal of International Money and Finance, 30(2), p. 354‐376.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Baybars Karacaovali and Luc Laeven. 2005. “Deposit Insurance around the World: A
         Comprehensive Database.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper no. 3628.Washington, DC: World
         Bank.
Eichengreen, B., and Hausmann, R. 1999. “Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility,” In New Challenges for
         Monetary Policy. Proceedings of a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Eichengreen, B. and D. Leblang. 2003. Exchange Rates and Cohesion: Historical Perspectives and Political-
         Economy Considerations. Journal of Common Market Studies, 41(5): 797–822.
Eichengreen, B., A. Rose and C. Wyplosz, (1995), “Exchange Market Mayhem: The Antecedents and Aftermaths of
         Speculative Attacks”, Economic Policy, 21, pp. 249-312, October.
Eichengreen, B., A. Rose and C. Wyplosz, (1996), “Contagious Currency Crises: First Tests”, Scandinavian Journal
         of Economics, 98(4), pp. 463−484.
Fischer, S. 2001. “Exchange Rate Regimes: Is the Bipolar View Correct?.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
         15(2): 3-24.
Frankel, J. A. 1999.“No Single Currency Regime is Right for All Countries or at All Times,” Essays in International
         Finance No. 215 (Princeton University Press: Princeton).
Frankel, J.A., S.L. Schmukler, and L. Serven. 2004. “Global Transmission of Interest Rates: Monetary
         Independence and Currency Regime,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 2004, v23(5,Sep), 701-
         733.



                                                        24
Ghosh, A., A. Gulde and J. Ostry. 1997. Does the Nominal Exchange Rate Regime Matter? NBER Working Paper
          No 5874.
Glick, R. and M. Hutchison. 2001. “Banking and Currency Crises: How Common Are Twins?” In R. Glick, R.
          Moreno, and M. Spiegel, eds. Financial Crises in Emerging Markets. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
          University Press, Chapter 2.
Gupta, P., D. Mishra and R. Sahay. 2000. “Output Response During Currency Crises.” Working paper, IMF.
Henry, P. B. 2007. “Capital Account Liberalization: Theory, Evidence, and Speculation,” Journal of Economic
          Literature, vol. 45(4), p. 887-935 (December).
Ito, H. and M. Kawai. 2012. “New Measures of the Trilemma Hypothesis and Their Implications for Asia.” ADBI
          Working Paper 381 (February).
Joyce, Joseph, 2011. "Financial Globalization and Banking Crises in Emerging Markets", Open Economies Review,
          vol. 22 no. 5.
Kaminsky, G. 2003. “Varieties of Currency Crises” NBER Working Paper Series, #10193.
Kaminsky, G.L. and C. M. Reinhart. 1999. “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and Balance-of-Payments
          Problems,” American Economic Review, vol. 89(3), pages 473-500.
Kaminsky, G., S. Lizondo, and C. Reinhart. 1998. “Leading Indicators of Currency Crises,” International Monetary
        Fund Staff Papers, 45, March, 1-48.
Kaminsky, Graciela, and Sergio Schmukler. 2002, “Short-Run Pain, Long-Run Gain: The Effects of Financial
        Liberalization,” World Bank Working Paper No. 2912.
Kapp, D. and M. Vega. 2012. “Real Output Costs of Financial Crises: A Loss Distribution Approach,” Papers
          1201.0967, arXiv.org (May).
Kose, M. A., E. Prasad, K. Rogoff, and S. J. Wei, 2006, Financial Globalization: A Reappraisal. IMF Working Paper,
          WP/06/189. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Laeven, L. and F. Valencia. 2008. “Systematic Banking Crises: A New Database,” IMF Working Paper WP/08/224,
          Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Laeven, L. and F. Valencia. 2010. “Resolution of Banking Crises: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly,” IMF Working
          Paper No. 10/44. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Laeven, L. and F. Valencia. 2012. “Systematic Banking Crises: A New Database,” IMF Working Paper WP/12/163,
          Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Levy-Yeyati, E. and F. Sturzenegger. 2003. To float or to fix: Evidence on the impact of exchange rate regimes on
          growth. The American Economic Review 93(4): 1173–1193.
Mundell, R.A. 1963. Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates. Canadian
          Journal of Economic and Political Science. 29 (4). pp. 475–85.
Obstfeld, M.. 2012a. “Financial Flows, Financial Crises, and Global Imbalances, Journal of International Money
          and Finance, 31, p. 469-480.
Obstfeld, M. 2012b. “Does the Current Account Still Matter?”, American Economic Review, 102(3), 1-23.
Obstfeld, M., J. C. Shambaugh, and A. M. Taylor, 2005. “The Trilemma in History: Tradeoffs among Exchange
          Rates, Monetary Policies, and Capital Mobility." Review of Economics and Statistics 87 (August): 423-38.
Popper H., A. Mandilaras, and G. Bird, 2011, Trilemma Stability and International Macroeconomic Archetypes,
          manuscript, Santa Clara University.
Prasad, E. S. and R. Rajan. 2008. A Pragmatic Approach to Capital Account Liberalization. NBER Working Paper
          #14051. (June).
Prasad, E.S., K. Rogoff, S. J. Wei, and M. A. Kose. 2003. “Effects of Financial Globalization on Developing
          Countries: Some Empirical Evidence.” Occasional Paper 220. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary
          Fund.
Reinhart, C. M. and K. Rogoff. 2009. This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, Princeton:
          Princeton University Press.
Reinhart, C. M. and K. Rogoff. 2008. “The Forgotten History of Domestic Debt,” NBER Working Paper #13946.
Shambaugh, Jay C. 2004. “The Effects of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy.” Quarterly Journal of
          Economics 119 (February): 301-52.
Willett, T. 2003. “Fear of Floating Needn't Imply Fixed Rates: An OCA Approach to the Operation of Stable
          Intermediate Currency Regimes,” Open Economies Review, Springer, vol. 14(1), pages 71-91 (January).
World Bank. 2012. Global Development Finance – External Debt of Developing Countries. Washington, D.C.:
          World Bank.



                                                       25
Appendix 1: Crisis Identification


Currency crisis – We identify the currency crisis in the same way as suggested by Eichengreen et
al. (1995, 1996). However, we calculate the exchange rate market pressure (EMP) against the
base country that we have used to construct the trilemma indexes (Aizenman, et al., 2008).31 For
the countries whose data for the EMP are not available, the crisis dummy is supplemented by the
currency crisis identification by Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). The crisis dummy is available for
1970 – 2010.


Banking crisis – It is based on the data developed by Laeven and Valencia (2008) and its update
(Laeven and Valencia, 2012). The Reinhart and Rogoff data are used to supplement the data. The
data are available for 1970 – 2010.


Debt crisis – It is identified using the dataset by Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). The data are
augmented using Babbel (1995), Beim, D. and C. Calomiris. (2001), Reinhart and Rogoff (2008),
and World Bank’s Global Development Finance (2012). The data are available for 1970 – 2010.


Twin crises – A twin crisis is identified when one type of crisis occurs while another type occurs
in the immediate previous year (t0–1), the same year (t0), or the immediate following year (t0+1).




31
  The “base country” is defined as the country that a home country’s monetary policy is most closely linked with as
in Shambaugh (2004). The base countries are Australia, Belgium, France, Germany, India, Malaysia, South Africa,
the U.K., and the U.S. The base country can change as it has happened to Ireland, for example. Its base country was
the U.K. until the mid-1970s, and changed to Germany since Ireland joined the EMS.

                                                        26
Appendix 2: Summary Statistics of Output Losses for Different Types of Crises and
Different Calculation Methods
A-Table 1: Singular Crises
                                                    Obs.        Mean    Std. Dev.        Min         Max
    Output Loss    Currency Crisis     Full          208       17.4%       51.5%     -148.0%      292.2%
                                      IDC             44       24.0%       21.9%      -13.3%       76.1%
                                      LDC            164       15.6%       56.8%     -148.0%      292.2%
                                      EMG             75       21.0%       44.9%      -74.3%      160.7%
                   Banking Crisis     Full           147       30.0%       58.2%      -71.6%      457.8%
                                      IDC             26       31.4%       24.9%       -5.9%      109.5%
                                      LDC            121       29.7%       63.1%      -71.6%      457.8%
                                      EMG             53       29.6%       39.6%      -60.3%      153.5%
                   Debt Crisis        Full           204       11.4%       64.0%     -175.6%      420.8%
                                      IDC              0
                                      LDC            204       11.4%       64.0%     -175.6%      420.8%
                                      EMG             54       26.2%       49.1%      -73.7%      153.5%
    Duration       Currency Crisis    Full           224         1.82        1.35          1           11
                                      IDC             47         1.64        1.15          1            7
                                      LDC            177         1.86        1.40          1           11
                                      EMG             77         2.04        1.66          1           11
                   Banking Crisis     Full           159         3.16        1.72          1            9
                                      IDC             26         4.04        0.82          1            5
                                      LDC            133         2.99        1.80          1            9
                                      EMG             56         3.00        1.72          1            9
                   Debt Crisis        Full           227         4.41        5.42          1           32
                                      IDC              0
                                      LDC            227         4.41        5.42          1          32
                                      EMG             57         4.89        5.26          1          28

A-Table 2: Twin Crises
                   Twin crises                      Obs.        Mean    Std. Dev.        Min         Max
    Output Loss    Currency and        Full          52        33.5%       45.8%      -71.6%      160.7%
                   Banking Crisis     IDC             6        42.7%       20.7%       12.7%       68.4%
                                      LDC            46        32.3%       48.1%      -71.6%      160.7%
                                      EMG            27        35.3%       48.2%      -60.3%      160.7%
                   Currency and       Full           56        27.3%       54.8%     -148.0%      207.2%
                   Debt Crisis        IDC             0
                                      LDC            55        28.1%       55.0%     -148.0%      207.2%
                                      EMG            27        28.4%       44.5%      -60.3%      160.7%
                   Banking and        Full           61        27.4%       51.5%     -117.1%      154.6%
                   Debt Crisis        IDC             0
                                      LDC            61        27.4%       51.5%     -117.1%      154.6%
                                      EMG            25        41.2%       41.7%      -78.2%      153.5%
    Duration       Currency and       Full           61          3.16        1.43          1            7
                   Banking Crisis     IDC             6          3.33        1.51          2            6
                                      LDC            55          3.15        1.43          1            7
                                      EMG            29          3.48        1.48          1            7
                   Currency and       Full           73          3.15        2.46          1           19
                   Debt Crisis        IDC             0
                                      LDC            70          3.16        2.45          1          19
                                      EMG            31          3.77        3.35          1          19
                   Banking and        Full           72          4.00        1.92          1          10
                   Debt Crisis        IDC             0
                                      LDC            72          4.00        1.92          1          10
                                      EMG            27          3.85        1.79          1           7

   Note: A twin crisis is identified when one type of crisis occurs while another type occurs in the immediate
   previous year (t0–1), the same year (t0), or the immediate following year (t0+1).


                                                     27
                            Table 1: Probit Estimations on the Probabilities of Different Types of Crisis Occurrences
                                (1) Currency   (2) Currency    (3) Currency    (4) Currency        (5) Banking   (6) Banking   (7) Banking   (8) Banking      (9) Debt       (10) Debt
                                     Full          IDC             LDC             EMG                FULL           IDC           LDC          EMG             LDC            EMG
       Relative income            0.041           0.051          0.064           0.026              -0.017         0.001         0.012         0.026          -0.108          -0.023
             (t-1)              (0.015)***       (0.035)        (0.027)**        (0.040)            (0.014)       (0.004)       (0.026)        (0.037)       (0.049)**        (0.026)
       IR holding (t-1)           -0.004         -0.156          0.001           0.008              -0.093         0.003        -0.131         -0.122         -0.124          -0.079
                                  (0.041)        (0.135)         (0.044)         (0.075)           (0.041)**      (0.016)      (0.047)***     (0.064)*       (0.050)**       (0.031)**
         Per Capita               -0.071         -0.243          -0.032          0.016              -0.124        -0.063        -0.063         -0.032         -0.134          -0.214
     Output growth (t-1)          (0.078)        (0.206)         (0.077)         (0.161)            (0.067)*      (0.053)       (0.069)        (0.115)        (0.113)        (0.088)**
    Private Credit change         0.015           0.056          0.035           0.190               0.097         0.002         0.209         0.150          -0.104          -0.070
             (t-1)                (0.067)        (0.079)         (0.088)        (0.096)**          (0.045)**      (0.012)      (0.070)***    (0.076)**        (0.128)         (0.065)
        Net Debt (t-1)            0.006          -0.004          0.021           0.052               0.008         0.005         0.007         -0.002          0.046          0.006
                                  (0.006)        (0.015)       (0.007)***       (0.023)**           (0.006)       (0.004)       (0.008)        (0.016)       (0.015)***       (0.012)
       Real Exchange              0.019           0.105          0.007           -0.004              0.005         0.010         0.003         0.011          -0.002          -0.001
     Overvaluation (t-1)         (0.010)*       (0.041)**        (0.009)         (0.020)            (0.013)       (0.008)       (0.015)        (0.020)        (0.014)         (0.011)
     Financial Exposure           -0.017         -0.023          -0.002          -0.025              0.013         0.004         0.015         0.010          -0.007          -0.012
            (t-1)               (0.006)***      (0.011)**        (0.009)         (0.019)           (0.004)***     (0.004)      (0.006)***      (0.007)        (0.016)         (0.014)
         ERS (t-1)                -0.012         -0.025          0.006           0.001               0.009        -0.002         0.009         0.020           0.035          0.016
                                  (0.011)        (0.019)         (0.012)         (0.018)            (0.009)       (0.004)       (0.011)        (0.017)       (0.016)**        (0.012)
       KAOPEN (t-1)               -0.042         -0.027          -0.024          -0.023             -0.009        -0.003        -0.011         -0.015         -0.001          -0.016
                                (0.015)***       (0.024)         (0.015)         (0.021)            (0.012)       (0.007)       (0.013)        (0.018)        (0.016)         (0.011)
     Tri. Pol. Conv (t-1)         0.001          -0.022          0.036           0.043               0.005         0.002        -0.000         0.011           0.051          0.024
                                  (0.011)        (0.014)       (0.014)***       (0.019)**           (0.010)       (0.003)       (0.013)        (0.017)       (0.017)***      (0.010)**
     Tri-Pol. Conv., SD           0.035           -0.001          0.039           0.052           0.045          0.012          0.027           0.024            0.081         0.038
          (t-5|t-1)              (0.036)          (0.053)        (0.041)         (0.057)         (0.033)        (0.012)        (0.042)         (0.056)        (0.053)13%     (0.025)11%
    Contagion: Currency           0.143            0.078          0.135           0.117          -0.050         -0.024         -0.042           0.025            0.076        -0.019
          (t or t-1)           (0.030)***        (0.047)*      (0.031)***       (0.066)*         (0.035)        (0.021)        (0.036)         (0.049)         (0.040)*       (0.045)
     Contagion: Banking           0.035           -0.034          0.055           0.093           0.124          0.027          0.073           0.089           -0.022         0.007
          (t or t-1)             (0.025)          (0.036)       (0.024)**      (0.034)***      (0.018)***       (0.026)      (0.019)***     (0.027)***          (0.038)       (0.025)
      Contagion: Debt            -0.015           -0.075         -0.003           0.046           0.005          0.046         -0.023           0.005           -0.234        -0.129
          (t or t-1)             (0.032)          (0.127)        (0.034)         (0.061)         (0.043)        (0.044)        (0.034)         (0.056)       (0.053)***     (0.034)***
       Banking Crisis             0.102                           0.107           0.124                                                                          0.030         0.027
          (t or t-1)           (0.029)***                      (0.032)***      (0.044)***                                                                       (0.024)       (0.019)
         Debt Crisis              0.007                           0.001           0.009          -0.004                        -0.006           0.011
          (t or t-1)             (0.014)                         (0.012)         (0.024)         (0.009)                       (0.010)         (0.020)
       Currency Crisis                                                                            0.056                         0.092           0.091            0.030         0.019
          (t or t-1)                                                                           (0.020)***                    (0.028)***     (0.033)***          (0.023)       (0.016)
              N                   2,407             662           1,745            932            2,372           627           1,745            906             1,562          847
Notes: The table reports the change in the probability of a crisis in response to a 1 unit change in the variable evaluated at the mean of all variables (x 100, to convert into
percentages) with associated z-statistic (for hypothesis of no effect) in parentheses below. * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors in brackets.




                                                                                              28
                                     Table 2: Output Cost of Different Types of Crises
                        Currency        Currency     Currency          Banking      Banking      Banking       Debt        Debt
                         FULL            LDC          EMG               FULL         LDC          EMG          LDC         EMG
                          (1)             (2)          (3)               (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)
  Relative income         0.003           0.818        1.371             0.064        0.673       1.299        1.931       -0.173
       (t0-1)            (0.167)         (0.393)**   (0.609)**          (0.193)      (0.431)     (0.562)**   (0.435)***    (1.151)
  IR holding(t0-1)       -0.259           -0.388      -0.453            -0.584       -0.690       0.579       -0.477       -1.837
                         (0.232)          (0.334)     (0.576)           (0.576)      (0.793)      (0.999)     (0.679)      (1.080)
   Per capita GDP        -3.340           -3.521      -0.456            -5.717       -6.004       -3.637      -2.779       -4.159
    Growth (t0-1)       (1.123)***      (1.022)***    (1.445)          (1.211)***   (1.313)***    (2.174)    (0.854)***   (1.887)**
Private Credit change     1.007           1.503        0.756             0.688        0.701       4.961       -0.612       -2.246
        (t0-1)           (0.753)          (0.907)     (1.641)           (1.026)      (2.521)     (2.801)*     (0.994)     (1.278)*
Exch. Overval.(t0-1)      0.702           0.729        0.518            -0.057       -0.060       0.286        0.231       0.215
                        (0.154)***      (0.195)***    (0.262)*          (0.098)      (0.126)      (0.246)    (0.104)**     (0.246)
   Net Debt(t0-1)        -0.025           0.151        1.071            -0.059       -0.213       0.564        0.204       0.313
                         (0.158)          (0.193)    (0.403)**          (0.101)      (0.208)     (0.300)*     (0.144)      (0.435)
 Financial exposure       0.057           0.049        0.266             0.074        0.322       0.778       -0.083       -0.036
       (t0-1)            (0.157)          (0.161)     (0.367)          (0.033)**     (0.276)      (0.595)     (0.141)      (0.312)
 Deposit Insurance       -0.105           -0.116      -0.128            -0.282       -0.379       -0.269      -0.169       0.092
       (t0-1)            (0.073)          (0.093)     (0.130)          (0.102)***   (0.134)***    (0.231)     (0.099)*     (0.134)
     ERS (t0-1)          -0.254           -0.244      -0.289            -0.126       -0.161       -0.613      -0.097       -0.002
                         (0.132)*         (0.173)     (0.238)           (0.159)      (0.208)      (0.353)     (0.141)      (0.325)
  KAOPEN (t0-1)           0.133           0.142        0.516             0.214        0.217       0.324        0.080       0.332
                         (0.123)          (0.123)    (0.190)**          (0.151)      (0.197)      (0.351)     (0.205)      (0.273)
Tri.Pol.Conv, d(t0-1)    -0.199           -0.279      -0.553            -0.176       -0.281       -0.334      -0.049       0.118
                         (0.100)*        (0.142)*    (0.198)***         (0.121)      (0.195)      (0.277)     (0.128)      (0.296)
 Tri-Pol. Conv., SD       0.160           0.097        0.445            -0.217       -0.773       -1.322      -0.138       -0.690
       (t-5|t-1)         (0.339)          (0.402)     (0.613)           (0.337)      (0.605)      (0.966)     (0.446)      (0.866)
   Banking Crisis         0.215           0.229        0.022                                                   0.205       0.049
  (t0-1, t0, or t0+1)   (0.090)**        (0.102)**    (0.147)                                                 (0.140)      (0.223)
     Debt Crisis          0.118           0.023        0.172             0.099        0.083       0.265
  (t0-1, t0, or t0+1)    (0.126)          (0.131)     (0.154)           (0.130)      (0.159)      (0.178)
  Currency Crisis                                                        0.252        0.252       -0.184       0.116       0.170
  (t0-1, t0, or t0+1)                                                  (0.100)**    (0.121)**     (0.190)     (0.132)      (0.240)
    Adjusted R2           0.47             0.53        0.37              0.28         0.27         0.40        0.40         0.22
           N              126               95          56                92           69           36         130           41

Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. The dummy for the debt crisis of 1982 and the Asian financial crisis of 1997-98, and the global
financial crisis of 2008-10 are also included, but not reported. The estimates for the constant term are also omitted. The terms of trade shocks
variable is removed from the currency crisis output loss estimations since it is persistently statistically insignificant.




                                                                  29
     Table 3: Determinants of the Degree of Trilemma Policy Divergence
                                Full               IDC             LDC              EMG
                                (1)                 (2)             (3)              (4)
          d (t-1)                0.828           0.914             0.761              0.753
                             (0.012)***       (0.017)***        (0.016)***        (0.024)***
     Relative income             0.028            0.043             0.003             0.034
                              (0.014)**         (0.059)           (0.027)           (0.048)
        IR hodling              -0.072            0.046            -0.034            -0.100
       (% of GDP)             (0.036)**         (0.156)           (0.041)           (0.083)
     Trade openness              0.023          -0.001             0.029             0.048
       (% of GDP)             (0.010)**         (0.028)         (0.011)***         (0.022)**
   Share of the economy          0.637            0.099             0.339             0.651
                             (0.195)***         (0.237)           (0.614)           (0.714)
       Manufacturer             -0.011           0.012            -0.024             -0.059
                               (0.008)          (0.025)         (0.009)***        (0.016)***
           EMU                   0.030            0.018             0.037             0.054
                              (0.012)**         (0.015)           (0.032)           (0.041)
     Currency crisis in         -0.015           -0.001            -0.014            -0.022
         (t-5|t-1)           (0.005)***         (0.010)         (0.005)***        (0.008)***
     Banking crisis in           0.001           -0.000             0.002            -0.000
         (t-5|t-1)             (0.004)          (0.008)           (0.004)           (0.007)
      Debt crisis in             0.000                              0.001             0.000
         (t-5|t-1)             (0.003)                            (0.003)           (0.004)
            R2                    0.75             0.87             0.62              0.63
             N                   2,703             701             2,002              1,000

NOTES: Robust standard errors in brackets * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%. The dummy for ERM countries is assigned for the countries and years that corresponds to participation
in the ERM (i.e., Belgium, Germany, France, Ireland, Italy, and Luxembourg from 1979 on; Spain from
1989; U.K. only for 1990-91; Portugal from 1992; Austria from 1995; Finland from 1996; and Denmark
and Greece from 1999) or ERM II (Estonia, Lithuania, and Slovenia from 2004; and Cyprus, Latvia, Malta,
and Slovak Rep. from 2005).




                                              30
             Table 4: Effects of Past Crises on the Degree of Trilemma Policy Divergence
 Singular effect of Crisis
 Full                               t-1    t-2      t-3      t-4      t-5     t-6    t-7     t-8      t-9    t-10
        Currency                          -0.065                     -0.038
        Banking
        Debt
 Industrialized countries           t-1    t-2      t-3      t-4      t-5     t-6    t-7     t-8      t-9    t-10
        Currency                                                                    0.075
        Banking                                                                             -0.169
        Debt                        --      --       --       --       --     --     --       --      --      --
 Developing countries               t-1    t-2      t-3      t-4      t-5     t-6    t-7     t-8      t-9    t-10
        Currency                          -0.066
        Banking
        Debt
 Emerging markets                   t-1    t-2      t-3      t-4      t-5     t-6    t-7     t-8      t-9    t-10
        Currency                          -0.071
        Banking                                                      -0.082
        Debt                                                                                -0.084

 Twin Crises (‘Marginal’ Effects)
 Full                               t-1    t-2      t-3      t-4      t-5     t-6    t-7     t-8      t-9    t-10
        Currency & Banking                -0.081
        Currency & Debt                                     -0.060
        Banking & Debt                                                                               0.093
 Industrialized countries           t-1    t-2      t-3      t-4      t-5     t-6    t-7     t-8      t-9    t-10
        Currency & Banking                                  0.384
        --                          --      --       --       --       --     --     --       --      --      --
        --                          --      --       --       --       --     --     --       --      --      --
 Developing countries               t-1    t-2      t-3      t-4      t-5     t-6    t-7     t-8      t-9    t-10
        Currency & Banking                         -0.110
        Currency & Debt                                     -0.066                  0.103
        Banking & Debt                                                                               0.097
 Emerging markets                   t-1    t-2      t-3      t-4      t-5     t-6    t-7     t-8      t-9    t-10
        Currency & Banking                         -0.137
        Currency & Debt                                     -0.106
        Banking & Debt                    0.135             0.193

Notes: The upper half of the table reports only the significant weighted autoregressive estimates for the crisis
dummies based on estimation equation (4). It must be noted that the estimation model does not include the
twin crisis dummies. The bottom half of the table displays significant autoregressive estimates only for the
(weighted) twin crisis dummies. The estimates on the (weighted) twin crisis dummies should be regarded as
the marginal effect of past twin crises because the estimation model controls for the (weighted) autoregressive
crisis dummies (though the estimates are not reported). Because there is no debt crisis episode for the
industrialized countries in the sample, the estimate of the debt crisis or the estimates of currency and debt or
banking and debt twin crises are unavailable for the group of industrialized countries.



                                                            31
    Table 5: Effects of Past Output Losses on the Degree of Trilemma Policy Divergence
 Singular effect of Crisis
 Full                               t-1    t-2      t-3      t-4      t-5     t-6     t-7      t-8      t-9      t-10
        Currency                          -0.081                     -0.044
        Banking
        Debt
 Developing countries               t-1    t-2      t-3      t-4      t-5     t-6     t-7      t-8      t-9      t-10
        Currency                0.039     -0.080                     -0.080
        Banking
        Debt
 Emerging markets                   t-1    t-2      t-3      t-4      t-5     t-6     t-7      t-8      t-9      t-10
        Currency                          -0.072                     -0.084                           -0.119
        Banking                                                                                        0.125
        Debt

 Twin Crises (‘Marginal’ Effects)

 Full                               t-1    t-2      t-3      t-4      t-5     t-6     t-7      t-8      t-9      t-10
        Currency & Banking                         -0.082
        Currency & Debt                                     -0.071                   0.161
        Banking & Debt
 Developing countries               t-1    t-2      t-3      t-4      t-5     t-6     t-7      t-8      t-9      t-10
        Currency & Banking                -0.076   -0.114                           -0.111
        Currency & Debt                                     -0.083                   0.191
        Banking & Debt                                      0.089
 Emerging markets                   t-1    t-2      t-3      t-4      t-5     t-6     t-7      t-8      t-9      t-10
        Currency & Banking                         -0.118            -0.190         -0.217
        Currency & Debt                                     -0.123                   0.229
        Banking & Debt                                      0.205
Notes: The upper half of the table reports only the significant autoregressive estimates for the weighted dummies for
crises with output losses. It must be noted that the estimation model does not include the dummies for twin crises
with output losses. The bottom half of the table displays significant autoregressive estimates only for the dummies
for twin crises with output losses. Because the estimation model controls for the (weighted) autoregressive dummies
for the crises with output losses (though not reported), the estimates on the dummies for twin crises with output
losses should be regarded as the marginal effect of past twin crises with output losses.




                                                            32
                           Figure 1: The Trilemma Triangle


                                   Floating exchange
                                      rate regime
                                    e.g., Japan, Canada




  Financially closed             Exchange Rate Stability           Monetary Union /
       system                                                      Currency Board
   e.g., Bretton Woods                                             e.g. Euro, Gold Stand.,
                                                                   Hong Kong


Figure 2: Degree of Policy Dispersions among Different Income Groups of Countries
 1.6
 1.4
 1.2
 1
 .8
 .6




       1970               1980                1990                 2000                2010
                                             Year

                   Non-Euro Adv. Econ                     Euro Econ. minus Germany
                   Non-EMG LDC                            Emerging Market Economies
       Note: 'Euro economies' include Austria, Beligium, France, Italy, Netherlands,
       Finland, Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain



                                            33
Figure 3: Degree of Policy Dispersions among Different Regional Country Groups


    1.6
    1.4
    1.2
    1
    .8
    .6




          1970              1980               1990              2000               2010
                                              Year

                       Emerging Asia                              Developing Asia
                       Latin America and Carribbeans              Others
          Note: 'Emerging Asia' include China, Hong Kong, Korea, Indonesia, Thailand,
          Malaysia, Philippines, and Singapore




                                            34
       Figure 4: Average of the Measure of Relative policy divergence over Currency Crisis
                                                                                            (a) Total
                                                                      Average of d: IDC(43), LDC(159),EMG(75)




                                                     1.05
                                                     1 .95
                                                 Avg. of d
                                                .9   .85


                                                             -3          -2           -1               0                 1          2           3
                                                                                                     years

                                                                              Industrial countries                      Developing countries
                                                                              EMG countries




                   (b) Output Loss vs. No Output Loss                                                                         (c) High or Low IR Holding
                      Avg. of d - Output Loss: LDC(96),EMG(52)                                                                 Avg. of d - IR High: LDC(64),EMG(30)
      1.05




                                                                                                           1.05
      1




                                                                                                           1
  Avg. of d




                                                                                                       Avg. of d
    .95




                                                                                                         .95
      .9




                                                                                                           .9
      .85




                                                                                                           .85




              -3        -2         -1          0                  1            2            3                      -3          -2          -1          0     1           2       3
                                             years                                                                                                   years

                             Developing countries                     EMG countries                                                  Developing countries        EMG countries




                    Avg. of d - No Output Loss: LDC(57),EMG(22)                                                                Avg. of d - IR Low: LDC(89),EMG(45)
      1.05




                                                                                                           1.05
                                                                                                           1
      1
  Avg. of d




                                                                                                       Avg. of d
                                                                                                         .95
    .95




                                                                                                           .9
      .9




                                                                                                           .85
      .85




              -3        -2         -1          0                  1            2            3                      -3          -2          -1          0     1           2       3
                                             years                                                                                                   years

                             Developing countries                     EMG countries                                                  Developing countries        EMG countries


Note: The figures in parentheses indicate the number of countries included in the averaging.




                                                                                                35
             Figure 5: Average of the Measure of Relative policy divergence over Banking Crisis
                                                                                                           (a) Total
                                                                                  Average of d: IDC(23), LDC(98),EMG(44)




                                                             1.2
                                                               1.1
                                                         Avg. of d
                                                         1   .9
                                                             .8
                                                                     -3            -2             -1              0                   1             2          3
                                                                                                                years

                                                                                         Industrial countries                        Developing countries
                                                                                         EMG countries




                      (b) Output Loss vs. No Output Loss                                                                                      (c) High or Low IR Holding
                        Avg. of d - Output Loss: LDC(64),EMG(33)                                                                              Avg. of d - IR High: LDC(39),EMG(18)
     1.05




                                                                                                                       1.05
     1




                                                                                                                       1
     .95




                                                                                                                 .85 .9 .95
 Avg. of d




                                                                                                                   Avg. of d
 .85 .9
     .8




                                                                                                                       .8
     .75




                                                                                                                       .75
     .7




                                                                                                                       .7




                -3        -2          -1          0                  1               2                 3                        -3            -2              -1          0      1           2       3
                                                years                                                                                                                   years

                                Developing countries                         EMG countries                                                              Developing countries         EMG countries




                        Avg. of d - No Output Loss: LDC(32),EMG(10)                                                                            Avg. of d - IR Low: LDC(55),EMG(26)
         1.05




                                                                                                                        1.05
         1




                                                                                                                        1
         .95




                                                                                                                        .95
    Avg. of d




                                                                                                                    Avg. of d
    .85 .9




                                                                                                                    .85 .9
         .8




                                                                                                                        .8
         .75




                                                                                                                        .75
         .7




                                                                                                                        .7




                 -3        -2          -1          0                     1               2                 3                    -3             -2             -1           0     1           2       3
                                                 years                                                                                                                   years

                                 Developing countries                         EMG countries                                                             Developing countries         EMG countries


Note: The figures in parentheses indicate the number of countries included in the averaging.




                                                                                                               36
                     Figure 6: Average of the Measure of Relative policy divergence over Debt Crisis
                                                                                                    (a) Total
                                                                                 Average of d: LDC(189),EMG(48)




                                                       1.05
                                                       1
                                                   Avg. of d
                                                     .95
                                                       .9
                                                       .85



                                                               -3           -2             -1           0                   1           2             3
                                                                                                      years

                                                                                     Developing countries                       EMG countries




                  (b) Output Loss vs. No Output Loss                                                                              (c) High or Low IR Holding
                     Avg. of d - Output Loss: LDC(89),EMG(35)                                                                      Avg. of d - IR High: LDC(70),EMG(14)
     1.05




                                                                                                              1.05
                                                                                                              1
     1
 Avg. of d




                                                                                                          Avg. of d
                                                                                                               .95
   .95




                                                                                                              .9
     .9




                                                                                                              .85
     .85




             -3        -2         -1          0                     1            2              3                      -3          -2            -1          0     1            2       3
                                            years                                                                                                          years

                            Developing countries                        EMG countries                                                    Developing countries           EMG countries




                   Avg. of d - No Output Loss: LDC(89),EMG(13)                                                                   Avg. of d - IR Low: LDC(113),EMG(34)
     1.05




                                                                                                            1.05
     1




                                                                                                            1
 Avg. of d




                                                                                                       Avg. of d
   .95




                                                                                                        .95
     .9




                                                                                                            .9
     .85




                                                                                                            .85




             -3        -2         -1          0                     1            2              3                     -3          -2            -1          0      1           2        3
                                            years                                                                                                         years

                            Developing countries                        EMG countries                                                   Developing countries           EMG countries


Note: The figures in parentheses indicate the number of countries included in the averaging.




                                                                                                     37
Figure 9: Average Deviations from the Means (i.e., :                                                                          _                   ,    _                                , and                                 _                                   ) over Currency Crisis
                                                                                                                                             (a) Total
                           Average of MI_r: IDC(47), LDC(173),EMG(76)                                                Average of ERS_r: IDC(47), LDC(176),EMG(76)                                                          Average of FAO_r: IDC(43), LDC(160),EMG(75)


             1.3




                                                                                                     1.1




                                                                                                                                                                                         1 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6
                                                                                                     1
             1.2




                                                                                                          .9




                                                                                                                                                                                         Avg. of fao_r
                                                                                              Avg. of ers_r
       Avg. of mi_r
               1.1




                                                                                                   .8
        1




                                                                                             .7




                                                                                                                                                                                                      .9
             .9




                                                                                                     .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                      .8
             .8




                                                                                                     .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                      .7
                      -3      -2           -1               0      1           2         3                      -3       -2             -1             0      1           2         3                                -3       -2           -1               0        1           2         3
                                                          years                                                                                      years                                                                                                years

                                   Industrial countries           Developing countries                                        Industrial countries           Developing countries                                                  Industrial countries             Developing countries
                                   EMG countries                                                                              EMG countries                                                                                        EMG countries



                                                                                                                      (b) Those with output losses
                               Average of MI_r: LDC(102),EMG(52)                                                         Average of ERS_r: LDC(102),EMG(52)                                                                   Average of FAO_r: LDC(96),EMG(52)
             1.3




                                                                                                     1.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                     1
             1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                       .9
                                                                                                           .9




                                                                                                                                                                                         Avg. of fao_r
                                                                                               Avg. of ers_r
       Avg. of mi_r
               1.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                  .8
                                                                                                    .8




                                                                                                                                                                                           .7
        1




                                                                                             .7




                                                                                                                                                                                                      .6
             .9




                                                                                                     .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                      .5
             .8




                                                                                                     .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                      .4
                      -3      -2           -1               0      1           2         3                      -3       -2             -1             0      1           2         3                                -3       -2           -1               0        1           2         3
                                                          years                                                                                      years                                                                                                years

                                     Developing countries              EMG countries                                              Developing countries            EMG countries                                                      Developing countries                EMG countries



                                                                                                                     (c) Those without output losses
                               Average of MI_r: LDC(61),EMG(23)                                                          Average of ERS_r: LDC(62),EMG(23)                                                                    Average of FAO_r: LDC(57),EMG(22)
             1.3




                                                                                                     1.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                     1
             1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                       .9
                                                                                                           .9




                                                                                                                                                                                         Avg. of fao_r
                                                                                               Avg. of ers_r
       Avg. of mi_r
               1.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                  .8
                                                                                                    .8




                                                                                                                                                                                           .7
        1




                                                                                             .7




                                                                                                                                                                                                      .6
             .9




                                                                                                     .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                      .5
             .8




                                                                                                     .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                      .4
                      -3      -2           -1               0      1           2         3                      -3       -2             -1             0      1           2         3                                -3       -2           -1               0        1           2         3
                                                          years                                                                                      years                                                                                                years

                                     Developing countries              EMG countries                                              Developing countries            EMG countries                                                      Developing countries                EMG countries




                                                                                                                                                38
Figure 10: Average Deviations from the Means (i.e., :                                                                                                                   _                  ,   _                                           , and                                     _                                  ) over Banking Crisis
                                                                                                                                                                                     (a) Total
                                          Average of MI_r: IDC(24), LDC(103),EMG(45)                                                                        Average of ERS_r: IDC(24), LDC(114),EMG(48)                                                                         Average of FAO_r: IDC(25), LDC(104),EMG(46)

             1.2




                                                                                                                               1.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                               1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8
             1




                                                                                                                                    .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Avg. of fao_r
                                                                                                                        Avg. of ers_r
       Avg. of mi_r
                .8




                                                                                                                             .8
        .6




                                                                                                                       .7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
             .4




                                                                                                                               .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .8
             .2




                                                                                                                               .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .6
                          -3                 -2            -1               0          1          2            3                              -3                  -2           -1               0          1          2            3                                 -3             -2           -1               0         1            2          3
                                                                          years                                                                                                               years                                                                                                             years

                                                   Industrial countries               Developing countries                                                             Industrial countries               Developing countries                                                           Industrial countries              Developing countries
                                                   EMG countries                                                                                                       EMG countries                                                                                                     EMG countries



                                                                                                                                                                 (b) Those with output losses
                                                  Average of MI_r: LDC(69),EMG(34)                                                                                Average of ERS_r: LDC(75),EMG(36)                                                                                 Average of FAO_r: LDC(67),EMG(35)
               1.2




                                                                                                                                 1.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .9
                   1.1




                                                                                                                                       .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Avg. of fao_r
                                                                                                                           Avg. of ers_r
        Avg. of mi_r




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .8
                                                                                                                                .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .7
                                                                                                                         .7
               1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .6
                                                                                                                                 .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .5
               .9




                                                                                                                                 .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                           -3                 -2            -1              0          1           2           3                                -3                -2            -1              0          1           2           3                              -3                -2           -1           0            1            2           3
                                                                          years                                                                                                               years                                                                                                         years

                                                     Developing countries                  EMG countries                                                                 Developing countries                  EMG countries                                                              Developing countries                  EMG countries



                                                                                                                                                            (c) Those without output losses
                                                     Average of MI_r: LDC(32),EMG(10)                                                                                  Average of ERS_r: LDC(33),EMG(10)                                                                                 Average of FAO_r: LDC(33),EMG(10)
                                                                                                                                                 1.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                 1
                            1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .9
                                                                                                                                                       .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Avg. of fao_r
                                                                                                                                           Avg. of ers_r
                      Avg. of mi_r




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .8
                           1.1




                                                                                                                                                .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .7
                                                                                                                                         .7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .6
                            1




                                                                                                                                                 .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .5
                            .9




                                                                                                                                                 .5




                                     -3            -2            -1             0          1           2           3                                        -3         -2            -1             0          1           2           3                           .4          -3        -2           -1             0          1            2          3
                                                                              years                                                                                                               years                                                                                                            years

                                                          Developing countries                 EMG countries                                                                  Developing countries                 EMG countries                                                              Developing countries                  EMG countries




                                                                                                                                                                                          39
Figure 11: Average of the Measure of Relative policy divergence for Latin America and Asia

                           Average of d: LAMERICA (12) and Asia (5)

             1.1
             1
             .9
         Avg. of d
         .7  .6
             .5
             .4.8




                     -5   -4   -3     -2     -1      0       1       2          3   4       5
                                                   years

                                           Latin America                 Asia



      Notes: “Latin America” includes: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Columbia, Costa Rica,
      Ecuador, El Salvador, Honduras, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela. “Asia” includes:
      Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thailand. For each of the Latin American
      countries, “Year 0” indicates the year when the crisis is the most severe among the years: 1981.
      1982, and 1983, i.e., it varies among the countries. For the Asian countries, “Year 0” is 1997.




                                                  40
Figure 12: Average Deviations from the Means (i.e., : _          ,    _                            , and
                    _            ) for Latin America (a) and Asia (b)

                                                (a) Latin America
                 1.4
                 1.2
                   1
         Avg. of d
            .8   .6
                 .4
                 .2




                           -5   -4   -3    -2     -1      0       1    2      3        4    5
                                                        years

                                          Monetary Indep.             Exch. R. Stab.
                                          Financial Op.



                                                       (b) Asia
               1 1.2 1.4
         Avg. of d
         .8      .6
                 .4
                 .2




                           -5   -4   -3    -2     -1      0       1    2      3        4    5
                                                        years

                                          Monetary Indep.             Exch. R. Stab.
                                          Financial Op.

     Notes: “Latin America” includes: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Columbia, Costa Rica, Ecuador,
     El Salvador, Honduras, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela. “Asia” includes: Indonesia, Korea,
     Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thailand. For each of the Latin American countries, “Year 0” indicates
     the year when the crisis is the most severe among the years: 1981. 1982, and 1983, i.e., it varies
     among the countries. For the Asian countries, “Year 0” is 1997.

                                                       41
