                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     INTERNATIONAL LENDING AND
                     BORROWING IN A STOCHASTIC
                        SEQUENCE EQUILIBRIUM




                         Richard H. Clarida




                       Working Paper No. 1944




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             June 1986




I would like to thank Truman Bowley, Willem Buiter, Russ Cooper,
Roger Farmer, Tom Sargent as well as members of workshops at
Harvard, the Cowles Foundation, and Penn for their comments on an
earlier draft. Financial support from the National Science
Foundation Grant SES-642g227 is acknowledged with thanks. All
remaining errors are my responsibility. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               Working Paper #1944
                                               June 1986




  International Lending and Borrowing in a Stochastic Sequence Equilibrium




                                  ABSTRACT



     This paper is a theoretical investigation of international lending and

borrowing in the context of a general equilibrium model in which national

productivities are subject to random fluctuations and rates of time

preference differ among countries. International capital flows arise from

the efforts of risk—averse households situated in different countries to

self—insure against random productivity fluctuations. We establish the

existence of a rational expectations equilibrium in 'which the world

interest rate is constant and strictly less than the rate of time

preference of the least impatient countries. The rate of time preference,

solvency restrictions on borrowing, and balanced—budget fiscal policies are

rigorously analyzed.




                                             Richard H. Clarida
                                             The Cowles Foundation
                                             Yale University
                                             Box 2125, Yale Station
                                             New Haven, CT 06520
                      INTERN.(TIONAL LENDING AND BORROWING

                      IN A STOCHASTIC SEQUENCE EQUILIBRIUM


                                        by

                              Richard   H. Clarida*


1. Introduction
    This paper is a   theoretical investigation of international lending and

borrowing in a stochastic sequence equilibrium, It shares with recent

research on the determinants of the current account by Sache (1982), Obst—

feld   (1982, 1983), and Dornbusch (1983) its emphasis on the intertemporal

consumption and savings choices of infinitely lived, optimizing house—
      1
holds. However, in contrast to the deterministic, partial equilibrium

approach taken by the above authors, we      study   international lending and

borrowing in the context of a general equilibrium model in which national

productivities are subject to random fluctuations. Rates of time prefer-

ence and levels of lump sum taxation differ among countries. Countries

have access to world bond market and face a borrowing limit which

precludes bankruptcy with probability one.2 International lending and

borrowing arise in the stochastic sequence equilibrium we study from

the efforts of risk—averse households situated in different countries to

self—insure against random productivity fluctuations by accumulating in

relatively productive periods financial claims against the rest of the


                                        1
                                          2



world which can be used to finance a less variable profile of consumption

relative to output when    productivity   is unexpectedly low.

     The analysis is adopted from the work of Bewley (1984) and employs the

device of a continuum of countries subject to independently and identic-

ally distributed productivity shocks, A number of interesting results are

obtained. The equilibrium world interest rate is constant and strictly

less than the rate of time preference of the least impatient countries.

The equilibrium distribution of net foreign asset holdings among countries

is non—degenerate and stationary. Individual countries in general run

current account imbalances, and thus decumulate or accumulate foreign

assets, as national productivities are continually shocked. However, in

equilibrium, the fraction of countries with net foreign asset holdings

less than or equal to any particular value is constant over time. In

particular, we show that there is a constant fraction of countries which

exhaust their debt limits in each period and exhibit a zero correlation

between unanticipated, transitory productivity shocks and their current

account balances.

     The stochastic steady—state properties of equilibrium consumption, the

current account, the trade balance, and net foreign asset holdings in each

country are completely characterized by stationary probability distribu-

tions which depend on the aversion to risk and rate of time preference of

the representative household, the probability distribution of productivity

shocks, and the equilibrium rate of interest. While the expected

asymptotic     current account balance is zero in each country, the expected
asymptotic trade balance, consumption, and      net   foreign asset holdings will
in   general   depend upon preferences and the probability distribution of
productivity     shocks. We obtain the intuitive results that low time
                                          3



 preference countries run expected asymptotic trade balance deficits,

 service   account surpluses, and   achieve   higher expected asymptotic
 consumption   relative to their high time preference counterparts. In the

 special case in which all countries share the identical rate of time

 preference, the expected asymptotic trade balance and net foreign asset

 holdings are zero and expected asymptotic consumption equals mean output.

       We also investigate the influence of lump sum taxes, collected to

 finance government consumption which does not enter agents' utility

 functions, on the stochastic steady—state in each country. In the special

case in which all governments levy the same lump sum tax, the results are

unsurprising: expected asymptotic private consumption in each country

falls by the amount of the tax and the        expected asymptotic trade balance
and   foreign asset holdings are unaffected relative to the no tax (and

thus,   no government consumption) case. However, if tax rates differ among

countries,   we establish that expected asymptotic private consumption in
each    country falls by the averase lump sum tax across all countries. This

implies that 'high tax' economies run expected asymptotic trade deficits

and service account surpluses relative to their 'low tax' counterparts.

      Sach (1982) and Obatfeld (1983) investigate     international   lending and

borrowing   in the   context of a small open economy populated by a

representative, infinitely lived household who discounts utility at a

constant rate of time preference and who can borrow completely against a

deterministic output sequence at a    constant,    exgenous rate of interest.

In this set up, a steady—state exists 1ff the exogenous world interest

rate equals the rate of time preference. Household preferences for a flat

consumption profile induce current account deficits (surpluses) in periods

of below (above) average productivity. Furthermore, as emphasized by
                                      4



Sachs (1982), consumption is constant and equal to permanent income in

each period and the stock of net foreign assets converges asymptotically

to its initial level so that, if output converges to its permanent income

level, the trade balance converges to the additive inverse of the interest

income on initial foreign asset holdings. Of course, if the world is

comprised of countries with different rates of time preference, there

cannot be a steady—state with international capital mobility in the

deterministic case. Lucas (1982, part 2) studies a two—country Arrow—

Debreu equilibrium model which features Markovian fluctuations in the

national outputs of imperfectly substitutable goods. Although his primary

concern is with asset pricing in the open economy, the strong implication

of the risk pooling equilibrium studied by Lucas is that current account

balances are zero in each period because countries hold identical

portfolios in every period.

    The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 2 establishes the

existence of a stationary, rational expectations equilibrium. Section 3

investigates the correlation between unanticipated productivity shocks and

the current account. Sections 4 and 5     establish,   respectively, the links

between   time preference and lump sum taxation and the stochastic steady

state behavior of consumption, the trade balance, and foreign asset

holdings. Section 6 provides some concluding remarks.
                                           5




 2.    The Model

 2.1, Overview and Assumetions

       We study a world economy with a continuum of countries indexed

 i      [0,1] ,    each populated by a representative trader with an infinite

 planning horizon. Each trader has access to a stochastic, kicardian

 technology which transforms labor into the single, tradable consumption

 good. We assume that labor is not mobile internationally and that no

 utility is attached to leisure,3 Time is discrete, and at the beginning

 of each period t = 0, 1, 2, ,.. ,       the labor input requirement in each
country is randomly shocked. These shocks are assumed to be independently

and identically distributed across countries and across time so that, with

a continuum of countries, there is no aggregate uncertainty.4       Normalizing
the labor endowment in each country to unity so that we may speak of out-

put and productivity interchangeably, the output of consumption goods in

country     i     at date t may be written as


             i          i
(1)




      is a deterministic, constant lower bound on the productivity of labor

in each country and e is the stochastic productivity shock in i             at

t .    Formally,         is a drawing from a finite set of a non—negative

random variable from the fixed cd,f. G such that G(0) > 0 and
0(c) = 1

      Countries have access to a world capital market in one—period bonds

and are allowed to borrow in amounts which can be repaid with probabLlity

one. However, in contrast to the recent work of Lucas (1982), we assume

that Arrow—Debreu contingent claims markets do not exist.      Although we do
                                      6



not rigorously derive this restricted market structure, we argue, as have

Lucas (1980), Bewley (1980c), and Scheinkman and Weiss (1984) in related

closed—economy constructs, that it captures apparently important pre-

cautionary and self—insurance considerations which underlie the lending,

borrowing, and consumption decisions of 'liquidity constrained' house-

holds. This being said, let a denote the net holdings of foreign claims

maturing in period t purchased last period by country i ,     and let

Pt = 1 +   r   be the gross rate of return on these claims.

    To establish the existence of stationary, rational expectations

sequence equilibrium, we begin by examining the partial equilibrium

consumption and accumulation behavior of a representative country

confronting a constant rate of interest, i.i.d. productivity fluctuations,

and a deterministic limit on borrowing which precludes bankruptcy with

probability one. Schechtman and Escudero (1977) prove the existence of a

stationary distribution for wealth in the special case in which borrowing

is not allowed and the rate of interest is zero, and show that the wealth

accumulation process is bounded above if the rate of interest is strictly

less than the rate of time preference and the elasticity of marginal

utility is bounded above. Clarida (1985) establishes that these latter

conditions are sufficient to insure the existence of a stationary

distribution for asset holdings in the more general case in which lending

and borrowing (in amounts which can be repaid with probability one) are

allowed at a constant rate of interest. Bewley (1984) proves that the

mean of this distribution is a continuous function of the interest rate

and that there exists at least one interest rate, strictly less than the

rate of time preference, at which the mean of this distribution is zero.

    In a world with homogeneous preferences, a continuum of countries, and
                                             7




 i,i.d, shocks, the per—country supply of loans is given by the mean of the

 stationary distribution for lending if loans are initially distributed

 among countries according to this distribution. As Bewley shows, these

 results together imply that there exists at least one stationary rational

 expectations sequence equilibrium in which the rate of interest is

 constant and the per—capita excess demand for goods and net supply of

 loans is zero in every period. We extend in an entirely straightforward

 manner Bewley's existence argument to incorporate heterogeneous rates of
 time   preference   and, in Section 5, rates of lump sum    taxation   among
 countries.


 22. keuresentative Country's Ootisdzation Problem

       The representative country confronting a constant rate of interest r

 acts so as to



(2)           max E(1+6ytu(ct)
            (ct)to

(3)        s.t. c +              (1+r)a +

(4)
                          a
(5)
                          ct.O

Here      = (1+6)1     is the discount factor and 6        [,6] is the positive
rate of time preference, u :          —)   K is   a bounded, strictly concave, and

twice differentiable utility function shared by all agents, and           c is
consumption at t •      We   assume that   all countries confront (4), an

institutional restriction on borrowing which precludes bankruptcy with

probability one.

      In this simple set up, the current account is equal to domestic
                                                      8




savings, s ,              since   investment spending is, for simplicity, ignored:5


(6)
               S      ai      —
                                  a = ra   +      —




The trade balance,                   is just the difference between output and

consumption:




      Let   v(w; r; 6) be the value of (2) for a country facing interest
rate r beginning the period with wealth w ,                      where


(8)         wpa+y+I/r.
The    trader in this country makes a             consumption/lending decision which

solves


(9)     v(w;   r; 6) = max{u(c)         + fv(p(w—c) + s')dG(e'))         ,   0   c   jw


Denote the optimal consumption                 decision by c(w; r; 6) and note from (3)

and    (8) that the implied optimal lending/borrowing decision                   is   given by

(10)           a' =   w   —
                              c(w; r; 6) —   hr       'f(w; r; 6; z)

The existence and             several   key properties of v and c are established in

Schechtman and Esoudero (1977) and Clarida (1985) and are now                         stated
without     proof.
                                                          9



Proposition 2.1 [Schechtman and Escudero (1977) Property 1.3, p 153,

Theorem 1.2, p. 154,          Theorem 3.4, p. 59; Clarids (1985), Proposition

2.1. 6]: There exists a unique, bounded, continuous, strictly increasing,

 strictly increasing function a which solves (9). For all 0 , w                            ..
           A                                          6
where w6 is the unique              solution      to



(11)           u'() = pfu'(c')dG(e')              ;




optimal consumption is given by


(12)           c(w; r; 6)     w

For all w > 'r            optimal   consumption satisfies


(13)           u'(c(w)) =   pfv'(p(w      —   c(w)) + e')dG(e')

       From the strict concavity of v and u                    ,    it   follows that optimal

lending (w; r; 8; z)              is   a unique, continuous, and           strictly
increasing function for w                     .   Furthermore, for 0 1         w   .

(14)           (w; r; 6; z) =


That is, there exists a threshold level of wealth, '                        , at which it is
optimal    to exhaust the borrowing limit so long as r < 6

       For a given rate of interest, the decision rule c(w; r; 8)                      ,   the
transition equation                    p(w —      c)       +       , and   the c.df. 6
together define a Markov process for wealth


(15)                  =      — c(w;     r; 6)) +
               wt+i
                                          10




The following proposition, which is proved in the appendix, establishes

the existence of a unique limiting distribution for wealth which is

independent of initial wealth (and thus initial asset holdings).


Proposition 2.2 [Schechtman and Escudero (1977), Theorem 3.8, P. 161 and

Theorem 3.4, p. 59; Clarida (1985), Theorem 2.1, p. 9—13]: If r < &

and —cu''/u' < , wealth is a delayed renewal process with state w = 0
the renewal point. There exists a unique stationary distribution for

wealth, denoted F(w; r; 6) ,       which is independent of initial

wealth. Furthermore


(16)        F(0; r; 6) > 0


Corollary 2.3: Under the conditions of Proposition 2.2, end—of—period

asset holdings evolve according to a delayed renewal process with state

a —hr the renewal point. There exists a unique stationary

distribution for assets, denoted X(a; r; 6; x) which is indepen-

dent of initial assets. Furthermore (see Figure 1)


(17)        X(—yjr; r; 6; z) > 0


Proof: End—of—period foreign asset holdings are a continuous, monotonic

function of beginning—of—poriod wealth                     r; 6; ) . Thus

X(—jr; r; 6; z) =     F(;    r; 6) ,   and for a' > —yjr

X(a'; r; 6; )      F((a'; r; 6; z)) since            is strictly

increasing for w >       .   Q.E.D.

       Key properties of the mean of the stationary distribution of asset

holdings are established in Bewley (1984) and are now stated without

proof.
                                              11




 Provosition 2.4 [Buley (1984), Loma            17,   p. 8 (Section 2), Lemma      24,   p.

 19 (Section 2), Proposition 6, p. 1 (Section 4)]:


 (18)            (i) E(aIX(a; r; 8; z)) is a continuous function

                        of r if 0 < r < 6 ;

 (19)           (ii) urn E(aJX(a; r; 8; z)
                      rl8

 (20)           (iii) urn E(alX(a; r; 6; z) —
                      r40

2.3. Existence of a Stationary. Rational Expectations Eanilibriun

        We shall assume, to simplify the exposition, that there are two rates

of time preference             and 6 ,   with      0 < . < & ,   exhibited   in the world

econorny. Let       a    be the strictly positive fraction of countries sharing

8 •      With   a continuum of countries in each fraction, the per capita net

supply of bonds in a in each period is given by


(21)         E(ajX(a; r; 5; z)) ;


where I(a; r;            z) is the stationary distribution for net foreign

asset holdings for each country in a at the interest rate r                    •   For
there to be a stationary rational expectations sequence equilibrium, we

must find at least one interest rate such that


(22)        aE(aJI(a; r; 6; z) + (1—a)E(aIX(a; r; 6; z))             0


If (20) is satisfied, then from (6), per—country            consumption      equals per—

country output.7


(23)        r(aEa(r;6)      + (1—a)Ea(r;)]   + Ey =   aEc(r;)    + (1—a)Ec(r;fr)   ;



(24)        Ey aEc(r;) + (1—a)Ec(r;&)
                                      12




The interpretation of such an equilibrium, if it exists, is as follows.

If foreign asset holdings are initially distributed among low (high) time

preference countries according to X(a; r; 6; z)      (X(a;     r; 6; z)   such

that r satisfies (22), then the goods and asset markets clear in every

period   at this interest rate and the distribution of assets among

countries remains constant over time. Of course, consumption and asset

holdings in any particular country will fluctuate over time as countries

are continually shocked by new drawings from G •         In   a stationary,

rational expectations equilibrium, the stochastic steady-state behavior of

the current account, foreign asset holdings, consumption, and the trade

balance are completely characterized by non—degenerate stationary

probability distribution. We investigate some key properties of these

distributions in Sections 3, 4 and 5. However, we must first establish

the existence of a stationary rational expectations sequence equilibrium.

Bewley (1984) provides the existence argument for the special case in

which all countries share the same rate of time preference. The following

proposition is a straightforward extension of Hawley.


Proposition 2.5: There exists at least one stationary, rational expecta-

tions sequence equilibrium. In equilibrium, the rate of interest is

constant and satisfies:


 (25)




Proof: From (22) and (18), the world per—country demand for assets is a

continuous function of r so long as 0 < r <          .    Since we assume that

 a is strictly positive, (19) implies that the world per-country demand

 for assets becomes positive as r 1 & ,    since   the per-country demand of
                                              13




 the & countries is bounded below by (1—a)(—yjr)              .   Conversely, as
 r & 0 ,   the per—country demand for assets must become negative. It
 follows that there exists at least one r such that the per—capita supply

of loans is identically zero if assets are initially distributed in .

countries according to X(a r;            z)        and in 6 countries according to

X(a; r; 6; z)   . Furthermore,   since these are stationary distributions,

the per—country   supply   of loans will be equal to zero in every period at

this interest rate and     per-country   consumption will equal per—country

output in every period. Thus, we have proven existence of a rational

expectations, sequence equilibrium with interest rate r •               Q.E.D.

    Figure 2 illustrates the above existence argument. Note that nothing

guarantees that the world per-country demand for assets is a monotonic

function of r ; we cannot rule      out       multiple equilibria.



3. Productivity Shocks and the Current Account

    Consumption smoothing plays a key role in recent theoretical research

on the determinants of the current account [see in particular Sachs (1981,

1982) and Obstfeld (1983)]. This work implies that households' prefer-

ences for a smooth consumption profile relative to income lead, ceteris

paribus, to current account surpluses in relatively productive periods and

deficits in relatively unproductive periods. If such productivity fluctu-

ations are perfectly foreseen, countries select a consumption profile

consistent with permanent income and use their access to the world bond

market to finance trade deficits when output is temporarily low. In the

present framework, productivity fluctuations are stochastic and, as we

have seen, the-equilibrium interest rate is strictly less than the rate of
                                        14



time preference of the least impatient countries. These observations

suggest that countries may run up against their debt limits when faced

with a sequence of adverse productivity shocks. Without access to addi-

tional borrowing, such countries are forced to cut back consumption one

for one with output when the latter is unexpectedly low, and to use what-

ever output is produced, z    , to service the debt already incurred. We
now establish that in equilibrium, a constant fraction of countries do in

fact exhaust their debt limited in every period and exhibit a zero corre—

lat ion between adverse productivity shocks and the current account. This

fraction of 'liquidity constrained' economies is strictly less than one;

the remaining fraction of countries exhibits a strictly positive corre-

lation between unanticipated productivity shocks and the current account.


Proposition 3.1: The equilibrium current account in each country is non—

negatively correlated with unanticipated, transitory productivity shocks.

A constant fraction of countries aP(; r; ) +               (1—a)F(6; r 8) < 1
individually exhaust their debt limits and exhibit a zero correlation

between the current account and productivity disturbances. The remaining

fraction of countries individually exhibit a strictly positive correlation

between the current account and productivity shocks.


Proof: For all (a;c) such that pa +                +e +   hr > r&    optimal
consumption satisfies


(26)     u'(o)   fpfv'(pa +       + a + i/r — a;      s')dG(e')) ;


so that c(a;a)    c(pa +   +a +      i/r)     iS   S strictly   increasing function

of a given a • For all (a;e)                = ((a;a) : pa + y + a +    yjr

(27)     c(a;a) = pa + a      +   yjr
                                                             15



 The current    account in each country                      is   given by


 (28)     s(a;c)       ra +            +a —     c(ac)

 so that, for all (a;e)


 (29)     s(a;a)       —(a +          yjr)      0


The fraction of countries which begin each period with assets a and

 receive a productivity shock a such that                             (a;e)          a is given by


 (30)    0 < aP(;           r;       6) +
                                             (1—a)F('6; r; 6) < 1

This fraction is strictly positive by Propositions 2.2 and                                  2.5. It       is

strictly less than         unity      by the equilibrium condition that


(31)     aE(a;    r; 6;      z)      + (1—a)E(a; r; 6; z)                    0   ;



and the fact that P(6) F(s)                              1 implies E(a;)                 E(a;6) =   —/r
which cannot be an equilibrium.. In the remaining fraction of countries,

the current account is strictly positively correlated with unanticipated

productivity shocks. This follows from the fact that, for all
                           (2)                     (1)
(a;&)     ,     c(a;   a         )   — c(a;    a         )   < a (1) —   a
                                                                             (2)
                                                                                     where a (2)   > a
                                                                                                         (1)


are drawings from G ,                since v is strictly concave.                         Q.E.D.



4. Asvtotic Properties

    In this section we invstigate the behavior of the expected asymptotic

equilibrium current account, trade                   balance,         foreign asset holdings, and

consumption    in each country. We begin by deriving a central implication of

the equilibrium established in Section 2.
                                            16




Proposition 4.1: The expected asymptotic current account balance in each

country is zero.


Proof: From Proposition 2.2, there exists a unique limiting distribution

for assets. In particular, if


                                     6; r; x) =    X(a';
(32)       Prob(a a'Ia = a;                                r; 6; i) ;



then, from (6)


                                     rEa' + Ey
                                               —           0
(33)
           Es    Ea+i — Eat                        Ec
Since


(34)                               = a) = X(a; r; 6; z)
            lim Prob(a      '1a0
            t*cb

it   follows from Feller (1971), Theorem 1, p. 249


            lim Eat =   0    •   Q.E.D.
            t—,=


       In general, a country's expected asymptotic trade balance, foreign

asset holdings, and consumption will depend upon its rate of time prefer-

ence, aversion to risk, and the probability distribution of productivity

shocks. The following proposition establishes the equilibrium relation-

ships between a country's rate of time preference and its expected

asymptotic consumption, trade balance, and net foreign asset holdings.


Proposition 4.2: Each low time preference country enjoys strictly higher

expected asymptotic consumption than does its high time preference

counterpart, and    it      runs as expected asymptotic trade balance deficit

which is financed by an expected asymptotic service account surplus.
                                               17




 Proof: Clarida (1984), Theorem 3, PP. 17, shows that v'(w; r; 6)

..   v'(w;   r; 8) . Using (13), we obtain for w >


 (36)        u'(c(w;8)) < pfv'(p(w       —
                                             c(w;&)) +     a';   )dG(a')

Thus, from the strict concavity of u and v


 (37)        c(w;&) < c(w;&)      Vw >



        Using this result, we now show that expected asymptotic asset holdings

are inversely related to a        country's rate of time preference. We compare
the accumulation of wealth        and assets of two countries,    and 6 ,   .
which reach period t with w and behave optimally.8 Let

             wt÷i   .., )    be any potential sequence of random events with

associated random realizations a(9)
                                                    (es,
                                                                  •••   )       Define
9) and i(9) as


(38)         w(e)    &(e) +

(39)         a(O) = a6(O) + y(e)


Since c(w;k) j c(w;&) ,         with   strict inequality if w >                 ,   it
follows that


             6
(40)
                        atfl(&)    ;



             6
(41)
                       t+i      w1(&,
                                           18




From Proposition 3.1, we know that t(w; r; 8; x)              is   a strictly in-

creasing function of w Vw >           •   Thus



(42)
           4+2(et,           a2(t
ilence, the sequence                         •..   )   is   a converging

sequence of non—negative numbers. Thus



(43)       Ea(O) = Ea6(O) + Ey(O)         Ea8(e)



Using the fact that the expected asymptotic current account is zero, we

obt gin



(44)       Ec rEa + Ey      > rEa6 + Ey = Ec8


Finally, using the definition of the trade balance, we have



(45)       E=Ey—EcEy—Ec6'E.
       In equilibrium



(46)       oEa(r) + (1—a)Ea8(r) = 0


If Ea(r) and Ea8(r) are equal, they must, from Propositions 3.1 and

4,2,    equal —hr •     But this contradicts (46). Thus



           Ec>Ec8

(47)       Eak>O >Ea8

                0 < Er .     Q.E.D.
                                             19



 We conclude this section by investigating expected asymptotic consumption,

 foreign asset holdings, and      the    trade balance in a 'world in which all

 countries share a common rate of time preference.


Proposition       4.3: In the special case a = 1      ,       expected asymptotic con-
 sumption   in each country is equal to mean      productivity and the expected
 asymptotic    trade balance is zero. Furthermore, initial debtors (creditors)

run an expected asymptotic cumulative current account surplus (deficit).

The fraction of countries which run an expected asymptotic cumulative

current account deficit is given by 1 — X(O)              .   The fraction of countries

which run an expected asymptotic cumulative surplus is given by

X(O) —    Prob(a — OJX(a;    r; 6; z))


Proof:     In equilibrium



(48)        Ea6(r) — 0   ;
so that

(49)        EcA=Ey;
(50)        Er&=0

The expected cumulative current account surplus at t is given by

              6      6
(51)       Ec—a=Ezs.
                n=O


The final   result follows from the existence of a limiting distribution for

assets which, at the equilibrium interest rate, has mean zero,                Q.E.D.
                                       20



   As discussed in the Introduction, in the special case in which output

evolves according to a deterministic sequence a steady—state exists iff

the rate of interest equals the rate of time preference. In this case,

the limiting value of the trade balance is uniquely determined by initial

asset holdings, the cumulative current account surplus converges to zero,

and consumption is constant and equal to permanent income. Thus, our

findings enrich those obtained in existing partial equilibrium,

deterministic frameworks. The results contained in Proposition 4.3 are

intuitive and related to the findings of Buiter (1981) who analyzes

international investment flows in a two country version of Diamond's

(1965) overlapping generations model. Blanchard (1985) studies a small

open economy in which agents face a constant probability of death in each

period. In this framework, a steady state exists if the exogenous world

interest rate is less than the sum of the rate of time preference and the

probability of death. In Blanchard's model, if the rate of interest is

less than the rate of time preference, the small open economy is a net

debtor in steady state and thus runs a steady-state trade balance surplus.



5. Effect of Taxes on the Stochastic Steady State

    We now investigate the effect of lump sum    taxes,   used to finance

government consumption which does not enter agents' utility functions: on

the stochastic steady state behavior of the trade balance, foreign asset

holdings, and private consumption in each country. We consider a world

comprised of a fraction       of 'low tax' economies and a fraction

(1—a9) of 'high tax' economies; rates of time preference are assumed to

be the same across all countries. In the special case in which all

governments levy the same   per   capita tax, the results are as expected:
                                                        21



 expected asymptotic private consumption in each country                           falls by    the
 amount      of   the lump   sum tax, and        the expected asymptotic trade balance and

 foreign asset holdings are unaffected relative to the no—tax                           (no
government consumption) case. However, if tax rates differ among

countries, we show that expected asymptotic equilibrium consumption in

each country falls by the averaae lump sum tax across all countries. High

tax economies are shown to run expected asymptotic trade deficits and

service      account surpluses relative to their low tax                       counterparts.
       We begin by demonstrating that, at any                     given   interest rate, the

consumption decision rule is identical in low and high tax                            economies. Let
o      y <         be the lump sum tax collected to finance government

consumption in 'low tax'            countries,      and let 0 < Ox                 be the lump sum

tax collected        in 'high tax' economies with 0 >                      .   Using the fact that


(52)
              a+1        (l+r)at +      1(1_0i) +       — c   ,           ,0
and    the   definition of wealth



(53)
              w      (l+r)at +   i(l — 0i) +             + z(1     —   O)/r
we obtain


                                                    —   i(1   —   03)(1+r)/r
(54)
              (l+r)a+i        (l+r)(wt —      ct)

Re—arranging and adding                      to both sides we obtain


                     =              —        +
(55)
             wt1         (l+r)(wt       c)
                                             22



that is, the transition equation for wealth is independent of the lump sum

tax so long as borrowing is allowed up to z(1 —             e)/r   .   Of   course,

households in countries with higher taxes begin, ceteris paribus, with

lower initial wealth. But the optimal consumption decision rule depends

only upon preferences, the probability distribution of productivity

shocks, and the transition equation (technology for transferring wealth

between periods), and not the initial level of wealth. Formally, we have


Proposition 5.1: At any given interest rate, the consumption decision

rule is independent of lump sum taxes.


Proof: Clarida (1985), Theorem 4.2, p. 19.


       It follows immediately from Proposition 5.1 that the Markov processes

for wealth in low and high tax countries differ only in initial

conditions. This implies from Proposition 2.2 that the limiting

probability distributions for wealth in low and high tax economies are

identic&l for any given interest rate less than & ,                the common rate of

time preference. Thus



(56)        pEa' +   z(1-4)   + Es +   yj(1-f)Ir   = pEa0 + z(l—0) + Es + 1(1—e)/r

Re—arranging we obtain

(57)        Ea   —   Ea = (—0)/r
The interpretation of (57) is that, because low and high lump sum tax
countries accumulate so as to attain the identical expected asymptotic

level of wealth, the savings behavior of high tax economies must be such

that their expected asymptotic foreign asset holdings are large enough to

offset their lower after tax income and borrowing capacity.
                                             23




        Consider now the equilibrium in a world comprised of a fraction
                                                                                  a9
 low tax countries and a fraction (1 —                  high tax countries. The
                                                  a9)
 existence of a stationary rational expectations equilibrium can be

 established using exactly the arguments of Section 2.3; the proof will

 be omitted. In equilibrium, it must be the case that


 (58)
            a0E(aIX(a;     r; 8; i(l—O)) +   (1 — ae)E(afX(a,   r, 8, i(1—e))     0


Furthermore, at any interest rate less than 8 ;


 (59)       Ea9 —    Ea   — z(e—!)/r


Substituting (58)      into   (59) we obtain, after routine calculation,



(60)             —


(61)        Ea       (1 — ae)z(ee)fr


where r is the equilibrium interest rate. We are now in a position to

prove the following proposition.


ProDosition 5.2:       Each   high tax economy runs     an expected   asymptotic trade

balance deficit and service account surplus relative to its low tax

counterpart. Expected asymptotic private consumption is identical across

countries and    equals

(62)
           EcZ(l—u—(1—a9)9)+Ee,

that is, relative to the zero tax (and government consumption) case,

expected asymptotic consumption in each country falls by the average lump

sum tax across countries.
                                        24



Proi:     Using the fact that the expected asymptotic current account is

zero, we have, from (60) and (61)



(63)       Bc0 =   a(0—0) + x(1-0) +   Es



(64)       BC! =   (1 — u0)i(0—O) + i(l—!) + Es


Re—arranging terms, we obtain



(65)       EcO=Ec!=x(1_a!(1C0)0)+Ee.

The expected asymptotic trade balance deficit in high tax economies is

just the additive inverse of the service        account   surplus



           Ei =
(66)               u(!—0)

and similarly for the expected asymptotic trade surplus in low tax

countries


(67)        Ei (1 — a0)i(!—O)     .    Q.E.D.




6. Concludins Remarks

       The objective of this paper has been to study international lending

and borrowing in general equilibrium framework in which countries are

subject to stochastic productivity fluctuations. The role of time pref—

erence, borrowing limits,and lump sum taxation were rigorously analyzed,

yielding results which enrich those obtained in the existing literature.

Two useful extensions of the present analysis would be the incorporation
                                      25



of   capital accumulation and the derivation of equilibrium loan agree*ents

froni an underlying model of asymmetric information between borrowers and

lenders.
                                                   26




                                             APPENDIX



      This appendix demonstrates the existence of a limiting distribution

for wealth. Schechtman and Escudero (S—E) (1977) prove existence for the

case in which borrowing is not allowed, the rate of interest is zero, and

the rate of time preference is positive. These authors also demonstrate

that, so long as r < & •          the wealth accumulation process is bounded
above so long as —cu''/u' <             .    Clarida    (1985)   extends   the S—E existence

proof to the case in borrowing is allowed at a positive interest rate in

amounts which can be repaid with probability one. The case in which

is countable is straightforward.

      Consider




             Max E
                         u(c)
                   t—o

(1)          s.t. Oc.1w
                                                   +
                            (l+r)(wt         Ct)
                                      +
                            (l+r)at         yt

where            is a countable r.v, with lower support z and                r < & ,

       1/1+6 .    This   is S—E (1977) case (b) and, by their Theorem 3.8, ]a

V     s.t.

(2)          (i.+r)(w —   c(w))   + y   .1   V Ywt       w


where c(w) is the solution to the d.p. problem (9). Now, if w > '
                                                        27



 (3)            u'(c(w))        pfv'(p(w — c(w)) +              + e')dG(e')
                           .    pv'(p(r —        c(w)) +

 since     ,'     is   non—increasing. By the envelope theorem


 (4)            u'(c(w))        pu'(c(p(w        —   c(w)) +

so that


                   >        —                +
                                c(w))

Thus, if the agent receives the worst shock £ in T consecutive

periods,               > '+ >            > '1+T      , By    Schechtman and Escudero (1977),

Theorem 2.3. p. 156, in a finite number of drawings of                          ,
                                                                                    w   hits y
By S—E    (1977),       Theorem 3,3, wealth is a delayed renewal and by Feller

(1968), Theorem 2, p. 315, there exists a limiting distribution of wealth

invariant to initial wealth. From the arguments in Clarida (1985), it can

be shown that if                > w ,        wealth   will converge almost surely to the

interval (i,w]

       If borrowing is allowed


(6)
            wtpat+Z+et+I/r,

and the wealth accumulation process evolves according to


                                —        +
            w41                     c)
The proof goes through exactly as above so long as u'(O) <                          ,   a condi-

tion which insures that                   > 0 •       Q.E.D.
                                     28




                                   NOTES


*1 would like to thank Truman Bewley, Willem Buiter, Russ Cooper, Roger
Farmer, Tom Sargent as well as members of workshops at Harvard, the Cowles
Foundation, and Penn for their comments on an earlier draft. Financial
support from the National Science Foundation grant SES—8420227 is
acknowledged with thanks. All remaining errors are my responsibility.

1. Each of these authors also examines relationships between a relative
    price and current account — in Sachs (1982) it is the relative price
    of semi—tradeable goods; in Obstfeld (1983), the terms of trade;
    in Dornbuscb (1983), the real exchange rate. To simplify the general
    equilibrium model studied here, we abstract from relative prices so as
    to focus on the determination of the equilibrium rate of interest and
    the asymptotic properties of consumption, the trade balance, and asset
    holdings.

2. It would certainly be preferable to derive optimal lending and
    borrowing contracts from an underlying model of asymmetric
    information. Although progress has been made on this front by
    Townsend (1983), the difficulties in characterizing incentive—
    compatible arrangements in a form susceptible to the analysis of this
    paper preclude this more satisfactory approach at this time.

3. Indeed, if labor were mobile internationalli and preferences were
    identical, each country would consume   + a  — the maximum average
    product of labor — in each period and there would be no lending or
    borrowing in equilibrium.

4. See Bewley (1980b) for a rigorous treatment of the measurability
    issues involved with the device of a continuum of traders.

5. Empirically, investment fluctuations appear to be an important
    determinant of current account fluctuations (Sach (1981)). For
    analytical tractability we must unfortunately abstract from investment
    as do Sachs (1982), Obstfeld (1983), Dornbusch (1983), and Blanchard
    (1985).

6.       is unique if r   6 ,   a condition which will be satisfied in
     equilibrium.

7. The existence of a stationary distribution for consumption follows
    immediately from Proposition 2.2 and the result that consumption is a
    strictly increasing function of wealth.

8. These arguments draw on Danthine and Donaldson (1981).
     x &)




            i




Ir          C
i*) #- "')E' ')




                  6   r
                                     29




                                 REFERENCES



 Buiter, W. (1981), Time Preference and International Lending and Borrowing
     in an Overlapping—Generations Model, Journal of Political Economy, 89:
     769—797.

 Bewley, T. (1980a), The Optimum Quantity of Money, in • areken and N.
     Wallace Cods.), Models of Monetary Economics (Minneapolis: Federal
     Reserve Bank).

_________ (1980b), Stationary Monetary Equilibrium with a Continuum of
    Independently Fluctuating Consumers, mimeo, Northwestern University.
_________ (1984),  Notes on Stationary Equilibrium with a Continuum of
    Independently Fluctuating Consumers, mimeo, Yale University.

Blanchard, 0, (1985), Debt, Deficits, and Finite Horizons, Journal of
    Political Economy, 93: 223—247.

Clarida, K. (1984), On the Stochastic Steady—State Properties of Optimal
    Asset Accumulation in the Presence of Random Income Fluctuations,
    Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No, 701.

_________ (1985), Consumption, Liquidity Constraints, and Asset
    Accumulation in the Presence of Random   Income Fluctuations,   Cowles
    Foundation Discussion Paper No. 701K,

Danthine, J—P. and I. P. Donaldson (1981), Stochastic Properties of Fast
    vs. Slow Growing Economies, Econometrica, 49: 1007—1033.

Dorubuach, K, (1983). Real Interest Rates, Home Goods, and Optimal
    External Borrowing, Journal of Political Econ, 91: 141—153.

Feller, W, (1971), An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its
    A,plications (New York: John Wiley and Sons).

Grossman, S. and L, Weiss (1981), Savings and Insurance, mimco, University
    of Pennsylvania,

Hall, D. (1978), Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle—Permanent
    Income Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence, Journal of Political Economy,
    86: 971—989.

Helpman, E. and A. Resin (1982). Dynamics of a Floating Exchange Rate
    Regime, Journal of Political Economy, 9: 728—754.
                                    30



Lucas, R. E. (1980), Equilibrium in a Pure Currency Economy, in I. lareken
    and N. Wallace (eds.), Models of Monetary Economies (Minneapolis:
    Federal Reserve Bank), pp. 31—145.

_________ (1982), Interest Rates and Currency Prices in a Two Country
    World. Journal of Monetary Economics, 10: 335—361.

Obstfeld, M. (1983), Intertemporal Price Speculation and the Optimal
    Current Account Deficit, National Bureau of Economic Research Working
    Paper 1100.

_________ and Alan Stockman (1983), Exchange Rate Dynamics,   National
    Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 1230.

Sach, 3, (1982), The Current Account in the Macroeconomic Adjustment
    Process, Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 84: 147—159.

Schechtman, 1. (1976), An Income Fluctuations Problem, Journal of Economic
    Theory, 12: 218—241.

_________ and V. Escudero (1977), Some Results on 'An Income Fluctuations
    Problem,' Journal of Economic Theory, 16: 151—166.

Scheinkman, I. and L. Weiss (1984), Borrowing Constraints and Aggregate
    Economic Activity, IMSSS Technical Report No. 445.
