                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DOES FEDERALLY-FUNDED JOB TRAINING WORK? NONEXPERIMENTAL
     ESTIMATES OF WIA TRAINING IMPACTS USING LONGITUDINAL DATA ON
                          WORKERS AND FIRMS

                                          Fredrik Andersson
                                           Harry J. Holzer
                                             Julia I. Lane
                                          David Rosenblum
                                            Jeffrey Smith

                                        Working Paper 19446
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19446


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2013




We thank the Charles Stewart Mott Foundation and the National Science Foundation for generous
financial support of this project and Carolyn Heinrich, Kevin Hollenbeck, Adriana Kugler, Peter Mueser,
and Ken Troske for helpful discussions. We also thank seminar participants at McMaster, Simon Fraser
and the Institute for Fiscal Studies and conference participants at CESifo, IZA/SoLE, the Institute
for Research on Poverty Summer Research Workshop, and the New Developments in Human Capital
in Jerusalem conference for their helpful comments. The views here are solely those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the U.S. Census Bureau, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Fredrik Andersson, Harry J. Holzer, Julia I. Lane, David Rosenblum, and Jeffrey Smith.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Federally-Funded Job Training Work? Nonexperimental Estimates of WIA Training
Impacts Using Longitudinal Data on Workers and Firms
Fredrik Andersson, Harry J. Holzer, Julia I. Lane, David Rosenblum, and Jeffrey Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 19446
September 2013
JEL No. I38,J08,J24

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the job training provided under the US Workforce Investment Act (WIA) to adults and
dislocated workers in two states. Our substantive contributions center on impacts estimated non-
experimentally using administrative data. These impacts compare WIA participants who do and do
not receive training. In addition to the usual impacts on earnings and employment, we link our state
data to the Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics (LEHD) data at the U.S. Census Bureau,
which allows us to estimate impacts on the characteristics of the firms at which participants find
employment. We find moderate positive impacts on employment, earnings and desirable firm
characteristics for adults, but not for dislocated workers. Our primary methodological contribution
consists of assessing the value of the additional conditioning information provided by the LEHD
relative to the data available in state Unemployment Insurance (UI) earnings records. We find that
value to be zero.


Fredrik Andersson                                        David Rosenblum
Economics Department                                     Cornell University
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency            424 Apple Drive
400 7th St. SW                                           Exton, PA 19341
Washington, DC 20219                                     dbr26@cornell.edu
Fredrik.Andersson@occ.treas.gov
                                                         Jeffrey Smith
Harry J. Holzer                                          Department of Economics
Georgetown Public Policy Institute                       University of Michigan
Old North 401                                            238 Lorch Hall
Georgetown University                                    611 Tappan Street
37 and O St. NW                                          Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
Washington DC 20057                                      and NBER
hjh4@georgetown.edu                                      econjeff@umich.edu

Julia I. Lane
American Institutes of Research
jlane@air.org
1. Introduction


Experimental evaluations of large-scale active labor market programs have great value, but occur

only in the United States and, even there, only every couple of decades. In other times, in other

places, and for many other programs, both policymakers and scholars must continue to rely on

non-experimental evaluations.1 As such, improving our stock of non-experimental evidence

based on current methods and the best available data, as well as continuing to advance the

methodological frontier, have great value. In that spirit, this paper provides new substantive

findings on the training provided under the Workforce Investment Act (WIA), the current large

federal employment and training program in the US. We also provide important new evidence on

several open methodological questions in the literature. 2


Our first substantive contribution consists of estimating the earnings and employment impacts of

receiving WIA training (and possibly other services) rather than just WIA non-training services

using administrative data from two states. Building on the rich set of conditioning variables in

our data, particularly the pre-program labor market outcomes shown by the literature to matter in

this context, most of our estimates rely on a “selection on observed variables” (or

“unconfoundedness” ) identification strategy. Moreover, because we focus on the impact of

service type conditional on WIA participation, rather than the impact of WIA versus no WIA that

receives most of the attention in the literature, we do not have to worry about selection into WIA,




1
  Of course, experiments have issues too. See e.g. Heckman and Smith (1995) and Heckman et
al. (1999).
2
  Relatively recent reviews of this literature include Lalonde (1995), Friedlander et al. (1997),
Heckman et al. (1999), King (2004), Bergemann and van den Berg (2008), Holzer (2009), Card
et al. (2010), Heinrich and King (2010), and Decker (2011).

2
just selection into training conditional on selection into WIA. Our data, and the WIA institutional

setup, suggest that this constitutes a less challenging identification problem.


More broadly, we read the literature that uses experiments as benchmarks to study the

performance of alternative non-experimental sources of identification as indicating that high

quality non-experimental evaluations, where quality refers to both data and methods, can

successfully replicate the broad conclusions of experimental methods. See in particular the

evidence on the importance of what goes in the conditioning set in Heckman et al. (1998) and the

broad comparison of experimental and high quality (mostly European) non-experimental

evaluations in the meta-analysis of Card et al. (2010). The US-focused meta-analysis of

Greenberg et al. (2006) reaches a similar conclusion.


Our preferred estimates show positive, substantively relevant and statistically significant impacts

of WIA training on earnings and employment over the 12 calendar quarters following WIA

registration for workers served under the adult funding stream. In contrast, for workers served

under the dislocated worker funding stream, we find persistently negative impacts in one state

and initially negative and later marginally positive impacts in the other. These findings parallel

those in closely related earlier work by Heinrich et al. (2012) and Hollenbeck (2009). Though

they comport with the literature, they nonetheless represent a puzzle, as the characteristics of the

workers served by the two streams do not differ as dramatically as their impact estimates. These

estimates have important implications for efforts at program reform and for decisions about

which registrants should receive scarce training opportunities funding by the program. At the end

of the paper, we consider the implications of our estimates for the cost-benefit performance of

the program.



3
For our second (and most innovative) substantive contribution, we estimate impacts on the types

of firms at which WIA participants obtain jobs. We can do this because, for the first time in the

literature, we link administrative data from the WIA programs in our two states to the rich

Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) data maintained by the U.S. Census

Bureau. Motivating this analysis is the well-known fact that, controlling for worker

characteristics, employer characteristics contribute importantly to worker earnings and other

employer outcomes; see e.g. Abowd and Kramarz (2002), Andersson et al. (2005) and Holzer et

al. (2011). If WIA and other training programs can improve the quality of the firms to which

workers are “matched,” then we have identified an important mechanism through which job

training programs might work, over and above their effects on the worker’s stock of general

human capital. At the same time, we may have increased our worries about upward bias in partial

equilibrium impact estimates due to displacement. Empirically, our data yield quite modest

positive impacts of WIA training on the propensity of adult workers to get jobs at firms with

desirable firm characteristics and some small negative impacts on the parallel propensity for

displaced workers. In addition, WIA training generally leads to moderate impacts on industry of

employment.


Our final substantive contribution centers on our analysis of the determinants of training receipt

conditional on WIA registration. We find standard patterns for age and schooling, with younger

workers more likely to receive training, along with those in the middle of the educational

distribution. These patterns appear both descriptively and in our multivariate analysis, and

suggest that WIA allocates training in reasonable ways along these dimensions. In contrast, we

find large unconditional differences by race / ethnicity but only very small conditional




4
differences. Here, our multivariate analysis sheds important light on the source of univariate

disparities in the allocation of program resources.


Our primary methodological contribution lies in the examination of alternative sets of

conditioning variables in the context of our preferred “selection on observed variables”

identification strategy. Once again, the greatest novelty arises in our examination of variables

related to the firm at which the worker last worked prior to WIA participation. As with the firm

characteristic outcome variables, we do this using the linked LEHD data. We expected, based on

the literature, that firm characteristics might proxy for otherwise unobserved worker

characteristics and so have an effect on our estimates by reducing any remaining selection bias.

In fact, we find to our surprise that the firm characteristics add essentially no value to the

conditioning variables available from state UI wage record data. We also examine the value of

conditioning on an additional year of pre-program earnings data relative to Heinrich et al. (2012)

and the value of conditioning on a proxy for local labor markets. The former does not move the

estimates, somewhat to our surprise. In contrast, local labor markets do matter. Our findings on

this dimension have important implications for the design and credibility of future non-

experimental evaluations.


Our second methodological contribution arises from comparing our estimates based on

“selection on observed variables” with estimates based on the bias stability assumption, which

underlies difference-in-differences estimators. Broadly, we find little difference, which suggests

either little selection into training based on time invariant unobserved variables that also affect

outcomes or that the pre-program outcomes in our conditioning set do an adequate job of

capturing stable factors like motivation and ability that we do not directly observe. Finally, we



5
examine the sensitivity of our estimates to alternative econometric estimators, though this aspect

of the analysis is not fully developed due to issues with access to the data.3


The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Sections 2 and 3 describe the WIA program and

our data, respectively. Section 4 defines the treatment, and Sections 5 and 6 lay out our

identification strategies and the econometric estimators that build upon them. Sections 7-9

present our empirical findings on the determinants of training receipt, as well as impacts on

earnings, employment and firm characteristics. Sections 10 and 11 consider the sensitivity of the

estimates to alternative identification strategies and alternative estimators. Section 12 embeds our

findings in a cost-benefit framework and Section 13 concludes.


2. The WIA program


The Workforce Investment Act (WIA) was passed by Congress and signed into law by President

Clinton in 1998, and became operational in 1999-2000; Besharov and Cottingham (2011)

provide a detailed history. WIA distributes federal resources for employment and training

services to state and local Workforce Investment Boards (or WIBs), with about 15 percent

reserved for the former and the remainder going to the latter. Title I of WIA provides general

funding streams for services to adults, dislocated workers, and youth, with the state and local

WIBs allocating these funds for specific use within their regions. Adults comprise individuals 18

years and over meeting various broad criteria. Dislocated workers comprise adults who have

3
 The Census Bureau initially granted us access to the data for 15 months. Because of the
complexity of the data, the large amount of data cleaning it required, the lags inherent in the
important process of review and disclosure of results, and the coordination delays associated
with four authors at different institutions (only one of whom had access to the data), we were not
able to complete all of our analysis during that time interval. Census Bureau policy provides for
extensions of access when a paper receives a “revise and resubmit” from a refereed journal; we
hope to complete our analyses at that time..

6
recently lost a job or are about to lose a job. WIA youth programs serve in-school and out-of-

school youth ages 18-21. The target populations for these three streams overlap to some degree;

in particular, almost all clients served as dislocated workers could be served as adults. Some

adult clients could be served as dislocated workers.4


As of Fiscal Year 2011, these three streams received just $2.8B in funds, a dramatic decline in

real dollars relative to peak funding for federal job training in 1980 (Holzer, 2009). Other

programs within Title I and the other titles obtain additional funding, though these are for much

more specific programs and populations (e.g. the Job Corps for youth, vocational rehabilitation

of the disabled, etc.). Because youth receive quite different services from other participants, we

restrict our attention, and our data, to individuals served under the adult and dislocated worker

programs.


Participation in WIA often begins at a “One-Stop” office. These offices aim to (and sometimes

actually do) provide workers with access to a variety of programs including WIA,

Unemployment Insurance (UI) and the U.S. Employment Service (ES) in a single location

(Blank et al. 2011). Workers may find the “One-Stop” on their own or via a referral from another

agency or service provider. As described in e.g. Blank et al. (2011), WIA-funded services for

adults and dislocated workers fall into four categories: self-service core services, staff-assisted

core services, intensive services and training services. Recipients of self-service core services

typically use computers or other resources related to job search and do not formally register for

the program. As a result, they do not appear in our data. Staff-assisted core services (hereinafter



4
 The DOL website provides surprisingly vague summaries of the eligibility rules:
http://www.doleta.gov/programs/general_info.cfm and http://www.doleta.gov/youth_services/

7
just core services) consist of low-intensity interventions such as assisted job search or provision

of labor market information. Intensive services include interventions such as assessment, case

management, and short courses in topics not specific to a particular occupation such as anger

management or generic work skills. Finally, training services include both classroom training in

occupational skills and subsidized on-the-job training at private firms. WIA explicitly imposes

no eligibility rules on core services. Low-income individuals and individuals on public assistance

receive priority for intensive and training services but, unlike JTPA, WIA imposes no income-

based eligibility rules (Blank et al. 2011).5


Individual Training Accounts (ITA) fund most training under WIA; on-the-job training

constitutes the key exception. ITAs represent vouchers that participants can use to purchase

training at certain providers; King and Barnow (2011) document the pre-approval process and its

variation over time and space. In addition to restrictions on providers and on expenditures,

participants typically make their decision in consultation with a caseworker, who may encourage

some choices and discourage (or even prohibit) others. As the reader will have already guessed,

this feature of WIA also varies widely in implementation; see e.g. McConnell et al. (2009) and

Van Horn and Fichtner (2011). Most of the training funded under ITAs consists of relatively

short occupational training courses provided by community colleges, other non-profit institutions

or sometimes by for-profit providers.


Normatively, WIA participants follow a path from core services to intensive services to training,

where each succeeding step only occurs when the prior step fails to yield employment. In

practice, there exists tremendous variation across states, across WIBs within states, and even


5
    See also: http://www.doleta.gov/usworkforce/wia/Runningtext.cfm

8
across caseworkers within WIBs, as well as over time at all of these levels, in how registrants

select into specific services and, most important for our study, into training. As just noted, some

states structure their programs to train almost everyone who registers. Others, as documented for

Wisconsin in Almandsmith et al. (2006), rely in part on the information provided by the Worker

Profiling and Reemployment Services (WPRS) system, which includes predictions of likely

benefit exhaustion or benefit receipt duration among UI claimants (see e.g. Black et al. (2003)

and Pope and Sydnor (2011) for more on the WPRS). Other states, including the states in our

study (as best we can tell from the limited information we obtained in response to our inquiries)

have a more ad hoc approach. Some claimants follow the normative sequence while others do

not, perhaps because they show up with a referral from a training provider or perhaps because

program staff identify job skills as their key deficiency or because the training program they

want to participate in starts very shortly after they register, leaving little time for the earlier

stages, or perhaps because they hit it off with the caseworker, as in Behnke, Frölich, and Lechner

(2010). Exhibit II-1 in D’Amico et al. (2009) illustrates this type of system.


Lurking in the background of this complex and heterogeneous program we find the WIA

performance management system. This system provides rewards and punishments to states and

WIBs primarily on the basis of the measured outcome levels of registrants. Through its focus on

outcomes rather than value-added it may lead to “cream-skimming” (i.e. selection based on

expected labor market performance) at the registration stage as well as leading WIBs to focus

expensive training services on those they deem unlikely to realize good labor market outcomes

without them. For more on the tainted glories of the WIA performance system, see e.g. Barnow

and Smith (2004), Barnow (2011) and Heckman et al. (2011).




9
3. Data


3.1 States


Despite a substantial recruiting effort on our part and despite offering what amounts to a free

evaluation of the state’s WIA training program, we obtained the cooperation, and thus the data,

of only two states. One, State A, is a medium-sized state on the Atlantic seaboard; the other,

State B, is a large, Midwestern state. Our recruiting performance parallels that of Heinrich et al.

(2012) but on a smaller scale. They attempted to recruit all 50 states with the assistance of the

US Department of Labor and ended up with 12. We attempted to recruit nine without the formal

assistance of the US Department of Labor and ended up with two. In both cases, none of the

participating states would allow public links between state-level impacts and state identities.


3.2. WIASRD


Individual records from the Workforce Investment Act Standard Record Data (WIASRD)

constitute our first major data source. These data play a key role in program monitoring and in

the WIA performance management system. The WIASRD files contain data on every individual

who registered for WIA services in each state. The US Department of Labor compiles all of the

WIASRD data from the local and state WIBs for each program year, tabulates them and

publishes summaries online.6


For each registrant, the micro data at the local and state levels contain the following: dates of

WIA registration and exit, location of WIA service receipt, personal demographics (including


6
  See http://www.doleta.gov/Performance/results/Reports.cfm?#wiastann. These reports are
tabulated each year for DOL by Social Policy Research Associates (SPRA) and appear on DOL’s
website as SPRA reports.

10
age, education, race and gender) as well as whether the individual fits into certain categories

(such as disabled, veteran status, and the like), a listing of specific services received along with

starting and ending dates for each service (in state A only), and labor market outcomes for

quarters before and after services were received, such as employment and quarterly earnings,

drawn from state Unemployment Insurance (UI) records, and used to construct some of the WIA

performance measures.


3.3 LEHD


The Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) Data constitute our other primary

data source. The LEHD program was established at the Census Bureau in 1998 to provide

information on employer and employee dynamics and the link between the two. The program

draws on already existing survey and administrative data from both the demographic and

economics directorates at the Bureau, and integrates them with Unemployment Insurance wage

record data from its partner states.7


State Unemployment Insurance (UI) wage records sit at the core of these data. These records

consist of quarterly reports filed by employers for each individual in covered employment, which

includes roughly 96% of private non-farm wage and salary employment (Stevens 2007). The UI

data provide less comprehensive coverage of agricultural employment and completely exclude

federal government employees, self-employed individuals and independent contractors and

workers in the informal sector. According to US Department of Labor (1997) UI wage records

measure “gross wages and salaries, bonuses, stock options, tips, and other gratuities, and the

value of meals and lodging, where supplied.” They do not include employer contributions to

7
    For more on the LEHD, see the Census program website: http://lehd.ces.census.gov/.

11
Social Security, health insurance, workers compensation, unemployment insurance, and private

pension and welfare funds. Although UI administrative records contain some errors, staff at the

LEHD program has invested substantial resources in cleaning the records and making them

internally consistent; see e.g. Abowd et al. (2009).


The LEHD necessarily inherits some limitations from the underlying UI record data. Most states

(including our two) do not require employers to report hours or weeks worked; as a result, we

cannot measure hourly or weekly earnings and thus cannot easily distinguish between low wages

and few hours worked as sources of low quarterly earnings. The data contain no information on

employment separate from earnings; as such, we code employment in a calendar quarter as an

indicator for non-zero earnings in a quarter, a process that will miss some extended leaves. In

addition, for workers holding multiple jobs in a given calendar quarter the data provide no way

to determine whether they hold them sequentially or in parallel. Finally, we have no direct

information on why workers leave jobs, or on a range of personal characteristics (beyond basic

demographics) typically captured in survey data. See Kornfeld and Bloom (1999), Hotz and

Scholz (2002) and Wallace and Haveman (2007) for discussions comparing administrative and

survey outcome measures.


The LEHD data is matched to the long-form Decennial Census data, from which we obtain basic

demographic information including date of birth, place of birth, sex and a crude measure of race

and ethnicity. The LEHD is also matched to a number of other Census survey data sets, but

because they have relatively small samples, and we have only two states, the intersection

provides too little information for us to effectively utilize.




12
In addition to the large samples and long earnings histories, the matched employer data

represents a marquee advantage of the LEHD data. They enable us to observe several important

fixed and time-varying characteristics of workers and their firms. For workers, these include a

measure of overall experience and job tenure with each employer in addition to the quarterly

earnings and employment already described; for firms, they include industry, firm size, average

earnings paid per quarter, and measures of turnover and job churning. Furthermore, LEHD

researchers have estimated person and firm “fixed effects” based on the quarterly earnings for

each; see e.g. Abowd et al. (2002). The primary limitation of the employer data centers on the

reporting unit. Although we often refer to the employer as a “firm,” the actual reporting unit is an

administrative, rather than an economic entity; in other words, the filing unit reflects an

“Employer Identification Number,” or EIN, rather than a specific establishment. This represents

a distinction without a difference for the approximately 70% of workers with a single

establishment employer – but for those who work for a multiple establishment employer, we

cannot identify the exact employing establishment within the firm.


3.4 Analysis file


We begin by limiting our WIASRD data to all program participants in each state who registered

between 1999 and 2005, with an exit date prior to the end of our data and not prior to their

registration date. The Census Bureau then converts (on our behalf) the social security numbers in

the WIASRD data to personal identification numbers, as they do with the LEHD data and other

datasets they hold, enabling us to link the WIASRD data with the LEHD data. For each

individual included in the data, we retain employment and earnings in the LEHD data for 25

calendar quarters including the quarter of registration and 12 quarters before and after that

quarter. We adjust the earnings values into 2008 constant dollars using the CPI-U-RS.

13
Characteristics of employers, including industry, size and turnover rates, refer to the last

employer prior to registration (when used as conditioning variables) and to the last employer in

our data (when used as outcomes). Appendix Table A-1 provides comprehensive variable

definitions and Appendix Table A-2 details the observations lost due to the restrictions on our

analysis sample.


In all, we have a total of over 26,000 WIA registrants for state A, with nearly 16,000 in the adult

program and nearly 11,000 among the dislocated; comparable sample sizes for state B are over

50,000 for the state, with 23,000 and 28,000 respectively in each subgroup.


3.5 Descriptive statistics


Tables 1 and 2 describe our samples of WIA registrants. Table 1 presents our conditioning

variables as well as outcomes other than employment and earnings, while Table 2 presents

quarterly earnings and employment.


In terms of timing, roughly three-fourths of the sample registered during the labor market

downturn in 2001-03, but the sample also includes non-trivial numbers of participants before and

after that period. Overall, the patterns in our two states broadly comport with the national

WIASRD summaries published by DOL for the years 2001-05.


In terms of who receives training and who does not, Table 1 reveals several important patterns:

First, in both states and for both funding streams, whites have a higher probability of receiving

training than non-whites. Second, women receive more training among adults while men receive

more among the dislocated. Third, WIA participants in the middle of the education distribution

(i.e. those with high school or some college) tend to receive training more often in both funding



14
streams. Fourth, relatively younger participants (in their 20s or early 30s among adults and early

or late 30s among the dislocated) differentially sort into training.


At least some of these distinctions make sense, in terms of who might make a good candidate for

an investment in skills training. For instance, as in the standard human capital model, training

likely makes more sense for younger workers, who have a longer time horizon over which to

realize the returns from their investment. As suggested in Jacobsen et al. (2003), workers in the

middle of the education distribution likely have the basic skills to master somewhat technical

occupational training, while those with less than high school may well lack them. At the same

time, workers who already have a college education likely already have sufficient skills or will

learn what they need on the job, as in Barron et al. (1998). The multivariate models of training

receipt in Section 7 reveal the extent to which these univariate differences hold up after further

conditioning.


The quarterly earnings and employment data tabulated in Table 2 and graphed in Figures 1 and 2

also has stories to tell. We focus on three patterns here. First, in both states, WIA participants

served as dislocated workers have substantially higher pre-program mean earnings and

employment than those served as adults. This signals that even the relatively vague eligibility

rules for the dislocated funding stream have real-world bite. Second, particularly in State A,

trainees have about the same earnings as non-trainees within each funding stream. This suggests

relatively little selection into training based on time-invariant outcome differences, consistent

with our finding (discussed in more detail later on) that impact estimates based on difference-in-

differences methods differ little from those based on cross-sectional methods. Third, as shown

for the JTPA program in Heckman and Smith (1999), the mean earnings and employment of

WIA participants in our states decline in the period leading up to registration. This literature calls

15
this oft-observed pattern the Ashenfelter (1978) dip, after the first paper to point it out. In this

population, the dip begins about four quarters prior to registration. The dip indicates strong

selection into WIA based on transitory outcome shocks but the quite modest differences in the

nature and extent of the dip between trainees and non-trainees within each funding stream and

state suggest little selection into training based on differences in transitory labor market shocks

among registrants, especially in State A.


4. Treatment and the parameter of interest


4.1 Treatment


This study focuses on estimating the impact of receipt of WIA training conditional on WIA

registration. That is, we compare WIA participants who receive training, and perhaps also core

and/or intensive services, to WIA participants who received only core and/or intensive services.

Our estimates, combined with data on costs, allow us to determine whether the additional

resources spent on training services, on average, have labor market effects that cover their costs.

This represents an important policy question; the wide divergence across states in the fraction of

WIA participants receiving training documented in e.g. Heinrich et al. (2012) suggests that

policymakers do not perceive a clear consensus on this question in the literature.


As shown in Table 1, many WIA participants in both our states and both funding streams

receiving training, and many do not. Median WIA enrollment duration for trainees is around

three quarters in State A and around 4 quarters in State B. In contrast, the median enrollment

duration for registrants receiving only core and/or intensive services is typically about a quarter

shorter. These values provide only a crude guide to treatment intensity for several reasons,

including data quality issues (e.g. we observe large spikes in enrollment durations at particular


16
values in one state), the potential for strategic manipulation for performance management

reasons as in Courty and Marschke (2004), and because training participants may have to wait

for a course to start and may also receive job search assistance following training completion.


Unlike Hollenbeck (2009) and Heinrich et al. (2012), we do not attempt to estimate the impact of

participating in WIA versus not participating, instead leaving this equally important question to

future work. Given our additional methodological concerns, we lack the space in a single paper

to address both topics. We prioritized the training analysis because we think it represents a

simpler non-experimental evaluation problem. First WIA core/intensive participants represent a

natural comparison group for trainees in a way that ES recipients and/or UI claimants do not for

all WIA participants. Second, given the common earnings patterns for trainees shown in Table 2,

combined with the substantial amount of caseworker discretion and local heterogeneity in the

WIA program, we think that a selection on observed variables identification strategy has greater

plausibility in the training context. Finally, focusing on training allows us to avoid difficult

questions of temporal alignment that arise when comparing WIA participants to other groups.


4.2 Parameter of interest


We estimate the impact of receiving training relative to receiving only core and/or intensive

services, for the trained. To represent our parameter of interest more formally, consider the

standard potential outcomes framework captured in Frost (1920), wherein Y1 denotes the treated

outcome, in this case the outcome with training and Y0 denotes the outcome without training. In

the jargon of the literature on treatment effects (in economics) or causal inference (in statistics)

we estimate the Average Treatment Effect on the Treated (ATET) given by E (Y1  Y0 | D  1) .

When combined with data on the average incremental cost of training, the ATET allows the

17
analyst to perform a cost-benefit analysis on the training for the trainees who currently receive it.

Our analysis does not purport to provide evidence on the effect of training on those not currently

receiving it.8


5. Identification


5.1 Conditional independence


Our primary identification strategy builds on the conditional (mean) independence assumption

(CIA) and assumes that, conditional on a set of observed characteristics X, the untreated outcome

does not depend on treatment status. The literature also calls this “selection on observed

variables” or unconfoundedness. Informally, this identification strategy assumes we can

condition our way out of the problem of non-random selection into training among WIA

enrollees. In notation, we assume E(Y0 | X , D  1)  E (Y0 | X , D  0) . In words, we assume that,

conditional on the correct collection of pre-determined (i.e. not affected by treatment)

conditioning variables, treatment is unrelated to the untreated outcome. This (very strong)

assumption suffices to identify the ATET of training in our context; we offer a defense of it

shortly. Following standard practice in the literature we match on the scalar propensity score,

which in our context corresponds to the conditional probability of training receipt given WIA

enrollment. In notation, the propensity score equals P( X )  Pr( D  1| X ) . Rosenbaum and Rubin

(1983) show that if the CIA given above holds then a version based on the propensity score holds

as well, i.e. E(Y0 | P( X ), D  1)  E(Y0 | P( X ), D  0) . We estimate the propensity score using a



8
 We applied the dynamic treatment effects framework introduced in Sianesi (2004) and
Fredriksson and Johansson (2008). Because nearly all trainees start training in the quarter of
WIA registration or the following quarter, this analysis did not add much to what we report here.

18
flexible probit model, promising to increase its flexibility (but not too quickly!) on that magic

day when our sample size increases.


For the CIA to hold in practice requires that X include all the variables that affect both training

receipt and outcomes in the absence of training receipt – a tall order, indeed! Many researchers

implicitly adopt the view that there exists a benevolent identification deity that ensures that the

available data always include some set of covariates that lead the CIA to hold, so that no

justification of the conditioning variables is required. We do not hold this view. Instead, we find

it helpful to think about what we know from theory, the institutional context, and existing

empirical evidence about the determinants of training participation and of labor market outcomes

in this population, list the desired conditioning variables they imply, and then argue that our data

do (or do not) contain them and/or reasonable proxies for them.


The first thing to recognize about this institutional context is that it is a two-sided selection

problem. In order for training to happen, the WIA participant has to want training and the WIA

caseworker has to want to give them training. WIA participants’ desires for training will depend

on things like their perception of the job market for their current skill set, their age, which affects

the time they have to recoup their investment in new skills, their motivation, their ability to learn

in a classroom setting (and their utility from doing so), their beliefs about the value of training on

offer in their community, the availability of alternative funds, via transfers from the government

or from family and friends, to provide the basics of life during the training and so on. Many of

these factors, such as motivation, ability and inclination to learn and the market value of their

skills, also affect outcomes in the absence of training. Indeed, the short-term outcome in the

absence of training represents the opportunity cost of training. The caseworker will have beliefs



19
about all these factors as well. In addition, the caseworker will have information about the

budget set of the local WIA.


We observe some of these variables directly, such as age and the most recent industry of

employment, and so can enter them into the conditioning set. For others, such as motivation and

ability, we have to rely on proxies; in our case, realized pre-program labor market outcomes

serve as the proxies. Motivated workers, and high ability workers, should do persistently well in

the labor market; if so, conditioning on earlier labor market outcomes will remove any selection

bias that results from motivation and ability also helping to determine training receipt. The extant

literature clearly shows the importance of conditioning on pre-program labor market outcomes; it

is less clear about whether they can serve as all or just part of a successful identification strategy.

In addition to lagged outcomes, we can use geographic indicators to proxy for both the state of

the local economy, which affects the opportunity costs of training, as well as differences in local

training emphasis and opportunity.


Furthermore, the broader literature claims that we have most of what we need. In particular, the

important study of Lechner and Wunsch (2013) compares alternative sets of conditioning

variables in the context of über-rich German administrative data and identifies those that solve

the selection problem in their context.9 Of the variables they identify, we lack variables related to

family status, part-time work, occupation in last job and more detailed information on past

qualifications than the simple years of schooling variable present in our data. Also worth noting

are variables that do not make a difference in their study, which include firm characteristics (just



9
  This list includes control variables sets 0-6 and 8a in their Table 2; see also the discussion in
their Section 5.3.

20
as we find below), industry- and occupation-specific experience, health-related variables,

openness to mobility and various caseworker-related variables, job-search behavior, and local

labor markets (as we find below). Along this same line, Caliendo and Mitnik (2013) link survey

data on various non-cognitive skills to the German administrative data and find that they do not

make a difference to the impact estimates. While we certainly advocate further work along the

lines of Lechner and Wunsch (2013) and Caliendo and Mitnik (2013) using US data, their studies

increase our confidence in our identification strategy and in the conclusions we draw from

comparing estimates based on different conditioning variables.


We consider six different sets of conditioning variables X. Model 1, inspired by Dehejia and

Wahba (1999, 2002), contains only sex, race, age, education and two calendar years of pre-

enrollment earnings. It serves as a minimalist baseline that incorporates only variables available

in commonly used datasets such as the CPS. Our prior, given the performance of similar

specifications in other contexts in Smith and Todd (2005) and Heckman et al. (1997, Table 6a),

is that this conditioning set does not suffice for the CIA.


Model 2 represents our approximation of the specification employed in Heinrich et al. (2012),

but leaving aside indicators for geographic location. Relative to Model 1, it includes calendar

year and calendar quarter indicators, a more flexible age specification, disability and veteran

status indicators, flexible employment and earnings histories over the eight calendar quarters

prior to registration including the industry of the most recent employer, and UI benefit receipt

and Employment Service (ES) participation over the same period. The notes to Table 3 and

Table A-2 provide more details regarding variable definitions.




21
Model 3 adds locational indicators to the model; in particular, we include indicator variables for

the local One-Stop office at which the participant enrolled. These indicators approximately

represent indicators for counties. Model 4 then adds a range of characteristics of the firms for

which each worker most recently worked, including indicators for quintiles of the firm “fixed

effect” from the LEHD, which captures the firm wage premium after conditioning on various

firm and worker characteristics (with a separate category for those not employed in the pre-

program period). Model 4 also adds variables related to worker turnover at the most recent

employer, as well as firm size and proportion of low wage workers.


Model 5 conditions on an extra four quarters of pre-program earnings and employment

information relative to Model 3. Finally, Model 6 starts with Model 3 and adds both the LEHD

firm variables included in Model 4 and the additional quarters of pre-program earnings included

in Model 5 to create one grand propensity score model. This model will serve as our preferred

specification throughout the remainder of the paper.


To evaluate the importance of including particular variables in the conditioning set, we compare

the non-experimental impacts they imply because we do not have an experimental benchmark.

This strategy, which loosely says that if you keep adding conditioning variables and the

estimates do not change, then probably you have solved the selection problem, is not an

uncommon one in the literature; see e.g. Black, Daniel and Smith (2005, Tables 2-4). Heckman

and Navarro (2004) provide a very useful formalization of this strategy that makes clear that it

requires the absence of a variable or variables affecting both treatment and outcomes unrelated to

the conditioning sets under consideration. We cannot rule this out with certainty, but we think it

is implausible, as we have trouble thinking of a variable that would affect earnings and post-

program labor market outcomes while not affecting the pre-program outcomes included in our

22
conditioning set. We also note that, from the narrow perspective of whether or not it passes a

researcher / funder cost-benefit test to go to the time and trouble of linking to the LEHD for the

additional conditioning variables it provides, it does not matter whether or not we get the correct

answer; rather, it only matters whether the estimates change or not.


5.2 Conditional bias stability


The conditional Bias Stability Assumption (BSA) assumes that unconfoundness holds but only

conditional on a unit-specific fixed effect. Put differently, BSA assumes that the available

conditioning variables do not suffice to solve the problem of non-random selection into treatment

on their own, but do suffice once the fixed effect has been removed by differencing (or some

other panel data estimation strategy). In terms of our notation, the propensity score version of the

BSA corresponds to:


E(Y0t  Y0t  | P( X ), D  1)  E(Y0t  Y0t  | P( X ), D  0)


where t denotes an “after” period and t  denotes a “before” period. Written in this way the BSA

is sometimes called the “common trends” assumption, as it assumes that, conditional on X, the

mean of the untreated outcome has the same time trend for the treated and untreated units. See

e.g. Heckman et al. (1998), Rosenbaum (2001) or Lechner (2010) for more on the BSA.


Substantively, the motivation for BSA relative to the CIA comes from the concern that some

relatively stable unobserved characteristic, such as ability or motivation or attractiveness or grit,

may affect labor market outcomes in a persistent way, but not get fully captured by conditioning

on observed pre-program labor market outcomes over a relatively short period, like two or three

years in our context.



23
The literature suggests that this issue may arise in some contexts but not others. For example,

Smith and Todd (2005) find that difference-in-differences matching, motivated by the BSA, does

better at matching the experimental estimates in the context of the National Supported Work

(NSW) Demonstration data studied in LaLonde (1986) than does cross-sectional matching

motivated by the CIA, but argue that it largely solves problems related to using different

outcome measures for the treated and untreated units as well as severe geographic mismatch. In

contrast, while Heckman and Smith (1999) find what looks like both selection on transitory

shocks to labor market outcomes and on persistent difference in the unconditional earnings

patterns in the National Job Training Partnership Act Study non-experimental data, they find no

strong pattern of differences in estimates between their cross-sectional and conditional

difference-in-differences estimates, suggesting that the conditioning on pre-program outcomes

sufficed in that context to capture the not-directly-observed time invariant characteristics. Chabé-

Ferret (2012) compares matching estimators motivated by the CIA and the BSA and describes

the earnings processes under which each estimator performs better. Given the state of the

literature, we think it worthwhile to examine estimators based on the BSA in addition to our

preferred estimation strategy based on the CIA.


6. Estimation


The literature offers a wide variety of estimators for use with our identification strategies. In the

context of the “selection on observed variables” we consider two different estimators with

contrasting costs and benefits. Inverse propensity weighting (IPW), despite an academic pedigree

dating back (in the not unrelated non-response context) to Horvitz and Thompson (1952), has

become popular in the treatment effects literature only recently. Key papers in the literature are

Hirano, Imbens and Ridder (2003) and Hirano and Imbens (2001). IPW has three primary

24
benefits for our purposes: First, it does very well relative to other estimators in recent Monte

Carlo horseraces run by Huber, Lechner and Wunsch (2013) and Busso, DiNardo and McCrary

(2013). Second, it has the desirable asymptotic property that it attains the “semi-parametric

efficiency bound”, which means that (under certain conditions) it attains minimum asymptotic

variance within the class of semi-parametric estimators; see Hirano, Imbens and Ridder (2003)

on this point. Third, unlike many other semi-parametric treatment effects estimators, it does

require the choice of a bandwidth or other tuning parameter. In terms of our notation, the IPW

estimator is given by

                                                  1
       1 n       1 n  1 n Pˆ ( X )(1  Di )  Pˆ ( X i )Yi (1  Di )
ˆ TT   Yi Di                                                  ,
       n1 i 1   n0 i 1  n0 i 1 1  Pˆ ( X )    1  Pˆ ( X i )


where n0 denotes the number of untreated units and n1 the number of treated units.


The downside to IPW lies in its sensitivity to estimated propensity scores close to zero or one in

finite samples. A quick look at the estimator makes the source of the trouble clear enough; the

estimator divides by both P( X ) and 1  P( X ) . As a result, when the propensity score lies very

near zero, small changes in the value of the propensity score can move the estimate a lot. In our

application, we do not have this problem.


The Monte Carlo literature, in particular Busso, DiNardo and McCrary (2013), emphasizes the

importance of normalizing the weights to sum to one in the sample for the finite sample




25
performance of the estimator. The formula given here embodies that normalization. We obtain

estimated standard errors by bootstrapping.10


We utilize nearest neighbor matching on the propensity score as our secondary estimator of

choice. We do so despite its uniformly poor performance in terms of mean squared error in the

Monte Carlo studies just cited, as well as in Frölich (2004). That poor performance in mean

squared error terms masks a combination of quite good performance on bias, and truly awful

performance on variance. The latter is perhaps not surprising given that nearest neighbor

matching, particularly the most common variant with a single nearest neighbor used with

replacement, completely ignores the information available in the data from comparison

observations close to, but not closest to, particular treated units. The low bias, combined with

relative insensitivity to propensity scores close to zero and one makes nearest neighbor matching,

in our view, a good complement to IPW. We present nearest neighbor estimates using one, three

and five nearest neighbors. Increasing the number of neighbors trades off bias (due to using more

distant matches) and variance (which decreases in the number of untreated units used to

construct the counterfactual). We chose these bandwidths on a priori grounds rather than, say,

via cross-validation as in Black and Smith (2004). Abadie and Imbens (2008) show that the

bootstrap fails to provide consistent standard error estimates for the nearest neighbor estimator.

Instead, we employ the consistent estimator in Abadie and Imbens (2012).11




10
   In the current version of the paper, the bootstrap standard errors for the IPW estimator do not
include the estimation of the scores and so likely have a marginal downward bias. We will fix
this at revision time when we regain access to the data.
11
   In the current version of the paper, we do report bootstrap standard errors for the nearest
neighbor estimator. The Monte Carlo analysis in Abadie and Imbens (2008) suggests that while

26
We use the same set of estimators when relying on the conditional bias stability assumption for

identification, but instead of an outcome level as the dependent variable, we have a pre-post

difference in outcomes as the dependent variable, as in e.g. Smith and Todd (2005).


7. Results: determinants of training receipt


Tables 3a to 3d present average derivatives from the six propensity score model specifications

described in Section 5.1. As we do throughout the paper, we present completely separate

estimates for each funding stream (i.e. adult and dislocated worker) in each state.


Many of the univariate differences between trainees and non-trainees prove robust to

conditioning. In particular, differences in the incidence of training by age (younger participants

get more) and education (participants in the middle of the education distribution get more) group

generally persist as we condition on progressively richer sets of baseline variables. The large

differences we observed by race represent the partial exception to this broader pattern. Consider,

for example, adults in State A. In Table 1a, 58 percent of adult trainees are black, compared to 70

percent of non-trainees. In Table 3a, which reports the results from the quite parsimonious Model

1, blacks have a -0.19 difference in the conditional probability of training relative to whites. In

contrast, in the models with the richest covariate sets, namely Models 3 to 6, the difference,

though still statistically significant, falls to around –0.015. The addition of the geographic

variables to the conditioning set appears to make the difference. A similar pattern appears for

adults and dislocated workers in State B, while for dislocated workers in State A, blacks have a




not zero, the inconsistency in the bootstrap will generally not lead to severely misleading
inferences. We will fix this at revision time when we regain access to the data.

27
statistically significantly higher probability of training receipt of about 0.039 starting with Model

2.


8. Results: impacts on earnings and employment


8.1 Full sample


Tables 4a and 4b present estimates from Model 6, our preferred specification, obtained using our

preferred IPW estimators.12 In each table, we present impacts on earnings and employment for

the first 12 calendar quarters after registration. We also present two summary measures of

earnings impacts: the sum over all 12 quarters and the sum over quarters 9-12. The latter

measure completely avoids the “lock-in” period when trainees are receiving training.


Our estimates display several important patterns. First, in both states and both streams we

observe the lock-in effects of negative impacts in the initial quarters after WIA registration. This

results from trainees reducing or eliminating job search during their training while the

comparison group actively engages the job market during and after their receipt of core and/or

intensive services. Second, we find for both states and streams that the quarterly impacts

gradually increase until they appear to stabilize, usually around eight quarters after registration.


Third, we find substantively important and surprisingly large differences in impacts between the

adult and dislocated worker funding streams. In State A, the impacts for adults stabilize around

$300 per quarter while those for dislocated workers stabilize at around -$150; similarly, in State

B the adults stabilize at $450 or so while the dislocated workers, which start out with large



12
  When we regain access to the data, we will add a line for the reweighted comparison group to
Figures 1 and 2, providing a graphical display of the temporal pattern of the impacts.

28
negative impacts, have positive and significant impacts of over $300 in the last two quarters of

the data. Given that essentially all the dislocated worker participants could have received

services under the adult funding stream and that many of the adults could have received services

under the dislocated worker stream, this difference puzzles us.13 Fourth, the employment impacts

track the earnings impacts except for the dislocated worker stream in State A, where negative

earnings impacts in later quarters coincide with positive employment impacts, suggesting that

training in State A leads to lower-paying jobs but more of them. Fifth, we find modest

differences across states, with larger impacts in State B than in State A for both funding streams.


We consider the likely persistence of the impacts in the context of our cost-benefit discussion in

Section 12. For the moment, it suffices to say that the estimates that sum over all 12 quarters do a

reasonable job of foreshadowing our main conclusions.


8.2 Men and women


As discussed in e.g. LaLonde (1995), earlier evaluations of employment and training programs in

the US have typically found larger impacts for women than for men. Table 5 presents separate

estimates for men and women in our context for the two summative earnings impact measures:

one for quarters 9-12 and one for all 12 calendar quarters after registration. The point estimates

for the adult stream match the usual finding, with women having larger impacts than men over

the full 12 quarters. However, the close similarity of the estimates for men and women in the

four final quarters suggests that the overall difference derives mainly from differences in

opportunity cost, with men giving up higher earnings while in training. In contrast, for the

13
  When we regain data access, we will examine whether differences in characteristics, combined
with impacts that vary with characteristics, can explain the difference in impacts between the two
funding streams.

29
dislocated worker stream, women have more negative impacts overall but, as with the adult

stream, a much smaller difference in quarters 9 to 12. None of these differences attain

conventional levels of statistical significance. Given the lack of clear evidence of impact

differences, we pool men and women in our other analyses.


In results not presented here, we also produced subgroup estimates broken down by race /

ethnicity and by years of schooling. As with men and women, we did not observe substantively

important subgroup differences in the estimates.


8.3 Comparisons to the literature


How do our findings comport with those in Heinrich et al. (2012) and Hollenbeck (2009)?

Though they provide similar analyses, we should note a few differences. First, the different

studies look at different states. Our states do not constitute a proper subset of those considered in

Heinrich et al. (2013) nor is Indiana, the state considered by Hollenbeck (2009), one of our two

states. Second, the time periods differ, with Heinrich et al. (2012) considering participants who

exited between July 2003 and June 2007, and Hollenbeck (2009) considering exits from program

year 2006. Third, though both studies assume a selection on observed variables identification

strategy and rely on administrative data for the conditioning variables, the exact propensity score

specifications and matching / weighting estimators differ in the details. Finally, Hollenbeck

(2009) measures outcomes relative to program exit rather than relative to registration.14


Heinrich et al. (2012) Figures 5 and 8 present estimates of the impact of training versus core /

intensive services for adults and dislocated workers, respectively. They pool the data from the


14
   In an e-mail to one of us, Hollenbeck indicated that this choice did not make much difference
to his results.

30
states in their analysis but present separate impacts for men and women. At a broad level, they

find the same patterns that we do, including a substantial lock-in effect in the initial quarters

(other than male adults), impacts that increase in relative time and then stabilize (other than male

adults), slightly more positive impacts for women than men, and much more positive impacts for

adults than for dislocated workers. As shown in their Table 4, in their WIA versus no-WIA

analysis they also find cross-state variation in impacts, which lends some support to our finding

of differential impacts of WIA training versus core / intensive services in our two states.


Hollenbeck (2009) focuses almost exclusively on WIA versus no-WIA treatment effects; the sole

exception comes in his Table 6, where he separately compares WIA training to no-WIA and

WIA-without-training to no-WIA. The difference between these provides an indirect estimate of

the impact of training versus core/intensive. Read this way, for adults he finds surprisingly large

employment effects of around 10 percentage points in Q+3 and Q+7, along with modest earnings

effects of around $450. For dislocated workers, he finds negative employment effects of about 2-

3 percentage points combined with positive earnings effects of about $150. The information he

provides does not allow the calculation of standard errors for these estimates.


In sum, our estimates generally tell the same stories about WIA training impacts as other studies

applying roughly the same methods to similar data in other times and places. Perhaps most

importantly, our brief sojourn into the literature strongly suggests that the poor performance of

the displaced worker stream does not represent an anomaly that affects only one or two states.


9. Results: Firm characteristics


We now turn to our estimated impacts on outcomes related to the jobs that WIA participants

obtain in the post-program period. From a long list of possible (and interesting!) candidate firm-


31
related outcomes, we confine ourselves to just six to avoid concerns about multiple comparisons.

We chose our six based on the prior literature and before looking at any impact estimates.


Three of our outcome measures relate to the firm “fixed effect” contained in the LEHD data.

These fixed effects, described in detail in Abowd and Kramarz (1999), condition on fixed effects

of the workers as well as some firm characteristics, and so represent a relatively clean measure of

job “quality”. We include three outcomes related to the fixed effect: (1) an indicator for having a

job at a firm with a fixed effect above the median; (2) an indicator for having no available firm

fixed effect, which implies either having no job in the twelve calendar quarters after registration

or only jobs at firms with fewer than 25 employees; and (3) the (continuous) firm fixed effect

itself. Note that we code the first indicator as zero for observations with the second indicator

equal to one, so that both indicators are defined for all sample members. As a result, we do not

have to deal with selection into employment (or employment at a firm with at least 25 workers)

when analyzing those variables. When using the continuous fixed effect as an outcome, we

simply drop the observations without a fixed effect; the resulting selection problem, a non-trivial

one given the treatment effects on employment described above, leads us to interpret the

corresponding estimates as merely suggestive.


Our fourth firm-related outcome consists of an indicator for working at a firm with at least 100

employees. A large literature, e.g. Parsons (1986) and Brown et al. (1990), links firm size and

compensation levels. The fifth measure consists of an indicator for working at a high turnover

firm, defined as having a turnover rate above the median, since the literature has found that

employment at high turnover firms is systematically associated with lower compensation (Holzer

et al., 2004). The sixth measure is an indicator for changing industries between the last pre-

registration employer and the last post-registration employer. This last represents an ambiguous

32
measure in the sense that changing industries may represent a good thing, as when moving from

a declining to a growing industry, or a bad thing, due to leaving behind industry-specific human

capital, or some combination of the two. As with the indicators related to the firm fixed effects,

for all three of these variables we code workers without post-registration employment as zeros.

Andersson et al. (2005) and Holzer et al. (2011) provide evidence on the correlations among the

firm-related variables in the LEHD.


All six measures refer to the last firm that employed the worker in our 12 quarters of post-

registration data. While WIA might arguably have the largest direct effect on the first firm with

which the worker matches, we thought it more important to focus on longer-run outcomes. By

looking at the last firm we may capture the result of a sequence of jobs induced by the program,

while missing potentially promising job matches that end quickly.


Tables 6a and 6b present impacts on the firm-related outcomes measured as of the twelfth

calendar quarter after WIA registration. For adults, the pattern of point estimates shows a

desirable effect on every outcome measure (e.g. a higher probability of working at a high fixed

effect firm, and lower probability of working at a high turnover firm and so on). In State A, the

effects are all quite small and not statistically different from zero. In State B, we find larger,

though still modest, effects, some of which do attain conventional levels of statistical

significance. Given the earnings impacts presented above, it will perhaps not startle the reader to

learn that the estimates for dislocated workers tell a more negative story. In both states, all of the

point estimates on the variables related to the firm fixed effect, as well as the firm size and

turnover indicators, suggest that training leads workers to worse firms on average, though in this

case none of the estimates differs statistically from zero.



33
In regard to the more ambiguous industry switching outcome, we find positive and substantively

large impacts for adults in State B and dislocated workers in both states, with a fairly precise

zero impact for adults in State A. Though the data speak louder about switching industries than

about any of the other firm outcomes we examine, they do not speak clearly, in the sense that it

is hard to interpret these impacts when they coincide with moves to better firms for adults and to

worse firms for dislocated workers.


How should we think about these estimates? First, we can think about them as illustrating

mechanisms through which WIA generates impacts on earnings. Larger firms pay higher wages;

for adults, WIA training generates earnings impacts in part because trainees get jobs at larger

firms. Second, we can think about them as providing information relative to the likely duration

of impacts. The literature on worker-firm matches suggests that the more frequent placements at

larger, lower turnover firms likely bodes well for the persistence of the adult impacts we find.

Third, we can think about them as informative of the potential for general equilibrium effects,

particularly displacement, to lead our partial equilibrium estimates to overstate the social benefits

of WIA training. If WIA training just changes who gets the “good jobs” at the larger, lower

turnover, higher fixed effect firms, then it may have some equity benefits, but it will not increase

efficiency. Finally, the firm fixed effects results have an ambiguous interpretation to the extent

that higher wages mean fewer other forms of remuneration, e.g. lower fringes or less pleasant

work, as in a compensating differences world, rather than functioning as a one-dimensional

measure of overall firm quality as in the standard search literature.




34
10. Results: Alternative identification strategies


10.1. CIA with alternative conditioning sets


This section addresses one of our primary questions of interest: does having information on the

firms at which WIA participants worked prior to participation move the estimates relative to the

conditioning variables available only from the union of the WIASRD and UI administrative

datasets. It does so by comparing estimates obtained using our preferred cross-sectional IPW

specification but with propensity scores containing the various sets of conditioning variables

described in Section 5.1. Doing so also allows us to address other substantive questions from the

literature related to the value of administrative data from UI records, to the number of years of

pre-program earnings to condition on and to the importance of local labor markets.


To start off, Table 7 presents correlations among the predicted probabilities of training from the

six propensity score models described in Section 5.1 for the four samples defined by state and

funding stream. At the grandest level, the table has one very obvious pattern: Models 1 and 2 are

“not like the others”. The correlation between Model 1 and Model 2 ranges between 0.68 and

0.88, while those between Model 1 and Models 3-6 range from 0.37 to 0.61 and those between

Model 2 and Models 3-6 range from 0.55 to 0.71. In contrast, the correlations among Models 3,

4, 5 and 6 all exceed 0.99. Clearly, the variables added in going from Model 1 to Model 2, or

from Model 2 to Model 3, add real substance to the propensity score model. In contrast, the

additional variables added beyond Model 3, which includes both the firm variables drawn from

the LEHD and the additional four quarters of pre-program earnings, do not. These patterns have

clear implications for how the impact estimates will change (or not) as we vary the conditioning

set.


35
Table 8 presents the impact estimates associated with the different specifications. To save space,

we focus solely on the aggregated impacts for the 12 quarters after enrollment and for quarters 9-

12 after enrollment and focus on our preferred IPW estimator applied to earnings levels. As

Table 7 suggested that they would, the estimates differ substantially between the rather sparse

specification of Model 1 and the richer conditioning sets in the other models. In the case of the

adults, Model 1 produces less positive estimates while in the case of the dislocated workers they

turn out more negative. Given the differences between the estimates, combined with our earlier

arguments regarding the variables required for credibility of the CIA, we interpret these

differences as bias. Thus, in substantive terms, we conclude that producing credible impact

estimates for WIA training requires (at least) conditioning relatively flexibly on the information

available from the UI administrative data.


The data also provide pretty clear responses to the other substantive questions that motivated our

investigation of alternative specifications. The value of investing in obtaining the firm variables

from the LEHD to use as conditioning variables shows up in the differences in estimates, if any,

between Model 4 and Model 3 and between Model 6 and Model 5. In all but one case, those

differences turn out quite minor indeed. For example, looking at the sum of earnings over Q+9 to

Q+12, the changes are quite small (just eight dollars in one case) except for dislocated workers in

State A. The additional firm variables in LEHD data clearly do not pass a researcher cost-benefit

test in this context based on what they add in terms of the credibility of the CIA.


A comparison of Model 5 with Model 4 provides evidence on the importance of adding an

additional year of quarterly pre-program earnings (from Q-9 to Q-12) to the conditioning set we

modeled on that of Heinrich et al. (2012). In our data, the additional year of quarterly earnings



36
barely moves the estimates. We conclude that the additional pre-program earnings variables do

not add anything to the credibility of the CIA in this context.


Finally, a comparison of Model 3 with Model 2 signals the value of adding indicators for the

local one-stop at which the participant enrolled in WIA. As noted above, we interpret these

primarily as indicators for local labor markets. Our states each contain multiple urban labor

markets as well as rural ones. As a result, we expected these variables to matter, though the

ambivalent findings in the literature muted our prior: while e.g. Heckman et al. (1998) and

Friedlander and Robins (1995) find that local labor markets matter a lot, Dolton and Smith

(2011) do not. In our data, even given the conditioning already present in Model 2, additional

conditioning on local labor markets moves the impact estimates substantially. This finding

reflects substantial geographic heterogeneity in training receipt within our states.


10.2 Conditional bias stability


Table 9 presents the estimates that assume the conditional bias stability assumption. We again

report estimates for two after periods: Q+1 to Q+12 and Q+9 to Q+12. In both cases, we use the

symmetric pre-program period as the before period for the difference-in-differences estimator;

that is, we use Q-1 to Q-12 as the before period in the first case and Q-9 to Q-12 in the second

case. An alternative strategy would avoid the period of the Ashenfelter dip by using Q-9 to Q-12

as the before period in both cases; Heckman and Smith (1999) document that grave programs

result from including the period of the dip in their context. We do not do that here due to the lack

of apparent selection into training based on transitory shocks shown in Figure 1. We do not

report impacts at the quarterly level to save space. In all cases, we employ our preferred IPW

estimator, which now becomes a difference-in-differences weighting estimator.


37
Somewhat to our surprise, the difference-in-differences estimates in Table 9 differ only

marginally from the cross-sectional estimates discussed above and shown in Table 6. The

impacts are just a bit more positive among the dislocated in both states. This similarity suggests

that our conditioning variables do a very fine job indeed of capturing time-invariant differences

in outcome levels between the trainees and the non-trainees in our sample of WIA enrollees.


11. Results: Alternative econometric estimators


In this section, we briefly examine the sensitivity of our estimates to alternative econometric

estimators. In particular, Table 10 compares our preferred IPW estimator to estimates obtained

using nearest neighbor matching with replacement on the estimated propensity score with one,

three and five nearest neighbors. The table reveals little substantive difference between the

estimates generated by the different estimators. We do not find this particularly surprising given

our relatively large sample sizes and given that our estimated propensity scores do not stray too

close to zero and one.15


12. WIA Costs and benefits


This section performs relatively crude cost-benefit calculations for WIA training versus no

training using our preferred estimates from Table 6. Before presenting the results of our

calculations we briefly discuss several issues that arise when performing them. See e.g. Bloom et




15
  At revision time, when we again have access to the data, we will examine three additional
estimators: pooled OLS, OLS estimated using only the untreated units, and pooled median
regression to examine sensitivity to outliers. We also doubt the current nearest neighbor
estimates (and so do not say much about them in this version) and look forward to re-generating
them using the new routines in Stata 13 rather than the old routines in SAS.

38
al. (1997), Heckman et al. (1999, Section 10.1), Schochet et al. (2006) and Hollenbeck (2011) for

more detailed discussions.


First, WIA, like JTPA before it, stands out for its lack of serious data on programs costs. As

such, we examine the cost-benefit performance of WIA training using two different numbers for

the costs, neither of them particularly satisfactory. The lower value of $2500 draws on the

discussion in Heinrich et al. (2011), who in turn cite average direct cost (to WIA) values for the

twelve states in their study. Their numbers correspond to all WIA participants, rather than to

trainees versus non-trainees, but still likely provide a lower bound, given the strong difference in

relative direct costs between the two groups. The higher value of $7500 draws on Table 4 in

Hollenbeck (2012) and reflects data from Washington State on the cost of providing career and

technical education inclusive of the large state subsidies to the community colleges providing the

training. We have trimmed down Hollenbeck’s numbers a bit to account for the fact that we seek

the difference in costs between training and core services, rather than difference between training

and no treatment, and because receiving training from WIA may reduce costs to the public of

subsidized training provided via other programs (e.g. Pell grants). We assume that all direct costs

occur in the first quarter following enrollment.


Second, our data limit us to estimating impacts for 12 quarters following WIA enrollment. Yet

the impacts of WIA training may last far longer than that. The literature provides conflicting

evidence or, put differently, the literature has too few studies with long-term follow-up data to

allow it to sort out what factors do and do not predict persistent impacts; Smith (2011) provides

further discussion and citations to the literature. To account for the uncertainty about the

persistence of the impacts, our calculations embody three scenarios: (1) zero impacts after the



39
data run out; (2) the impacts in Q+12 persist for an additional eight quarters then fall to zero; and

(3) the impacts in Q+12 continue indefinitely.


Third, we need to say something about the social discount rate and the marginal social cost of

public funds (MSCPF). As far as we know, the US does not have any sort of official social

discount rate. As such, we follow Heckman et al. (1999) and use 0.05 and 0.10 as annual rates.

The MSCPF includes both the direct costs of operating the tax system (e.g. the IRS) and the lost

output due to the use of distortionary rather than lump-sum taxes. Estimates of the MSCPF vary

widely across studies; see Auerbach and Hines (2002) and Dahlby (2008) for overviews. To

account for this variability, we consider values of zero, 0.25 and 0.50, where e.g. 0.25 means that

each dollar of government funds costs society $1.25 in output.


Finally, our cost-benefit calculations omit both general equilibrium effects and effects on

outcomes other than earnings. General equilibrium effects can result from displacement, wherein

the trained worker takes a job that otherwise would have gone to someone else (who is likely not

in our no training WIA participant comparison group) or from changes in relative skill prices.

We expect our failure to consider equilibrium effects to lead us to overstate the social benefits of

WIA training; see e.g. Lise et al. (2004) or Cahuc and Le Barbanchon (2010) for more on these

issues. Effects on other outcomes, such as crime or the well-being of children could in principal

go either way; for example, Job Corps’ negative effects on crime represent a large portion of its

benefits, as shown in Schochet et al. (2008), while Morris and Michalopoulos (2003) find that

Canada’s Self-Sufficiency Project had mixed effects on child outcomes that depend on child age.

On net, we think our failure (a direct result of the limitations imposed by our data) to take other

outcomes into consideration likely leads us to understate the benefits of WIA training. Though it



40
would make life easier for us and for the reader, the literature provides no reason for thinking the

biases from these two omissions cancel each other out.


With all the foregoing in mind, turn now to Tables 11a and 11b, which present the results of our

calculations for State A and State B, respectively. This table largely follows the structure of

Table 20 in Heckman et al. (1999). In each table, the first column indicates the assumed duration

of the program impacts, the second the assumed marginal social cost of public funds (a.k.a. the

welfare cost of taxation), and the third the assumed discount rate. The next two present

discounted net present values per participant from the perspective of society for adults and

dislocated workers assuming $2500 in direct costs, while the final two columns repeat the

exercise under the assumption of $7500 in direct costs.


For the adult stream, the assumptions make a difference in both states. In both states, the adult

stream always passes a cost-benefit test when the impacts last forever. In State A, but not State

B, it passes even when the benefits cease after three years, so long as the discount rate, MSCPF

and direct costs are not too high. When the impacts last for five years, in both states the adult

program has positive net social benefits for many (but not all) parameter combinations. On the

other hand (and not at all surprisingly given the impact estimates) the dislocated worker stream

essentially never passes a cost-benefit test except for State B under the optimistic assumption

that program impacts never fade out.


13. Conclusions


Our examination of the impacts of receiving WIA training rather than solely core and/or

intensive services in two anonymous states has yielded a wealth of important findings both

substantive and methodological. We start by reviewing our substantive findings.


41
We find differences in probabilities of training receipt as a function of race, age and education.

Substantial unconditional differences by race largely, but not entirely, disappear with

conditioning. Differences by age and schooling comport with standard human capital theory and

with the types of training offered by WIA.


Our preferred estimates indicate positive earnings and employment effects for the adult funding

stream and mostly negative estimates for the dislocated worker stream. This difference, for

which we lack a good explanation, parallels findings in the broader literature and represents an

important (and highly policy-relevant) open question in this area. Surprisingly, we do not find

statistically different impacts for men and women, though our point estimates generally show

large impacts for women, in line with the literature. Using the linked data from the LEHD, we

find modest impacts on the characteristics of firms where workers get jobs, in directions

consistent with the impacts on earnings. We find modest impacts for most groups on switching

industries relative to the last pre-WIA employer. The impacts on firm characteristics illustrate

one mechanism through which WIA training affects earnings, but also raises concerns about

general equilibrium effects. Our estimates imply that the dislocated worker programs likely do

not pass a social cost-benefit test, while for the adult programs the sign of the cost-benefit

calculation depends on assumptions regarding discount rates, duration of impacts outside the

data, the marginal social cost of public funds and the direct social cost of training. Particularly

for State A, most reasonable assumptions yield a passing grade.


Our data cover WIA participants who entered the program between 1999 and 2005, inclusive. To

what extent would we expect our findings to generalize to the latter part of the last decade, or to

the present day? As the institutional framework of WIA has not changed much in the last decade,

external validity will hinge on changes in the participant population and on changes in program

42
impacts with the business cycle. Published WIASRD data show some important changes in the

participant population since 2005. For one thing, the sizes of the adult and dislocated populations

have grown quite dramatically; in program years 2001-05, the adults and dislocated worker

populations nationwide average about 230,000 and 185,000 respectively. But in PY 2006 the

number of adults rises to over 500,000, and in PY 2009 it rose to over 1.1 million. Over time, the

populations trend towards containing relatively fewer minority, less-educated and/or low-earning

workers; these trends start even before 2007 and become even stronger afterwards, as we might

expect to occur during a major recession. Given our finding of no substantively important

subgroup differences by sex, race or education, changes in the mix of participants along these

variables should not lead to concerns about generalizability. The literature, see Lechner and

Wunsch (2009) and the references therein, suggests that partial equilibrium impacts of active

labor market programs increase during downturns, because the opportunity cost for trainees falls.

Our data also include a downturn, but one not as severe as the Great Recession. This suggests

that bumping them up a bit when generalizing to the present. Finally, expanding the scale of the

program so dramatically may change the nature of any general equilibrium effects, on which

point one could tell stories in either direction. Overall, with think our estimates likely generalize

well to the present day but, as always when extrapolating out of sample, with some added

uncertainty.


On the methodological side, our most important (and, to us, surprising) conclusion is that adding

variables related to the last employer prior to WIA participation to the conditioning set does not

budge our “selection on observed variables” estimates. Nor does adding an additional four

quarters of lagged earnings move the estimates. In contrast, conditioning on indicators for local

labor markets does move the estimates. Comparing our cross-sectional estimates to the


43
difference-in-differences estimates also shows little change, suggesting either that selection into

training occurs mainly on the something other than relatively time-invariant differences in labor

market performance and/or that the conditioning set available in the UI administrative data does

a good job of capturing the time invariant differences that matter. While further research linking

the UI administrative data to other data sets that would provide alternative conditioning

variables, such as psychometric tests, information on other household members and more

detailed academic histories remains of great value, we think that taken together, our

methodological findings suggest that current practice, as embodied particularly in this paper and

in Heinrich et al. (2012), likely removes much of the bias for this estimand.


We conclude with a final point on evaluation policy: why does the federal government, which

provides the funding for WIA, not require states to cooperate with serious, policy-relevant

research efforts in exchange? In our view, important opportunities for program improvement via

research remain largely unexploited because current law allows state administrators too much

leeway in restricting access to data over privacy concerns that are not always compelling. We

would like to see this change in the future.




44
References
Abadie, Alberto and Guido Imbens. 2008. “On the Failure of the Bootstrap for Matching
Estimators.” Econometrica 76(6): 1537-1557.
Abadie, Alberto and Guido Imbens. 2012. “Matching on the Estimated Propensity Score.”
Unpublished manuscript, Harvard University.
Abowd, John and Francis Kramarz. 2002. “The Analysis of Labor Markets Using Matched
Employer-Employee Data.” In Orley Ashenfelter and David Card eds. Handbook of Labor
Economics, Volume 3B. Amsterdam: North Holland. 2629-2710.
Abowd, John, Bryce E. Stephens, Lars Vilhuber, Fredrik Andersson, Kevin McKinney, Marc
Roemer, and Simon Woodcock. 2009. “The LEHD infrastructure files and the creation of the
Quarterly Workforce Indicators.” In Timothy Dunne, J. Bradford Jensen and Mark Roberts eds.
Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
149-230.

Abowd, John, Paul Lengermann and Kevin McKinney. 2002. “The Measurement of Human
Capital in the U.S. Economy.” LEHD Technical Paper TP-2002-09, US Bureau of the Census.
Almandsmith, Sherry, Lorena Adams and Hans Bos. 2006. Evaluation of the Strengthening the
Connections Between Unemployment Insurance and the One-Stop Delivery Systems
Demonstration Project in Wisconsin: Final Report. Oakland: Berkeley Policy Associates.

Andersson, Fredrik, Harry Holzer and Julia Lane. 2005. Moving Up or Moving On: Who
Advances in the Low-Wage Labor Market? New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Ashenfelter, Orley. 1978. “Estimating the Effect of Training Programs on Earnings.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 60(1): 47-57.

Auerbach, Alan and James Hines. 2002. “Taxation and Economic Efficiency.” In Alan Auerbach
and Martin Feldstein eds. Handbook of Public Fiance, Volume 3. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
1347-1421.

Barnow, Burt. 2011. “Lessons from WIA Performance Measures.” In Douglas Besharov and
Phoebe Cottingham eds. The Workforce Investment Act: Implementation Experiences and
Evaluation Findings. Kalamazoo MI: Upjohn Institute. 209-232.

Barnow, Burt and Jeffrey Smith. 2004. “Performance Management of U.S. Job Training
Programs.” In Christopher O’Leary, Robert Straits and Stephen Wandner eds. Job Trainining
Policy in the United States. Kalamazoo MI: Upjohn Institute. 21-56.

Barron, John, Mark Berger and Dan Black. 1997. On-the-Job Training. Kalamazoo MI: Upjohn
Institute.




45
Behnke, Stefanie, Markus Frölich, and Michael Lechner. 2010. “A Caseworker Like Me – Does
the Similarity between the Unemployed and their Casewokers Increase Job Placements.”
Economic Journal 120(549): 1430-1459.

Bergemann, Annette and Gerard van den Berg. 2008. “Active Labor Market Policy Effects for
Women in Europe – A Survey.” Annals of Economics and Statistics 91/92: 384-408.

Besharov, Douglas and Phoebe Cottingham eds. 2011. The Workforce Investment Act:
Implementation Experiences and Evaluation Findings. Kalamazoo MI: Upjohn Institute.

Black, Daniel and Jeffrey Smith. 2004. “How Robust is the Evidence on the Effects of College
Quality? Evidence from Matching,” Journal of Econometrics 121(1): 99-124.

Black, Dan, Kermit Daniel and Jeffrey Smith. 2005. “College Quality and Wages in the United
States.” German Economic Review 6(3): 415-443.

Black, Dan, Jeffrey Smith, Miana Plesca and Suzanne Shannon. 2003. Estimating the Duration
of Unemployment Insurance Benefit Recipiency. Revised Final Report Prepared for the US
Department of Labor.

Blank, Diane, Laura Heald and Cynthia Fagnoni. 2011. “An Overview of WIA.” In Douglas
Besharov and Phoebe Cottingham eds. The Workforce Investment Act: Implementation
Experiences and Evaluation Findings. Kalamazoo MI: Upjohn Institute. 49-80.

Bloom, Howard, Larry Orr, Stephen Bell, George Cave, Fred Doolittle, Winston Lin and
Johannes Bos. 1997. “The Benefits and Costs of JTPA Title II-A Programs: Finidngs from the
National Job Training Partnership Act Study.” Journal of Human Resources 32: 549-576.

Brown Charles, James Hamilton and James Medoff. 1990. Employers Large and Small.
Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.

Busso, Matias, John DiNardo and Justin McCrary. 2013. “New Evidence on the Finite Sample
Properties of Propensity Score Reweighting and Matching Estimators.” Unpublished manuscript,
University of California at Berkeley.

Cahuc, Pierre and Thomas Le Barbanchon. 2010. “Labor Market Policy Evaluation in
Equilibrium: Some Lessons of the Job Search and Matching Model.” Labour Economics 17(1):
196-205.

Caliendo, Marco and Oscar Mitnik. 2013. “Unobservable, But Unimportant! The Influence of
Usually Unobserved Variables for Estimating Treatment Effects.” Unpublished manuscript,
University of Potsdam.

Card, David, Joachim Kluve and Andrea Weber. 2010. “Active Labour Market Policy
Evaluations: A Meta-Analysis.” Economic Journal 120(548): F452-F477.



46
Chabé-Ferret, Sylvain. 2012. “Matching vs. Differencing when Estimating Treatment Effects
with Panel Data: the Example of the Effect of Job Training Programs on Earnings.” Unpublished
manuscript, IRSTEA.

Courty, Pascal and Gerald Marschke. 2004. “An Empirical Investigation of Dysfunctional
Responses to Explicit Performance Incentives.” Journal of Labor Economics 22(1): 23-56.

Dahlby, Bev. 2008. The Marginal Cost of Public Funds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

D’Amico, Ronald, Kate Dunham, Annelies Goger, Charles Lea, Nicole Rigg, Sheryl Ude and
Andrew Wiegand. 2009. Findings from a Study of One-Stop Self-Services: A Case Study
Approach. Oakland: Social Policy Research Associates.

Decker, Paul. 2011. “Ten Years of WIA Research.” In Douglas Besharov and Phoebe
Cottingham eds. The Workforce Investment Act: Implementation Experiences and Evaluation
Findings. Kalamazoo MI: Upjohn Institute. 315-346.

Dehejia, Rajeev and Sadek Wahba. 1999. “Causal Effects in Nonexperimental Studies:
Reevaluating the Evaluations of Training Programs.” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 94(448): 1053-1062.

Dehejia, Rajeev and Sadek Wahba. 2002. “Propensity Score Matching Methods for
Noexperimental Causal Studies.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(1): 151-161.

Dolton, Peter and Jeffrey Smith. 2011. “The Impact of the UK New Deal for Lone Parents on
Benefit Receipt.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 5491.

Fredriksson, Peter and Per Johansson. 2008. “Program Evaluation and Random Program Starts.”
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 26(4): 435-445.

Friedlander, Daniel, David Greenberg and Philip Robins. 1997. “Evaluating Government
Training Programs for the Economically Disadvantaged.” Journal of Economic Literature 35(4):
1809-1855.

Friedlander, Daniel and Philip Robins. 2005. “Evaluating Program Evaluations: New Evidence
on Commonly Used Experimental Methods.” American Economic Review 85(4): 923-937.

Frölich, Markus. 2004. “Finite-Sample Properties of Propensity-Score Matching and Weighting
Estimators.” Review of Economics and Statistics 86(1): 77-90.

Frost, Robert. 1920. “The Road Not Taken.” In: Robert Frost (ed.), Mountain Interval. New
York: Henry Holt.

Greenberg, David, Charles Michalopoulos and Philip Robins. 2006. “Do Experimental and
Nonexperimental Evaluations Given Different Answers About the Effectiveness of Government-
Funding Training Programs?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 25(3): 523-552.

47
Heckman, James, Carolyn Heinrich, Pascal Courty, Gerald Marschke and Jeffrey Smith. 2011.
The Performance of Performance Standards. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for
Employment Research.

Heckman, James, Hidehiko Ichimura and Petra Todd. 1997. “Matching as an Econometric
Evaluation Estimator: Evidence from Evaluating a Job Training Programme.” Review of
Economic Studies 64(4): 605-654.
Heckman, James, Hidehiko Ichimura, Jeffrey Smith, and Petra Todd. 1998. “Characterizing
Selection Bias Using Experimental Data,” Econometrica 66(5): 1017-1098.

Heckman, James and Salvador Navarro-Lozano. 2004. “Using Matching, Instrumental Variables
and Control Functions to Estimate Economic Choice Models.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 86(1): 30-57.

Heckman, James, Robert LaLonde, and Jeffrey Smith. 1999. “The Economics and Econometrics
of Active Labor Market Programs” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card eds. Handbook of
Labor Economics, Volume 3A. Amsterdam: North-Holland. 1865-2097.

Heckman, James, and Jeffrey Smith. 1995. “Assessing the Case for Social Experiments,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(2): 85-110.

Heckman, James, and Jeffrey Smith. 1999. “The Pre-Program Earnings Dip and the
Determinants of Participation in a Social Program: Implications for Simple Program Evaluation
Strategies,” Economic Journal 109(457): 313-348.

Heinrich, Carolyn, Peter Mueser, Kenneth Troske, Kyung-Seong Jeon and Daver Kahvecioglu.
2009. “A Nonexperimental Evaluation of WIA Programs.” In Douglas Besharov and Phoebe
Cottingham eds. The Workforce Investment Act: Implementation Experiences and Evaluation
Findings. Kalamazoo MI: Upjohn Institute. 371-406.
Heinrich, Carolyn, Peter Mueser, Kenneth Troske, Kyung-Seong Jeon and Daver Kahvecioglu.
2012. “New Estimates of Public Employment and Training Program Net Impacts:
Nonexperimental Evaluation of the Workforce Investment Act Program.” Unpublished
manuscript, University of Kentucky.
Heinrich, Carolyn and Christopher King. 2010. "How Effective are Workforce Development
Programs?" Presented at the 40th Anniversary Conference of the Ray Marshall Center,
University of Texas, Austin TX, October.
Hirano, Keisuke and Guido Imbens. 2001. “Estimation of Causal Effects Using Propensity Score
Weighting: An Application to Data on Right Heart Catheterization.” Health Services and
Outcomes Research Methodology 2: 259-278.
Hirano, Keisuke, Guido Imbens, and Geert Ridder. 2003. “Efficient Estimation of Average
Treatment Effects Using the Estimated Propensity Score.” Econometrica 71(4): 1161-1189.


48
Hollenbeck, Kevin. 2009. “Return on Investment Analysis of a Selected Set of Workforce
System Programs in Indiana.” Report submitted to the Indiana Chamber of Commerce
Foundation, Indianapolis, Indiana. http://research.upjohn.org/reports/15.
Hollenbeck, Kevin. 2012. “Return on Investment in Workforce Development Programs.” Upjohn
Institute Working Paper 12-188. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment
Research. http://research.upjohn.org/up_workingpapers/188.
Holzer, Harry. 2009. “Workforce Development Policy as an Antipoverty Tool: What Do We
Know? What Can We Do?” In Maria Cancian and Sheldon Danziger eds. Changing Poverty,
Changing Policy. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. 301-329.
Holzer, Harry, Julia Lane and Lars Vilhuber. 2004. “Escaping Poverty for Low-Wage Workers:
The Role of Employer Characteristics and Changes.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review
57(4): 560-578.
Holzer, Harry, Julia Lane, David Rosenblum and Fredrik Andersson. 2011. Where Are All the
Good Jobs Going? What National and Local Job Quality and Dynamics Mean for U.S. Workers.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Horvitz, D. and D. Thompson. 1952. “A Generalization of Sampling Without Replacement from
a Finite Universe.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 47(260): 663-685.
Hotz, V. Joseph and Karl Scholz. 2002. “Measuring Employment and Income Outcomes
for Low-Income Populations with Administrative and Survey Data.” In Studies of
Welfare Populations: Data Collection and Research Issues. National Research Council:
National Academy Press. 275-315.
Huber, Martin, Michael Lechner and Conny Wunsch. 2013. “The Performance of Estimators
Based on the Propensity Score.” Journal of Econometrics 175:1-21.
Jacobson, Lou, Robert Lalonde and Daniel Sullivan. 2005. “The Impact of Community College
Retraining on Older Displaced Workers: Should We Teach Old Dogs New Tricks?” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review 58(3):398-415.
King, Christopher. 2004. “The Effectiveness of Publicly Financed Training in the United States.”
In Christopher O'Leary, Robert Straits and Stephen Wandner. eds. Job Training Policy in the
United States. Kalamazoo MI: Upjohn Institute. 57-100.
King, Christopher and Burt Barnow. 2011. “The Use of Market Mechanisms.” In Douglas
Besharov and Phoebe Cottingham eds. The Workforce Investment Act: Implementation
Experiences and Evaluation Findings. Kalamazoo, MI: Upjohn Institute. 81-112.
Kornfeld, Robert and Howard Bloom. 1999. “Measuring Program Impacts on Earnings and
Employment: Do Unemployment Insurance Wage Reports from Employers Agree with Surveys
of Individuals? Journal of Labor Economics 17: 168–197.

Lalonde, Robert. 1995. “The Promise of Public-Sector Training.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 9(2): 149-168.

49
Lalonde, Robert. 1986. “Evaluating the Econometric Evaluations of Training Programs with
Experimental Data.” American Economic Review 76(4): 604-620.
Lechner, Michael. 2010. “The Estimation of Causal Effects by Difference-in-Difference
Methods” Foundations and Trends in Econometrics 4(3): 165-224.
Lechner, Michael and Conny Wunsch. 2009. “Are Training Programs More Effective When
Unemployment is High?” Journal of Labor Economics 27(4): 653-692.
Lechner, Michael and Conny Wunsch. 2013. “Sensitivity of Matching-Based Program
Evaluations to the Availability of Control Variables.” Labour Economics 21:111-121.
Lise, Jeremy, Shannon Seitz and Jeffrey Smith. 2004. “Equilibrium Policy Experiments and the
Evaluation of Social Programs.” NBER Working Paper No. 10283.
McConnell, Sheena, Paul Decker and Irma Perez-Johnson. 2006. “The Role of Counseling in
Voucher Programs: Findings from the Individual Training Account Experiment.” Princeton NJ:
Mathematica Policy Research.
Morris, Pamela and Charles Michalopoulos. 2003. “Findings from the Self-Sufficiency Project:
Effects on Children and Adolescents of a Program That Increased Employment and Earnings.”
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology 24(2): 201-239.
Parsons, Donald. 1986. “The Employment Relationship: Job Attachment, Work Effort and the
Nature of Contracts.” In Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard eds. Handbook of Labor
Economics, Volume 1. Amsterdam: North Holland. 789-848.
Pope, Devon and Justin Sydnor. 2011. “Implementing Anti-Discrimination Policies in Statistical
Profiling Models.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3(3): 206-231.
Rosenbaum, Paul and Donald Rubin. 1983. “The Central Role of the Propensity Score in
Observational Studies for Causal Effects.” Biometrika 70(1): 41-55.
Rosenbaum, Paul. 2001. “Stability in the Absence of Treatment.” Journal of the American
Statistical Association 96: 210-219.
Schochet, Peter, John Burghardt, and Sheena McConnell. 2006. National Job Corps Study and
Longer-Term Follow-Up Study: Impact and Benefit-Cost Findings Using Survey and Summary
Earnings Records Data, Final Report. Washington, DC: Mathematica Policy Research.

Schochet, Peter, John Burghardt, and Sheena McConnell. 2008. “Does Job Corps Work? Impact
Findings from the National Job Corps Study.” American Economic Review 98(5): 1864–86.

Sianesi, Barbara. 2004. “An Evaluation of the Swedish System of Active Labor Market
Programs in the 1990s.” Review of Economics and Statistics 86(1): 133-155.

Smith, Jeffrey and Petra Todd. 2005. “Does Matching Overcome LaLonde’s Critique of
Nonexperimental Methods?” Journal of Econometrics 125(1-2): 305-353.



50
Stevens, David. 2007. “Employment That Is Not Covered by State Unemployment Insurance
Laws.” U.S. Census Bureau (Washington, DC) LEHD Technical Paper No. TP-2007-04.

US Department of Labor. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1997. Bureau of Labor Statistics Handbook
of Methods. Washington DC: Government Printing Office.

Van Horn, Carl and Aaron Fichtner. 2011. “Eligible Training Provider Lists and Consumer
Report Cards.” In Douglas Besharov and Phoebe Cottingham eds. The Workforce Investment
Act: Implementation Experiences and Evaluation Findings. Kalamazoo MI: Upjohn
Institute.153-176.
Wallace, Geoffrey and Robert Haveman. 2007. “The Implications of Differences between
Employer and Worker Employment/Earnings Reports for Policy Evaluation.” Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management 26 (4): 737-753.




51
TABLE 1a: Descriptive Statistics for Characteristics, State A


                                                                 Adult                Dislocated
                                                          Treated   Untreated     Treated   Untreated

                               Male                              0.38     0.41        0.44        0.40

Race                           White                             0.36     0.24        0.51        0.47
                               Other                             0.06     0.07        0.09        0.12
                               Black                             0.58     0.70        0.40        0.41

Age at Registration (years)                                     35.32    36.20       42.01      42.65

Education                      Less than High School             0.10     0.25        0.04        0.08
                               High School                       0.60     0.54        0.53        0.43
                               Some College                      0.20     0.11        0.24        0.23
                               College or More                   0.09     0.08        0.20        0.25
                               Missing                           0.01     0.03        0.00        0.02

Year of Registration                   1999                      0.00     0.00        0.00       0.00
                                       2000                      0.08     0.11        0.07       0.08
                                       2001                      0.32     0.31        0.24       0.28
                                       2002                      0.23     0.26        0.28       0.28
                                       2003                      0.20     0.17        0.28       0.19
                                       2004                      0.11     0.09        0.09       0.13
                                       2005                      0.06     0.06        0.04       0.05

Quarter of Registration                  1                       0.29     0.23        0.26       0.27
                                         2                       0.23     0.24        0.28       0.26
                                         3                       0.28     0.31        0.26       0.26
                                         4                       0.20     0.21        0.20       0.21

Earnings in 1st Previous Year                                   13355    12349      29618       29623
Zero Earnings in 1st Previous Year                                0.21     0.21       0.10        0.10
Earnings in 2nd Previous Year                                   14012    13837      29474       30108
Zero Earnings in 2nd Previous Year                                0.24     0.24       0.13        0.13

Age at Registration            <20                               0.08     0.08        0.01        0.01
                               21-25                             0.17     0.16        0.05        0.05
                               26-30                             0.14     0.13        0.08        0.08
                               31-35                             0.14     0.13        0.13        0.12
                               36-40                             0.14     0.14        0.17        0.15
                               41-45                             0.12     0.14        0.18        0.18
                               46-50                             0.09     0.10        0.16        0.16
                               51-55                             0.06     0.07        0.12        0.13
                               56-60                             0.03     0.04        0.07        0.08
                               61+                               0.02     0.02        0.02        0.03




                                                                                    Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 1a: Descriptive Statistics for Characteristics, State A


                                                                  Adult                     Dislocated
                                                           Treated   Untreated          Treated   Untreated

Firm Industry                    Construction                   0.03        0.03             0.03          0.03
                                 Manufacturing                  0.09        0.07             0.22          0.13
                                 Wholesale                      0.03        0.03             0.06          0.05
                                 Retail                         0.15        0.13             0.12          0.12
                                 Transportation                 0.02        0.02             0.02          0.02
                                 Information                    0.02        0.02             0.04          0.04
                                 Finance                        0.03        0.03             0.05          0.06
                                 Professional                   0.04        0.05             0.09          0.11
                                 Support                        0.13        0.18             0.10          0.12
                                 Education                      0.03        0.03             0.03          0.03
                                 Health Care                    0.10        0.09             0.06          0.08
                                 Hotels/Food                    0.12        0.12             0.03          0.04
                                 Public Administration          0.02        0.03             0.02          0.02
                                 Other                          0.03        0.03             0.03          0.03
                                 Other Services                 0.03        0.03             0.03          0.03
                                 Unemployed                     0.12        0.11             0.07          0.06

Disabled                                                        0.06        0.03             0.03          0.03
Veteran                                                         0.06        0.05             0.08          0.07

Transition: Employed to Employed                                0.29        0.26             0.43          0.41
Transition: Employed to Not Employed                            0.30        0.25             0.35          0.35
Transition: Not Employed to Employed                            0.26        0.38             0.14          0.17
Transition: Not Employed to Not Employed                        0.15        0.11             0.08          0.07

TANF in Quarter t                                               0.06        0.08             0.00          0.01
TANF in Quarter t-1                                             0.05        0.07             0.00          0.01
TANF in Quarter t-2                                             0.04        0.07             0.00          0.01
TANF in Quarter t-3 or t-4                                      0.05        0.07             0.00          0.01
TANF in Quarters t-1 to t-2                                     0.06        0.09             0.01          0.02
TANF in Quarters t-1 to t-4                                     0.06        0.09             0.01          0.02

Firm Size >= 100                                                0.65         0.68            0.67          0.64
Low-Wage Proportion                                             0.20         0.21            0.10          0.11
High Turnover                                                   0.23         0.24            0.28          0.27
Firm Fixed Effects Quintile 1                                   0.08         0.10            0.21          0.23
Firm Fixed Effects Quintile 2                                   0.10         0.10            0.18          0.14
Firm Fixed Effects Quintile 3                                   0.13         0.11            0.15          0.14
Firm Fixed Effects Quintile 4                                   0.18         0.18            0.13          0.13
Firm Fixed Effects Quintile 5                                   0.25         0.27            0.11          0.13
No Firm Fixed Effects Quintile                                  0.14         0.13            0.15          0.17


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.
Notes: The industry labeled 'Other' comprises agriculture, utilities, mining, real estate, management of
companies, and entertainment. Previous year refers to the four quarters prior to the quarter of WIA
registration. Prior industry refers to the most recent job prior to quarter of WIA registration.


                                                                                           Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 1b: Descriptive Statistics for Characteristics, State B


                                                                 Adult                Dislocated
                                                          Treated   Untreated     Treated   Untreated

                               Male                              0.37     0.41        0.57         0.52

Race                           White                             0.48     0.22        0.72         0.46
                               Other                             0.11     0.20        0.14         0.23
                               Black                             0.40     0.57        0.14         0.32

Age at Registration (years)                                     33.10    35.73       40.60        42.66

Education                      Less than High School             0.11     0.22        0.05         0.13
                               High School                       0.58     0.49        0.53         0.51
                               Some College                      0.24     0.22        0.24         0.23
                               College or More                   0.07     0.08        0.18         0.12
                               Missing                           0.00     0.00        0.00         0.00

Year of Registration                   1999                      0.07     0.04        0.08         0.05
                                       2000                      0.09     0.12        0.09         0.11
                                       2001                      0.26     0.25        0.26         0.25
                                       2002                      0.30     0.22        0.32         0.25
                                       2003                      0.20     0.20        0.19         0.18
                                       2004                      0.08     0.14        0.06         0.13
                                       2005                      0.01     0.03        0.00         0.02

Quarter of Registration                  1                       0.27     0.28        0.26         0.32
                                         2                       0.23     0.22        0.25         0.23
                                         3                       0.30     0.27        0.28         0.23
                                         4                       0.21     0.23        0.22         0.21

Earnings in 1st Previous Year                                    9275     7412      35120         30573
Zero Earnings in 1st Previous Year                                0.22    0.30        0.05          0.05
Earnings in 2nd Previous Year                                   12094    10089      39318         35343
Zero Earnings in 2nd Previous Year                                0.23     0.31       0.05          0.04

Age at Registration            <20                               0.07     0.05        0.01         0.01
                               21-25                             0.22     0.17        0.06         0.06
                               26-30                             0.18     0.15        0.11         0.09
                               31-35                             0.15     0.14        0.14         0.11
                               36-40                             0.13     0.14        0.16         0.14
                               41-45                             0.10     0.13        0.18         0.18
                               46-50                             0.07     0.10        0.16         0.18
                               51-55                             0.04     0.06        0.11         0.14
                               56-60                             0.02     0.03        0.05         0.08
                               61+                               0.01     0.02        0.01         0.02




                                                                                             Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 1b: Descriptive Statistics for Characteristics, State B


                                                                 Adult                      Dislocated
                                                          Treated   Untreated           Treated   Untreated

Firm Industry                    Construction                   0.02        0.01             0.01           0.01
                                 Manufacturing                  0.11        0.11             0.39           0.39
                                 Wholesale                      0.03        0.02             0.05           0.04
                                 Retail                         0.13        0.11             0.08           0.09
                                 Transportation                 0.04        0.04             0.04           0.04
                                 Information                    0.02        0.02             0.05           0.04
                                 Finance                        0.02        0.03             0.04           0.06
                                 Professional                   0.03        0.03             0.08           0.04
                                 Support                        0.16        0.19             0.08           0.08
                                 Education                      0.02        0.02             0.02           0.01
                                 Health Care                    0.13        0.09             0.04           0.05
                                 Hotels/Food                    0.12        0.10             0.02           0.04
                                 Public Administration          0.02        0.01             0.01           0.02
                                 Other                          0.03        0.03             0.04           0.04
                                 Other Services                 0.02        0.02             0.02           0.02
                                 Unemployed                     0.10        0.16             0.03           0.02

Disabled                                                        0.05        0.08             0.03           0.02
Veteran                                                         0.05        0.05             0.10           0.09

Transition: Employed to Employed                                0.26        0.19             0.49           0.48
Transition: Employed to Not Employed                            0.32        0.28             0.37           0.33
Transition: Not Employed to Employed                            0.27        0.36             0.10           0.16
Transition: Not Employed to Not Employed                        0.15        0.17             0.04           0.03

No UI Experience in Quarter t-1 or t-2                          0.94        0.92             0.87          0.820
No UI Experience in Quarter t-3 or t-4                          0.97        0.95             0.97          0.933
No UI Experience in Quarters t-5 to t-8                         0.99        0.98             0.99          0.978
Any UI Experience in Quarters t-1 to t-4                        0.07        0.10             0.13          0.187
Any UI Experience in Quarters t-1 to t-8                        0.07        0.11             0.13          0.188
Any ES Service Events in Quarter t-1 or t-2                     0.04        0.06             0.03          0.040
Any ES Service Events in Quarter t-3 or t-4                     0.03        0.03             0.01          0.018
Any ES Service Events in Quarters t-5 or t-8                    0.03        0.03             0.01          0.013
Received any ES Service Events in Quarters t-1 to t-4           0.05        0.07             0.04          0.048
Received any ES Service Events in Quarters t-1 to t-8           0.06        0.08             0.04          0.053

Firm Size >= 100                                                0.69        0.69             0.78           0.81
Low-Wage Proportion                                             0.26        0.24             0.09           0.10
High Turnover                                                   0.17        0.17             0.26           0.26
Firm Fixed Effects Quintile 1                                   0.07        0.06             0.31           0.23
Firm Fixed Effects Quintile 2                                   0.08        0.09             0.21           0.23
Firm Fixed Effects Quintile 3                                   0.11        0.11             0.12           0.17
Firm Fixed Effects Quintile 4                                   0.21        0.20             0.12           0.15
Firm Fixed Effects Quintile 5                                   0.29        0.28             0.09           0.12
No Firm Fixed Effects Quintile                                  0.13        0.10             0.10           0.08


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.
Notes: The industry labeled 'Other' comprises agriculture, utilities, mining, real estate, management of
companies, and entertainment. Previous year refers to the four quarters prior to the quarter of WIA
registration. Prior industry refers to the most recent job prior to quarter of WIA registration.

                                                                                                    Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 2a: Descriptive Statistics for Earnings & Employment, State A


                                                                                Adult                                         Dislocated
                                                               Treated                     Untreated              Treated                     Untreated


Number of Participants                                          4640                         10892                 4347                         6489

                                                          Earnings Employment           Earnings Employment   Earnings Employment          Earnings Employment
                             t-12                            3120        0.57              3117        0.55      6408        0.72             6406        0.70
                             t-11                            3248        0.58              3173        0.56      6718        0.74             6670        0.72
                             t-10                            3223        0.59              3271        0.57      6760        0.74             6853        0.73
                             t-9                             3391        0.60              3353        0.58      6993        0.75             7064        0.74
                             t-8                             3386        0.61              3341        0.59      7059        0.76             7120        0.74
                             t-7                             3549        0.62              3472        0.61      7309        0.78             7491        0.78
                             t-6                             3518        0.63              3480        0.61      7461        0.80             7632        0.79
                             t-5                             3559        0.63              3544        0.61      7644        0.81             7865        0.80
                             t-4                             3558        0.64              3431        0.62      7753        0.82             7766        0.81
                             t-3                             3557        0.64              3218        0.60      7806        0.83             7723        0.81
                             t-2                             3364        0.63              3018        0.59      7449        0.80             7558        0.80
                             t-1                             2877        0.60              2682        0.58      6610        0.75             6576        0.73
                             t                               1942        0.55              2150        0.64      3985        0.57             3845        0.58
                             t+1                             2072        0.58              2879        0.69      2658        0.49             3758        0.60
                             t+2                             2796        0.65              3353        0.70      3457        0.60             4883        0.69
                             t+3                             3381        0.68              3575        0.70      4228        0.65             5390        0.72
                             t+4                             3678        0.69              3631        0.69      4713        0.68             5479        0.71
                             t+5                             3875        0.70              3754        0.68      4921        0.69             5668        0.71
                             t+6                             4092        0.70              3714        0.67      5271        0.70             5783        0.71
                             t+7                             4109        0.69              3777        0.67      5381        0.71             5859        0.70
                             t+8                             4137        0.68              3801        0.66      5439        0.70             5811        0.70
                             t+9                             4196        0.68              3838        0.66      5507        0.70             5951        0.69
                             t+10                            4247        0.68              3811        0.65      5591        0.70             5967        0.69
                             t+11                            4259        0.67              3881        0.64      5681        0.70             6021        0.68
                             t+12                            4286        0.66              3902        0.64      5644        0.69             5978        0.68


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.
Notes: Earnings are in 2008$. Employment is proportion employed.




                                                                           Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 2b: Descriptive Statistics for Earnings & Employment, State B


                                                                                Adult                                         Dislocated
                                                               Treated                     Untreated              Treated                     Untreated


Number of Participants                                          11380                        11802                 16187                        12059

                                                          Earnings Employment           Earnings Employment   Earnings Employment          Earnings Employment
                             t-12                            3015        0.60              2594        0.54      9324        0.88             8523        0.88
                             t-11                            3104        0.62              2631        0.55      9448        0.88             8681        0.89
                             t-10                            3108        0.62              2622        0.55      9504        0.89             8690        0.89
                             t-9                             3107        0.62              2604        0.55      9579        0.89             8759        0.90
                             t-8                             3066        0.62              2582        0.55      9730        0.90             8839        0.90
                             t-7                             3081        0.63              2583        0.55      9837        0.91             8869        0.91
                             t-6                             3015        0.63              2516        0.55      9933        0.91             8833        0.91
                             t-5                             2931        0.63              2408        0.54      9818        0.91             8802        0.91
                             t-4                             2785        0.62              2286        0.52      9655        0.90             8557        0.90
                             t-3                             2572        0.61              2052        0.51      9478        0.89             8278        0.88
                             t-2                             2180        0.59              1729        0.48      8635        0.85             7550        0.83
                             t-1                             1738        0.56              1345        0.45      7352        0.76             6190        0.73
                             t                               1296        0.53              1214        0.55      4198        0.59             3922        0.64
                             t+1                             1618        0.55              2351        0.66      2369        0.48             3658        0.66
                             t+2                             2216        0.61              2766        0.67      3346        0.57             4695        0.73
                             t+3                             2595        0.64              2878        0.65      4203        0.63             5306        0.75
                             t+4                             2835        0.65              2901        0.64      4762        0.67             5405        0.76
                             t+5                             3117        0.66              2960        0.63      5187        0.70             5584        0.76
                             t+6                             3238        0.66              2948        0.61      5484        0.71             5696        0.76
                             t+7                             3316        0.65              2951        0.60      5776        0.72             5747        0.75
                             t+8                             3445        0.65              2967        0.59      5953        0.73             5705        0.75
                             t+9                             3547        0.65              2998        0.59      6207        0.74             5843        0.74
                             t+10                            3574        0.64              2954        0.58      6375        0.74             5835        0.74
                             t+11                            3699        0.64              2971        0.57      6532        0.74             5862        0.73
                             t+12                            3686        0.64              2984        0.57      6585        0.74             5839        0.73


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.
Notes: Earnings are in 2008$. Employment is proportion employed.




                                                                           Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 3a: Probit Models of WIA Training Receipt, State A, Adult Classification



                                                                      Model 1                         Model 2                           Model 3                      Model 4                         Model 5                         Model 6
Omitted                                                       Avg. Marginal                   Avg. Marginal                     Avg. Marginal                Avg. Marginal                   Avg. Marginal                   Avg. Marginal
Category      Variable                                           Effect     Std. Error           Effect     Std. Error             Effect     Std. Error        Effect     Std. Error           Effect     Std. Error           Effect     Std. Error

Quarter 1     Registered in Quarter 2                                                                 -0.042         0.000             -0.017      0.000             -0.017       0.000              -0.017      0.000              -0.017       0.000
Quarter 1     Registered in Quarter 3                                                                 -0.043         0.000             -0.044      0.000             -0.044       0.000              -0.044      0.000              -0.044       0.000
Quarter 1     Registered in Quarter 4                                                                 -0.039         0.000             -0.043      0.000             -0.043       0.000              -0.043      0.000              -0.043       0.000
2002          Registered in 2000                                                                       0.024         0.000              0.016      0.000              0.016       0.000               0.017      0.000               0.016       0.000
2002          Registered in 2001                                                                       0.040         0.000              0.029      0.000              0.029       0.000               0.029      0.000               0.029       0.000
2002          Registered in 2003                                                                       0.058         0.000             -0.005      0.000             -0.004       0.000              -0.005      0.000              -0.004       0.000
2002          Registered in 2004                                                                       0.044         0.000             -0.043      0.000             -0.042       0.000              -0.042      0.000              -0.042       0.000
2002          Registered in 2005                                                                       0.025         0.000             -0.044      0.000             -0.043       0.000              -0.044      0.000              -0.043       0.000
Female        Male                                                    -0.012       0.000              -0.025         0.000              0.023      0.000              0.023       0.000               0.023      0.000               0.023       0.000
White         Other                                                   -0.103       0.000              -0.097         0.000             -0.018      0.000             -0.019       0.000              -0.018      0.000              -0.018       0.000
White         Black                                                   -0.121       0.000              -0.104         0.000              0.015      0.000              0.014       0.000               0.015      0.000               0.014       0.000
High School   Less than HS                                            -0.190       0.000              -0.187         0.000             -0.168      0.001             -0.168       0.001              -0.168      0.001              -0.167       0.001
High School   Some College                                             0.094       0.000               0.087         0.000              0.045      0.000              0.045       0.000               0.045      0.000               0.045       0.000
High School   College or More                                         -0.004       0.000               0.001         0.000             -0.015      0.000             -0.015       0.000              -0.015      0.000              -0.015       0.000
High School   Education Missing                                       -0.135       0.000              -0.151         0.000             -0.044      0.000             -0.044       0.000              -0.044      0.000              -0.044       0.000
26-30         Age <20                                                                                 -0.027         0.000             -0.013      0.000             -0.012       0.000              -0.012      0.000              -0.012       0.000
26-30         21-25                                                                                    0.003         0.000              0.001      0.000              0.000       0.000               0.001      0.000               0.000       0.000
26-30         31-35                                                                                   -0.011         0.000             -0.010      0.000             -0.010       0.000              -0.010      0.000              -0.010       0.000
26-30         36-40                                                                                   -0.030         0.000             -0.016      0.000             -0.017       0.000              -0.016      0.000              -0.017       0.000
26-30         41-45                                                                                   -0.081         0.000             -0.047      0.000             -0.047       0.000              -0.046      0.000              -0.046       0.000
26-30         46-50                                                                                   -0.090         0.000             -0.054      0.000             -0.054       0.000              -0.054      0.000              -0.054       0.000
26-30         51-55                                                                                   -0.116         0.000             -0.061      0.000             -0.061       0.000              -0.060      0.000              -0.060       0.000
26-30         56-60                                                                                   -0.163         0.000             -0.100      0.000             -0.100       0.000              -0.100      0.000              -0.099       0.000
26-30         61+                                                                                     -0.062         0.000             -0.060      0.000             -0.061       0.000              -0.060      0.000              -0.060       0.000
              Disabled                                                                                 0.128         0.000              0.094      0.000              0.094       0.000               0.094      0.000               0.094       0.000
              Veteran                                                                                  0.037         0.000              0.005      0.000              0.005       0.000               0.005      0.000               0.005       0.000
              Never Employed                                                                          -0.066         0.000              0.001      0.000              0.005       0.000               0.000      0.000               0.004       0.000

              Model 1 Earnings variables                               Included
              Model 1 Age variables                                    Included

              Industry of Employing Firm                                                               Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              No Employment in quarters t-1 to t-8                                                     Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              Earnings in quarters t-1 to t-8                                                          Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              Square of Earnings in quarters t-1 to t-8                                                Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              Employment Transitions                                                                   Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              Positive Earnings in certain periods                                                     Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              Zero Earnings in certain periods                                                         Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              TANF Benefits in certain periods (women only)                                            Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included

              WIA Location                                                                                                              Included                      Included                        Included                       Included

              Firm Variables                                                                                                                                          Included                                                       Included

              Extra Earnings variables                                                                                                                                                                Included                       Included


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.
Notes: Model 1 earnings variables are earnings in year before WIA registration, a dummy variable for zero earnings in year before WIA registration, earnings in 2nd year before WIA registration, and a dummy variable for zero earnings in 2nd year
before WIA registration. Model 1 age variables are age at time of WIA registration and square of age at time of WIA registration. Firm variables are Firm Size >=100, Low-Wage Proportion, High Turnover, and a series of dummy variables for Firm
Fixed Effects Quintile. Extra earnings variables are mean earnings in quarters t-12 through t-5, the standard deviation of earnings in quarters t-12 through t-5, and a series of dummy variables for the number of quarters with zero earnings.




                                                                                                                  Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 3b: Probit Models of WIA Training Receipt, State A, Dislocated Classification



                                                                      Model 1                         Model 2                           Model 3                      Model 4                         Model 5                         Model 6
Omitted                                                       Avg. Marginal                   Avg. Marginal                     Avg. Marginal                Avg. Marginal                   Avg. Marginal                   Avg. Marginal
Category      Variable                                           Effect     Std. Error           Effect     Std. Error             Effect     Std. Error        Effect     Std. Error           Effect     Std. Error           Effect     Std. Error

Quarter 1     Registered in Quarter 2                                                                  0.003         0.000              0.003      0.000              0.005       0.000               0.004      0.000               0.004       0.000
Quarter 1     Registered in Quarter 3                                                                 -0.013         0.000             -0.013      0.000             -0.015       0.000              -0.015      0.000              -0.015       0.000
Quarter 1     Registered in Quarter 4                                                                 -0.010         0.000             -0.010      0.000             -0.014       0.000              -0.013      0.000              -0.015       0.000
2002          Registered in 2000                                                                       0.054         0.000              0.054      0.000              0.054       0.000               0.055      0.000               0.055       0.000
2002          Registered in 2001                                                                      -0.023         0.000             -0.023      0.000             -0.022       0.000              -0.024      0.000              -0.022       0.000
2002          Registered in 2003                                                                       0.034         0.000              0.034      0.000              0.032       0.000               0.034      0.000               0.032       0.000
2002          Registered in 2004                                                                      -0.074         0.000             -0.074      0.000             -0.074       0.000              -0.073      0.000              -0.074       0.000
2002          Registered in 2005                                                                      -0.064         0.000             -0.064      0.000             -0.065       0.000              -0.064      0.000              -0.065       0.000
Female        Male                                                     0.048       0.000               0.040         0.000              0.040      0.000              0.041       0.000               0.041      0.000               0.041       0.000
White         Other                                                   -0.073       0.000               0.005         0.000              0.005      0.000              0.004       0.000               0.005      0.000               0.004       0.000
White         Black                                                   -0.028       0.000               0.039         0.000              0.039      0.000              0.035       0.000               0.038      0.000               0.035       0.000
High School   Less than HS                                            -0.190       0.000              -0.140         0.000             -0.140      0.000             -0.140       0.000              -0.141      0.000              -0.141       0.000
High School   Some College                                            -0.042       0.000              -0.006         0.000             -0.006      0.000             -0.007       0.000              -0.006      0.000              -0.006       0.000
High School   College or More                                         -0.107       0.000              -0.046         0.000             -0.046      0.000             -0.046       0.000              -0.046      0.000              -0.047       0.000
High School   Education Missing                                       -0.602       0.001              -0.404         0.001             -0.404      0.001             -0.406       0.001              -0.404      0.001              -0.406       0.001
26-30         Age <20                                                                                 -0.117         0.000             -0.117      0.000             -0.120       0.000              -0.114      0.000              -0.117       0.000
26-30         21-25                                                                                   -0.005         0.000             -0.005      0.000             -0.007       0.000              -0.005      0.000              -0.006       0.000
26-30         31-35                                                                                    0.012         0.000              0.012      0.000              0.012       0.000               0.012      0.000               0.012       0.000
26-30         36-40                                                                                    0.015         0.000              0.015      0.000              0.015       0.000               0.015      0.000               0.016       0.000
26-30         41-45                                                                                   -0.012         0.000             -0.012      0.000             -0.011       0.000              -0.011      0.000              -0.010       0.000
26-30         46-50                                                                                   -0.007         0.000             -0.007      0.000             -0.006       0.000              -0.007      0.000              -0.006       0.000
26-30         51-55                                                                                   -0.039         0.000             -0.039      0.000             -0.037       0.000              -0.038      0.000              -0.036       0.000
26-30         56-60                                                                                   -0.057         0.000             -0.057      0.000             -0.055       0.000              -0.057      0.000              -0.055       0.000
26-30         61+                                                                                     -0.065         0.000             -0.065      0.000             -0.063       0.000              -0.063      0.000              -0.061       0.000
              Disabled                                                                                 0.013         0.000              0.013      0.000              0.012       0.000               0.013      0.000               0.012       0.000
              Veteran                                                                                 -0.004         0.000             -0.004      0.000             -0.005       0.000              -0.004      0.000              -0.005       0.000
              Never Employed                                                                          -0.034         0.000             -0.034      0.000              0.001       0.000              -0.029      0.000               0.002       0.000

              Model 1 Earnings variables                               Included
              Model 1 Age variables                                    Included

              Industry of Employing Firm                                                               Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              No Employment in quarters t-1 to t-8                                                     Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              Earnings in quarters t-1 to t-8                                                          Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              Square of Earnings in quarters t-1 to t-8                                                Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              Employment Transitions                                                                   Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              Positive Earnings in certain periods                                                     Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              Zero Earnings in certain periods                                                         Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              TANF Benefits in certain periods (women only)                                            Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included

              WIA Location                                                                                                              Included                      Included                        Included                       Included

              Firm Variables                                                                                                                                          Included                                                       Included

              Extra Earnings variables                                                                                                                                                                Included                       Included


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.
Notes: Model 1 earnings variables are earnings in year before WIA registration, a dummy variable for zero earnings in year before WIA registration, earnings in 2nd year before WIA registration, and a dummy variable for zero earnings in 2nd year
before WIA registration. Model 1 age variables are age at time of WIA registration and square of age at time of WIA registration. Firm variables are Firm Size >=100, Low-Wage Proportion, High Turnover, and a series of dummy variables for Firm
Fixed Effects Quintile. Extra earnings variables are mean earnings in quarters t-12 through t-5, the standard deviation of earnings in quarters t-12 through t-5, and a series of dummy variables for the number of quarters with zero earnings.




                                                                                                                  Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 3c: Probit Models of WIA Training Receipt, State B, Adult Classification



                                                                      Model 1                         Model 2                           Model 3                      Model 4                         Model 5                         Model 6
Omitted                                                       Avg. Marginal                   Avg. Marginal                     Avg. Marginal                Avg. Marginal                   Avg. Marginal                   Avg. Marginal
Category      Variable                                           Effect     Std. Error           Effect     Std. Error             Effect     Std. Error        Effect     Std. Error           Effect     Std. Error           Effect     Std. Error

Quarter 1     Registered in Quarter 2                                                                  0.023         0.000              0.023      0.000              0.023       0.000               0.023      0.000               0.023       0.000
Quarter 1     Registered in Quarter 3                                                                  0.026         0.000              0.026      0.000              0.026       0.000               0.025      0.000               0.026       0.000
Quarter 1     Registered in Quarter 4                                                                  0.014         0.000              0.014      0.000              0.013       0.000               0.013      0.000               0.014       0.000
2002          Registered in 1999                                                                      -0.103         0.000             -0.103      0.000             -0.103       0.000              -0.102      0.000              -0.102       0.000
2002          Registered in 2000                                                                      -0.175         0.000             -0.175      0.000             -0.175       0.000              -0.174      0.000              -0.174       0.000
2002          Registered in 2001                                                                      -0.093         0.000             -0.093      0.000             -0.093       0.000              -0.092      0.000              -0.092       0.000
2002          Registered in 2003                                                                      -0.018         0.000             -0.018      0.000             -0.018       0.000              -0.018      0.000              -0.018       0.000
2002          Registered in 2004                                                                      -0.098         0.000             -0.098      0.000             -0.097       0.000              -0.101      0.000              -0.097       0.000
2002          Registered in 2005                                                                      -0.302         0.001             -0.302      0.001             -0.302       0.001              -0.309      0.001              -0.298       0.001
Female        Male                                                    -0.022       0.000               0.013         0.000              0.013      0.000              0.012       0.000               0.011      0.000               0.010       0.000
White         Other                                                   -0.296       0.000              -0.045         0.000             -0.045      0.000             -0.045       0.000              -0.045      0.000              -0.045       0.000
White         Black                                                   -0.254       0.000              -0.012         0.000             -0.012      0.000             -0.010       0.000              -0.013      0.000              -0.011       0.000
High School   Less than HS                                            -0.141       0.000              -0.073         0.000             -0.073      0.000             -0.072       0.000              -0.072      0.000              -0.071       0.000
High School   Some College                                            -0.007       0.000               0.007         0.000              0.007      0.000              0.007       0.000               0.006      0.000               0.006       0.000
High School   College or More                                         -0.046       0.000              -0.006         0.000             -0.006      0.000             -0.006       0.000              -0.008      0.000              -0.008       0.000
High School   Education Missing                                             .           .                   .             .                  .          .                  .           .                   .          .                   .           .
26-30         Age <20                                                                                  0.028         0.000              0.028      0.000              0.028       0.000               0.032      0.000               0.032       0.000
26-30         21-25                                                                                    0.026         0.000              0.026      0.000              0.027       0.000               0.028      0.000               0.028       0.000
26-30         31-35                                                                                    0.007         0.000              0.007      0.000              0.006       0.000               0.006      0.000               0.005       0.000
26-30         36-40                                                                                   -0.014         0.000             -0.014      0.000             -0.015       0.000              -0.015      0.000              -0.015       0.000
26-30         41-45                                                                                   -0.040         0.000             -0.040      0.000             -0.040       0.000              -0.042      0.000              -0.042       0.000
26-30         46-50                                                                                   -0.040         0.000             -0.040      0.000             -0.041       0.000              -0.042      0.000              -0.042       0.000
26-30         51-55                                                                                   -0.048         0.000             -0.048      0.000             -0.049       0.000              -0.050      0.000              -0.050       0.000
26-30         56-60                                                                                   -0.069         0.000             -0.069      0.000             -0.069       0.000              -0.074      0.000              -0.073       0.000
26-30         61+                                                                                     -0.184         0.000             -0.184      0.000             -0.185       0.000              -0.183      0.000              -0.184       0.000
              Disabled                                                                                -0.127         0.000             -0.127      0.000             -0.126       0.000              -0.125      0.000              -0.125       0.000
              Veteran                                                                                  0.007         0.000              0.007      0.000              0.007       0.000               0.007      0.000               0.007       0.000
              Never Employed                                                                          -0.022         0.000             -0.022      0.000             -0.049       0.000              -0.003      0.000              -0.028       0.000

              Model 1 Earnings variables                               Included
              Model 1 Age variables                                    Included

              Industry of Employing Firm                                                               Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              No Employment in quarters t-1 to t-8                                                     Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              Earnings in quarters t-1 to t-8                                                          Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              Square of Earnings in quarters t-1 to t-8                                                Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              Employment Transitions                                                                   Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              Positive Earnings in certain periods                                                     Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              Zero Earnings in certain periods                                                         Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              UI Experience in certain periods                                                         Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              ES Service Events in certain periods                                                     Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included

              WIA Location                                                                                                              Included                      Included                        Included                       Included

              Firm Variables                                                                                                                                          Included                                                       Included

              Extra Earnings variables                                 Included                                                                                                                       Included                       Included


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.
Notes: Model 1 earnings variables are earnings in year before WIA registration, a dummy variable for zero earnings in year before WIA registration, earnings in 2nd year before WIA registration, and a dummy variable for zero earnings in 2nd year
before WIA registration. Model 1 age variables are age at time of WIA registration and square of age at time of WIA registration. Firm variables are Firm Size >=100, Low-Wage Proportion, High Turnover, and a series of dummy variables for Firm
Fixed Effects Quintile. Extra earnings variables are mean earnings in quarters t-12 through t-5, the standard deviation of earnings in quarters t-12 through t-5, and a series of dummy variables for the number of quarters with zero earnings.




                                                                                                                  Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 3d: Probit Models of WIA Training Receipt, State B, Dislocated Classification



                                                                      Model 1                         Model 2                           Model 3                      Model 4                         Model 5                         Model 6
Omitted                                                       Avg. Marginal                   Avg. Marginal                     Avg. Marginal                Avg. Marginal                   Avg. Marginal                   Avg. Marginal
Category      Variable                                           Effect     Std. Error           Effect     Std. Error             Effect     Std. Error        Effect     Std. Error           Effect     Std. Error           Effect     Std. Error

Quarter 1     Registered in Quarter 2                                                                  0.028         0.000              0.028      0.000              0.026       0.000               0.027      0.000               0.026       0.000
Quarter 1     Registered in Quarter 3                                                                  0.043         0.000              0.043      0.000              0.044       0.000               0.044      0.000               0.045       0.000
Quarter 1     Registered in Quarter 4                                                                  0.015         0.000              0.015      0.000              0.016       0.000               0.016      0.000               0.017       0.000
2002          Registered in 1999                                                                      -0.066         0.000             -0.066      0.000             -0.066       0.000              -0.064      0.000              -0.065       0.000
2002          Registered in 2000                                                                      -0.129         0.000             -0.129      0.000             -0.130       0.000              -0.129      0.000              -0.130       0.000
2002          Registered in 2001                                                                      -0.067         0.000             -0.067      0.000             -0.065       0.000              -0.065      0.000              -0.065       0.000
2002          Registered in 2003                                                                      -0.029         0.000             -0.029      0.000             -0.028       0.000              -0.029      0.000              -0.028       0.000
2002          Registered in 2004                                                                      -0.136         0.000             -0.136      0.000             -0.134       0.000              -0.135      0.000              -0.133       0.000
2002          Registered in 2005                                                                      -0.308         0.001             -0.308      0.001             -0.309       0.001              -0.306      0.001              -0.306       0.001
Female        Male                                                     0.011       0.000               0.020         0.000              0.020      0.000              0.019       0.000               0.018      0.000               0.018       0.000
White         Other                                                   -0.203       0.000              -0.025         0.000             -0.025      0.000             -0.024       0.000              -0.026      0.000              -0.024       0.000
White         Black                                                   -0.285       0.000              -0.047         0.000             -0.047      0.000             -0.046       0.000              -0.047      0.000              -0.045       0.000
High School   Less than HS                                            -0.143       0.000              -0.060         0.000             -0.060      0.000             -0.059       0.000              -0.059      0.000              -0.058       0.000
High School   Some College                                             0.012       0.000               0.015         0.000              0.015      0.000              0.014       0.000               0.015      0.000               0.014       0.000
High School   College or More                                          0.063       0.000               0.026         0.000              0.026      0.000              0.025       0.000               0.023      0.000               0.023       0.000
High School   Education Missing                                             .           .                   .             .                  .          .                  .           .                   .         .                    .           .
26-30         Age <20                                                                                 -0.009         0.000             -0.009      0.000             -0.005       0.000              -0.002      0.000               0.001       0.000
26-30         21-25                                                                                    0.010         0.000              0.010      0.000              0.010       0.000               0.011      0.000               0.011       0.000
26-30         31-35                                                                                   -0.005         0.000             -0.005      0.000             -0.004       0.000              -0.006      0.000              -0.005       0.000
26-30         36-40                                                                                   -0.021         0.000             -0.021      0.000             -0.020       0.000              -0.022      0.000              -0.021       0.000
26-30         41-45                                                                                   -0.052         0.000             -0.052      0.000             -0.051       0.000              -0.053      0.000              -0.052       0.000
26-30         46-50                                                                                   -0.077         0.000             -0.077      0.000             -0.075       0.000              -0.078      0.000              -0.076       0.000
26-30         51-55                                                                                   -0.119         0.000             -0.119      0.000             -0.116       0.000              -0.120      0.000              -0.117       0.000
26-30         56-60                                                                                   -0.151         0.000             -0.151      0.000             -0.148       0.000              -0.152      0.000              -0.150       0.000
26-30         61+                                                                                     -0.175         0.000             -0.175      0.000             -0.172       0.000              -0.175      0.000              -0.172       0.000
              Disabled                                                                                -0.023         0.000             -0.023      0.000             -0.023       0.000              -0.024      0.000              -0.023       0.000
              Veteran                                                                                 -0.007         0.000             -0.007      0.000             -0.007       0.000              -0.007      0.000              -0.008       0.000
              Never Employed                                                                          -0.001         0.000             -0.001      0.000             -0.039       0.000               0.010      0.000              -0.024       0.000

              Model 1 Earnings variables                               Included
              Model 1 Age variables                                    Included

              Industry of Employing Firm                                                               Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              No Employment in quarters t-1 to t-8                                                     Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              Earnings in quarters t-1 to t-8                                                          Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              Square of Earnings in quarters t-1 to t-8                                                Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              Employment Transitions                                                                   Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              Positive Earnings in certain periods                                                     Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              Zero Earnings in certain periods                                                         Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              UI Experience in certain periods                                                         Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included
              ES Service Events in certain periods                                                     Included                         Included                      Included                        Included                       Included

              WIA Location                                                                                                              Included                      Included                        Included                       Included

              Firm Variables                                                                                                                                          Included                                                       Included

              Extra Earnings variables                                 Included                                                                                                                       Included                       Included


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.
Notes: Model 1 earnings variables are earnings in year before WIA registration, a dummy variable for zero earnings in year before WIA registration, earnings in 2nd year before WIA registration, and a dummy variable for zero earnings in 2nd year
before WIA registration. Model 1 age variables are age at time of WIA registration and square of age at time of WIA registration. Firm variables are Firm Size >=100, Low-Wage Proportion, High Turnover, and a series of dummy variables for Firm
Fixed Effects Quintile. Extra earnings variables are mean earnings in quarters t-12 through t-5, the standard deviation of earnings in quarters t-12 through t-5, and a series of dummy variables for the number of quarters with zero earnings.




                                                                                                                  Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 4a: Impacts on Earnings & Employment, Inverse Propensity Score Weighting, Model 6, State A


                                               Adult Classification                Dislocated Classification
                                       Treatment Standard                     Treatment Standard
                                         Effect       Error       P-value       Effect      Error       P-value

Earnings, Differences
                  t+1                       -597           55      <.0001           -939         104     <.0001
                  t+2                       -464           59      <.0001          -1121         102     <.0001
                  t+3                       -276           67      <.0001           -969         105     <.0001
                  t+4                        -39           67       0.597           -546         104     <.0001
                  t+5                        -11           69       0.887           -478         105     <.0001
                  t+6                        214           74       0.009           -281         112      0.014
                  t+7                        245           69       0.001           -180         110      0.103
                  t+8                        274           70       0.000           -154         112      0.174
                  t+9                        304           72       0.000           -491         161      0.002
                  t+10                       393           72      <.0001           -155         114      0.179
                  t+11                       261           74       0.001           -123         124      0.330
                  t+12                       299           75       0.000           -129         118      0.281
                  Total, t+1 to t+12         602          641       0.387          -5567        1047     <.0001
                  Total, t+9 to t+12        1257          270      <.0001           -899         447      0.045

Employed
                  t+1                      -0.070       0.008      <.0001         -0.067       0.010     <.0001
                  t+2                      -0.030       0.008       0.000         -0.055       0.009     <.0001
                  t+3                      -0.013       0.007       0.121         -0.030       0.009      0.001
                  t+4                      -0.003       0.007       0.729         -0.001       0.009      0.886
                  t+5                       0.012       0.007       0.126          0.009       0.009      0.316
                  t+6                       0.022       0.007       0.007          0.026       0.009      0.004
                  t+7                       0.021       0.007       0.009          0.043       0.009     <.0001
                  t+8                       0.007       0.007       0.366          0.039       0.009     <.0001
                  t+9                       0.018       0.008       0.032          0.035       0.009      0.000
                  t+10                      0.028       0.008       0.001          0.036       0.009     <.0001
                  t+11                      0.018       0.008       0.028          0.051       0.009     <.0001
                  t+12                      0.022       0.008       0.008          0.037       0.009     <.0001


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.




                                                                            Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 4b: Impacts on Earnings & Employment, Inverse Propensity Score Weighting, Model 6, State B


                                               Adult Classification                Dislocated Classification
                                       Treatment Standard                     Treatment Standard
                                         Effect       Error       P-value       Effect      Error       P-value

Earnings, Differences
                  t+1                       -688           37      <.0001          -1258          63     <.0001
                  t+2                       -633           43      <.0001          -1295          62     <.0001
                  t+3                       -374           45      <.0001          -1179          66     <.0001
                  t+4                       -184           46      <.0001           -852          65     <.0001
                  t+5                         24           49       0.630           -662          66     <.0001
                  t+6                         81           50       0.105           -399          67     <.0001
                  t+7                        157           50       0.002           -262          69      0.000
                  t+8                        245           53      <.0001           -134          68      0.051
                  t+9                        368           53      <.0001            -26          71      0.713
                  t+10                       405           54      <.0001            163          71      0.022
                  t+11                       486           55      <.0001            310          71     <.0001
                  t+12                       445           56      <.0001            368          72     <.0001
                  Total, t+1 to t+12         329          467       0.480          -5227         653     <.0001
                  Total, t+9 to t+12        1703          201      <.0001            815         265      0.002

Employed
                  t+1                      -0.084       0.006      <.0001         -0.120       0.006     <.0001
                  t+2                      -0.049       0.006      <.0001         -0.105       0.006     <.0001
                  t+3                      -0.017       0.006       0.007         -0.086       0.006     <.0001
                  t+4                       0.010       0.006       0.106         -0.066       0.005     <.0001
                  t+5                       0.018       0.006       0.004         -0.046       0.005     <.0001
                  t+6                       0.026       0.006      <.0001         -0.025       0.005     <.0001
                  t+7                       0.023       0.006       0.000         -0.019       0.005      0.000
                  t+8                       0.046       0.006      <.0001         -0.003       0.005      0.559
                  t+9                       0.047       0.006      <.0001          0.001       0.005      0.862
                  t+10                      0.049       0.006      <.0001          0.007       0.005      0.191
                  t+11                      0.056       0.006      <.0001          0.016       0.005      0.003
                  t+12                      0.055       0.006      <.0001          0.017       0.005      0.002


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.




                                                                            Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 5a: Impacts on Earnings, Inverse Propensity Score Weighting, Model 6, State A


                                               Adult Classification                  Dislocated Classification
                                      Treatment Standard                        Treatment Standard
                                        Effect      Error       P-value           Effect      Error       P-value

Women
                 Total, t+1 to t+12          625         761       0.444            -7,254       1229      <.0001
                 Total, t+9 to t+12        1,204         318       0.001            -1,119        504       0.029

Men
                 Total, t+1 to t+12          382       1123        0.758            -5,254       1805        0.004
                 Total, t+9 to t+12        1,256        477        0.019            -1,316        792        0.096


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.




                                                   Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 5b: Impacts on Earnings, Inverse Propensity Score Weighting, Model 6, State B


                                               Adult Classification                  Dislocated Classification
                                      Treatment Standard                        Treatment Standard
                                        Effect      Error       P-value           Effect      Error       P-value

Women
                 Total, t+1 to t+12        1,355         525      0.010             -5,074         824     <.0001
                 Total, t+9 to t+12        2,238         228     <.0001                566         338      0.096

Men
                 Total, t+1 to t+12          236         861      0.784             -3,675         949      0.000
                 Total, t+9 to t+12        2,056         363     <.0001              1,756         383     <.0001


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.




                                                   Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 6a: Impacts on Firm Characteristics, Inverse Propensity Score Weighting, Model 6, State A


                                            Adult Classification                  Dislocated Classification
                                   Treatment Standard                        Treatment Standard
                                     Effect      Error       P-value           Effect      Error       P-value

High Fixed Effect
                    t+12                0.006       0.007       0.401            -0.001       0.008       0.892

No Fixed Effect
                    t+12                0.008       0.006       0.186             0.010       0.007       0.179

Continuous Fixed Effect
                 t+12                   0.003       0.005       0.477            -0.011       0.005       0.053

Firm Size >= 100
                    t+12                0.005       0.009       0.637            -0.015       0.011       0.167

High Turnover
                    t+12               -0.009       0.008       0.301             0.006       0.009       0.481

Switched Industry
                    t+12               -0.001       0.009       0.909             0.054       0.010     <.0001


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.




                                                Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 6b: Impacts on Firm Characteristics, Inverse Propensity Score Weighting, Model 6, State B


                                            Adult Classification                  Dislocated Classification
                                   Treatment Standard                        Treatment Standard
                                     Effect      Error       P-value           Effect      Error       P-value

High Fixed Effect
                    t+12                0.036       0.006     <.0001             -0.005       0.005       0.336

No Fixed Effect
                    t+12               -0.006       0.004       0.172             0.014       0.004       0.001

Continuous Fixed Effect
                 t+12                   0.002       0.004       0.530            -0.001       0.003       0.850

Firm Size >= 100
                    t+12                0.030       0.007     <.0001             -0.011       0.006       0.075

High Turnover
                    t+12               -0.012       0.006       0.073             0.004       0.005       0.398

Switched Industry
                    t+12                0.050       0.008     <.0001              0.065       0.006     <.0001


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.




                                                Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 7a: Correlation matrix of predictions from six propensity score models, State A

            Adult                                                                                          Dislocated
            Model 1    Model 2   Model 3   Model 4   Model 5   Model 6                                     Model 1     Model 2   Model 3   Model 4   Model 5   Model 6
Model 1         1.0000    0.7993    0.4563    0.4560    0.4562    0.4559                        Model 1         1.0000    0.6753    0.3712    0.3696    0.3708    0.3692
Model 2                   1.0000    0.5681    0.5677    0.5681    0.5677                        Model 2                   1.0000    0.5547    0.5522    0.5542    0.5517
Model 3                             1.0000    0.9993    0.9999    0.9991                        Model 3                             1.0000    0.9958    0.9989    0.9947
Model 4                                       1.0000    0.9991    0.9999                        Model 4                                       1.0000    0.9947    0.9989
Model 5                                                 1.0000    0.9993                        Model 5                                                 1.0000    0.9958
Model 6                                                           1.0000                        Model 6                                                           1.0000


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.




                                                                              Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 7b: Correlation matrix of predictions from six propensity score models, State B

            Adult                                                                                          Dislocated
            Model 1    Model 2   Model 3   Model 4   Model 5   Model 6                                     Model 1     Model 2   Model 3   Model 4   Model 5   Model 6
Model 1         1.0000    0.8599    0.6144    0.6141    0.6140    0.6137                        Model 1         1.0000    0.8813    0.6132    0.6117    0.6126    0.6111
Model 2                   1.0000    0.7148    0.7143    0.7141    0.7136                        Model 2                   1.0000    0.6949    0.6931    0.6942    0.6926
Model 3                             1.0000    0.9993    0.9989    0.9982                        Model 3                             1.0000    0.9973    0.9990    0.9963
Model 4                                       1.0000    0.9983    0.9990                        Model 4                                       1.0000    0.9963    0.9991
Model 5                                                 1.0000    0.9994                        Model 5                                                 1.0000    0.9974
Model 6                                                           1.0000                        Model 6                                                           1.0000


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.




                                                                              Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 8a: Impacts on Earnings, Inverse Propensity Score Weighting, Alternative Conditioning Variables, State A


                                            Adult Classification                  Dislocated Classification
                                   Treatment Standard                        Treatment Standard
                                     Effect      Error       P-value           Effect      Error       P-value


Combined change over t+1 through t+12
               Model 1                -1703           655       0.016             -8819       1024      <.0001
               Model 2                 -603           648       0.388             -8994       1025      <.0001
               Model 3                  622           641       0.371             -5671       1047      <.0001
               Model 4                  626           641       0.368             -5544       1048      <.0001
               Model 5                  596           641       0.391             -5679       1047      <.0001
               Model 6                  602           641       0.387             -5567       1047      <.0001

Combined change over t+9 through t+12
               Model 1                    502         274      0.093              -1777         431     <.0001
               Model 2                    747         272      0.012              -2048         433     <.0001
               Model 3                   1277         270     <.0001               -935         449      0.038
               Model 4                   1263         270     <.0001               -901         448      0.045
               Model 5                   1270         270     <.0001               -927         447      0.039
               Model 6                   1257         270     <.0001               -899         447      0.045


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.




                                                Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 8b: Impacts on Earnings, Inverse Propensity Score Weighting, Alternative Conditioning Variables, State B


                                            Adult Classification                  Dislocated Classification
                                   Treatment Standard                        Treatment Standard
                                     Effect      Error       P-value           Effect      Error       P-value


Combined change over t+1 through t+12
               Model 1                -1293           463       0.005             -9684         658     <.0001
               Model 2                  -82           463       0.860             -7510         661     <.0001
               Model 3                  704           465       0.130             -5308         654     <.0001
               Model 4                  668           465       0.151             -5247         653     <.0001
               Model 5                  347           467       0.457             -5292         654     <.0001
               Model 6                  329           467       0.480             -5227         653     <.0001

Combined change over t+9 through t+12
               Model 1                   1378         198     <.0001               -520         270       0.056
               Model 2                   1621         199     <.0001                 67         272       0.807
               Model 3                   1826         200     <.0001                784         266       0.003
               Model 4                   1801         200     <.0001                804         265       0.003
               Model 5                   1716         201     <.0001                797         265       0.003
               Model 6                   1703         201     <.0001                815         265       0.002


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.




                                                Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 9a: Differences-in-Differences Impacts on Earnings, Inverse Propensity Score Weighting, Model 6, State A


                                              Adult Classification                  Dislocated Classification
                                     Treatment Standard                        Treatment Standard
                                       Effect      Error      P-value            Effect      Error       P-value


Differences-in-Differences, t+1 to t+12
Difference in      Prior Earnings          -128          722       0.872            -2562        1273        0.047
                   Total Change             729          738       0.373            -3005        1329        0.026
                   t+1                     -587           69      <.0001             -726         125       <.0001
                   t+2                     -453           70      <.0001             -908         125       <.0001
                   t+3                     -266           75       0.001             -756         127       <.0001
                   t+4                      -29           74       0.728             -332         126        0.010
                   t+5                        0           76       0.999             -264         126        0.041
                   t+6                      224           79       0.011              -68         130        0.613
                   t+7                      255           74       0.002               33         129        0.801
                   t+8                      285           76       0.001               59         129        0.653
                   t+9                      315           77       0.000             -278         175        0.104
                   t+10                     403           76      <.0001               59         132        0.662
                   t+11                     271           78       0.002               90         141        0.531
                   t+12                     310           79       0.000               84         135        0.540

Differences-in-Differences, t+9 to t+12
Difference in      Prior Earnings           -81          273       0.787             -807          475       0.093
                   Total Change            1337          321       0.000              -92          568       0.873
                   t+9                      324           85       0.001             -290          185       0.109
                   t+10                     413           84      <.0001               47          143       0.748
                   t+11                     281           86       0.003               79          152       0.612
                   t+12                     319           86       0.001               73          146       0.625


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.
Notes: For differences-in-differences analysis, the pre-period is t-12 through t-1 when using t+1 to t+12 as the
post-period, and is t-12 through t-9 when using t+9 through t+12 as the post-period.




                                                                      Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 9b: Differences-in-Differences Impacts on Earnings, Inverse Propensity Score Weighting, Model 6, State B


                                              Adult Classification                  Dislocated Classification
                                     Treatment Standard                        Treatment Standard
                                       Effect      Error      P-value            Effect      Error       P-value


Differences-in-Differences, t+1 to t+12
Difference in      Prior Earnings           836          493       0.091            -1018          812       0.215
                   Total Change            -506          525       0.335            -4209          805      <.0001
                   t+1                     -758           47      <.0001            -1174           78      <.0001
                   t+2                     -703           50      <.0001            -1211           77      <.0001
                   t+3                     -444           51      <.0001            -1094           79      <.0001
                   t+4                     -254           51      <.0001             -767           76      <.0001
                   t+5                      -46           53       0.387             -578           76      <.0001
                   t+6                       11           53       0.830             -315           77      <.0001
                   t+7                       87           53       0.102             -177           78       0.025
                   t+8                      175           55       0.001              -49           77       0.529
                   t+9                      298           55      <.0001               59           80       0.468
                   t+10                     335           56      <.0001              248           79       0.002
                   t+11                     416           57      <.0001              395           80      <.0001
                   t+12                     375           59      <.0001              452           81      <.0001

Differences-in-Differences, t+9 to t+12
Difference in      Prior Earnings           291          217       0.180             -251          304       0.414
                   Total Change            1412          250      <.0001             1066          328       0.001
                   t+9                      295           64      <.0001               37           86       0.673
                   t+10                     332           66      <.0001              226           86       0.009
                   t+11                     413           66      <.0001              373           86      <.0001
                   t+12                     372           67      <.0001              430           88      <.0001


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.
Notes: For differences-in-differences analysis, the pre-period is t-12 through t-1 when using t+1 to t+12 as the
post-period, and is t-12 through t-9 when using t+9 through t+12 as the post-period.




                                                                      Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 10a: Impacts on Earnings, Model 6, Alternative Matching and Weighting Estimators, State A


                                           Adult Classification                  Dislocated Classification
                                  Treatment Standard                        Treatment Standard
                                    Effect      Error       T-value           Effect      Error       T-value


Combined change over t+1 through t+12
               1 Neighbor             7923         3993         1.98             -3374       4595        -0.73
               3 Neighbors            6541         3555         1.84             -3268       3992        -0.82
               5 Neighbors            6651         3382         1.97             -3648       3727        -0.98
               IPW                     729          738         0.99             -3005       1329         2.30

Combined change over t+9 through t+12
               1 Neighbor               3302       1813         1.82              -794       2032        -0.39
               3 Neighbors              1393        807         1.73               -23        908        -0.02
               5 Neighbors              3452       1480         2.33              -930       1657        -0.56
               IPW                      1337        321         4.20               -92        568         0.16


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.




                                               Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 10b: Impacts on Earnings, Model 6, Alternative Matching and Weighting Estimators, State B


                                           Adult Classification                   Dislocated Classification
                                  Treatment Standard                         Treatment Standard
                                    Effect      Error       T-value            Effect      Error       T-value


Combined change over t+1 through t+12
               1 Neighbor               -4400       3437        -1.28             -1620       2844        -0.57
               3 Neighbors              -5067       2980        -1.70               296       2386         0.12
               5 Neighbors              -4706       2766        -1.70              1648       2255         0.73
               IPW                       -506        525         0.96             -4209        805         5.23

Combined change over t+9 through t+12
               1 Neighbor              557          1496         0.37              979        1185         0.83
               3 Neighbors             577           682         0.85              585         513         1.14
               5 Neighbors             642          1236         0.52             1877         937         2.00
               IPW                    1412           250         5.66             1066         328         3.25


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.




                                                Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 11a: Cost-Benefit Analysis, State A

                                                                                             Net Benefit per Participant
                                                                      $2500 Direct Costs                                   $7500 Direct Costs
                        Welfare Cost Annual Discount
   Benefit Duration     of Taxation      Rate                    Adult                Dislocated                   Adult                  Dislocated
3 Years
                                    0                 0                    729                      -3005                       729                    -3005
                                    0              0.05                    564                      -2989                       564                    -2989
                                    0               0.1                    406                      -2972                       406                    -2972
                                 0.25                 0                    104                      -3630                     -1146                    -4880
                                 0.25              0.05                    -61                      -3614                     -1311                    -4864
                                 0.25               0.1                   -219                      -3597                     -1469                    -4847
                                  0.5                 0                   -521                      -4255                     -3021                    -6755
                                  0.5              0.05                   -686                      -4239                     -3186                    -6739
                                  0.5               0.1                   -844                      -4222                     -3344                    -6722
5 Years
                                    0                 0                   2792                      -3289                      2792                    -3289
                                    0              0.05                   2277                      -3230                      2277                    -3230
                                    0               0.1                   1815                      -3176                      1815                    -3176
                                 0.25                 0                   2167                      -3914                       917                    -5164
                                 0.25              0.05                   1652                      -3855                       402                    -5105
                                 0.25               0.1                   1190                      -3801                       -60                    -5051
                                  0.5                 0                   1542                      -4539                      -958                    -7039
                                  0.5              0.05                   1027                      -4480                     -1473                    -6980
                                  0.5               0.1                    565                      -4426                     -1935                    -6926
Indefinite
                                    0                 0                    +inf                        -inf                    +inf                       -inf
                                    0              0.05                  22839                      -3753                    22839                     -3753
                                    0               0.1                   9875                      -3298                     9875                     -3298
                                 0.25                 0                    +inf                        -inf                    +inf                      -inf
                                 0.25              0.05                  22214                      -4378                    20964                     -5628
                                 0.25               0.1                   9250                      -3923                     8000                     -5173
                                  0.5                 0                    +inf                       -inf                     +inf                      -inf
                                  0.5              0.05                  21589                      -5003                    19089                     -7503
                                  0.5               0.1                   8625                      -4548                     6125                     -7048


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.
Notes: Estimates are drawn from Table 4. With an annual discount rate of 0, the benefits under the assumption of indefinite benefit duration become
infinite, whether positive ("+inf") or negative ("-inf"). Costs are assumed to entirely occur in the first quarter after WIA registration.

                                                                Formatted Tables, 08162013
TABLE 11a: Cost-Benefit Analysis, State B

                                                                                             Net Benefit per Participant
                                                                      $2500 Direct Costs                                   $7500 Direct Costs
                        Welfare Cost Annual Discount
   Benefit Duration     of Taxation      Rate                    Adult                Dislocated                   Adult                  Dislocated
3 Years
                                    0                 0                   -506                      -4209                      -506                    -4209
                                    0              0.05                   -656                      -4266                      -656                    -4266
                                    0               0.1                   -800                      -4316                      -800                    -4316
                                 0.25                 0                  -1131                      -4834                     -2381                    -6084
                                 0.25              0.05                  -1281                      -4891                     -2531                    -6141
                                 0.25               0.1                  -1425                      -4941                     -2675                    -6191
                                  0.5                 0                  -1756                      -5459                     -4256                    -7959
                                  0.5              0.05                  -1906                      -5516                     -4406                    -8016
                                  0.5               0.1                  -2050                      -5566                     -4550                    -8066
5 Years
                                    0                 0                   1146                      -4173                      1146                    -4173
                                    0              0.05                    699                      -4284                       699                    -4284
                                    0               0.1                    301                      -4375                       301                    -4375
                                 0.25                 0                    521                      -4798                      -729                    -6048
                                 0.25              0.05                     74                      -4909                     -1176                    -6159
                                 0.25               0.1                   -324                      -5000                     -1574                    -6250
                                  0.5                 0                   -104                      -5423                     -2604                    -7923
                                  0.5              0.05                   -551                      -5534                     -3051                    -8034
                                  0.5               0.1                   -949                      -5625                     -3449                    -8125
Indefinite
                                    0                 0                    +inf                      +inf                      +inf                  +inf
                                    0              0.05                  23774                     15520                     23774                 15520
                                    0               0.1                   9586                      4095                      9586                  4095
                                 0.25                 0                    +inf                      +inf                      +inf                  +inf
                                 0.25              0.05                  23149                     14895                     21899                 13645
                                 0.25               0.1                   8961                      3470                      7711                  2220
                                  0.5                 0                    +inf                      +inf                      +inf                  +inf
                                  0.5              0.05                  22524                     14270                     20024                 11770
                                  0.5               0.1                   8336                      2845                      5836                   345


Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.
Notes: Estimates are drawn from Table 4. With an annual discount rate of 0, the benefits under the assumption of indefinite benefit duration become
infinite, whether positive ("+inf") or negative ("-inf"). Costs are assumed to entirely occur in the first quarter after WIA registration.

                                                                Formatted Tables, 08162013
                                                              Figure 1a: Mean Earnings, State A, Adult
                         5,000



                         4,500



                         4,000



                         3,500
Mean Earnings in 2008$




                         3,000



                         2,500



                         2,000



                         1,500



                         1,000



                          500



                            0
                                 t-12 t-11 t-10   t-9   t-8   t-7   t-6   t-5   t-4   t-3     t-2     t-1   t   t+1     t+2   t+3   t+4   t+5   t+6   t+7   t+8   t+9 t+10 t+11 t+12

                                                                                            Treated         Untreated
                                                          Figure 1b: Mean Earnings, State A, Dislocated
                         9,000



                         8,000



                         7,000



                         6,000
Mean Earnings in 2008$




                         5,000



                         4,000



                         3,000



                         2,000



                         1,000



                            0
                                 t-12 t-11 t-10   t-9   t-8   t-7   t-6   t-5   t-4   t-3     t-2     t-1   t   t+1     t+2   t+3   t+4   t+5   t+6   t+7   t+8   t+9 t+10 t+11 t+12

                                                                                            Treated         Untreated
                                 Figure 1c: Mean Earnings, State B, Adult
                         4,000




                         3,500




                         3,000




                         2,500
Mean Earnings in 2008$




                         2,000




                         1,500




                         1,000




                          500




                            0

                                               Treated   Untreated
                                  Figure 1d: Mean Earnings, State B, Dislocated
                         12,000




                         10,000




                          8,000
Mean Earnings in 2008$




                          6,000




                          4,000




                          2,000




                             0

                                                   Treated   Untreated
                                                      Figure 2a: Employment, State A, Adult
             80%




             70%




             60%




             50%
% Employed




             40%




             30%




             20%




             10%




             0%
                   t-12 t-11 t-10   t-9   t-8   t-7    t-6   t-5   t-4   t-3    t-2      t-1   t      t+1   t+2   t+3   t+4   t+5   t+6   t+7   t+8   t+9 t+10 t+11 t+12

                                                                               Treated             Untreated
                                                Figure 2b: Employment, State A, Dislocated
             90%



             80%



             70%



             60%



             50%
% Employed




             40%



             30%



             20%



             10%



             0%
                   t-12 t-11 t-10   t-9   t-8   t-7   t-6   t-5   t-4   t-3    t-2      t-1   t      t+1   t+2   t+3   t+4   t+5   t+6   t+7   t+8   t+9 t+10 t+11 t+12

                                                                              Treated             Untreated
                   Figure 2c: Employment, State B, Adult
             70%




             60%




             50%




             40%
% Employed




             30%




             20%




             10%




             0%

                                Treated   Untreated
                    Figure 2d: Employment, State B, Dislocated
             100%



             90%



             80%



             70%



             60%
% Employed




             50%



             40%



             30%



             20%



             10%



              0%

                                   Treated   Untreated
TABLE A-1: Variable Definitions

Variable                                      Description

Male                                          (WIA) Dummy variable equal to 1 if the participant is male, and 0 otherwise
White                                         (WIA) Dummy variable equal to 1 if the participant lists white only as racial category and non-Hispanic, and 0 otherwise
Black                                         (WIA) Dummy variable equal to 1 if the participant lists black only as racial category and non-Hispanic, and 0 otherwise
Other                                         (WIA) Dummy variable equal to 1 if the values for White and Black are both 0, and 0 otherwise
Age                                           (WIA) Age in years at time of WIA registration
Education                                     (WIA) Series of dummy variables equal to 1 if the participant has years of education in the relevant range, and 0 otherwise
Disabled                                      (WIA) Dummy variable equal to 1 if the participant has disabled status, and 0 otherwise
Veteran                                       (WIA) Dummy variable equal to 1 if the participant has veteran status, and 0 otherwise

Year of Registration                          (WIA) Series of dummy variables equal to 1 if the participant registered in that year and 0 otherwise
Quarter of Registration                       (WIA) Series of dummy variables equal to 1 if the participant registered in that quarter and 0 otherwise
Age at Registration                           (WIA) Series of dummy variables equal to 1 if participant's age at time of WIA registration was within the range of the dummy variable, and 0 otherwise
WIA Location                                  (WIA) Series of dummy variables equal to 1 if the participant registered in that area, and 0 otherwise

Earnings in 1st Previous Year                 (LEHD) Total earnings in year before quarter of WIA registration (quarters t-4 through t-1) in 2008$
Zero Earnings in 1st Previous Year            (LEHD) Dummy variable equal to 1 if participant had zero earnings in quarters t-4 through t-1, and 0 otherwise
Earnings in 2nd Previous Year                 (LEHD) Total earnings in 2nd-to-last year before quarter of WIA registration (quarters t-8 through t-5) in 2008$
Zero Earnings in 2nd Previous Year            (LEHD) Dummy variable equal to 1 if participant had zero earnings in quarters t-8 through t-5, and 0 otherwise
No Employment                                 (LEHD) Series of dummy variables equal to 1 if the participant was not employed in that quarter, and 0 otherwise
Quarterly Earnings                            (LEHD) Participant's earnings in that quarter in 2008$
Square of Quarterly Earnings                  (LEHD) Square of participant's earnings in that quarter in 2008$
                                              (LEHD) Series of 4 dummy variables. A participant is considered employed / employed if earnings were positive during the quarter of WIA entry and all five
                                              previous quarters. A participant is considered not employed / employed if earnings were positive during the quarter of WIA entry but were zero in at least one of the
Employment Transitions
                                              five previous quarters. A participant is considered employed / not employed if earnings were zero during the quarter of WIA entry but were positive in at least one of
                                              the previous five quarters. A participant is considered not employed / not employed if earnings were zero during the quarter of WIA entry and all five previous
Positive Earnings in certain periods          (LEHD) Series of dummy variables equal to 1 if participant had positive earnings in relevant period, and 0 otherwise
Zero Earnings in certain periods              (LEHD) Series of dummy variables equal to 1 if participant had zero earnings in relevant period, and 0 otherwise

TANF Benefits in certain periods (women only (WIA) Series of dummy variables equal to 1 if participant received TANF benefits during relevant period, and 0 otherwise (State A only)
UI Experience in certain periods             (WIA) Series of dummy variables equal to 1 if participant had received UI benefits during relevant period, and 0 otherwise (State B only)
ES Service Events                            (WIA) Series of dummy variables equal to 1 if participant received ES services during relevant period, and 0 otherwise (State B only)

Firm Industry                                 (LEHD) Series of dummy variables equal to 1 if the participant's last employer before quarter of WIA registration was in that industry (by NAICS code), and 0 otherwise
Firm Size >=100                               (LEHD) Dummy variable equal to 1 if the participant's employer had at least 100 employees, and 0 otherwise
Low-Wage Proportion                           (LEHD) Continuous variable equal to the percentage of workers at participant's employer who had annual earnings below $15,000 and 0 otherwise
High Turnover                                 (LEHD) Dummy variable equal to 1 if the participant's employer had annual turnover of at least 75%, and 0 otherwise
Firm Fixed Effects Quintile                   (LEHD) Series of dummy variables equal to 1 if participant's employer was within the relevant fixed effects quintile, and 0 otherwise
Switched Industry                             (LEHD) Dummy variable equal to 1 if the participant's employer post-WIA is in different industry than most-recent pre-registration employer




                                                                                                 Formatted Tables, 08162013
Table A-2: # Sample Loss in the Analysis Sample
                                       State A                    State B
                                  Adult    Dislocated        Adult    Dislocated
Before Eliminations                 29267       19376         24362        30025
Duplicate observations              20970       13727         24362        30025
No registration date                20970       13727         24362        30025
No exit date                        16851       11512         24362        30025
Exit before entrance                16851       11512         24362        30025
Entrance before 1999                16851       11512         23822        28962
Earnings restrictions               15532       10836         23182        28246

Source: Authors' calculations from WIA and LEHD data.

Notes: Earnings restrictions mean dropping participants in the top half percent of
total earnings summed over the 12 quarters before WIA registration or in the top
half percent of total earnings summed over the 12 quarters after WIA
registration. In accordance with Census Bureau rules on reporting small
differences, some cells where a very small number of participants were dropped
are instead reported as no participants being dropped.




                                                  Formatted Tables, 08162013
