NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE AGGREGATE EFFECT OF SCHOOL CHOICE:
EVIDENCE FROM A TWO-STAGE EXPERIMENT IN INDIA
Karthik Muralidharan
Venkatesh Sundararaman
Working Paper 19441
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19441
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013

This paper is based on the Andhra Pradesh School Choice Project that was carried out under the larger
program of the "Andhra Pradesh Randomized Evaluation Studies (AP RESt)", which was set up as
a research partnership between the Government of Andhra Pradesh, the Azim Premji Foundation, and
the World Bank. The majority of the funding for the project was provided by the Legatum Foundation
and the Legatum Institute, with additional financial support from the UK Department for International
Development (DFID), and the World Bank. Muralidharan also acknowledges financial support from
a National Academy of Education/Spencer Foundation post-doctoral fellowship. We are deeply grateful
to M Srinivasa Rao, B Srinivasulu, S Ramamurthy, and staff of the Azim Premji Foundation for their
outstanding efforts in implementing the project in Andhra Pradesh, and to DD Karopady and Dileep
Ranjekar for their constant support. We thank Gautam Bastian, Vikram Jambulapati, Naveen Mandava,
Jayash Paudel, and Arman Rezaee for excellent research assistance at various stages of the project.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do
not necessarily represent the views of the Government of Andhra Pradesh, the Azim Premji Foundation,
the World Bank, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Karthik Muralidharan and Venkatesh Sundararaman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Aggregate Effect of School Choice: Evidence from a Two-stage Experiment in India
Karthik Muralidharan and Venkatesh Sundararaman
NBER Working Paper No. 19441
September 2013, Revised October 2014
JEL No. C93,H44,H52,I21,O15
ABSTRACT
We present experimental evidence on the impact of a school choice program in the Indian state of
Andhra Pradesh (AP) that provided students with a voucher to finance attending a private school of
their choice. The study design featured a unique two-stage lottery-based allocation of vouchers that
created both a student-level and a market-level experiment, which allows us to study both the individual
and the aggregate effects of school choice (including spillovers). After two and four years of the program,
we find no difference between test scores of lottery winners and losers on Telugu (native language)
and math, suggesting that the large cross-sectional test-score differences between public and private
school students on these subjects mostly reflect omitted variables. However, private schools spent
significantly less instructional time on Telugu and math, and instead taught more English, science,
social studies, and Hindi. Averaged across all subjects, lottery winners scored 0.13 higher, and the
average causal impact on test scores of attending a private school was 0.23. Further, the mean cost
per student in the private schools in our sample was less than a third of the cost in public schools. Thus,
private schools in this setting deliver (slightly) better test score gains than their public counterparts,
and do so at substantially lower costs per student. Finally, we find no evidence of spillovers on publicschool students who do not apply for the voucher, or on private school students, suggesting that the
positive impacts on voucher winners did not come at the expense of other students.
Karthik Muralidharan
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
kamurali@ucsd.edu
Venkatesh Sundararaman
South Asia Human Development Unit
The World Bank
vsundararaman@worldbank.org

1. Introduction
One of the most important trends in primary education in developing countries over the past
two decades has been the rapid growth of private schools, with recent estimates showing that
private schools now account for over 20% of total primary school enrolment in low-income
countries (Baum et al. 2014). The growing market share of fee-charging private schools is
especially striking as it is taking place in a context of increased spending on public education and
near universal access to free public primary schools, and raises important questions regarding the
effectiveness of private schools in these settings and the optimal policy response to their growth.
Opponents of the growth of private schooling argue that it has led to economic stratification
of education systems and has weakened the public education system by causing elites to secede.
They also worry that private schools compete by cream-skimming students, and attract parents
and students on the basis of superior average levels of test scores, but that they may not be
adding more value to the marginal applicant. 1 Others contend that private schools in developing
countries have arisen and grown in response to failures of the public schooling system, that they
are more accountable and responsive to parents, that the revealed preference of parents suggests
that they are likely to be better than public schools, and that policymakers should be more open
to voucher-like models that combine public funding and private provision of education. 2
There is, however, very little rigorous empirical evidence on the relative effectiveness of
private and public schools in low-income countries. Non-experimental studies have used several
approaches to address identification challenges, and have typically found that private school
students have higher test scores, but have not been able to rule out the concern that these
estimates are confounded by selection and omitted variables. 3 Further, even experimental studies
of school choice to date (from anywhere in the world) have not been able to distinguish between
the effects of school productivity and changes in peer composition for voucher winners. For
instance, Hsieh and Urquiola (2006) argue that Chile's school voucher program led to increased
sorting of students among schools, but did not improve average school productivity.
1

This concern is supported by several studies across different contexts, which find that highly-demanded elite
schools do not seem to add more value to student learning (see Zhang (2014) in China, Lucas and Mbiti (2014) in
Kenya, Cullen et al. (2006) in Chicago, and Abdulkadiroglu et al (2014) in Boston and New York).
2
See Tooley and Dixon (2007), Muralidharan and Kremer (2008), Goyal and Pandey (2009), and Tooley (2009).
3
Existing approaches to identifying the causal effects of private schools in developing countries include controlling
for observables (Muralidharan and Kremer 2008), incorporating a selection correction (Desai et al. 2009), using
family fixed effects and within household variation (French and Kingdon 2010), aggregation of test scores to
district-level outcomes (Bold et al 2011; Tabarrok 2013), and using panel data (Andrabi et al. 2011; Singh 2014).

We present experimental evidence on the impact of a school choice program in the Indian
state of Andhra Pradesh (AP) that featured a unique two-stage randomization of the offer of a
voucher (across villages as well as students). The design creates a set of control villages that
allows us to experimentally evaluate both the individual impacts of school choice (using the
student-level lottery) as well as its aggregate effects including the spillovers on non-applicants
and students who start out in private schools (using the village-level lottery). The experiment
was a large one that led to 23% of students in public schools in program villages moving to a
private school. Participation of private schools in the voucher program was voluntary, but they
were not permitted to selectively accept or reject voucher-winning students.
The main operating difference between private and public schools in this setting is that
private schools pay substantially lower teacher salaries (less than a sixth of that paid to public
school teachers), and hire teachers who are younger, less educated, and much less likely to have
professional teaching credentials. However, private schools hire more teachers, have smaller
class sizes, and have a much lower rate of multi-grade teaching than public schools. Using
official data and data collected during unannounced visits to schools, we find that private schools
have a longer school day, a longer school year, lower teacher absence, higher teaching activity,
and better school hygiene. We find no significant change in household spending or in time spent
doing homework among voucher-winning students, suggesting that the impact of school choice
on test scores (if any) is likely to be due to changes in school as opposed to household factors.
At the end of two and four years of the school choice program, we find no difference
between the test scores of lottery winners and lottery losers on the two main subjects of Telugu
(native language of AP) and math, suggesting that the large cross-sectional test-score differences
in these subjects across public and private schools (of 0.65σ) mostly reflect omitted variables.
However, analysis of school time use data reveals that private schools spend significantly less
instructional time on Telugu (40% less) and math (32% less) than public schools, and instead
spend more time on English, science and social studies (EVS), and especially Hindi (not the
main language in AP; but the most widely spoken one in India). We conduct tests in all these
subjects after four years of the program and find small positive effects of winning the voucher on
English (0.12σ; p = 0.098), and EVS (0.08σ; p = 0.16), and large, positive effects on Hindi
(0.55σ; p < 0.001). Averaging across subjects, we find that students who won a voucher scored
0.13σ higher, and students who attended private schools scored 0.23σ higher (p < 0.01).
1

Our finding of positive and significant test score impacts of winning a voucher is based on
equal weights across subjects (including Hindi). However, even without assuming equal weights
across subjects, we can still infer that private schools were more productive than public schools
because they were able to achieve similar Telugu and math test scores for the lottery winners
with substantially less instructional time, and use the additional time to improve outcomes on
other subjects – especially Hindi. Further, the cost-effectiveness comparison is rendered stark by
the fact that the annual cost per student in the public-school system is over three times the mean
cost per student in the private schools in our sample. Thus, students who win a lottery to attend
private schools do as well on some subjects and better on others even though the private schools
spend substantially lower amounts per student.
The gains in test scores for voucher-winning students do not come at the expense of other
students who may have been indirectly affected by the voucher program. Comparing across
treatment and control villages, we find no evidence of spillovers on public-school students who
do not apply for the voucher. We also do not find any significant difference between the test
scores of applicants who are lottery losers across treatment and control villages. Finally, we find
no evidence of any negative spillovers on students who started out in private schools to begin
with. Taken together, we find no evidence of adverse effects on any of the groups of students
who experienced a change in their peer group as a result of the voucher program.
Turning to heterogeneity, we find limited evidence of variation in program impact by student
characteristics, but do find suggestive evidence of heterogeneity as a function of school and
market characteristics. In particular, instrumental variable (IV) estimates suggest that students
who switched from attending a public school to a Telugu-medium private school did better than
those attending an English-medium one (especially on non-language subjects). 4 The IV estimates
have large standard errors and are not precise, but they suggest that private schools may have
been even more effective when students did not experience the disruption of changing their
medium of instruction. They also suggest that switching to English-medium schools may have
negative effects on first-generation learners' literacy in the native language and on their learning
of content in other non-language subjects. Finally, we also find suggestive evidence that the
impact of the vouchers may have been higher in markets with greater choice and competition.
4

We instrument for medium of instruction of the school attended (which is a choice variable) with the medium of
instruction of the nearest private school to each applicant for the voucher, and the interaction of receiving the
voucher and the medium of instruction of the nearest private school. See details in section 4.4.2.

2

Since Friedman (1962), the theoretical promise that greater school choice and competition
may yield better education outcomes has generated a large empirical literature, with the bestidentified studies typically using lottery-based designs to identify the impact of choice and better
schooling options. 5 However, the results to date on school choice are quite mixed with most
studies typically finding zero to modest positive effects of receiving a voucher or attending a
more selective school on test scores (Rouse and Barrow 2009 review the evidence). On the other
hand, more recent studies have found significant positive effects of attending charter schools on
test scores (Hoxby et al. 2009; Abdulkadiroglu et al. 2011; Dobbie and Fryer 2011).
We add to this evidence base with a large and comprehensive (in terms of data collected on
intermediate inputs) study that provides the first experimental evidence on the impact of school
choice, and the relative performance of public and private schools in a developing country. 6
Further, our two-stage design allows us to conduct the first experimental analysis (anywhere in
the world) of the spillover effects of school choice programs on non-applicants, on lottery losers,
and on private school students.
More generally, our results highlight that it is essential for the school choice literature to
recognize that schools provide vectors of attributes and may be horizontally differentiated in
their offerings. Note that our inference regarding the relative productivity of private and public
schools would have been wrong if we had not accounted for school time use patterns and had not
measured outcomes on additional subjects on the basis of analyzing the school time use data.
Similarly, evaluating school choice and charter school programs on a limited set of test scores
(typically in math and reading) may provide an incomplete picture of the impact of such
programs if they do not account for the full pattern of time use in these schools. Our suggestive
evidence of heterogeneity of impact by medium of instruction further highlights the centrality of
accounting for variation across schools' instructional programs for studying the relative
productivity of public and private schools, and the impact of school choice. On the other hand,
our results also suggest that peer-effects and spillovers may be an empirically second-order issue
for the school-choice literature (especially when private schools cannot select students).
5

Studies of school choice and charter schools using lottery-based designs include Howell et al. (2002), Howell and
Peterson (2002), Krueger and Zhu (2004), Cullen et al (2006), Hoxby, Murarka, and Kang (2009), Abdulkadiroglu
et al. (2011), Dobbie and Fryer (2011), and Wolf et al. (2013).
6
Angrist et al. (2002, 2006) provide experimental evidence on vouchers in the middle-income setting of Colombia,
and find positive effects of Colombia's PACES program. However, the program allowed vouchers to be topped up,
and required students to maintain minimum academic standards to continue receiving the voucher. The estimates
therefore reflect a combination of private school productivity, additional education spending, and student incentives.

3

The policy implications of our results are particularly timely in the Indian context. Reflecting
concerns of growing economic stratification in schooling, the recently passed Right to Education
(RtE) Act in India includes a provision mandating that private schools reserve up to 25% of their
seats for students from socio-economically disadvantaged backgrounds, with a reimbursement of
fees by the government. This provision in the RtE Act could lead to India having the world's
largest number of children attending private schools with public funding. It may also be the most
ambitious attempt to achieve school integration across economic classes anywhere in the world.
However, these large-scale changes to the education system have been mandated (and are
starting to be implemented) with almost no evidence on their likely impacts. Our results are
directly relevant to understanding the possible impacts of the RtE Act in India, and to informing
policy approaches to the rapid growth of private schools in developing countries.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the AP School Choice
experiment (design, validity, and data collection); section 3 presents results on summary
statistics of school, teacher, and household inputs into education; section 4 presents the test score
results, and section 5 discusses policy implications, caveats, and directions for future research.
2. The Andhra Pradesh (AP) School Choice Experiment
2.1 Background and Context
India has the largest school education system in the world comprising around 200 million
children. Primary school enrollments have steadily increased over the past two decades and over
96% of primary-school aged children are now enrolled in school. Nevertheless, education
quality is low with less than 40% of children aged 6 to 14 in rural India being able to read at the
second-grade level (ASER 2013). The majority of children in rural India are enrolled in free
government-run public schools (with additional benefits such as free textbooks, and mid-day
meals). 7 However, the public education system in India is characterized both by inefficient
choices of inputs, as well as inefficient use of resources conditional on the choice of inputs. 8
7

Note that government-run public schools are referred to as "government schools" in India, with the term "public
school" sometimes referring to elite private schools (following the British convention). We use the term "public
school" throughout this paper to refer to government-run public schools following the more standard use of the term.
8
As an example of inefficient choice of inputs, Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2013) show that locally-hired
contract teachers are at least as effective as civil-service teachers in spite of the latter being paid five times higher
salaries. The most striking evidence on inefficient use of inputs is perhaps the high rate of teacher absence. 26.2%
of public-school teachers in rural India were found absent during unannounced visits to a nationally-representative
sample of schools in 2003 (Kremer et al. 2005), and 23.6% were found absent in 2010 (Muralidharan et al. 2014).

4

A prominent trend in India in the past two decades has been that parents are enrolling their
children in fee-charging private schools in increasing numbers. Annual data from the ASER
reports show that 29% of children between the ages of 6 and 14 in rural India attended feecharging private schools in 2013 compared to 18.7% in 2006, pointing to a rapid growth in the
market share of fee-charging private schools at a rate exceeding one percentage point per year
(ASER 2013). While annual data on private school market share is not available for urban areas,
this figure was estimated to be 58% in 2005 (Desai et al. 2009) and was recently estimated to be
over 65% for the medium-sized Indian city of Patna (Rangaraju et al. 2012).
The majority of these private schools are low-cost or "budget" private schools that cater to
non-affluent sections of the population, and per-student spending in these schools is significantly
lower than that in public schools (Tooley 2009). However, since private schools charge fees and
public schools are free, students attending private schools on average come from more affluent
households with higher levels of parental education (Muralidharan and Kremer 2008; also see
Table A.1). Cross-sectional studies have found that students in private schools significantly
outperform their counterparts in public schools, even after correcting for observable differences
between the characteristics of students attending the two types of schools (Muralidharan and
Kremer 2008; Desai et al. 2009; French and Kingdon 2010). Nevertheless, these studies cannot
fully address selection and omitted variable concerns with respect to identifying the causal
impact of attending a private school. 9
The growth of private schools has led to concerns about increasing economic and social
stratification in education (Srivastava 2013), and has led to calls for expanding access to private
schools for all children, regardless of socioeconomic background – including experimenting with
voucher-based school choice programs (Shah 2005; Kelkar 2006). India's recent Right to
Education (RtE) Act includes a provision mandating that private schools reserve up to 25% of
the seats in their school for students from disadvantaged backgrounds, with a reimbursement of
fees by the government (subject to a maximum of the per-child spending in the public schools).
If implemented as intended, this provision in the RtE Act could lead to India having the
world's largest number of children attending private schools with public funding. It may also
9

Beyond selection, a major limitation in the cross-sectional comparisons is that private school students typically
have two years of pre-school education (nursery and kindergarten) compared to public school students (who
typically start in the first grade). Thus, comparisons of test score levels at a given primary school grade confound
the effectiveness of private schools and the total years of schooling. Panel data approaches can mitigate this concern
(Singh 2014) but are limited by the lack of annual panel data on test scores in representative samples.

5

constitute the most ambitious attempt at school integration (across socio-economic classes) that
has ever been attempted (analogous to school desegregation in the US). Estimating the relative
productivity of public and private schools, and the spillover effects of moving children from
public to private schools are therefore especially policy relevant in this setting.
2.2 Conceptual Overview of Experiment Design
Experimental evaluations of school voucher programs to date typically feature excess
demand for a limited number of vouchers, which are allocated among applicants by lottery.
Such a design creates four groups of students as shown in Figure 1 (Panel A): non-applicants
(group 1), applicants who lose the lottery (group 2), applicants who win (group 3), and students
in private schools to begin with (group 4). The lottery is used to estimate the impact of winning a
voucher conditional on applying for it (comparing groups 3 and 2), and the impact of attending a
private school (using the lottery as an instrumental variable for attending a private school).
However, even this experimental design faces two limitations: a contaminated control group,
and an inability to estimate spillover effects that may negate (potential) gains estimated for
voucher winners. First, the departure of some voucher winners may have additional effects on
lottery losers (group 2) including changes in the peer group, changes in per-student resources
(especially class size), and behavioral changes by public school teachers in response to the
voucher program. These confounding factors could bias experimental studies to date, since the
control group is not unaffected by the voucher program. Second, existing studies cannot
experimentally estimate impacts on students left behind in public schools who did not apply for
the voucher and may be worse off from the departure of highly-motivated peers (group 1), or the
impact on students in private schools who may be worse off due to an influx of low-performing
students from public schools (group 4). Thus, even if group 3 does better than group 2 (the focus
of experimental studies to date), this may have come at the cost of poorer performance for
groups 1 and 4. Hence, a critical open question in the global literature on vouchers and school
choice is that of the "aggregate impact" of such programs (Hsieh and Urquiola 2006).
The Andhra Pradesh (AP) School Choice Project (that this paper is based on) aims to address
both these issues using a two-stage experiment, where villages are first randomized into control
and treatment groups, after which some applicants in the treatment villages are offered vouchers
using a second lottery (Figure 1 - Panel B). Since villages are randomized into treatment and
control status after baseline tests are conducted and after parents apply for the voucher,
6

comparing the lottery winners (3T) with lottery losers in control villages (2C) allows for an
uncontaminated estimate of the impact of school choice. Thus, applicants in group 2C are a
"pure" control group because they applied for the voucher and lost the lottery (at the village
level), but nothing changed for them because there was no voucher program in their villages.
The design also allows us to estimate three sets of spillovers, which have not been possible to
date. First, comparing groups 2T (control students with spillovers) and 2C (control students
without spillovers), provides an estimate of the extent to which ignoring spillovers to the control
group may bias existing voucher studies. Second, comparing groups 1T and 1C lets us estimate
the impact of school choice programs on the students "left behind" in public schools (who for
reasons of limited information or motivation choose to not apply for the voucher). Third,
comparing outcomes between groups 4T and 4C provides an estimate of whether students in
private schools are adversely affected by an influx of students from public schools (which is
what will happen under the school integration envisaged by the RtE Act). Overall, the key
innovation in our design is that the control villages provide a "system-level" counterfactual to the
voucher program enabling experimental comparisons that have not been possible to date.
2.3 The AP School Choice Experiment
Andhra Pradesh (AP) is the 5th most populous state in India, with a population of 85 million
(70% rural). Recent estimates suggest that over 35% of students in rural AP are enrolled in
private schools (ASER 2013), compared to an all India average of 28%. The Andhra Pradesh
School Choice Project was implemented by the Azim Premji Foundation (one of India's leading
non-profits working on education). 10 The school year in AP runs from mid-June to mid-April.
The AP School Choice project started in the school year 2008-09, and continued for four years
(preparatory work started in the previous school year).
The project was carried out in five districts across AP over a universe of 180 villages that had
at least one recognized private school. 11 Baseline tests were conducted for all students in two

10

The AP School Choice Project was carried out under the larger program of the "Andhra Pradesh Randomized
Evaluation Studies (AP RESt)" which was set up as a research partnership between the Government of Andhra
Pradesh, the Azim Premji Foundation, and the World Bank. The original state of AP was divided into two states on
June 2, 2014. Since this division took place after our study, we use the term AP to refer to the undivided state.
11
These were the same districts as in the overall AP RESt project, and were representative of all the three major
regions of AP (Muralidharan and Sundararaman 2010, 2011, 2013); the AP School Choice Project was conducted in
different sub-districts and so there was no overlap in the schools/villages across these studies.

7

cohorts of all schools (public and private) in these villages in March-April 2008. 12 This was
followed by an invitation to apply for a voucher to parents of students in public schools (who had
taken the baseline test) in all 180 villages. The application specified the full terms of the voucher
including the fact that it would be allocated by lottery and that applying did not guarantee receipt
of the voucher. The voucher covered all school fees, textbooks, workbooks, notebooks and
stationery, and school uniforms and shoes, but did not cover transport costs to attend a private
school outside the village and did not provide any allowance in lieu of the free mid-day meals
that the public schools provide. The value of the voucher was paid directly to the school, and
books and materials were provided directly to the voucher households by the schools. 13
At the same time as the baseline tests, the Azim Premji Foundation (the Foundation) also
invited participation in the project from private schools in the sample villages, and school
participation was voluntary. The value of the voucher was set at the 90th percentile of the
distribution of the all-inclusive private school fees in the sampled villages, and schools were
asked to indicate if (a) they wanted to participate in the program by being willing to admit
economically disadvantaged students who would be awarded a voucher by the Foundation, and
(b) if so, how many seats they could make available to voucher students in each of the two
cohorts. 14 The terms and conditions specified that the Foundation would directly pay the value of
the voucher to the school's bank account (in three installments per year, which was the typical
fee cycle of the schools). The only condition imposed on the schools was that they were not
allowed to select students. If there was greater demand for a school than the number of places
offered, then the school could either admit all voucher recipients who wanted to attend the

12

The cohorts covered were students attending kindergarten and grade 1 in the previous school year (2007-08), and
the voucher covered the entire primary education of recipients from the school year 2008-09 (from grade 1 to 5 for
the younger cohort and from grade 2 to 5 for the older cohort). Baseline tests were conducted in math and Telugu
(native language of AP) for the older cohort and in Telugu for the younger cohort.
13
This was consistent with the standard practice that private schools had a recommended set of books, uniforms etc.,
which they procured in bulk and supplied to parents for a fixed fee. It was therefore easiest to have the voucher
cover these payments directly as opposed to making cash payments to parents for these additional expenses. The
communication regarding the voucher program and the application process was done by field staff of the Azim
Premji Foundation during the summer break in May 2008.
14
At the time of starting the project, the 2005 draft of the Right to Education (RtE) Act was already in circulation
and private schools knew that the stipulation regarding reserving seats for economically disadvantaged children in
private schools was likely to be implemented. Thus, the communications to schools regarding the project was along
the lines that this was a pilot project being done by the Foundation to help the Government of AP understand the
impacts and implications of implementing this provision of the RtE Act. The value of the voucher was set at the 90th
percentile of the fee distribution to ensure that the reimbursement was above marginal cost for all schools (while still
being considerably below the benchmark of per-child spending in public schools).

8

concerned school or the Foundation would conduct a lottery to allocate the places among the
applicants. This was similar to admission protocols of most charter school programs in the US. 15
All communications with schools (and elicitation of willingness to participate) was
conducted before the village-level randomization took place. 16 Once the applications were
completed, 90 villages (stratified by district) were assigned by lottery to be voucher villages
(Figure 1 - Panel A), while the other 90 villages continued "as usual" with no voucher program
(Figure 1 – Panel B). Conditional on being a "voucher village", a second lottery was conducted
to offer the vouchers to a subset of applicants. The design therefore created two lottery-based
comparison groups – those who did not get the voucher due to their village not being selected for
the program (group 2C in Figure 1), and those who did not get the voucher due to losing the
individual level lottery conducted within voucher villages (group 2T in Figure 1).
Out of 10,935 eligible households, a total of 6,433 households applied for the voucher (59%).
A total of 3,097 households had applied in the treatment villages, from which 1,980 were
selected by lottery to receive the voucher (64%). 1,210 of these 1,980 households accepted the
voucher and enrolled in a private school at the start of the project (61%). Thus, a total of 23% of
public school students in treatment villages accepted the voucher and moved to private schools,
and around 8% of the students in private schools (in the two treated cohorts) were those who had
transferred from the public school with the voucher. At the end of four years of the project, a
total of 1,005 students continued to avail of the voucher. Figure 2 shows the program design
with the actual number of students in each of the cells.
Table A.2 shows that application for the voucher, and acceptance conditional on being
awarded one are not correlated with observable demographic characteristics like parental assets,
education, or caste. The only observables that are correlated with application are having a
private school within a radius of half a kilometer (positive), having a sibling in the public school,
and being in the older cohort (both negative) which are consistent with lower (higher) switching
costs. The same patterns are observed in acceptance conditional on being awarded the voucher.
15

In practice, participating schools accepted all applicants who indicated a preference for the school, and the
Foundation never needed to conduct a lottery to allocate students to potentially over-subscribed schools.
16
The initial frame for the project was 200 villages, which was reduced to 180 after dropping villages where there
was no private school willing to participate, or where the private schools did not obtain recognition at the start of the
2008-09 school year (the sample initially included villages with unrecognized schools that said that they were in the
process of getting recognized, but villages where there was no school that had obtained recognition were dropped
from the study universe). This was done because the Foundation did not want to put voucher-winning children in a
situation where the school they went to would be shut down by the government (as the law entitles them to do).

9

The lack of correlation between household socio-economic characteristics and voucher
application or acceptance is an important result and suggests that the provision of vouchers can
significantly reduce socio-economic stratification in private schools (which is one of the main
concerns expressed regarding the growth of private schools – see Srivastava and Walford 2007,
and Srivastava 2013 for illustrative discussions).
The allocation of villages and students to the voucher program by lottery ensured that the
treatment groups and the corresponding comparison groups are not significantly different on
observable characteristics including baseline test scores, parental education, assets, and caste.
Table A.3 (Panel A) shows the balance between lottery winners and losers – first showing the
comparison with lottery losers in the treatment villages and then showing it with lottery losers in
control villages. Panel B shows the balance for the groups of students who will be used for the
spillover analysis – first showing the comparison between non-applicants across treatment and
control villages, and then showing it between students who start out in private schools across
these villages (for the representative sample of students in these groups who we track over time).
2.4. Data and Attrition
We collect a rich set of survey data on school and teacher characteristics. Enumerators
conducted unannounced visits to schools during the four years of the project and measured
teacher absence and activity, classroom practices and processes, and school hygiene. They also
conducted household surveys to obtain data on household inputs into education – including
expenditure as well as student time-use data. The school surveys were carried out once a year in
all schools in the 180 project villages, while the household surveys were carried out in a
representative sample of households each year from all the four groups of students as indicated
in Figure 2 (in both treatment and control villages).
Data on learning outcomes was collected through independent student tests conducted at the
end of two and four years of the project. Tests in Telugu (native language of AP and the medium
of instruction in public schools), math, and English, were conducted at the end of two and four
years, while additional tests in science and social studies (EVS), and Hindi were administered at
the end of four years. All subjects except Hindi were administered as written tests, whereas the
Hindi tests were administered individually to students by enumerators. We attempted to
administer the written tests to the full set of students who had applied for the voucher (groups 2
and 3), and a representative sample of students who had either not applied or who were in the
10

private schools at the start of the project (groups 1 and 4). The Hindi tests were more expensive
to conduct (since they were done individually) and were administered to a representative sample
of the students who applied for the voucher. We verify that the samples are balanced across
treatment and control groups for all variables in Table A.3 in all cases where we survey/test a
representative sample of students (tables available on request).
Field enumerators made extensive efforts to keep track of all students who were in the frame
of the study at the beginning, but some attrition was unavoidable. 17 The two year attrition rate
was 10% and 15% in the treatment and control groups respectively, and the four-year attrition
rate was 15% and 19% in the two groups (Table A.4 – Panel A; columns 4, 5, 10, and 11). 18
These differences are statistically significant (columns 6 and 12), but we find no difference in
observable characteristics between the attritors across the treatment categories. We also estimate
a model of the probability of attrition from the sample using a rich set of observable
characteristics collected before the lottery (including baseline test scores, and household
socioeconomic indicators) and cannot reject the null that the same model predicts attrition in
both the treatment and control samples.
Given the balance of attrition on all observable characteristics (both individually and jointly),
the estimation sample is unlikely to be imbalanced on unobservables that may be correlated with
test score gains over the period of the study. Nevertheless, we test our results for robustness
using both inverse-probability reweighting as well as bounding (Lee 2009). The attrition rate in
the sample that is used to test for spillovers is around 33% (Table A.4 – Panel B), but the
differences between treatment and control students are not significant. 19

17

Most of the attrition is due to students who had migrated and could not be found, as opposed to students still
attending schools but not present for testing. The initial tests at the end of two years of the project were conducted in
schools, but had high attrition rates (around 40%). This was followed by an intense effort by enumerators to track
down all the students who had applied for the voucher and the conducting of an additional round of testing in each
village outside school hours. This was conducted in November 2010 (around a third of the way into the third year of
the program), and so the test score results corresponding to "two years" as described in the text are based on tests
conducted around 2.33 years into the program. A similar protocol was followed for testing after four years.
18
Note that the main treatment effects will be calculated with respect to the lottery-losers in the control villages.
Columns 1-3 and 7-9 present the attrition rates relative to the lottery-losers in the treatment villages
19
There is a significant difference between treatment and control groups in this sample in 1 out of 24 comparisons,
which is in line with expectations in a random sample (Table A.4 – Panel B). We control for the variables compared
in Table A.4 in all our estimates of program impact.

11

3. Results – School, Teacher and Household Inputs
3.1 School and Teacher Inputs
Table 1 (Panel A) presents key summary statistics on private schools in our sample (using
data from only the control villages to ensure that the descriptive statistics represent "business as
usual" differences and are not affected by the treatment). 20 On average, private schools in our
sample are considerably larger than their public counterparts. They have a longer school year (2
working weeks or 11 days longer per year), and have considerably lower pupil-teacher ratios
(around a third lower) than public schools. They are also more likely to have drinking water,
functional toilets (as well as separate toilets for girls), functional electricity, and to have a
computer, with the differences being quite stark on some of these measures. Public schools are
more likely to have a functioning library and radio. 21
Public school teachers are more likely to be male, are considerably older, have more years of
teaching experience, are more likely to have completed a college degree, and are much more
likely to have completed a teacher training course (Table 1 - Panel B). However, they are less
likely to be from the same village as the schools that they are assigned to, and are paid six times
higher salaries. This calculation understates the differences in total pay, because it does not
include the discounted value of the pension and other retirement benefits that civil-service
teachers obtain that are typically not available to private school teachers.
The total spending per-child spending in the public schools is over four times the mean perchild spending in the private schools in our sample (Table 1 - Panel C). 22 As the discussion
above suggests, the main driver of these differences in costs is the much higher salaries paid to
public school teachers. However, private schools hire more teachers per student, and also have

20

There are no significant differences in mean private school characteristics across treatment and control villages,
but we use only the control villages for the purposes of the summary statistics. We verify that being in treatment
villages does not change the average of several key school characteristics between treatment and control villages
over the course of the study (results available on request). In other words, it appears as if schools used the additional
resources provided by the voucher payments to either keep overall enrollments constant (by accepting voucher
recipients instead of other students) or by hiring enough staff so that their characteristics (such as class size) did not
change on average. More broadly, since this was a one-off experiment that was not repeated for later cohorts, we do
not expect to see a significant supply-side response from private schools in response to the program (unlike what
might be expected in a scaled-up steady state implementation of the RtE Act).
21
The libraries referred to here are typically not separate rooms dedicated to being libraries, but are more typically a
collection of books kept in a cupboard that students can use. The large prevalence of radios reflects a policy to
facilitate distance education in public schools, through the distribution of radios to schools.
22
Note that since salary expenditures are not reported at the school level, we compute average per-child spending in
public schools from analysis of budget documents at the state-level (Dongre 2012).

12

better infrastructure, as a result of which the differences in per-child expenditure are not as stark
as the differences in teacher salaries.
In addition to reporting on measures of school and teacher quality based on their
characteristics, we also measure school quality using direct observations of schools and teachers
conducted during unannounced visits to the schools during the four years of the project (a
representative sample of schools and teachers were observed each year). Private schools
significantly outperform public schools on all measures of observed classroom processes (Table
2 – Panel A). Classrooms in private schools are significantly more likely to be engaged in active
teaching (51% vs. 34%), have a greater likelihood of a teacher being in the classroom (97% vs.
92%), and are much less likely to be multi-grade classrooms where more than one grade is taught
simultaneously by the same teacher (24% vs. 79%). Moreover, enumerators coded teachers in
private schools as being more likely to be in complete control of the class (69% vs. 41%) and as
more effective in teaching and maintaining discipline (50% vs. 36%).
We find from observations at the teacher level (Table 2 – Panel B) that public school teachers
were considerably more likely to be absent than private school teachers (24% versus 9%) and
less likely to have been actively teaching at the point of observation (35% versus 50%). 23
Finally, enumerators also coded measures of school hygiene based on their observations when
they entered the schools (Table 2 – Panel C) and we find that private schools are less likely to
have indicators of poor hygiene such as having garbage dumped on the school premises, having
stagnant water (breeding ground for mosquitos), or having a heavy presence of flies on the
school premises (a common carrier of pathogens from open human and animal waste).
3.2 Household Inputs
In addition to school-level factors, receipt of a voucher may also change household inputs
into education (Das et al. 2013; Pop-Eleches and Urquiola 2013). We collect data on time use as
well as household expenditure on education from a representative sample of students, and
compare these across treatment and control households. Columns 1 and 2 of Table 3 present the
cross-sectional comparison of average child time use and household education expenditure
between the children attending private and public schools. Columns 4 and 5 present means of
23

The discrepancy between the difference in teacher absence rates (15 percentage points) and the difference in the
probability that a classroom does not have a teacher (5 percentage points) is partly explained by the fact that the
most common response to teacher absence in public schools is to combine grades and have all students taught by the
same teacher (as seen in the much higher rate of multi-grade teaching in public schools).

13

these same metrics for students who were awarded the voucher and those who were not. Column
6 presents the estimate of the intent-to-treat (ITT) effect of receiving a voucher on time use and
expenditure, while column 7 presents the estimate of average treatment-on-treated (ToT). Thus,
comparing columns 7 and 3 provides a measure of the extent to which time use and household
expenditure patterns of voucher receiving students who attended a private school have converged
to the typical patterns of students attending private schools.
The typical private school student spends 43 minutes more per day in school, and an
additional 23 minutes per day on studying and doing homework at home (Table 3, Panel A,
columns 1-3), which adds up to over an hour of extra school and study time per day and over 250
hours per year. Comparing columns 3 and 7, we see that the voucher receiving students who
attend a private school have completely caught up with the typical private school student in
terms of time spent in school. However, a striking result is that they do not appear to have
caught up in terms of time spent studying and doing homework at home. Also, the typical
private school student spends 20 minutes less per day playing with friends, while there is no
reduction in time spent playing with friends for the voucher winners. These results suggest that
study and play habits of voucher winners at home did not change over this period. 24
Households with children attending private schools spend over five times as much money on
that child's education (Table 7, Panel B, columns 1-3), which reflects private school fees and
additional required expenditures on textbooks and uniforms. Public schools are free, provide free
textbooks, and uniforms are optional. However, voucher-winning households spend a little less
on the education (of the winning child) relative to the control group (column 7), which is
consistent with the fact that the voucher pays for school fees, books, and uniforms/shoes.
In summary, household expenditure on education is slightly lower for voucher-winning
children, and we find no evidence of a change in home study habits of the voucher winners.
However, the average time spent in school does go up for voucher winners. Thus, any impact on
test scores for voucher winners is likely to be due to changes in school-level factors as opposed
to increases in household inputs.

24

Overall, around two thirds of the cost of the extra time spent in school (45 minutes/day) seems to have been borne
by parents (30 minutes of reduced time on chores and work outside the home), while the remaining one third was
borne by the student (15 minutes less of watching TV and free time).

14

4. Results – Test Scores
4.1 Impact of winning a voucher and attending a private school
Our main estimating equation for the impact of receiving the voucher takes the form:
𝑇𝑖𝑠𝑣 (𝑌𝑛 ) = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ∙ 𝑇𝑖𝑠𝑣 (𝑌0 ) + 𝛽2 ∙ 𝑉𝑜𝑢𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖 + 𝛽𝑍𝑖 ∙ 𝑍𝑖 + 𝛽𝑋𝑖 ∙ 𝑋𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖𝑠𝑣

(1)

where 𝑇𝑖𝑠𝑣 (𝑌𝑛 ) represents normalized test scores for student i in subject s in village v, at the end
of n years of the experiment. Since test scores are highly correlated over time, we control for

baseline test scores to increase the precision of our estimates. 25 We also include a set of district

fixed effects (𝑍𝑖 ) to absorb geographic variation and increase efficiency, and to account for the

stratification of the village-level lottery at the district level. The main estimate of interest is 𝛽2,

which provides an unbiased estimate of the impact of winning a voucher on test scores (the

intent-to-treat or ITT estimate) since the voucher was assigned by lottery. We estimate 𝛽2 both

with and without controlling for household socioeconomic characteristics (𝑋𝑖 ) shown in Table 1.
As described in section 2, a key feature of our design is the ability to estimate the impact of

winning the voucher relative to the control group in control villages. The estimation sample
therefore includes the applicants who won the voucher lottery, and applicants whose villages
were not selected (by lottery) to receive the voucher. The estimation sample does not include the
applicants who lost the lottery but were in treatment villages (we use this sample later when
analyzing spillover effects). Test scores are normalized relative to the distribution of the publicschool students in the control villages on each test, since these students represent the "business as
usual" distribution of test scores. Standard errors are clustered at the village level to account for
common shocks to test scores that may occur at the village level.
We estimate the impact of attending a private school using the offer of a voucher as an
instrumental variable for attending a private school, where the second stage equation is:
𝑇𝑖𝑠𝑣 (𝑌𝑛 ) = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ∙ 𝑇𝑖𝑠𝑣 (𝑌0 ) + 𝛽2 ∙ 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑣𝑎𝑡𝑒_𝑆𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑙𝑖 + 𝛽𝑍𝑖 ∙ 𝑍𝑖 + 𝛽𝑋𝑖 ∙ 𝑋𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖𝑠𝑣

(2)

𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑣𝑎𝑡𝑒_𝑆𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑙𝑖 = 𝛾0 + 𝛾1 ∙ 𝑇𝑖𝑠𝑣 (𝑌0 ) + 𝛾2 ∙ 𝑉𝑜𝑢𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖 + 𝛾𝑍𝑖 ∙ 𝑍𝑖 + 𝛾𝑋𝑖 ∙ 𝑋𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖𝑠𝑣

(3)

and the endogenous regressor 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑣𝑎𝑡𝑒_𝑆𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑙𝑖 is instrumented for with the first-stage equation:
These results are presented in Table 4 for test scores at the end of two and four years of the
program, with Panel A showing the impact of being awarded a voucher and Panel B showing the
25

The default baseline score that we control for is the score on the same subject, but in cases where no baseline test
was conducted in the same subject, we control for the mean normalized test score across all subjects for which a
baseline test was available (which provides a measure of baseline ability, and increases precision).

15

impact of attending a private school. We report the results for each subject separately, as well as
averaged across subjects. 26 Results in Table 4 includes the controls shown in Table 1 (for
greater precision), but they are unchanged without the controls. 27
At the end of two and four years of the program, we find that voucher lottery winners had
slightly lower scores on Telugu and math than lottery losers (not significant – columns 1, 2, 5,
and 6), and higher scores in English (0.19σ after two years, p = 0.02, and 0.12σ after four years,
p = 0.098; columns 3 and 7). The average impact across the three subjects that were assessed at
the end of two years was close to zero (Table 4 – column 4).
These results might seem surprising since private schools perform better on most measures of
effort – including having a longer school year and school day, substantially lower pupil-teacher
ratios, and higher levels of teacher attendance and effort. On the other hand, the teachers in the
private schools are less likely to have a college degree or a teacher training credential. They are
also less experienced, and paid much lower wages. So these factors may offset each other and
produce a net effect of close to zero. Overall, these results suggest that the large cross-sectional
differences in math and Telugu test scores (of 0.65σ) shown in Table A.1 are mostly driven by
omitted variables and not by differential effectiveness of public and private schools.
However, in addition to facilities, teachers, and teacher activity levels, a key determinant of
education outcomes is instructional time, and in particular the allocation of instructional time
across different subjects. 28 We present data from school time tables in Table 5, and see that
private schools have sharply different patterns of time allocation than public schools. In
particular, they allocate a lot less time per week to Telugu and math, which are the two main
subjects taught in the public schools - accounting for over 500 minutes/week, and around 28% of
total instructional time each. Private schools spend around 200 minutes less on Telugu and 160
minutes less on math per week (40% and 32% less instructional time respectively). On the other
hand, they spend significantly more time on other subjects such as English (~90 minutes/week),
social studies (~65 minutes/week), science (~100 minutes/week), Hindi (~215 minutes/week),
and computer use (~45 minutes/week). They also spend an hour/week more on "other" periods
26

This procedure is similar to that of Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007) for the analysis of programs with multiple
outcomes. Olken, Onishi, and Wong (2012) use a similar approach in a recent field experiment in Indonesia that
studied multiple outcomes across health and education.
27
The only result whose significance changes without socioeconomic controls (that improve precision) is the 4-year
impact on English that moves from a p-value of 0.098 (with controls) to a p-value of 0.113 (without controls).
28
We thank Mark Jacobsen for this comment while discussing the two-year results, which prompted us to collect
and analyze school time table data, and test additional subjects at the end of Year 4 based on the time table data.

16

which include arts, crafts, sports, and study hall. Overall, we see that the three subjects that were
tested at the end of two years of the program account for 70% of the instruction time in public
schools, but for less than 50% of that in the private schools.
Thus, limiting our analysis to these subjects may provide an incomplete picture of the impact
of the voucher. Based on the time table data, we also conducted tests in science/social studies
(EVS) and Hindi after four years of the voucher program. 29 While this still does not account for
all the subjects (computer use for instance), the tested subjects now account for over 80% of
instructional time in both types of subjects and are also closer to being equal across school types
(81% for private and 85% for public schools). The full set of test score results are presented in
Table 4 – columns 5 to 10. Voucher-winning students score slightly better in EVS (0.08σ; p =
0.16), and much better in Hindi (0.55σ, p < 0.001). Averaging across all subjects, students who
won a voucher score 0.13σ better than those who did not, and the causal impact of attending a
private school is estimated as 0.23σ (both with p < 0.01).
Since the overall positive effects of receiving a voucher are mainly driven by gains in Hindi,
and since public schools do not teach Hindi, we analyze the Hindi results in more detail at the
individual question level (by skill) to better understand what the program impact means in terms
of actual ability to use Hindi. We present these results in Table A.5, and see that attending a
private school more than doubles the probability of students reading letters correctly, and more
than triples the probability of being able to read words, sentences, and paragraphs.
While we follow Kling, Katz, and Liebman (2007) in reporting mean test score impacts
across subjects, our finding of a positive impact of receiving a voucher (and attending private
schools) depends on assuming equal weights across subjects. However, while views on optimal
weights across subjects may vary, we can unambiguously infer that private schools are more
productive, because they deliver similar outcomes in Telugu and math with less instructional
time, and use the extra time to improve test scores in other subjects (especially Hindi).

29

Under the government syllabus for primary schools, science and social studies are taught jointly under the subject
title of "environmental studies" (EVS). The tests we conduct follow the curriculum and are therefore analyzed and
reported jointly as EVS. The EVS tests were administered in a standard written format. Hindi is not taught in the
public schools, and so we could not administer a written test (which would result in more children being coded as
scoring zero in Hindi relative to their true level of competence). Enumerators therefore administered individual oral
tests to a representative sample of the universe of voucher applicants (which was balanced between treatment and
control categories on all observables). The test follows the same format as that administered by the non-profit
Pratham in their annual surveys of learning levels implemented across India (ASER 2013) and is therefore
comparable with a benchmark measure of competence that has been widely used in India in the recent past.

17

4.2 Robustness to attrition
The main threat to the results above is from the differential attrition noted in Table A.4. As
discussed in section 2.4, we verify that our results are robust to this concern using two different
procedures. In Table 6 – Panel A, we report the ITT effects of winning a voucher using inverse
probability reweighting to account for the differential probability of attrition based on
observables, and see that doing so barely changes the estimated effects presented in Table 8 –
Panel A. As we will see in section 4.4.1, there is very limited evidence of heterogeneous
treatment effects by baseline student characteristics, and it is therefore not surprising that inverse
probability reweighting does not change the main estimates.
A more conservative approach to the differential attrition rates between treatment and control
groups is to compute bounds based on Lee (2009). We calculate these bounds and show the
widened 95% confidence intervals as a result of the procedure in Table 6 – Panel B. The results
are all robust to implementing these bounds. The point estimates of the impact on math, Telugu,
and EVS continue to be insignificant; the estimated impact on English is now insignificant (not
surprising, given its marginal significance in Table 4); and the estimated impact on Hindi is large
enough that its significance is not affected by using the more conservative confidence intervals
implied by the Lee bounds. The overall ITT estimate (averaged across subjects – column 10)
also continues to be significant (though at the 5% and not at the 1% level as in Table 4).
4.3 Spillover Effects
An important concern in the global school choice literature is that positive estimated effects
of vouchers from experimental studies may be overstating the benefits of private schools because
these estimates do not account for potential negative spillovers to students in the public schools
who do not apply for the voucher or for potential negative spillovers on the students who start in
the private schools, and who are exposed to lower-scoring peers from public schools as a result
of the voucher program (Hsieh and Urquiola 2006). Our two-stage design experimental design
allows us to estimate these spillovers. We calculate three different sets of spillovers as described
in section 2.2, and the estimating equations all take the same form as (1), but the right-hand side
variable of interest is now an indicator for being in a voucher village. The estimation samples
comprise the concerned group for whom we want to estimate the spillovers (lottery losers, nonapplicants, and students attending private schools before the school choice program) from both

18

treatment and control villages. The village-level lottery ensures that we obtain unbiased reduced
form estimates of these three spillovers.
Table 7 - Panel A compares the within-village control group to the across-village control
group. Note that the former is the traditional control group used in typical experimental studies
of school choice (the lottery losers in the treatment villages) and that this sample has not been
used so far in any of the analysis due to the possibility of spillovers as discussed in section 2.2.
We find no difference whatsoever between the groups, and the combined effects across subjects
are not only insignificant but close to zero. 30 Panel B estimates if there were any spillovers on
non-applicants and we again find no significant effects on either individual subjects or on the
aggregate test scores across subjects. Thus, even though the literature has often worried about
the possibility of negative spillovers on students who are "left behind" in public schools in
response to voucher programs, these spillovers were not empirically salient in our setting even
though a large fraction (23%) of public school students moved out to private schools. 31
In the Indian context, a greater concern has been the possibility that the Right to Education
Act clause on quotas in private schools would lead to negative spillovers on the students who
start out in the private schools (see Shah 2012 for an example). We estimate these spillovers in
Panel C and find that there are no significant negative spillovers on the students who were in
private schools to begin with. In addition to these average spillover effects on private school
students in the exposed cohorts, we also estimate the extent of spillovers as a function of the
number of voucher-winning students who join a particular private school.
Since this is endogenous, we first construct a measure of "potential exposure to voucher
students" for each private school (in both treatment and control villages) as the number of
voucher applicants for whom it is the nearest private school. We then construct an instrumental
variable for the number of voucher-winning students who join any given private school by
interacting the "potential exposure" with the (randomly-determined) fraction of these students
who win a voucher. The instrument will be zero for all private schools in control villages (where
no vouchers were awarded), and can vary across private schools in treatment villages. We
30

Our not finding any significant spillovers here suggests that the potential contamination of the "typical" control
group (as discussed in section 2.2) in existing voucher studies is likely to be an empirically second-order issue.
31
Of course, the estimated 'non-effect' is a reduced form estimate that combines factors which could potentially hurt
the students left behind (loss of motivated peers) as well as those that could help them (smaller class sizes if teacher
allocations did not fully adjust to the departure of the voucher students, and potential positive teacher effort response
to competition). We do not have enough power to explore these channels with adequate precision, but we do
provide the first experimental reduced form estimates of these spillovers.

19

present the IV estimates of spillovers on private school students as a function of the number of
voucher students received by the school in Table A.6, and again find no impact on the test scores
of students who started out in private schools. 32 While set in India, these results are consistent
with those reported in Angrist and Lang (2004) who similarly find negligible impacts on white
students from the school desegregation conducted under the Boston Metco Program.
Taken together, our results suggest that the positive test score effects for voucher winners are
not achieved at the cost of negative outcomes for any other group of students who may have
been indirectly affected by the voucher program. Of course, our results do not imply that peer
effects and sorting never matter for evaluations of school choice. But they do suggest more
broadly that while spillovers are an important theoretical concern in the school choice literature,
they do not appear to be empirically first-order in our context, and may not be so for lotterybased studies of school choice in programs that do not allow private schools to select students. 33
4.4 Heterogeneous effects
4.4.1 Heterogeneous effects by student characteristics
We test for heterogeneity of the impact of the voucher program along several student
characteristics including baseline scores, gender, caste, parental literacy and affluence, cohort,
and religion, using a standard linear interaction specification of the form:
𝑇𝑖𝑠𝑣 (𝑌𝑛 ) = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ∙ 𝑇𝑖𝑠𝑣 (𝑌0 ) + 𝛽2 ∙ 𝑉𝑜𝑢𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖 + 𝛽3 ∙ 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑖 + 𝛽4 ∙ 𝑉𝑜𝑢𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖 ∙

(4)

𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑖 + 𝛽𝑍𝑖 ∙ 𝑍𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖𝑠𝑣

where the parameter of interest is 𝛽4 which estimates the extent to which the impact of the
vouchers is different for students with the concerned characteristic.

Table 8 reports estimates of 𝛽4 over two and four years. The main result is the lack of any

consistent evidence of heterogeneous effects along most student characteristics. In particular, the
32

The instrument is relevant because distance is a strong predictor of primary school choice (first stage F-statistic is
over 45 in Table A.6). We present the first stage regression in Table A.7 and see that the instrument strongly
predicts the number of voucher students attending any given private school. Further, the village-level randomization
(after inviting applications) allows us to define the "potential exposure" variable for every private school in both
treatment and control villages. Thus, an alternative approach to using a linear IV for estimating spillovers (as shown
in Table A.6) is to restrict our spillover analysis in Table 7 – Panel C to private schools (in treatment and control
villages) with higher potential exposure to voucher students. We re-estimate the spillover effects reported in Table –
Panel C in samples restricted to the top 50% of private schools (by potential exposure to voucher students) and also
the top 25%, and still find no evidence of spillover effects (results available on request).
33
Macleod and Urquiola 2012 develop a model of school choice under different selection regimes and show that
many of the potential gains of choice and competition may not materialize in systems where private schools are
allowed to select students, while also showing that choice and competition will typically improve outcomes if
private schools are not allowed to select their students.

20

baseline score can be treated as a summary statistic of educational inputs that students had
received up to the point when they enter the study, and the lack of any differential treatment
effects by baseline score suggests that the impacts of the program were broad based. The one
group that seems to benefit significantly more from the voucher program are Muslim students,
who are one of the most educationally disadvantaged groups in India (Sachar et al. 2006). 34
These results are consistent with those found in the US by Howell and Peterson (2002) who
report that educationally-disadvantaged groups gain the most from school choice programs.
4.4.2 Heterogeneous effects by school characteristics
Our experiment was not designed to identify heterogeneous effects by school
characteristics, 35 but we report some suggestive results that are likely to be important for future
research designed explicitly to study such heterogeneity. In particular, a key feature of private
school heterogeneity in India is the medium of instruction. All public schools in our sample teach
in Telugu, whereas over half the private schools use English as the medium of instruction. The
high actual and perceived returns to English in India have led to growing demand for Englishmedium private schools. 36 At the same time, it is possible that switching to being taught in
English may be disruptive to the learning of voucher-winning students (many of whom are firstgeneration learners with illiterate parents). Thus, studying heterogeneous impacts of attending
private schools as a function of the medium of instruction is especially important in this context.
Since the choice of school attended (and its medium of instruction) is endogenous, we use the
medium of instruction of the nearest private school to each applicant household, and its
interaction with the receipt of the randomly-assigned voucher as instruments for the medium of
instruction of the private school attended. We define the following variables of interest:
𝐴_𝐸𝑀_𝑃𝑆𝑖 = Student i attends an English Medium Private School
34

𝐴_𝑇𝑀_𝑃𝑆𝑖 = Student i attends a Telugu Medium Private School

Since we are testing heterogeneity across several covariates in Table 10, we need to be cautious in inferring
heterogeneity since significant results could simply be reflecting sampling variation. However, we can be more
confident in the inference that Muslim students benefit more from the vouchers because we see significant positive
effects for Muslim students in both the two-year as well as the four-year data and this is seen for every subject at the
two-year point, and three out of five subjects after four years.
35
Note that this is true of the experimental school choice literature in general, because even when a voucher is
randomly assigned, the school attended is typically not. Indeed, the logic of school "choice" is based to a
considerable extent on enabling better student-school matching on unobserved characteristics.
36
Munshi and Rosenzweig (2006), Azam, Chin, and Prakash (2011), Chakraborty and Kapur (2012), and Shastry
(2012) all find significant positive labor market returns in India to knowledge of English. Several journalistic
accounts and qualitative studies have noted the high perceived returns to English among parents, and the growing
demand for English medium schools in India (see Bajaj and Yardley 2011, and Meganathan 2011 for examples).

21

𝑁_𝑃𝑆_𝐸𝑀𝑖 = Nearest Private School to student i teaches in English Medium
𝑁_𝑃𝑆_𝑇𝑀𝑖 = Nearest Private School to student i teaches in Telugu Medium

and are interested in estimating 𝛽2 and 𝛽3 in the second-stage equation:

𝑇𝑖𝑠𝑣 (𝑌𝑛 ) = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ∙ 𝑇𝑖𝑠𝑣 (𝑌0 ) + 𝛽2 ∙ 𝐴_𝐸𝑀_𝑃𝑆𝑖 + 𝛽3 ∙ 𝐴_𝑇𝑀_𝑃𝑆𝑖 + 𝛽𝑋𝑖 ∙ 𝑋𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖𝑠𝑣

(5)

where the endogenous variables are 𝐴_𝐸𝑀_𝑃𝑆𝑖 and 𝐴_𝑇𝑀_𝑃𝑆𝑖 , and the first-stage equations are:
𝐴_𝐸𝑀_𝑃𝑆𝑖 (𝑜𝑟 𝐴_𝑇𝑀_𝑃𝑆𝑖 ) = 𝛾0 + 𝛾1 ∙ 𝑇𝑖𝑠𝑣 (𝑌0 ) + 𝛾2 ∙ 𝑁_𝑃𝑆_𝐸𝑀𝑖 + 𝛾3 ∙ 𝑁_𝑃𝑆_𝑇𝑀𝑖 + 𝛾4 ∙
𝑉𝑜𝑢𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖 ∙ 𝑁_𝑃𝑆_𝐸𝑀𝑖 + 𝛾5 ∙ 𝑉𝑜𝑢𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖 ∙ 𝑁_𝑃𝑆_𝑇𝑀𝑖 + 𝛾𝑋𝑖 ∙ 𝑋𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖𝑠𝑣

(6a/6b)

We use (6a) and (6b) to instrument for the two endogenous variables in (5), and present the
two first-stage regressions in Table A.8. The main parameters of interest (𝛽2 and 𝛽3 ) from the

IV estimation of (5) are presented in Table 9 – Panel A. A more conservative approach is to use
only the interactions as instruments, and we present the results from this specification in Table 9
– Panel B. 37 The estimation sample is the same as that in Table 4, and comprises the voucher
lottery winners in the treatment villages, and the lottery losers in the control villages. 38
At the end of four years of the voucher program, we find that the causal impact of attending
an English-medium private school varies sharply by subject, with students doing worse (than
staying in the public school) in Telugu, math, and EVS; but much better in English, and Hindi.
The mean impact across subjects is positive (0.22σ) but not significant. On the other hand, the
estimated impact of attending a Telugu-medium private school is positive for every subject, and
the mean impact across subjects is positive (0.53σ) and significant (Table 9 – Panel A). The IV
estimates in Table 9 have large standard errors, and are much less precise than the main
estimates in Table 4. Nevertheless, some suggestive patterns emerge in the results.
The first is that the causal impact of attending a Telugu-medium private school (for students
who start out in public schools – which all teach in Telugu medium) on test scores in Telugu,
math, and EVS appears to be greater than that of attending an English-medium private school (pvalue of 0.15, 0.13, and 0.06 respectively). The second is that there appears to be a negative
impact of switching the medium of instruction on the learning of content in non-language
37

Since the location decisions of English and Telugu medium schools may vary, the most conservative IV strategy
is to use only the interactions as instruments (because these are comparing similarly located schools across treatment
and control villages – which are chosen randomly). However, as we see in Table A.9, there is no difference in mean
baseline scores of voucher applicants as a function of whether their nearest private school is in English or Telugu
medium. So, our default specification uses all four instruments (for greater precision) and includes all variables in
Table A.9 as controls (Panel A), but we also report results with the more conservative IV strategy (Panel B).
38
However, we have around 7% fewer observations in Table 9 than in Table 4 due to missing household GPS data.
The results in Table 4 are unchanged when estimated in this truncated sample (available on request).

22

subjects. We see this most clearly in the last column of Table 9 – Panel A, where we present the
mean treatment effects across math and EVS (which are the two content subjects, while the other
three are language subjects). The difference in mean test scores across medium of instruction is
0.77σ, which is a very large effect (p = 0.07). The third is that private schools appear to be even
more effective than suggested by the estimates in Table 4 (a mean treatment effect of 0.53σ
across subjects as opposed to 0.23σ), when their students are not also going through the
disruption of switching their medium of instruction. 39
These results are only suggestive, and have several caveats. First, they are highly imprecise.
Using a more conservative IV strategy (reported in Table 9 – Panel B), we find similar estimates,
but the standard errors are too large for meaningful inference. Second, even with a precise IV
estimate, the medium of instruction will be correlated with other school characteristics.
However, we see that on average, the English-medium schools have superior indicators of school
quality – including facilities; teacher experience, qualifications, and salary; and annual fees
charged per child (Table A.10). Since our main result in Table 9 is that Telugu-medium private
schools appear to be more effective than English-medium ones, the superior input-based quality
indicators of the English-medium schools, suggest that the differences reported in Table 9 may
be a lower bound on the relative advantage of native-language versus English-medium
instruction (for the population of public school students who applied for the voucher).
These results are consistent with the education psychology literature, which suggests that
first-generation learners may be better off being taught in their native language, which can be
reinforced at home (see Abadzi 2006 for a summary). Qualitative interviews by enumerators
with teachers and parents, suggest that one plausible reason for adverse effects of shifting to an
English-medium private school is that these schools use textbooks written in English for teaching
non-language subjects such as math, and EVS, and that reading textbooks in English was much
more difficult for students shifting from public schools.
In the development economics literature, Ramachandran (2012) provides recent evidence
from Ethiopia showing that a switch to mother-tongue instruction for primary school led to a
39

Recall that the point estimates are relative to attending public schools, and the impacts on Telugu and math reflect
both the potentially higher private school "productivity effect", and the lower instructional time allocated to these
subjects in the private schools. The results on EVS on the other hand reflect both the productivity effect and
additional instructional time, and it is therefore not surprising that the estimated effects on EVS are much larger
(when the medium of instruction is not disrupted). However, our focus in this table is on the relative impact of
Telugu and English medium private schools (and less on the subject-level point estimates relative to public schools).

23

significant increase in education attainment. 40 Jain (2014) examines historical data from colonial
India and finds that linguistically-mismatched districts (where the official language did not
match the local language) had lower rates of literacy and college graduation results. Our results
are consistent with these findings in aggregate data, and highlight the importance of more wellidentified research to directly estimate the impact of the medium of instruction on test scores. 41
4.4.3 Heterogeneous effects by market characteristics
The market-level experimental design allows us to test whether students who have greater
choice among schools benefit more from a voucher (Hoxby 2000). We use the distance data
described above to calculate the number of private schools within a one-kilometer radius of each
voucher applicant. Our measure of choice and competition is constructed separately for each
student, and can therefore generate variation at the student-level even for students living in the
same village. We estimate the relationship between the number of schools in an applicant's
choice set and test scores, both parametrically and non-parametrically. For the first, we use a
linear interaction of voucher receipt and the number of schools in the choice set in a specification
similar to (4). For the second, we estimate equation (4) with the "characteristic" being whether
the number of schools a student has in her choice set is in the top 25%, top 10%, or top 5% of the
distribution of the number of schools.
These results are presented in Table 10, and we find no significant effect of choice and
competition when estimated with a linear interaction between voucher receipt and the number of
schools in a student's choice set within one kilometer. However, while conducting the study in a
rural sample allows us to study spillovers by randomizing across villages, a limitation is that
around 50% of voucher applicants have only 0 (27%) or 1 (21%) private school within a onekilometer radius. Thus, the extent of choice and competition between private schools is quite
limited for many of the voucher applicants.
The non-parametric estimates might therefore be more appropriate in this context, and they
provide some suggestive evidence of the benefits of greater choice and competition, since we
40

The estimated magnitudes are large, and suggest that the change led to an increase of one year of primary
schooling and 1.18 years of total schooling in the affected cohorts (which is one-third of the mean years of schooling
in Ethiopia at the time). It is also interesting to note that the estimated effects are all on the intensive margin of
years of education completed, suggesting that the mechanism of impact is not through increased likelihood of
enrollment but more likely through better learning and lower resulting drop-out rates.
41
See Grewal (2008) for a rich discussion of the ethical and economic considerations regarding language policy in a
globalized world where high returns to English prompt students in non-English speaking countries to learn English,
but often at considerable cost (both financial and opportunity costs of learning their own languages better).

24

find that voucher winners do significantly better when they have six or more schools within a
one kilometer radius of where they live (Table 10). We find evidence of larger impacts in areas
with more choice and competition in both the two-year and the four-year results, suggesting that
the heterogeneity is likely to be real and does not just reflect sampling variation. Further, we
find similar results when we consider heterogeneous impacts as a function of the number of
private schools in a half-kilometer radius and with the total number of schools in a half or onekilometer radius and not just the number of private schools (available on request).
However, these results are suggestive, since they are only significant in markets representing
the top 5% of the distribution of the extent of choice and competition, and the rural setting may
not be the best one to study heterogeneous impacts of school choice as a function of the extent of
choice and competition. However, urban India has much greater population and school density,
and a recent geo-coded school census in the city of Patna found that there are between 9 and 93
private schools within a one kilometer radius of every public school, with the median being
greater than 50 (Rangaraju et al. 2012). 42 Our results therefore suggest that the impact of a
school voucher program may be considerably larger in such a context. This is an important area
for future research.
4.5. Cost Effectiveness
The combination of test score results (Table 4) and school time table data (Table 5) already
show that private schools are more productive than public schools because they are able to
produce similar levels of test scores in math and Telugu using substantially less instructional
time and use the extra time to produce higher test scores in other subjects - especially Hindi.
Further, the results in Table 9 suggest that private schools may be even more productive when
students attending them are not experiencing the disruption of switching their medium of
instruction. Finally, it is worth highlighting that the average cost per-student in the private
schools in our sample is less than one-third of the per-student costs in the public schools (Table 1
- Panel C) and that the value of the voucher was only around 40% of the per-student costs in the
public schools. Thus, private schools produce better academic outcomes at lower cost and are
unambiguously both more productive and cost-effective than public schools in India.

42

Patna is the capital of the state of Bihar with a population of 1.7 million and population density comparable to
other large cities in India.

25

5. Discussion and Conclusion
We present evidence from the first experimental evaluation of the impact of a school choice
program and the first experimental evidence on the relative effectiveness of private and public
schools in a low-income country. The two-stage experimental design allows us to not only study
the impact of receiving a voucher and attending a private school, but also to estimate spillovers
on non-applicants and students in private schools.
Our results on private school productivity suggest that it may be possible to substantially
increase human capital formation in developing countries like India by making more use of
private provision in the delivery of education. The differences in productivity by type of school
management are consistent with the evidence in Bloom and Van Reenen (2010) documenting
that "government-owned firms are typically managed extremely badly". The costs of low
productivity in education delivery may be especially high in low-income settings where low
levels of human capital are likely to be barriers both to economic growth and to the inclusiveness
of growth, and where fiscal constraints limit the total spending on education.
Our results showing no significant spillovers on private-school students from receiving
voucher recipients from public schools suggest that it may be possible to achieve greater levels
of social integration in private schools, as envisaged by the RtE Act, without the efficiency costs
that opponents of integration are concerned about. While the estimates are clearly most relevant
to the Indian context, they are consistent with similar findings showing low academic costs to
advantaged students from school integration policies in the US (Angrist and Lang 2004).
Finally, our demonstration of the centrality of accounting for patterns of time use in
evaluating the effectiveness of private schools are perhaps the most general result for the global
literature on school choice. On the one hand, studies of vouchers and school choice that find no
effects on test scores may understate the benefits by not accounting for other subjects that the
private (or elite public) schools may be teaching. On the other hand, studies of charter schools
finding positive effects on test scores may overstate the benefits if charter schools focus more on
scores on high stakes tests and divert instructional time away from other subjects. More broadly,
schools provide vectors of outcomes and may be horizontally differentiated in their offerings,
which makes it difficult to compare outcomes across school types. In the absence of data on
long-term outcomes such as employment and wages, it is important for education researchers to

26

devise, test, and validate more content-neutral measures of learning that may enable meaningful
comparisons of outcomes across varying instructional programs.
The policy implications of our results for education in India are particularly timely. The
provision in the RtE Act for 25% reservation in private schools for disadvantaged students (with
the government reimbursing private school fees) has been highly controversial and contested all
the way up to the Supreme Court of India. Our results suggest that this provision is likely to not
only reduce social stratification at limited cost to current students in private schools, but also
likely to increase average productivity in the education sector by increasing the share of private
schooling. This may thus be a rare example of a policy that improves equity, and efficiency, and
does so at a lower cost than the status quo. 43
Nevertheless, there are important caveats to the broad implication that greater private sector
participation in education production (supported by public funding, and featuring enhanced
school choice) would improve the productivity of human capital formation. The first is that the
private schools in our sample did not on average improve outcomes in math and the native
language (even though they spent less time and money, and were as a result more productive). It
is important to highlight that our results do not imply that increasing the time or money spent on
instruction in these subjects in private schools will lead to a linear (or even concave) increase in
learning outcomes (we have no evidence on this). For instance, if the voucher value were to be
increased to equal the level of per-student spending in the public schools, it is possible that the
private schools may respond by improving aspects of the school that are more visible to parents
and improve their marketing prospects rather than investing in more effective teaching.
We see an illustration of this issue when we consider the question of why private schools
choose the allocation of instructional time that they do. In particular, students may be better off
if private schools used their higher productivity to spend more time on the native language to
help students reach grade-appropriate reading levels in at least one language, as opposed to low
levels of knowledge in three languages. 44 Qualitative interviews with head teachers suggest that
43

Note that reimbursements to private schools are capped at the per-child spending in public schools. The increased
social integration across economic classes may have broader social benefits as well. For instance, Rao (2014) finds
evidence in Delhi that exposure to economically disadvantaged students increased pro-social preferences and
behavior among privileged children attending private schools.
44
The literature on early childhood development in low-income countries suggests that returns to language
competence are convex for the first language, because of the importance of being able to "read to learn" in at least
one language (Abadzi 2006). The majority of public school students in AP are far behind grade-level competences
in Telugu and math (Muralidharan and Zieleniak 2014), and cannot typically read fluently even in Telugu, which is

27

an important reason for this is that the low-cost private schools in our sample typically copy the
curriculum of elite private schools, which feature the three-language formula that is typical of the
education that elites in India receive. 45 Given the socially-aspirational nature of private school
attendance (see Bajaj and Yardley 2011), the management of private schools we interviewed
stated that it would be difficult for them to remain competitive if they did not follow the
curriculum that was standard among elite private schools (even if this curriculum was not
optimal for the learning of the typical student attending a low-cost private school). 46
This discussion points to the second caveat, which is that there may be a trade-off between a
libertarian approach to school choice that believes that parents will make optimal schooling
choices for their children and a paternalistic one that believes that parents may make misguided
evaluations of school quality based on factors that may not contribute to more effective learning
(such as buildings and facilities, and levels of test scores of other students). Our results
unambiguously establish that private schools are more productive and cost effective than public
schools from the perspective of a social planner. But, it is not obvious that they represent a
better value for the marginal parent who is paying out of pocket for private schools over a free
public school. Since test scores did not improve in math and Telugu, the marginal parent would
have to place a high value on Hindi scores to justify paying out of pocket for the typical private
school in our sample. While, we cannot rule out this possibility (or that parents valued other
non-academic aspects of private schools), it is also possible that parents were not able to easily
determine the effectiveness of schools at improving learning outcomes, and it may be important
to provide better and easily understandable information on determinants of education quality to
schools and parents (Hastings and Weinstein 2008; Andrabi et al. 2013).
A final caveat is that the social efficiency gains from the greater productivity of private
schools can be negated if the steady state system of allocation of students to schools features
their native language (ASER 2013). Since the mean impact on Telugu scores of going to private schools was zero, it
is likely that the absolute level of competence in any language is low for voucher winners.
45
The three language formula aims to teach the state language, the national language (Hindi) and a global language
(English) that also serves as a lingua-franca between Indian states given the history of resistance to Hindi in some
non-Hindi speaking states of India. This is an onerous expectation relative to most countries, but is standard among
most Indian elites – especially those in non-Hindi speaking states such as Andhra Pradesh.
46
Of course, it is also likely that knowledge of an additional language like Hindi (the most widely-spoken Indian
language, and the fourth most spoken language in the world with over 500 million speakers) would have positive
labor market returns (especially with growing migration of workers across Indian states). But, it is not clear that
these returns are higher than those from increasing competence in the native language to enable better learning of
core content subjects. This is an important area for future research.

28

high degrees of selectivity by schools (see Macleod and Urquiola 2012 for a theoretical treatment
of this issue). This insight is already incorporated in the rules that most charter schools in the US
operate under (they cannot be selective in who they accept), but it is important to apply it to the
way that the RtE Act will be implemented.
Our results and discussion point towards several avenues for future research on school
choice. The first is to better estimate education production functions with a specific focus on the
relationship between instructional time per subject and test scores, and on the role of the
language of instruction (including positive and negative spillovers to other subjects, and
heterogeneous impacts as a function of home characteristics). Second, the analysis in this paper
(and in most of the school choice literature) has focused exclusively on the impacts of choice on
test scores and learning outcomes, and has ignored welfare gains to households from enhanced
choice and match quality. A natural extension therefore is to estimate a structural model of
school choice using revealed preference of program take up, and estimate the welfare gains to
households from introducing new schools into their feasible choice set by bringing their price
down sharply through vouchers (Bresnahan and Gordon 1996, Carneiro et al. 2013).
Three further sets of research questions are first order in the Indian context. First, it would
be important to replicate this experiment with the value of the voucher set equal to the perstudent spending in public schools to measure the extent to which the greater productivity of
private schools can translate into better absolute learning outcomes. Second, while we find
suggestive evidence on the positive effects of greater choice and competition, more conclusive
evidence will require running similar experiments in urban India – where the greater population
density allows for much more choice and competition between schools. Third, our estimates are
based on a voucher experiment with two cohorts of students, and do not capture the long-term
dynamic impacts of a school choice system. Doing so would require modeling (and measuring)
school entry and exit, as well as the endogenous price and quality responses of private schools in
response to a steady stream of public funding for students to attend private schools in (Nielson
2013 conducts such an exercise in Chile). Indian states are currently starting to implement the
RtE Act, and there is much fertile ground for future research to better understand education
markets in low-income settings and directly contribute to better education policy.

29

References:
Abadzi, H. 2006. Efficient Learning for the Poor: Insights from the Frontier of Cognitive
Neuroscience. Washington DC: The World Bank.
Abdulkadiroglu, A., J. Angrist, S. M. Dynarski, T. J. Kane, and P. A. Pathak. 2011. Accountability
and Flexibility in Public Schools: Evidence from Boston's Charters and Pilots. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 126:699-748.
Abdulkadiroglu, A., J. Angrist, and P. A. Pathak. 2014. The Elite Illusion: Achievement Effects at
Boston and New York Exam Schools. Econometrica 82 (1):137-196.
Andrabi, T., J. Das, and A. Khwaja. 2012. Report Cards: The Impact of Providing School and Child
Test-scores on Educational Markets: Harvard Kennedy School.
Andrabi, T., J. Das, A. Khwaja, and T. Zajonc. 2011. Do Value-Added Estimates Add Value?
Accounting for Learning Dynamics. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3
(July):29-54.
Angrist, J., E. Bettinger, E. Bloom, E. King, and M. Kremer. 2002. Vouchers for Private Schooling
in Colombia: Evidence from a Randomized Natural Experiment. American Economic Review
92 (5):1535-1558.
Angrist, J., E. Bettinger, and M. Kremer. 2006. Long-term Consequences of Secondary School
Vouchers: Evidence from Secondary School Records in Colombia. American Economic
Review 96 (3):847-862.
Angrist, J., and K. Lang. 2004. Does School Integration Generate Peer Effects? Evidence from
Boston's Metco Program. American Economic Review 94 (5):1613-1634.
ASER. 2013. Annual Status of Education Report: Aser Centre.
Azam, M., A. Chin, and N. Prakash. 2013. The Returns to English Language Skills in India.
Economic Development and Cultural Change.
Bajaj, V., and J. Yardley. 2011. Many of India's Poor Turn to Private Schools. The New York Times,
30 December 2011.
Baum, D. 2014. What Matters Most for Engaging the Private Sector in Education: A Framework
Paper. Washington DC: World Bank.
Bloom, N., and J. Van Reenen. 2010. Why Do Management Practices Differ across Firms and
Countries? Journal of Economic Perspectives 24 (1):203-224.
Bold, T., M. Kimenyi, G. Mwabu, and J. Sandefur. 2011. The High Return to Private Schooling in a
Low-Income Country: Center for Global Development Working Paper 279.
Bresnahan, T., and R. Gordon, eds. 1996. The Economics of New Goods: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Carneiro, P., J. Das, and H. Reis. 2013. Parental Valuation of School Attributes in Developing
Countries: Evidence from Pakistan: University College London.
Chakraborty, T., and S. Kapur. 2012. English Language Premium in a Globalizing Economy:
Evidence from a Policy Experiment in India: Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur.
Cullen, J. B., B. A. Jacob, and S. Levitt. 2006. The Effect of School Choice on Participants: Evidence
from Randomized Lotteries. Econometrica 74 (5):1191-1230.
Das, J., S. Dercon, J. Habyarimana, P. Krishnan, K. Muralidharan, and V. Sundararaman. 2013.
School Inputs, Household Substitution, and Test Scores. American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics 5 (2):29-57.
Desai, S., A. Dubey, R. Vanneman, and R. Banerji. 2009. Private Schooling in India: A New
Educational Landscape. In India Policy Forum, edited by S. Bery, B. Bosworth and A.
Panagariya. New Delhi: Sage.

30

Dobbie, W., and R. G. Fryer. 2011. Are High-Quality Schools Enough to Increase Achievement
Among the Poor? Evidence from the Harlem Children's Zone. American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics 3 (3):158-187.
Dongre, A. 2012. What is the Per Child Expenditure in Government Schools? In Accountability
Initiative. New Delhi.
French, R. J., and G. Kingdon. 2010. The relative effectiveness of private and government schools in
Rural India: Evidence from ASER data. London: Institute of Education.
Friedman, M. 1962. Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Goyal, S., and P. Pandey. 2009. How do Government and Private Schools Differ? Findings from two
large Indian states: World Bank.
Grewal, D. 2008. Network Power: The Social Dynamics of Globalization: Yale University Press.
Hastings, J. S., and J. M. Weinstein. 2008. Information, School Choice, and Academic Achievement:
Evidence from Two Experiments. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Howell, W. G., and P. E. Peterson. 2002. The Education Gap: Vouchers and Urban Schools.
Washington DC: Brookings Institution.
Howell, W. G., P. J. Wolf, D. E. Campbell, and P. E. Peterson. 2002. School vouchers and academic
performance: results from three randomized field trials. Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 21 (2):191-217.
Hoxby, C. 2000. Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers?
American Economic Review 90 (5):1209-1238.
Hoxby, C., S. Murarka, and J. Kang. 2009. How New York City's Charter Schools Affect
Achievement.
Hsieh, C.-T., and M. Urquiola. 2006. The effects of generalized school choice on achievement and
stratification: Evidence from Chile's school voucher program. Journal of Public Economics
90 (1477-1503).
Jain, T. 2014. Common Tongue: The Impact of Language on Educational Outcomes: Indian School
of Business.
Kelkar, V. January 16, 2006. Let Every Parent be a Consumer. India Today, January 16, 2006.
Kling, J. R., J. B. Liebman, and L. F. Katz. 2007. Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects.
Econometrica 75 (1):83-119.
Kremer, M., K. Muralidharan, N. Chaudhury, F. H. Rogers, and J. Hammer. 2005. Teacher Absence
in India: A Snapshot. Journal of the European Economic Association 3 (2-3):658-667.
Krueger, A., and P. Zhu. 2004. Another Look at the New York City School Voucher Experiment.
American Behavioral Scientist 47 (5):658-698.
Lee, D. 2009. Training, Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on Treatment
Effects. Review of Economic Studies 76 (3):1071-1102.
Lucas, A. M., and I. Mbiti. 2014. Effects of School Quality on Student Achievement: Discontinuity
Evidence from Kenya. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6 (3):234-263.
Macleod, B. W., and M. Urquiola. 2012. Anti-Lemons: School Reputation, Relative Diversity, and
Educational Quality: IZA Discussion Paper No. 6805.
Meganathan, R. 2011. Language Policy in education and the role of English in India: From library
language to language of empowerment. In Dreams and Realities: Developing Countries and
the English Language, edited by H. Coleman. London: British Council.
Munshi, K., and M. R. Rosenzweig. 2006. Traditional Institutions Meet the Modern World: Caste,
Gender, and Schooling Choice in a Globalizing Economy. American Economic Review 96
(4):1225-1252.
Muralidharan, K., J. Das, A. Holla, and A. Mohpal. 2014. The Fiscal Costs of Weak Governance:
Evidence from Teacher Absence in India. NBER Working Paper 20299.

31

Muralidharan, K., and M. Kremer. 2008. Public and Private Schools in Rural India. In School Choice
International, edited by P. Peterson and R. Chakrabarti. Cambridge: MIT.
Muralidharan, K., and V. Sundararaman. 2010. The Impact of Diagnostic Feedback to Teachers on
Student Learning: Experimental Evidence from India. Economic Journal 120 (546):F187F203.
———. 2011. Teacher Performance Pay: Experimental Evidence from India. Journal of Political
Economy 119 (1):39-77.
———. 2013. Contract Teachers: Experimental Evidence from India: NBER Working Paper 19440.
Muralidharan, K., and Y. Zieleniak. 2014. Chasing the Syllabus: Meauring Learning Trajectories in
Developing Countries with Longitudinal Data and Item Response Theory: UC San Diego.
Nielson, C. 2013. Targeted Vouchers, Competition Among Schools, and the Academic Achievement
of Poor Students: Yale.
Olken, B., J. Onishi, and S. Wong. 2012. Should Aid Reward Performance? Evidence from a Field
Experiment on Health and Education in Indonesia: NBER Working Paper 17892.
Pop-Eleches, C., and M. Urquiola. 2013. Going to a Better School: Effects and Behavioral
Responses. American Economic Review 103 (4):1289-1324.
Rangaraju, B., J. Tooley, and P. Dixon. 2012. The Private School Revolution in Bihar: Findings from
a Survey in Patna Urban.
Rao, G. 2014. Familiarity Does Not Breed Contempt: Diversity, Discrimination, and Generosity in
Delhi Schools: Harvard.
Rouse, C. E., and L. Barrow. 2009. School Vouchers and Student Achievement: Recent Evidence
and Remaining Questions. Annual Review of Economics 1:17-42.
Sachar, R., R. Basant, S. Hamid, A. Majeed, T. K. Oomen, and A. Shariff. 2006. Social, Economic,
and Educational Status of the Muslim Community in India. New Delhi: Government of India.
Shah, G. R. 2012. India Opens a Door to Private Education. The New York Times, 19 August 2012.
Shah, P. 2005. Equity in Education. Business Standard, July 13, 2005.
Shastry, K. 2012. Human Capital Response to Globalization: Education and Information Technology
in India. Journal of Human Resources 47 (2):287-330.
Singh, A. 2014. The Private School Premium: Size and sources of the private school advantage in
test scores in India: Oxford.
Srivastava, P. 2013. Low-fee Private Schooling: aggravating equity or mitigating disadvantage:
Symposium Books.
Srivastava, P., and G. Walford, eds. 2007. Private Schooling in Less Economically Developed
Countries: Asian and African Perspectives Oxford Studies in Comparative Education.
Tabarrok, A. 2013. Private Education in India: A Novel Test of Cream Skimming. Contemporary
Economic Policy 31 (1):1-12.
Tooley, J. 2009. The Beautiful Tree: A Personal Journey into How the World’s Poorest People are
Educating Themselves. New Delhi: Penguin.
Tooley, J., and P. Dixon. 2007. Private Education for Low-Income Families: Results from a Global
Reseach Project. In Private Schooling in Less Economically Developed Countries: Asian and
African Perspectives, edited by P. Srivastava and G. Walford: Oxford Studies in Comparative
Education.
Wolf, P. J., B. Kisida, B. Gutmann, M. Puma, N. Eissa, and L. Rizzo. 2013. School Vouchers and
Student Outcomes: Experimental Evidence from Washington, DC. Journal of Policy Analysis
and Management 32 (2):246-270.
Zhang, H. 2014. The Mirage of Elite Schools: Evidence from Lottery-based School Admissions in
China: Chinese University of Hong Kong.

32

Table 1: School and Teacher Characteristics
Panel A: School Characteristics

Total enrollment
Total working days
Pupil-teacher ratio
Drinking water available
Functional toilets
Separate functional toilets for girls
Functional electricity
Functional computers
Functional library
Functional radio
Observations

Private schools

Public schools

Difference

[1]

[2]

[3]

296.21
229.81
17.62
0.99
0.86
0.77
0.88
0.52
0.80
0.13

74.04
218.66
25.28
0.92
0.68
0.40
0.61
0.05
0.97
0.81

222.17***
11.15***
-7.67***
0.07***
0.18***
0.37***
0.28***
0.48***
-0.18***
-0.68***

289

346

Panel B: Teacher Characteristics
Male
Age
Years of teaching
Completed at least college or masters
Teacher training completed
Come from the same village
Current gross salary per month (Rs.)
Observations

0.24
27.58
5.14
0.69
0.34
0.44
2606.66

0.46
40.00
14.96
0.88
0.99
0.13
14285.94

2,000

1,358

-0.21***
-12.42***
-9.82***
-0.19***
-0.65***
0.32***
-11679.27***

Panel C: School Expenditures
Annual cost per child (Rs./child)
Observations

1848.88

8390.00

211

325

-6542***

Notes:
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. All standard errors are clustered at the school level. The sample for Panels A and B are restricted to schools and
teachers in control villages across years 2008 through 2012. In cases of multiple observations per school or teacher across different years,
variable means are used (so each teacher/school is one observation). All expenditures are measured in Rupees per student per year, trimmed at
the 1st and 99th percentiles to remove outliers. The actual number of observations for each regression may vary slightly within columns based on
the dependent variable. Estimates of annual cost per child in government schools come from government budget documents for 2010. The
private school figures for Panel C are therefore limited to private schools in control villages in 2010.

Table 2: Teacher and School Effort
Panel A: Measures of Classroom Activity
Private schools

Public schools

Difference

[1]

[2]

[3]

Class is engaged in active teaching
A teacher is present in class
Teacher is effective in teaching and maintaining discipline
Teacher has complete control over class
Teachers teaching mutliple classes at the same time

0.51
0.97
0.50
0.69
0.24

0.34
0.92
0.36
0.41
0.79

0.17***
0.048***
0.14***
0.28***
-0.55***

Observations

2,738

2,784

Panel B: Measures of Teacher Activity
Teacher is Absent
Teacher is actively teaching
Teacher is in school and not teaching

0.09
0.50
0.01

0.24
0.35
0.03

Observations

6,577

5,552

-0.15***
0.15***
-0.02***

Panel C: Measures of School Hygiene
Flies heavily present on premises of the school
Stagnant water present on premises of the school
Garbage dumped on premises of the school

0.14
0.18
0.33

0.19
0.28
0.44

Observations

426

614

-0.05**
-0.10***
-0.11***

Notes:
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. All regressions include a constant and district fixed effects. All standard errors are clustered at the school level.
The sample for this table is restricted to classrooms, teachers, and schools in control villages. All data are collected through unannounced
surveys of schools administered during the project (2008 through 2012). The unit of observations are classrooms (Panel A); teachers (Panel B);
and schools (Panel C). The actual number of observations for each regression may vary slightly within columns based on the dependent variable.

Table 3: Household Inputs
Panel A: Student Time Diaries (Minutes per Day)
Private schools Public schools

Difference

Applicants
offered
scholarship

Applicants in
Intention to
control villages treat estimate

Treatment on
the treated
estimate

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

423.53

380.25

43.28***

409.34

383.38

25.96***

46.93***

Activity:
Time spent in school
Studying and doing homework at home

75.99

52.72

23.27***

59.83

56.86

2.97

5.38

Private tuition

25.15

16.62

8.53***

21.95

17.43

4.52

8.17

Bathing/toilet/getting ready

55.11

61.7

-6.59***

57.82

61.24

-3.42

-6.19

Time traveling to school

23.5

20.92

2.58

23.51

21.43

2.08

3.75

Working (outside/inside the house)

1.51

11.05

-9.54***

5.46

9.36

-3.90*

-7.14*

Chores

16.82

31.18

-14.36***

21.62

34.45

-12.84***

-23.51***

Watching TV

75.88

83.38

-7.50**

80.57

84.04

-3.47

-6.28

Playing with friends

82.34

101.99

-19.65***

100.88

99.73

1.15

2.08

Eating

43.57

44.69

-1.12

43.78

44.12

-0.34

-0.61

Free time

53.38

64.38

-11.00***

56.69

62.13

-5.44

-9.96

652

1839

885

1212

Observations

2097

Panel B: Household Student Expenditure (Rupees per Year)
Household expenditure on student:
School admissions

140.58

14.95

125.63***

34.35

31.23

3.12

5.76

Uniforms

416.68

200.41

216.27***

171.14

237.07

-65.94***

-121.77***

Notebooks/textbooks

554.46

228.57

325.89***

209.05

278.35

-69.29***

-127.40***
-6.93*

Special events

15.91

7.29

8.62***

5.30

9.04

-3.74*

Transportation

113.61

13.59

100.02***

46.55

43.57

2.99

5.51

Private tuition

71.07

32.51

38.56***

34.80

39.55

-4.75

-8.75

2910.36

566.73

2343.64***

774.94

892.69

-117.75

-215.95

634

1815

858

1182

Total expenditure
Observations

2040

Notes:
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. All regressions include a constant and district fixed effects. All standard errors are clustered at the village level. In
all columns in Panels A, the sample is based on student time-use diaries from a normal, non-sick school day. The sample for columns [1] through
[3] is restricted to students and schools in control villages. The samples for columns [4] through [7] is applicants offered vouchers in treatment
villages and applicants not offered vouchers in control villages. Data for both panels come from the household surveys administered between
2008 and 2012. The chores activity consists of preparing meals, caring for other children, and caring for the elderly. Total expenditure includes the
categories listed and all other school-related expenditures. The actual number of observations for each regression may vary slightly within
columns based on the dependent variable.

Table 4: Test Score Impacts
Panel A: Impact of Winning a Voucher ("Intention to Treat" Effects)
Year 2 Assessments

Offered scholarship

Total observations
Treatment observations
Control observations

Year 4 Assessments

Telugu
score

Math score

English
score

Combined
across tests

Telugu
score

Math score

English
score

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

Science and
Combined
social studies Hindi score
across tests
(EVS) score
[8]

[9]

[10]

-0.079

-0.053

0.185**

0.016

-0.017

-0.031

0.116*

0.083

0.545***

0.133***

(0.055)

(0.065)

(0.079)

(0.061)

(0.051)

(0.052)

(0.070)

(0.060)

(0.068)

(0.045)

4,620
1,778
2,842

4,620
1,778
2,842

4,525
1,738
2,787

13,765
5,294
8,471

4,385
1,674
2,711

4,385
1,675
2,710

4,217
1,607
2,610

4,243
1,628
2,615

1,696
867
829

18,926
7,451
11,475

Panel B: Impact of Attending a Private School ("Treatment on the Treated" Effects, Using Lottery-based Voucher
Award as an Instrumental Variable)
Year 2 assessments
Scholarship recipient in private school

Total observations
Scholarship recipients
Non-recipients
First-stage F-stat

Year 4 assessments

-0.141

-0.094

0.328**

0.029

-0.031

-0.055

0.204*

0.146

0.923***

0.233***

(0.097)

(0.116)

(0.138)

(0.108)

(0.090)

(0.092)

(0.122)

(0.106)

(0.102)

(0.078)

4,620
997
3,623
368

4,620
997
3,623
368

4,525
982
3,543
366

13,765
5,294
8,471
369

4,385
945
3,440
361

4,385
946
3,439
363

4,217
911
3,306
382

4,243
920
3,323
374

1,696
510
1,186
407

18,926
7,451
11,475
391

Notes:
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. All regressions control for baseline normalized test scores and include a constant and district fixed effects. All standard errors are clustered at the
village level. All test scores are normalized across relative to the distribution of public school students in control villages by subject and grade. Telugu, math, English and EVS
(science and social studies) test scores are from written end of year tests; Hindi test scores are from an individual assessment administered to a representative sample of
students. Combined scores are obtained by running a pooled regression across all test scores in each year, with Hindi test score observations weighted up by the inverse of the
sampling probability within a given group of a student being selected to take the test from the universe of students. Controls include all the variables shown and defined in Table
A.1. Students with a missing value on any control have all controls coded as "0" and an additional dummy is included in all regressions indicating these students to ensure that no
observations are lost due to missing data on any individual control. Results are unchanged without controlling for the socioeconomic variables in Table A.1. The only result
whose significance changes without socioeconomic controls (that improve precision) is the 4-year impact on English that moves from a p-value of 0.098 (with controls) to a pvalue of 0.113 (without controls).

Table 5: School Time Use
Instructional Time by Subject (Minutes per Week)

Telugu

Math

English

Social studies

Science

Hindi

Moral science

Computer use

Other

Total instructional time

Break

Total school time

Observations

Private schools

Public schools

Difference

[1]

[2]

[3]

307.72

511.52

-203.81***

(6.36)

(3.60)

(6.99)

339.75

500.69

-160.94***

(7.50)

(3.36)

(8.63)

322.68

235.52

87.17***

(7.96)

(5.39)

(9.69)

239.21

173.24

65.96***

(6.29)

(6.89)

(9.84)

205.52

104.58

100.94***

(9.09)

(5.78)

(9.44)

215.78

0.01

215.77***

(6.08)

(0.89)

(6.41)

16.85

20.11

-3.26

(4.82)

(3.20)

(5.56)

46.7

0.51

46.19***

(6.50)

(1.02)

(6.80)

311.66

250.29

61.37***

(14.55)

(6.70)

(16.20)

2005.87

1796.47

209.4***

(13.73)

(6.86)

(14.46)

461

473.18

-12.18

(9.14)

(3.05)

(10.58)

2466.87

2269.65

197.22***

(17.46)

(8.25)

(19.79)

325

200

Notes:
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. All regressions include a constant and district fixed effects. All standard errors are
clustered at the village level. The sample for this table is restricted to schools in control villages. All numbers in
minutes per week. Other includes sports/PE, arts and crafts, and study hall.

Table 6: Robustness to Attrition (ITT Estimates)
Panel A: Inverse Probability Re-weighting
Year 2 Assessments

Offered scholarship

Total observations
Treatment observations
Control observations

Year 4 Assessments

Telugu
score

Math score

English
score

Combined
across tests

Telugu
score

Math score

English
score

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

-0.081

-0.054

0.183**

0.014

-0.018

-0.031

(0.055)

(0.065)

(0.079)

(0.061)

(0.051)

(0.052)

4,620
1,778
2,842

4,620
1,778
2,842

4,525
1,738
2,787

13,765
5294
8471

4,385
1,674
2,711

4,385
1,675
2,710

4,217
1,607
2,610

Science and
Combined
social studies Hindi score
across tests
(EVS) score
[8]

[9]

[10]

0.115

0.082

0.542***

0.137***

(0.070)

(0.060)

(0.068)

(0.045)

4,243
1,628
2,615

1,696
867
829

18,926
7451
11475

[9]

[10]

Panel B: Lee Bounds
Year 2 assessments

Lower bound estimate

Upper bound estimate

Confidence interval low
Confidence interval high

[1]

[2]

-0.148
(0.031)

Year 4 assessments

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

-0.142

0.076

-0.079

-0.076

(0.031)

(0.039)

(0.020)

(0.036)

-0.112

0.001

-0.010

0.493

0.052

(0.035)

(0.046)

(0.040)

(0.063)

(0.020)

0.028

0.041

0.262

0.110

0.059

0.045

0.199

0.200

0.591

0.220

(0.030)

(0.030)

(0.039)

(0.019)

(0.034)

(0.033)

(0.042)

(0.041)

(0.062)

(0.019)

-0.208
0.087

-0.202
0.099

-0.001
0.337

-0.118
0.147

-0.145
0.125

-0.180
0.109

-0.090
0.281

-0.089
0.280

0.368
0.712

0.014
0.256

Notes:
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. All regressions in Panel A control for baseline normalized test scores and include a constant and district fixed effects. All standard errors
are clustered at the village level. Test scores are as defined in Table 4.

Table 7: Spillovers (ITT Estimates)
Year 2 Assessments

Telugu
score

Math score

[1]

[2]

English
score

Year 4 Assessments

Combined
across tests

Telugu
score

Math score

English
score

Science and
Combined
social studies
across tests
(EVS) score

Panel A: Comparing the Within-Village to Across-Village Controls

Lottery loser in treatment village

Total observations
Treatment observations
Control observations

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

0.010

0.011

0.041

0.020

0.011

-0.002

-0.048

0.093

0.013

(0.060)

(0.071)

(0.090)

(0.069)

(0.058)

(0.057)

(0.067)

(0.071)

(0.055)

3,784
942
2,842

3,784
942
2,842

3,705
918
2,787

11,273
2,802
8,471

3,606
895
2,711

3,605
895
2,710

3,472
862
2,610

3,488
873
2,615

14,171
3,525
10,646

Panel B: Impact on Non-applicants from Public Schools
Treatment village

Total observations
Treatment observations
Control observations

-0.022

0.056

0.129

0.054

0.064

0.012

0.039

-0.004

0.028

(0.071)

(0.066)

(0.089)

(0.067)

(0.061)

(0.067)

(0.069)

(0.071)

(0.055)

1,030
490
540

1,030
490
540

1,008
476
532

3,068
1,456
1,612

1,173
555
618

1,174
555
619

1,145
541
604

1,149
542
607

4,641
2,193
2,448

Panel C: Impact on Non-scholarship Students from Private Schools
Treatment village

Total observations
Treatment observations
Control observations

0.067

0.028

-0.112

-0.000

0.043

0.038

-0.019

0.029

0.024

(0.060)

(0.073)

(0.073)

(0.060)

(0.061)

(0.059)

(0.098)

(0.073)

(0.057)

1,386
721
665

1,386
721
665

1,346
708
638

4,118
2,150
1,968

1,522
802
720

1,521
802
719

1,463
777
686

1,468
773
695

5,974
3,154
2,820

Notes:
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. All regressions control for baseline normalized test scores and include a constant and district fixed effects. All standard errors are
clustered at the village level. Test scores are as defined in Table 4.

Table 8: Heterogeneous Test Score Impacts by Student Characteristics (ITT Estimates)
Year 2 Assessments

Offered scholarship * covariate
Baseline test score

Female student

Scheduled caste student

Parents literate indicator

Parents laborers indicator

Household asset index

Muslim student

Christian student

Older cohort at baseline

Observations

Year 4 Assessments

Telugu
score

Math score

English
score

Combined
across tests

Telugu
score

Math score

English
score

Science and
social studies
(EVS) score

Hindi score

Combined
across tests

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

-0.056

-0.054

-0.074

-0.062

0.004

0.000

-0.022

-0.022

-0.107*

-0.031

(0.042)

(0.043)

(0.052)

(0.041)

(0.037)

(0.037)

(0.047)

(0.043)

(0.061)

(0.033)

0.013

0.069

0.117

0.065

0.010

-0.037

0.013

0.017

0.173*

0.035

(0.055)

(0.054)

(0.076)

(0.054)

(0.064)

(0.064)

(0.071)

(0.071)

(0.101)

(0.053)

-0.012

0.042

-0.025

0.001

0.029

0.099

0.006

0.056

-0.110

0.013

(0.069)

(0.066)

(0.082)

(0.066)

(0.070)

(0.070)

(0.090)

(0.083)

(0.124)

(0.064)

0.043

-0.022

-0.011

0.003

-0.031

-0.006

0.132

-0.138*

-0.240**

-0.059

(0.065)

(0.060)

(0.089)

(0.062)

(0.068)

(0.070)

(0.120)

(0.077)

(0.121)

(0.064)

-0.006

0.042

0.018

0.016

0.050

0.144**

0.148

0.019

-0.125

0.052

(0.069)

(0.069)

(0.083)

(0.066)

(0.069)

(0.071)

(0.102)

(0.081)

(0.118)

(0.065)

0.014

0.031

-0.018

0.010

-0.028

-0.001

0.009

-0.019

0.018

-0.002

(0.031)

(0.033)

(0.045)

(0.032)

(0.033)

(0.031)

(0.038)

(0.035)

(0.063)

(0.030)

0.232**

0.258*

0.404**

0.298**

0.364***

0.290**

0.151

0.288**

0.113

0.262***

(0.116)

(0.137)

(0.177)

(0.126)

(0.112)

(0.128)

(0.147)

(0.140)

(0.173)

(0.098)

-0.099

-0.085

-0.208

-0.130

-0.154

-0.232**

-0.113

-0.109

-0.198

-0.174

(0.122)

(0.126)

(0.157)

(0.122)

(0.130)

(0.111)

(0.121)

(0.159)

(0.255)

(0.113)

0.020

-0.062

0.107

0.019

-0.045

-0.055

0.101

-0.051

0.120

0.015

(0.072)

(0.083)

(0.089)

(0.071)

(0.082)

(0.087)

(0.116)

(0.097)

(0.107)

(0.069)

4,620

4,620

4,525

13,765

4,385

4,385

4,217

4,243

1,696

18,926

Notes:
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Each cell reports the coefficient from a separate regression that also includes controls for the characteristic in question, an indicator for whether a
student was offered a voucher, and the student's normalized baseline test scores. All regressions include a constant and district fixed effects and standard errors are clustered at
the village level. All test scores are as defined in Table 4, and indicators for assets and literacy are as defined in Table A.1. The actual number of observations for each regression
may vary slightly within columns based on the dependent variable.

Table 9: Heterogeneous Test Score Impacts (by Medium of Instruction - IV Estimates)
Panel A: Treatment on the Treated Effects by Medium of Instruction (all Four Instruments)
Year 2 Assessments

Students attending private English
medium schools

Students attending private Telugu
medium schools

Year 4 Assessments

Telugu score

Math score

English score

Combined
across tests

Telugu score

Math score

English score

Science and
social studies
(EVS) score

Hindi score

Combined across
tests

Combined across nonlanguage subjects (math &
science/social studies)

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

-0.078

-0.010

0.683***

0.198

-0.272

-0.349

0.677**

-0.197

1.379***

0.223

-0.274

(0.164)

(0.175)

(0.232)

(0.174)

(0.244)

(0.248)

(0.339)

(0.298)

(0.250)

(0.204)

(0.255)

-0.033

0.062

0.408

0.143

0.259

0.255

0.043

0.746**

1.384***

0.532***

0.496*

(0.168)

(0.197)

(0.285)

(0.202)

(0.245)

(0.254)

(0.171)

(0.313)

(0.230)

(0.181)

(0.275)

Total observations

4,291

4,291

4,209

12,791

4,070

4,070

3,922

3,935

1,576

17,573

8,005

First-stage F-stat on first regressor

33.2

33.2

32.9

33.2

12.1

12.2

12.4

12.1

11.2

12.6

12.2

First-stage F-stat on second regressor

38.3

38.3

39.4

38.7

21.5

21.5

22.1

20.5

20.6

22.2

21.1

P-value of equality by medium

0.80

0.72

0.33

0.78

0.15

0.13

0.09

0.06

0.99

0.29

0.07

Panel B: Treatment on the Treated Effects by Medium of Instruction (only Interactions as Instruments)
Year 2 Assessments
[1]
Students attending private English
medium schools

Students attending private Telugu
medium schools

Year 4 Assessments

[2]

[3]

[4]

-0.242

-0.173

0.595**

0.060

(0.231)

(0.239)

(0.289)

(0.232)

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

-0.523

-0.591

(0.385)

(0.381)

[10]

[11]

0.978**

-0.104

(0.460)

(0.384)

1.426***

0.213

-0.352

(0.365)

(0.285)

(0.360)

0.201

0.294

0.535

0.339

0.513

0.501

-0.274

0.651

1.337***

0.542*

0.575

(0.252)

(0.260)

(0.417)

(0.291)

(0.450)

(0.458)

(0.376)

(0.446)

(0.328)

(0.320)

(0.442)

Total observations

4,291

4,291

4,209

12,791

4,070

4,070

3,922

3,935

1,576

17,573

8,005

First-stage F-stat on first regressor

38.4

38.4

38.2

18.3

17.7

17.8

18.1

17.6

16.2

38.4

17.8

First-stage F-stat on second regressor

30.6

30.6

31.1

25.1

25.4

25.4

25.2

25.1

20.2

30.8

25.4

P-value of equality by medium

0.3

0.2

0.9

0.5

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.3

0.9

0.5

0.2

* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. In Panel A, we instrument for the medium of instruction of private school attended using the medium of instruction of the nearest private school and the interaction of receiving a voucher and the medium of
instruction of the nearest private school. First stage regressions are shown in Table A.8. In Panel B, we instrument for the medium of instruction of private school attended using only the interaction of receiving a voucher and the medium
of instruction of the nearest private school, and we control for the the closest private school being English medium and for the closest private school being Telugu medium. In both panels, we also control for mother's and father's
education, scheduled caste status, and a household asset index as defined in Table A.1. All regressions control for baseline normalized test scores. The results in this table do not include district fixed effects, because one of the districts
has very few English-medium schools. All standard errors are clustered at the village level. The sample is around 7% smaller than that in Table 4 (due to missing location data). All test scores are defined as in Table 4.

Table 10: Heterogeneous Test Score Impacts by Market Competition (ITT Estimates)
Year 2 Assessments

Year 4 Assessments

Telugu
score

Math score

English
score

Combined
across tests

Telugu
score

Math score

English
score

Science and
social studies
(EVS) score

Hindi score

Combined
across tests

[1]
0.024
(0.022)

[2]
0.015
(0.028)

[3]
0.019
(0.034)

[4]
0.020
(0.025)

[5]
0.027
(0.024)

[6]
-0.001
(0.027)

[7]
-0.021
(0.032)

[8]
-0.001
(0.030)

[9]
-0.007
(0.031)

[10]
-0.003
(0.021)

3 or more schools within 1km (top 25%)

0.042
(0.110)

-0.065
(0.126)

-0.127
(0.150)

-0.048
(0.118)

0.046
(0.102)

-0.051
(0.104)

-0.067
(0.158)

-0.084
(0.115)

-0.108
(0.139)

-0.065
(0.085)

5 or more schools within 1km (top 10%)

0.192
(0.117)

0.251*
(0.137)

0.270
(0.199)

0.238*
(0.134)

0.230*
(0.129)

0.125
(0.151)

-0.151
(0.177)

0.178
(0.160)

-0.004
(0.166)

0.061
(0.123)

6 or more schools within 1km (Top 5%)

0.183
(0.136)

0.295
(0.198)

0.452
(0.314)

0.309
(0.205)

0.480***
(0.125)

0.435***
(0.138)

0.208**
(0.099)

0.470***
(0.142)

-0.099
(0.228)

0.290**
(0.116)

4,612

4,612

4,518

13,742

4,378

4,378

4,215

4,237

1,689

18,897

Number of private schools within 1km (linear)

Observations
Notes:

* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Each cell reports the coefficient from a separate regression that also includes controls for whether a student was offered a voucher and the student's
normalized baseline test scores. All regressions include a constant district fixed effects and standard errors are clustered at the village level. All test scores are defined as in Table 4.

Figure 1: Design of AP School Choice Program
Panel A: Treatment Villages
Group 1T

Group 2T

Group 3T

Group 4T

Non
Non-Applicants
in
Public Schools

Applicants in Public
Schools NOT awarded
a Voucher

Applicants in Public
Schools AWARDED a
Voucher

Non-voucher Students
in Private Schools

Panel B: Control Villages
Group 1C

Group 2C

Group 3C

Group 4C

Non-Applicants
in
Non
Public Schools

Applicants in Public
Schools NOT awarded
a Voucher

Does not exist

Non-voucher Students
in Private Schools

Figure 2: Design of AP School Choice Program with Student Counts
Treatment Villages
Group 1T

Non
Non-Applicants in
Public Schools
(743), [2,165]

Group 2T
Applicants in
Public
Schools NOT
awarded a
Voucher
[1,117]

Group 𝟑𝑨 T

Applicants in
Public
Schools
AWARDED
but DID NOT
ACCEPT a
Voucher
[770; 975]

Group 𝟑𝑩 T

Applicants in
Public
Schools
AWARDED
and
ACCEPTED a
Voucher
[1,210; 1,005]

Group 4T

Non-voucher Students
in Private Schools
(1,152), [12,720]

Control Villages
Group 1C

Group 2C

Group 4C

Non
Non-Applicants
in
Public Schools

Applicants in Public Schools NOT awarded a
Voucher

Non-voucher Students
in Private Schools

(811), [2,337]

[3,336]

(1,106), [12,061]

Notes: All of groups 2T, 3T, and 2C were sampled for tests of learning outcomes after two and four years of the
project. For other groups, numbers in parentheses are the sample size that was tracked (with the total population in
brackets). The two numbers under group 3BT represent those who first accepted and started in a private school
(1210) and those who were still in a private school at the end of 4 years (1,005). Conversely in group 3AT, 770
initially rejected the offer, while 975 were no longer availing the voucher at the end of 4 year

Appendix Tables: A.1 - A.10
Table A.1: Baseline Test Scores and Socio-Economic Characteristics
Private
schools

Public schools

Difference

Difference with
village fixed
effects

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

Normalized baseline Telugu score
Normalized baseline math score
Both parents have completed at least primary school
At least one parent has completed grade 10
Scheduled caste
Household asset index
Annual school fees paid (Rs./month)

0.639
0.661
0.558
0.689
0.128
3.846
1041.54

0.004
0.015
0.285
0.394
0.329
3.193
40.08

0.635***
0.646***
0.273***
0.295***
-0.201***
0.653***
1001.27***

0.677***
0.678***
0.308***
0.325***
-0.193***
0.646***
1001.46***

Observations

14,541

8,538

Notes:
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. All standard errors are clustered at the school level. The sample for this table is restricted
to students in control villages at the baseline (2008). Telugu and math scores are normalized relative to the distribution of
public school students in control villages by subject and grade. The household asset index reported is a sum of five
household indicators, including whether a household owns its own home, has a non-mud house, has at least one
covered room, has working water facilities, and has a toilet available.

Table A.2: Voucher Take-up (Application and Acceptance)
Correlates of Application and Acceptance

Normalized baseline Telugu score

Scheduled caste

Muslim

Female

Both parents literate

Household asset index

Older sibling in government school

Private school exists within 0.5 kilometers

Older cohort

Observations

Applied==1

Accepted==1
(conditional on winning)

[1]

[2]

-0.006

0.013

(0.009)

(0.014)

0.005

-0.036

(0.013)

(0.022)

-0.014

-0.027

(0.023)

(0.047)

-0.001

0.000

(0.009)

(0.022)

0.022

-0.004

(0.014)

(0.020)

0.008

0.017

(0.007)

(0.011)

-0.022*

-0.062***

(0.013)

(0.019)

0.065***

0.078**

(0.022)

(0.036)

-0.070***

-0.084***

(0.015)

(0.022)

7,987

1,980

Notes:
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Each cell reports the coefficient from a separate binary regression that also
includes a constant and district fixed effects. All standard errors are clustered at the village level. Column 1
compares applicants to non-applicants, and includes all students who were eligible to apply for the voucher.
Column 2 compares those who accepted the voucher to those who did not (conditional on winning), and
includes all students who were awarded a voucher. The actual number of observations for each regression
may vary slightly within columns based on the dependent variable. The household asset index is as defined in
Table A.1.

Table A.3: Validity of Design
Panel A: Treatment and Control Students
Lottery
winners
[treatment
villages]

Lottery losers
[treatment
villages]

P-value for
difference

Lottery
winners
[treatment
villages]

Lottery losers
[control
villages]

P-value for
difference

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

Normalized baseline Telugu score
Normalized baseline math score
Both parents have completed at least primary school
At least one parent has completed grade 10
Scheduled caste
Household asset index

0.03
0.01
0.29
0.34
0.34
3.17

0.05
0.00
0.28
0.34
0.33
3.15

0.46
0.75
0.44
0.88
0.27
0.49

0.03
0.01
0.31
0.34
0.34
3.17

-0.04
-0.02
0.28
0.36
0.32
3.19

0.30
0.74
0.62
0.16
0.45
0.71

Observations

1,980

1,119

1,980

3,334

Panel B: Students for Spillover Analysis

Nonapplicants in
treatment
villages

Nonapplicants in
control
villages

Normalized baseline Telugu score
Normalized baseline math score
Both parents have completed at least primary school
At least one parent has completed grade 10
Scheduled caste
Household asset index

-0.02
-0.04
0.28
0.29
0.34
3.08

0.04
0.06
0.27
0.32
0.31
3.18

Sample observations
Total observations

734
2,816

809
2,756

P-value for
difference

Students
initially in
private
schools in
treatment
villages

Students
initially in
private
schools in
control
villages

P-value for
difference

0.58
0.41
0.92
0.39
0.43
0.28

0.55
0.72
0.52
0.50
0.12
3.84

0.66
0.59
0.55
0.54
0.13
3.85

0.16
0.17
0.45
0.20
0.57
0.91

1,151
12,720

1,104
12,061

Notes:
All variables are as defined in Table A.1. All standard errors are clustered at the school level. Note that standard errors in the test score
analysis are clustered (more conservatively) at the village level. None of the baseline differences reported above are statistically
significant with clustering at either the school or village level.

Table A.4: Attrition
Panel A: Voucher Winners and Losers
Year 2 Assessments

Year 4 Assessments

Lottery
winners
[treatment
villages]

Lottery losers
[treatment
villages]

P-value for
difference

Lottery
winners
[treatment
villages]

Lottery losers
[control
villages]

P-value for
difference

Lottery
winners
[treatment
villages]

Lottery losers
[treatment
villages]

P-value for
difference

Lottery
winners
[treatment
villages]

Lottery losers
[control
villages]

P-value for
difference

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

Characteristics
Present during the test

0.90

0.84

0.00***

0.90

0.85

0.01**

0.85

0.80

0.00***

0.85

0.81

0.08*

Comparison of attritors
Normalized baseline Telugu score
Normalized baseline math score
Both parents have completed at least primary school
At least one parent has completed grade 10
Scheduled caste
Household asset index

0.05
0.06
0.29
0.33
0.38
3.15

0.13
0.03
0.25
0.32
0.33
3.02

0.41
0.83
0.46
0.81
0.41
0.18

0.04
0.06
0.29
0.33
0.39
3.15

0.09
0.10
0.25
0.34
0.32
3.08

0.71
0.86
0.40
0.81
0.23
0.66

0.03
0.05
0.28
0.33
0.38
3.15

0.14
0.01
0.24
0.29
0.41
3.10

0.17
0.72
0.22
0.27
0.46
0.48

0.02
0.05
0.28
0.33
0.38
3.15

0.10
0.10
0.30
0.38
0.34
3.21

0.46
0.78
0.59
0.23
0.41
0.71

Observations

1,980

1,117

1,980

3,336

1,980

1,117

1,980

3,338

Panel B: Students for Spillover Analysis
Year 2 Assessments

P-value for
difference

Students
initially in
private
schools in
treatment
villages

Students
initially in
private
schools in
control
villages

0.67

0.83

0.62

-0.03
-0.03
0.26
0.27
0.38
3.13

0.07
0.11
0.25
0.29
0.28
3.29

0.52
0.43
0.86
0.73
0.10
0.21

743

811

Nonapplicants in
treatment
villages

Nonapplicants in
control
villages

Characteristics
Present during the test

0.66

Comparison of attritors
Normalized baseline Telugu score
Normalized baseline math score
Both parents have completed at least primary school
At least one parent has completed grade 10
Scheduled caste
Household asset index
Observations

Year 4 Assessments

P-value for
difference

Students
initially in
private
schools in
treatment
villages

Students
initially in
private
schools in
control
villages

P-value for
difference

0.76

0.63

0.70

0.65

0.18

-0.07
-0.01
0.18
0.25
0.35
3.13

-0.02
0.10
0.22
0.28
0.29
3.21

0.81
0.58
0.51
0.71
0.41
0.52

0.51
0.75
0.57
0.52
0.16
3.94

0.75
0.72
0.63
0.55
0.15
3.94

.03**
0.87
0.25
0.49
0.79
1.00

743

811

1,152

1,106

P-value for
difference

Nonapplicants in
treatment
villages

Nonapplicants in
control
villages

0.60

0.39

0.75

0.58
0.76
0.57
0.51
0.14
3.88

0.72
0.69
0.61
0.55
0.13
3.90

0.15
0.60
0.33
0.34
0.81
0.78

1,149

1,109

Notes:
All variables are as defined in Table A.1. All standard errors are clustered at the village level (the same unit of analysis in Table 4)

Table A.5: Hindi Test Score Impacts by Question Type
Panel A: Impact of Winning a Voucher
("Intention to Treat" Effects)
Student Score (Fraction Correct) by Question Type
Letters

Words

Sentences

Paragraph

Advanced

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

0.234***

0.171***

0.122***

0.121***

0.025***

(0.028)

(0.026)

(0.023)

(0.022)

(0.009)

Mean in control

0.23

0.13

0.08

0.08

0.02

Total observations
No. of obs. (voucher recipients)
No. of obs. (voucher non-recipients)

1,696
867
829

1,696
867
829

1,696
867
829

1,696
867
829

1,696
867
829

Offered voucher

Panel B: Impact of Attending a Private School
("Treatment on the Treated" Effects, Using Lottery-based
Voucher Award as an Insturmental Variable)
Attended a private school (using voucher as an
instrument)
Total observations
No. of obs. (voucher acceptors)
No. of obs. (voucher non-recipients and non-acceptors)

0.396***

0.289***

0.206***

0.204***

0.043***

(0.044)

(0.040)

(0.036)

(0.036)

(0.015)

1,696
510
1,186

1,696
510
1,186

1,696
510
1,186

1,696
510
1,186

1,696
510
1,186

Notes:
All regressions include a constant and district fixed effects. All standard errors are clustered at the village level. The Hindi test scores are
based on the ASER measurement tool used by Pratham to measure basic literacy, and were administered individually to a random
sample of voucher winning and losing students in June 2012. Panel B instruments for private school attendance using the lottery-based
offer of a voucher.

Table A.6: Spillover Effects as a Function of Number of Voucher Students Received by each Private School
Instrumental Variable Estimate of the Impact of the Number of Voucher Students who Join a School on the
Students who Started out in the Same Private School
Year 4 Assessments

Year 2 Assessments

Number of voucher students

Observations
First-stage F-stat

Telugu score

Math score

English score

Telugu score

Math score

English score

Science and
social studies
score

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

0.011

-0.004

-0.024*

0.017

0.009

0.028

0.001

(0.012)

(0.015)

(0.013)

(0.012)

(0.014)

(0.023)

(0.015)

1,385
48.6

1,385
48.6

1,345
47.1

1,519
64.2

1,518
64.2

1,461
80.6

1,465
64.5

Notes:
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. All regressions control for baseline normalized test scores and include a constant and district fixed effects. All standard errors are clustered at the
village level. All test scores are as defined in Table 4. The number of voucher students a school received is instrumented by the interaction between potential exposure to
voucher students (defined as the number of applicants for whom the given school is the nearest private school) and the fraction of those applicants who were offered the
voucher (zero in all control villages).

Table A.7: Spillover Effects as a Function of Number of Voucher Students (First-stage)

Interaction of number of applicants for whom a
given private school is the nearest one and the
fraction of these applicants that were offered the
voucher

Observations
Adjusted R-squared

Year 2

Year 4

Number of voucher students at
the private school

Number of voucher students at
the private school

[1]

[2]

0.370***

0.400***

(0.055)

(0.051)

1,385
0.350

1,519
0.372

Notes:
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. All regressions control for baseline normalized test scores and include a constant and
district fixed effects. All standard errors are clustered at the village level. The unit of observation is a student who
started out in a private school, and the endogenous right-hand side variable of interest in Table A.6 is the number of
voucher-winning students each of these students was exposed to. This table presents the first-stage of the
instrumental variable regression used in Table A.6.

Table A.8: Test Score Impacts by Medium of Instruction (First-stage)
Year 2

Year 4

Student attends
private English
medium school

Student attends
private Telugu
medium school

Student attends
private English
medium school

Student attends
private Telugu
medium school

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

0.064***

-0.086***

0.019

-0.040*

(0.020)

(0.023)

(0.024)

(0.022)

Closest private school is Telugu
medium

(omitted)

(omitted)

(omitted)

(omitted)

Offered scholarship * closest
private school is English medium

0.363***

0.097***

0.253***

0.141***

(0.040)

(0.029)

(0.045)

(0.038)

0.085***

0.387***

0.070**

0.312***

(0.028)

(0.049)

(0.031)

(0.049)

-0.018**

0.001

-0.007

0.006

(0.008)

(0.009)

(0.008)

(0.009)

0.033

-0.029**

0.086***

-0.025

(0.016)

(0.013)

(0.019)

(0.016)

0.042***

-0.022*

0.068***

-0.034**

(0.014)

(0.012)

(0.017)

(0.013)

-0.043***

-0.035**

-0.060***

-0.038***

(0.014)

(0.016)

(0.015)

(0.014)

0.016**

0.007

0.020**

0.011*

(0.007)

(0.006)

(0.008)

(0.007)

-0.017

0.118***

0.012***

0.090***

(0.024)

(0.029)

(0.029)

(0.024)

4,291
0.176

4,291
0.230

4,070
0.107

4,070
0.132

Instruments:
Closest private school is English
medium

Offered scholarship * closest
private school is Telugu medium

Controls:
Normalized baseline test score

Both parents have completed at
least primary school

At least one parent has completed
grade 10

Scheduled caste

Household asset index

Constant

Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Notes:

* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. All regressions control for baseline normalized test scores and standard errors are
clustered at the village level. The sample for this table is restricted to those students for whom location data is
available and students with at least one private school in their village. The sample is around 5% smaller than that
in Table 4 (due to missing location data). All controls are as defined as in Table A.1.

Table A.9: Balance by Medium of Instruction of Nearest Private School
Nearest
Nearest
private school private school
is English
is Telugu
medium
medium

P-value for
difference

[1]

[2]

[3]

Normalized baseline Telugu score
Normalized baseline math score
Both parents have completed at least primary school
At least one parent has completed grade 10
Scheduled caste
Household asset index

0.02
0.02
0.32
0.37
0.33
3.21

-0.07
-0.05
0.23
0.31
0.32
3.10

0.31
0.49
0.00
0.04
0.69
0.13

Observations

3,634

2,118

5,752

Notes:
All standard errors are clustered at the school level. All variables are defined as in Table A.1. The
sample comprises the voucher applicants for whom we also have GPS location data.

Tabel A.10: School and Teacher Characteristics by Private School Medium of Instruction
Panel A: School Characteristics
Private English
medium schools

Private Telugu medium
schools

Difference

[1]

[2]

[3]

Total enrollment

353.22

214.33

138.89***

Total working days

229.46

230.00

-0.55
4.76***

Pupil-teacher ratio

19.26

14.49

Drinking water available

0.99

0.97

0.022*

Functional toilets

0.91

0.76

0.16***

Separate functional toilets for girls

0.79

0.72

0.073

Functional electricity

0.90

0.83

0.068*

Functional computers

0.67

0.29

0.38***

Functional library

0.80

0.78

0.01

Functional radio

0.12

0.13

-0.01

Observations

164

89

Panel B: Teacher Characteristics
Male

0.24

0.25

-0.01

Age

33.27

31.97

1.29

Years of teaching

5.48

4.48

1.00***

Completed at least college or masters

0.81

0.49

0.32***

Teacher training completed

0.42

0.22

0.21***

Come from the same village

0.37

0.57

-0.20***

2757.68

1919.07

838.61***

1215

720

Current gross salary per month (Rs.)
Observations

Panel C: School Fees
Annual school fees charged per child (Rs./child)
Observations

1768.25

1021.92

156

88

746.33***

Notes:
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. The sample for this table is restricted to schools and teachers in control villages across years
2008 through 2012. In cases of multiple observations per school or teacher across different years, variable means are used
(so each teacher/school is one observation). School fees are measured in Rupees per student per year, trimmed at the 1st
and 99th percentiles to remove outliers. The actual number of observations for each regression may vary slightly within
columns based on the dependent variable.

