                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE MORE THINGS CHANGE, THE MORE THEY STAY THE SAME? THE SAFETY
               NET AND POVERTY IN THE GREAT RECESSION

                                           Marianne Bitler
                                           Hilary Hoynes

                                        Working Paper 19449
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19449


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2013




This paper was prepared for the NBER conference on “Labor Markets after the Great Recession.”
We thank David Card, Sheldon Danziger, Richard Freeman, Roland Fryer, Julie Hotchkiss, Larry Katz,
Alex Mas, Lucie Schmidt, Tim Smeeding, Eric Swanson, Rob Valetta, and Dan Wilson for comments
and David Autor, Mary Daly, Jenny Hunt, and Paige Shevlin for help with administrative data. Elira
Kuka provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Marianne Bitler and Hilary Hoynes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The More Things Change, the More They Stay the Same? The Safety Net and Poverty in the
Great Recession
Marianne Bitler and Hilary Hoynes
NBER Working Paper No. 19449
September 2013, Revised September 2014
JEL No. E32,I3,J65

                                             ABSTRACT

Much attention has been given to the large increase in safety net spending, particularly in Unemployment
Insurance and Food Stamp spending, during the Great Recession. In this paper we examine the relationship
between poverty, the social safety net, and business cycles historically and test whether there has been
a significant change in this relationship during the Great Recession. We do so using an alternative
measure of poverty that incorporates taxes and in-kind transfers. We explore the mediating role played
by four core safety net programs—Food Stamps, cash welfare (AFDC/TANF), the Earned Income
Tax Credit, and Unemployment Insurance—in buffering families from negative economic shocks.
This analysis yields several important findings. Our most robust and important finding is the safety
net is doing less to provide protection for the most disadvantaged. In the post-welfare reform world,
TANF did not respond in the Great Recession and extreme poverty is more cyclical than in prior recessions.
On the other hand, Food Stamps and UI are providing more protection-or at least providing no less
protection-in the Great Recession, although these results are less robust across our different models.
These programs are more likely to affect households somewhat higher up the income distribution;
we find some evidence of a reduction in cyclicality at 100% poverty and little evidence about this
at higher income-to-poverty levels.


Marianne Bitler
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 96297
and NBER
mbitler@uci.edu

Hilary Hoynes
Richard & Rhoda Goldman School of Public Policy
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
hoynes@berkeley.edu
1. Introduction

        The Great Recession led to large increases in unemployment, rising to a peak of 15.6 million

persons (seasonally adjusted) in October 2009. Employment declined by more than 8 million

between January 2008 and December 2009. 1 While the recession officially ended in July 2009, the

unemployment rate remained high, at 7.5 percent in April 2013, several percentage points above the

low point prior to entering the Great Recession.

        In the wake of this sharp downturn, the share of persons living in poverty increased

substantially. Official poverty increased from 12.5 percent in 2007 to 15.1 percent in 2010, for a 21

percent increase during this three year period. The increases were much larger in parts of the country

where the Great Recession was felt more acutely—for example in California, Florida and Nevada

where the housing crisis was severe, poverty rates increased by nearly 30 percent or more. 2 This tight

connection between labor market opportunities, economic growth and poverty reflects patterns

experienced over prior business cycles (Bitler and Hoynes 2010; Blank 1989, 1993; Blank and

Blinder 1986; Blank and Card 1993; Cutler and Katz 1991; Freeman 2001; Gunderson and Ziliak

2004; Hoynes et al., 2006; Meyer and Sullivan 2011).

        At the same time, the social safety net provided significant support to households affected by

the Great Recession. Fueled in part by benefit increases as part of the economic stimulus, in 2011

SNAP (or food stamp) expenditures amounted to 72.8 billion dollars and more than one in seven

people received benefits from the program. The maximum duration of Unemployment Insurance

benefits was extended to up to 99 weeks, far beyond the normal maximum of 26 weeks or even the

Extended Benefit maximum of 52 weeks in most states. The stimulus contained many provisions,

such as the Making Work Pay tax credit and increases in SNAP, Unemployment Insurance, and the

Earned Income Tax Credit, targeting lower-income families. Importantly, though, much of the



1
 All employment outcomes in this first paragraph are seasonally adjusted.
2
 Between 2007 and 2010, poverty increased from 12.7 to 16.3 in California, from 12.5 to 16.0 in Florida and from
9.7 to 16.6 in Nevada.

                                                        1
potential assistance provided by the social safety net is not captured in official poverty statistics.

Official U.S. poverty is based on cash, pre-tax income and thus in-kind and tax-based income sources

(such as SNAP, the EITC, and tax credits more generally) are not reflected in official poverty. The

substantial increase in official poverty may not fully reflect the change in resources experienced over

the Great Recession.

        Given this background, in this paper we comprehensively examine the performance of the

social safety net in protecting the disadvantaged population in the Great Recession. In particular, we

empirically estimate the relationship between poverty and business cycles historically and test

whether there has been a significant change in this relationship during the Great Recession. We

analyze traditional “cash” poverty as well as an alternative poverty measure that incorporates taxes

and the value of in-kind transfers (Bitler and Hoynes 2010, Citro and Michael, 1995). Additionally,

we examine the mediating role of four core safety net programs—Food Stamps, cash welfare

(AFDC/TANF), the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), and Unemployment Insurance (UI)—in

buffering families from negative income shocks. Our concept of the social safety net is broader than

one looking only at social assistance programs, which provide means tested transfers for low-income

individuals (e.g., Food Stamps, AFDC/TANF). It also includes both social insurance programs

relevant in economic cycles (e.g., UI) and tax credits such as the EITC that are designed to provide

income support to the working poor but are in practice a substantial source of redistribution.

        Throughout the paper, we identify the impact of the business cycle using variation across

states in the timing and severity of cycles. We estimate state panel data models and measure the

economic cycle using the state unemployment rate. This approach allows us to estimate the

cyclicality of poverty and of key elements of the social safety net. With these models, we test

whether the cyclicality (of poverty and the safety net) experienced in the Great Recession represents

a significant break from historical patterns. We present two such tests: in one we compare the Great

Recession to the early-1980s cycle and in the other we allow for asymmetric responses during

national contractions and expansions and test whether the Great Recession period is different from

                                                     2
earlier contraction and recession periods. In robustness tests, we also measure the cycle using the

employment to population ratio, finding results that are largely consistent with those using the

unemployment rate.

        We use data covering the period from 1980 through 2012, a period capturing the severe

downturns in the early 1980s and the Great Recession as well as the less severe recessions in the

early 1990s and early 2000s. To analyze the cyclicality of social safety net, we use high quality

administrative data—allowing us to examine both caseloads and program expenditures. For our

analysis of poverty, we use annual data from the Current Population Survey, the primary data source

used by the Census for annual poverty statistics. We look at both official poverty and our own

alternative poverty measure which compares net of tax and transfer income to the same thresholds as

the official poverty measure. We choose to limit our analysis to poverty rates among the nonelderly,

given the greater connection for this group to fluctuations in the labor market.

        This analysis yields several important findings. First, in the wake of welfare reform, the cash

safety net (TANF) was not responsive in the Great Recession. Reflecting this loss in protection from

a program that mostly pays benefits to those at the very bottom of the income distribution, extreme

poverty (income less than 50 percent of the poverty threshold) became more cyclical. This finding of

less protection at the bottom and more cyclicality of extreme post tax and transfer poverty is highly

robust, across various specifications and measures of the business cycle. Second, the safety net

programs receiving the most attention through the Great Recession (Food Stamps and UI) have

effects that vary depending on how we measure the cycle, but either show more protection or are

consistent with their behavior during previous historical cycles. These programs are more likely to

affect households somewhat higher up the income distribution and we find some evidence of a

reduction in cyclicality at 100% alternative poverty during the Great Recession period, suggesting

more buffering there. At a broader level, we find that official poverty masks substantial insurance

against loss of income provided by tax and transfer programs—overall the bulk of our post-tax and

transfer poverty measures are significantly less cyclical than cash poverty throughout the period,

                                                   3
including during the Great Recession.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section reviews the stylized

facts about cycles, the Great Recession, and the social safety net. Section 3 examines the cyclicality

of the safety net using administrative program data. Section 4 describes aggregate trends in poverty

and Section 5 examines the cyclicality of poverty and how it has changed in the Great Recession.

Section 6 combines the analysis of poverty and the analysis of the social safety net by exploring the

how the cyclicality of poverty changes with a static simulation of the elimination of each program.

Section 7 concludes.



2. The Social Safety Net in the Great Recession

        We begin by examining the Great Recession and cycles in our historical setting. Here and

throughout the paper, we focus on the period from 1980 through the most recent data available

(typically 2012). This allows for the comparison across two severe contractions (that of the early

1980s 3 and the Great Recession) and two smaller contractions (that of the early 1990s and the early

2000s). These cycles can be seen in Figure 1, where we present our primary measure of the economic

cycle—the unemployment rate—annually over this period. The current recession officially began in

December 2007, and since that time the unemployment rate rose from 5 percent in December 2007 to

a peak of 10.1 percent in October 2009. While the recession officially ended in July 2009, the

unemployment rate remained high for longer after the end of the recession than it had in many other

cycles (CBO, 2014). For example, it was 7.3 percent in July 2013 (seasonally adjusted), several

percentage points above the low point prior to entering the Great Recession, a full four years after the

end of the Great Recession. Based on the annual averages, shown in Figure 1, unemployment in the

current recession increased from 4.6 percent in 2007 to 9.6 percent in 2010. Figure 1 also shows the

employment to population ratio (EPOP). For the vast bulk of our sample period, these two measures


3
 Two recessions in quick succession led to an increase in the unemployment rate from 5.8 percent in 1979 to 9.7
percent in 1982.

                                                        4
track one another very well. However, as has been noted by many, in the recovery from the Great

Recession the unemployment rate decline has not been accompanied by a correspondingly large

increase in the EPOP.

        In this paper, we explore how poverty has fluctuated over this 35-year period of varying labor

market conditions. In this setting, we are particularly interested in understanding the mediating role

of the social safety net. We start here by summarizing the main elements of the social safety net and

how they have changed over this period, and in particular, during the Great Recession. Our analysis

is focused on four central elements of the social safety net: Food Stamps (now called SNAP or

Supplemental Assistance for Needy Families), Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF,

known as Aid to Families with Dependent Children or AFDC prior to welfare reform), the Earned

Income Tax Credit (EITC), and Unemployment Insurance (UI). We examine these programs because

they represent the key cash and near-cash elements of the safety net for the non-elderly. Note that

here, our concept of the social safety net not is not limited to social assistance programs (means

tested transfers for low-income individuals, such as Food Stamps) but it also includes social

insurance programs relevant in economic cycles (e.g., UI) and tax credits (e.g., EITC) that are

designed to provide income support to the working poor but are in practice a substantial source of

redistribution. 4

        Cash Welfare (AFDC/TANF): Since its creation as part of the 1935 Social Security Act,

AFDC provided cash welfare for single-parent families with children eligible on the basis of low

income and assets. A joint state-federal program, benefit generosity varies substantially across states

although few states ever provided benefits beyond extreme poverty levels (less than 50% of




4
  The largest cash or near-cash safety net program is Social Security Old Age and Retirement benefits. Given our
focus on the non-elderly, we do not analyze this program. SSI and SSDI are two other large programs which we
discuss below. Other programs which are part of the safety net, but are smaller in magnitude or cover a smaller
segment of the population include public housing, WIC, the National School Lunch and Breakfast programs, and
state programs such as General Assistance (CBO 2013, Short 2013).

                                                         5
poverty). 5 Historically, AFDC had a very high benefit reduction rate (67% to 100%) leading to a high

implicit tax rate on earned income (Moffitt 1983). Concerns about work disincentives (as well as

disincentives to form two-parent families) led to federal welfare reform in 1996. Under the new

program, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families or TANF, participation is limited to a maximum

of five years of lifetime use, recipients are faced with work requirements (with financial sanctions for

noncompliance), and in some states, recipients experience enhanced earnings disregards. These

changes were designed to facilitate the transition from welfare to work and to reduce dependence on

cash welfare. Caseloads fell to historic lows as a share of the population potentially eligible in the

wake of this important reform, and a non-trivial share of spending was diverted to non-cash benefits.

        Food Stamps: 6 Like AFDC/TANF, Food Stamps is a means tested program (whereby eligible

families and individuals must satisfy income and asset tests). Unlike AFDC/TANF, Food Stamps is a

federal program with little variation across states (although more state experimentation has happened

recently). Additionally, Food Stamp eligibility is universal and not limited to certain targeted groups

such as families with children, aged, and the disabled. The benefit reduction rate is relatively low

(30%), the income eligibility threshold is higher (130% of the poverty guideline for gross and 100%

for net income) compared to AFDC/TANF, thus the program reaches higher into the income

distribution and serves the working and nonworking poor. Food stamps is a voucher program (and

thus not treated as cash income by Census for the purposes of official poverty) but benefits can be

used to buy a wide array of food items (not prepared foods or alcohol) and the behavioral response to

food stamps is similar to the response to cash (Fraker et al., 1992; Hoynes and Schanzenbach, 2009;

Ohls et al., 1992). Welfare reform left Food Stamp rules relatively unaffected but did limit benefits

for legal immigrants (who were deemed ineligible) and able-bodied adults without dependents 18-49




5
  In 1996, on the eve of welfare reform, maximum benefits averaged about 39% of the poverty guideline. In 2011,
the average state provided maximum benefits at about 37% of the poverty guideline (U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, 2014).
6
  The program that originally was known as the Food Stamp Program is now known as the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program or SNAP. For ease, we refer to it as the Food Stamp Program throughout.

                                                       6
(who were limited to 3 months of benefits in a 3 year period). The 2002 Farm Bill reinstated benefits

for legal immigrants. In addition, beginning with regulatory changes in 1999 and continuing with the

2002 Farm Bill and later regulatory decisions, the USDA has encouraged states to make changes in

how they implement the program’s rules to make access to benefits easier. This has led to relaxing of

asset requirements and expanding eligibility in some cases beyond the gross federal income

eligibility limit, in what has been called broad-based categorical eligibility (U.S. GAO 2007, Ganong

and Liebman 2013, Ziliak 2013).

        EITC: The federal EITC is a refundable tax credit with benefits primarily targeted to families

with children. The EITC functions as an earnings subsidy and as such is only extended to working

families. The goal of the EITC is to increase after-tax income of lower earning taxpayers, primarily

those with children, while incentivizing work. The expansion of the EITC, facilitated through tax acts

in 1986, 1990 and 1993, has featured prominently in the movement toward more in-work assistance

in the U.S. safety net (and with welfare reform, a decline in out-of-work assistance). The potential

income transfer is substantial – in 2012 for a single taxpayer with two children, the maximum credit

is $5,236 (annual payment) and the phase-out range extends to those with earned income of up to

$41,952.

        UI Benefits: Unemployment insurance is a social insurance program which provides

temporary and partial earnings replacement for involuntarily unemployed individuals with recent

employment. As a social insurance program, UI is not means tested (limited to those with low

income), and eligibility and benefit levels are a function of earnings history. Recipients receive

benefits for a fixed duration, typically up to 26 weeks, through regular state benefits, funded by

payroll taxes while working. Under the extended benefit program, jointly funded by states and the

Federal government, UI benefits can be extended for 13 or 20 additional weeks in states experiencing

high unemployment rates. Lastly, in most major downturns, Congress has enacted emergency

extensions to UI; these programs tend to be relatively short lived and are explicitly countercyclical



                                                   7
and fully federally funded. 7

         Although not our focus, it is worth mentioning SSI and SSDI which provide cash benefits to

the disabled. Supplemental Security Income (SSI) is a federal cash welfare program where eligibility

is limited to disabled adults, disabled children, and aged (age 65 or older) low-income persons. The

Social Security Disability Income (SSDI) program is a social insurance program, funded by payroll

taxes while working, and benefits depend on employment and earnings history. Eligibility for SSI

and SSDI requires establishing a documented work-limiting condition, the inability to engage in

“substantial gainful activity.” 8 We point ahead to Figure 3, which plots (among other things) SSI and

SSDI spending per capita. It is clear from this figure that the disability programs do not exhibit clear

cyclical variation in aggregate spending. There is less evidence in the existing studies on the

importance of cyclicality for these programs (Cutler et al 2012, Bound et al 2013). The graph does

show the dramatic (for SSDI) and steady (for both) increase in expenditures in the disability

programs throughout the period, which to some extent has been linked to structural changes in the

labor market (Black et al 2002, Autor and Duggan 2003). We do not devote sustained attention to

SSI/SSDI from here on. 9

          How did these tax and transfer programs change in the Great Recession? Initially, many

states qualified for and received Extended Benefit programs for UI. 10 In 2009 the federal stimulus

(American Recovery and Reinvestment Act or ARRA) was passed. The ARRA contained many

provisions, some providing temporary expansions to the social safety net. First, the stimulus shifted

the full cost of UI extended benefit programs to the federal government (causing more states to opt


7
  States administer their programs and set payroll taxes and benefit levels. Funding for regular state benefits are paid
by the state trust fund while fiscal responsibility for the extended program is shared by the states and the federal
government. Recently, the emergency extensions have been fully federally funded. During some downturns, the
federal government has also helped fund the extended program and states can borrow from the federal government
to fund expenditures from their UI trust funds.
8
  Under SSI, children are determined to be disabled if they have impairments which cause “marked and severe
functional limitations.”
9
  More recently, Mueller, Rothstein, and von Wachter (2013) find no evidence that SSDI applications are caused by
UI benefit expiration during the Great Recession.
10
   Costs are typically split between the states and the federal government. Some states chose not to participate. See
Rothstein (2011) for a comprehensive documentation of UI over the Great Recession.

                                                           8
in). Additionally, in June 2008 Congress enacted the Emergency Unemployment Compensation

program, which (eventually) raised maximum UI benefit durations to as long as 99 weeks (Rothstein

2011). The ARRA also included a 13.6 percent increase in monthly maximum food stamp benefits

(e.g., $80 per month for a family of 4), a $25 increase in weekly UI benefits, and a suspension of the

three-month time limit for food stamps imposed on able bodied childless adults. Finally, the 2009

ARRA included a new tax credit – the Making Work Pay Tax Credit – providing a credit up to $400

per worker and an expansion of the EITC (adding a more generous schedule for families with three

or more children).

        These four core programs – Food Stamps, AFDC/TANF, EITC, and UI – together create a

patchwork of assistance, affecting different groups and providing differing levels of assistance.

Figure 2 illustrates a central dimension of these differences by plotting participation in the four

programs as a function of the ratio of private income relative to poverty thresholds, using the Current

Population Survey. 11 While we fully discuss the CPS below, the figure is created using a sample of

nonelderly persons and is based on income and program participation at the household level. Private

income includes all earned and unearned cash income excluding all government taxes and transfers;

and the figure truncates the sample at 8 times the poverty threshold (around the 90th percentile of the

2010 and 2012 distributions). Figure 2a provides the tabulation for calendar year 2010, in the depth

of the Great Recession (the period of highest annual unemployment rates). The figure shows that

only the lowest income-to-poverty ratio families are receiving TANF (and even at the lowest income-

to-poverty threshold levels, the participation rate is relatively low). Food Stamps and the EITC

receipt are both much higher and extend further up the income-to-poverty distribution compared to

TANF (reflecting their higher limits on income eligibility). The lack of means testing in UI is




11
  Meyer, Mok and Sullivan (2009) document that household surveys underreport government program participation
and transfer payments and find that the rate of underreporting is increasing over time. Wherever possible, in this
paper, we make use of administrative data on program participation and expenditures. However, these administrative
data do not allow tabulations by household income nor do they allow for calculations of poverty or multiple program
participation. Thus we use the CPS to complete our analysis.

                                                        9
reflected in the much more uniform distribution of participation across income–to-poverty. The

differences across the programs are also illustrated in the characteristics of persons receiving

benefits. Appendix Table 1 shows that TANF and Food Stamps (compared to UI) are more likely to

be received by those with lower education levels, by nonwhites, and by the never married.

        As we do in much of the paper, it is useful to compare the experience in the Great Recession

to another recessionary period. We use the early 1980s recessions which, prior to the GR, represented

the largest labor market shock of the post-war period, as our comparison. Figure 2b provides

household program participation by income-to-poverty for 1982 at the height (highest annual

unemployment rate) of the early 1980s recession. Comparing 2010 to 1982, the figures show the

dramatic decline in the importance of AFDC/TANF; which is an important result that holds

throughout our analysis. Additionally, compared to the early 1980s recession, in 2010 Food Stamp

participation is higher (particularly in the 100% to 200% of poverty range) and the EITC is a much

more important program. On the other hand, a smaller share are receiving UI. 12 Appendix Figure 1,

which plots household program benefits in 2010 (Appendix Figure 1a) and 1982 (Appendix Figure

1b), highlights the differences even more strongly. The figures show that AFDC was a much more

important source of income for those at the lowest income-to-poverty levels during the 1980s

recession than TANF was during the GR. The growth of the EITC is quite prominent as well.

        Given the many changes in the safety net over the intervening period, it is also of interest to

understand the extent to which households are participating in more than one of these programs,

especially given concerns about cumulative work disincentives (Mulligan 2012). While total per

capita spending can be obtained by simply adding up the administrative totals, to understand multiple

program participation we need data on simultaneous participation in these programs and here we

again use the March CPS. Among nonelderly persons living in households where someone obtained



12
   Given the possible increase in underreporting of some of these programs over time (Meyer, Mok and Sullivan
2009), the increase in SNAP is even more striking. The reduction in UI participation could in part be explained by
these trends in reporting.

                                                         10
UI, in 1982 14% also had someone receiving Food Stamp benefits; this number rose to 20% in 2010,

reflecting the increase in Food Stamps participation overall. However, for these nonelderly

individuals in households with some UI, very few participate in other programs—in 2010 3.1%

received TANF and 4.3% received SSI. 13 To analyze multiple program participation for Food Stamp

recipients, we can make use of administrative data (Food Stamp Quality Control data) and while

these data do not go back as far, we can compare participation for 2001 and 2010. We find a large

and important decline in participation in cash TANF among Food Stamp participants, only 8% of

Food Stamp units have some TANF income in 2010, while fully 23% did in 2001. Receipt of UI

among Food Stamp units is quite low but increasing over this period (from 2% in 2001 to 6% in

2010).

         To illustrate the broader trends and highlight some of the above mentioned changes in the

safety net programs over the longer term, in Figure 3 we plot real per capita expenditures from 1980

to 2012 for the four social safety net programs (using administrative data). Our TANF measure is

limited to the portion of TANF expenditures that goes to cash benefits. The figure also indicates

contractionary periods, which we construct based on annual unemployment rates. 14 As is clear on this

figure, UI is a central income replacement program in recessions and the increase in UI expenditures

in the Great Recession is striking. Somewhat less dramatically but also notable, Food Stamp

spending increased substantially in the Great Recession, while the EITC and TANF remained

relatively unchanged (and potentially less connected to the cycle). Table 1 reports the program totals

for 2010, in the depth of the Great Recession. In 2010 UI expenditures totaled $144.3 billion,

followed by Food Stamps at $70.1 billion and the EITC at $59.6 billion, with TANF amounting to

$11.3 billion (2012 dollars). Of the total UI spending, the emergency program is very large—




13
   Moffitt (2014) uses the SIPP to look at multiple participation among SNAP recipients, finding that multiple
program use has fallen over time.
14
   The official NBER recession dating is monthly. We constructed an annual series for contractions based on the
official monthly dates, augmented by examination of the peaks and troughs in the national unemployment rate. See
Bitler and Hoynes (2010) or Appendix Table 2 or the data appendix for more information on the annual dating.

                                                       11
emergency benefits were about $74 billion compared to a combined $71 billion for regular and

extended benefits.

       Figure 3 also illustrates features of the safety net over this time period that motivate our

work. First, in the wake of the 1996 federal welfare reform, cash TANF (and, not shown here, all

TANF) is a very small program and its reach and protection in cycles appears to be limited. Second,

with the decline of AFDC/TANF (as a result of welfare reform) and the expansion of the EITC, the

safety net for low income families with children has transformed from one subsidizing out-of-work

families into one subsidizing in-work families. This may have implications for the extent of

government protection in recessions for disadvantaged persons. Third, repeated federally-funded

expansions to UI have led to longer maximum benefit durations and more income protection.

Importantly, note the vastly larger spending on total UI in the time series in the GR compared with

previous recessions, even the early 1980s ones. Finally, benefits disbursed through the Food Stamp

program have dramatically expanded in the Great Recession.

       Given these changes to the safety net, we are interested in exploring how and to what extent

these programs are providing protection to at-risk families in the Great Recession. In particular, we

explore how the reductions in labor market opportunities in the Great Recession translate into

changes in poverty and family well-being. Has the growth in the social safety net buffered families

against the adverse impacts of the Great Recession? How does this compare to prior recessions?



3. The Cyclicality of the Safety Net, Historically and in the Great Recession

       Given the summary of the social safety net programs above in Section 2, here we move on to

document the empirical relationship between economic cycles and safety net programs historically

and test for a change in that relationship in the Great Recession. We do so using administrative data

at the state-year (or in some cases, state-month) level from Food Stamps, AFDC/TANF, UI and the

EITC. In particular, we present two measures of the safety net – the number of recipient units (which

we refer to as the “caseload”) and program expenditures (in 2012 dollars). For AFDC/TANF, Food

                                                  12
Stamps and the EITC the administrative unit is the family, household, or tax unit and our caseload

measure is a count of those units. For UI, the administrative unit is the person and the data are

reported as weeks of UI receipt per year; we convert this to the total population probability of being

on UI for 52 weeks, constructed by dividing total weeks within the year by 52. Our UI measure is

comprehensive and includes its three elements: regular state benefits, state extended benefits and

emergency benefits. Each of the caseload and expenditure measures are divided by the total state

population (available annually), generating measures of caseload per capita and real expenditures per

capita. 15

         Our empirical strategy exploits variation in the timing and severity of cycles across states and

we measure the business cycle using the state unemployment rate. We estimate a basic state panel

fixed effects model:

(1)          y=
              st βURst + α s + δ t + ε st

where subscripts refer to state s and year (or year by month) t. URst is the state unemployment rate

(divided by 100) and equation (1) also controls for state and year (or year by month) fixed effects,

α s and δ t respectively. In all results in the paper, we cluster the standard errors at the state level,

and the regressions are weighted using the relevant denominator (here total population in the state-

year cell). This analysis extends existing estimates on the cyclicality of safety-net programs (e.g.,

Bitler and Hoynes 2010; Blank 2001; Corsetto 2012; Hardy et al., 2014; Ziliak et al., 2000; Ziliak et

al., 2003).

         Table 2 presents estimates of our state panel data model where the dependent variable is the

caseload per capita for each safety net program. With the exception of the EITC (which covers

1980-2010) these models apply to data covering 1980-2012. AFDC/TANF and Food Stamps are



15
   The sources for the administrative data are US Department of Health and Human Services (2013), US Department
of Agriculture (2013), US Department of Labor (2010), and US Internal Revenue Service (2012). With the
exception of the EITC, which covers 1980-2010, the other safety net programs cover 1980−2012.The state
population data comes from SEER. See the data appendix for more details.

                                                      13
measured monthly and we measure URst using the monthly seasonally adjusted unemployment rate.

UI and EITC are measured annually and there we use the annual state unemployment rate. Given the

evidence on the trending down in the employment to population rate (EPOP) beginning prior to the

Great Recession (Moffitt 2012) as well as the more recent failure of EPOP to recover as has the

unemployment rate, we explore the sensitivity of our results to using the EPOP as an alternative

measure of the state economic cycle, and discuss the EPOP results (presented in appendix tables) as

we proceed. 16

        The results in Panel A show that AFDC/TANF, Food Stamps and UI are all countercyclical.

For example, the results in column 3 show that a one percentage point increase in the unemployment

rate (an increase of 0.01) leads to a 0.17 percentage point increase in the number of UI recipients per

capita. We also calculate and present percent impacts which are defined as the estimated coefficients

divided by the mean of the dependent variables over the entire time period. The results show that UI

is the most responsive of the programs--a one percentage point increase leads to a 14.4 percent

increase per capita UI beneficiaries, compared to a 5.4 percent increase in the per capita

AFDC/TANF caseload and a 3.4 percent increase in the per capita Food Stamps caseload. The final

column shows that the EITC is not significantly related to the economic cycle. In other work, we

show that this masks a modest countercyclical effect for married couples and an insignificant pro-

cyclical effect for single parents on the EITC (Bitler, Hoynes and Kuka 2013). We argue there that

this is consistent with the “in work” requirement of the EITC and the expected effects of job loss on

incomes (and hence EITC receipt and spending) for one- versus two-parent families. This finding of



16
  There is some dispute about whether the unemployment rate or the employment to population ratio is a better
measure of the strength of the labor market, which is what we want our measure of the business cycle to capture.
There has also been some discussion about the extent to which the failure of the EPOP and the labor force
participation rate to recover to the pre-GR period baselines is a result of secular changes (e.g., aging of the
population) and how much it reflects cyclical and structural factors (e.g., Erceg and Levin (2013), CBO (2014),
Kudlyak (2013) and Fallick and Pingle (2007)). The EPOP and labor force participation rate incorporate labor
supply decisions as well as labor demand shocks (e.g., Hotchkiss (2014)).We focus primary attention on the
unemployment rate, but also examine the EPOP and note where they differ. Other measures such as state GDP are
thought to be less well measured than these (for example, when allocating state GDP, national companies output
must be parceled out to states).

                                                       14
more responsiveness of UI than the other programs to labor market shocks is mirrored in Appendix

Table 3, which use EPOP as the measure of the labor market. 17

         As a companion to the analysis of caseloads, in Table 3 we estimate similar models for per

capita real expenditures on AFDC/TANF, Food Stamps and UI. Each of these are measured at the

annual level and the unemployment rate is also measured annually. Our TANF expenditures include

the total going to cash benefits (although the results are similar if we use total TANF expenditures).

As above, UI is the most responsive—a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate

leading to a 16.6 percent increase in real per capita benefits. Food stamps shows a 5.1 percent

increase and AFDC/TANF shows no response (a statistically insignificant 4.2 percent). We next

modify the regression model to explore whether the cyclicality of the social safety net in the Great

Recession represents a significant change from historical patterns. We perform two comparisons. In

the first, we compare the Great Recession to the early-1980s recession by estimating the following

model:

(2) =yst β80 D80URst + βGR DGRURst + βO DOURst + α s + δ t + ε st

We split 1980−2012 into three periods: the 1980s recession and expansion ( D80 = 1 ), the Great

Recession and expansion ( DGR = 1 ) and the rest of period ( DO = 1 ). The corresponding coefficients

β k measure the cyclicality over a given period k (there is no main effect, so comparisons across the

periods can be done by comparing the coefficients). For the annual data the periods are 1980−1989,

1990−2006 (spanning two recessions), and 2007−2012. 18 In this specification, we focus on β80 and

βGR , and test whether the cyclical responsiveness during the Great Recession is different than the

1980s cycle (the p-value for this test is included in the table of estimates).



17
   An increase in the EPOP reflects an improvement in labor market conditions and the opposite holds for the UR.
The coefficients on the EPOP, presented in the appendix tables, then, have the opposite sign from the UR.
18
   It is worth noting that our identification strategy leverages variation in the timing and severity of cycles across
states. Yet we use the national cycle for unemployment to identify these three periods. We do this because of the
focus here on the “national” Great Recession and possible changes in the safety net that have taken place during it.

                                                          15
        In the second comparison we break 1980-2012 into periods of contraction ( DCON ) and

periods of expansion ( DEXP ) and test if the Great Recession period contractions and expansions are

different from earlier contraction and expansion periods. We estimate the following model:

=
(3) yst βCON DCONURst + β EXP DEXPURst + βGR
                                          CON
                                              DGR DCONURst + βGR
                                                              EXP
                                                                  DGR DEXPURst + α s + δ t + ε st

The coefficients of interest are β GR which captures the difference between the cyclicality in the GR
                                   CON




and the cyclicality in previous recessions and β GR which captures the difference between the
                                                 EXP




cyclicality in the expansion out of the Great Recession (compared to previous expansions). Thus a

statistically significant coefficient estimate for the Great Recession contraction or expansion denotes

a difference during this most recent period compared to the rest of the period; captured by the main

effect. For each recession, we assign the contraction as the period from the year after the trough of

the national unemployment rate to the year of the subsequent peak of the national unemployment

rate, and expansions go from the year after the peak to the year of the trough. We should note that we

only have two years of post-GR expansion (2011 and 2012); these results could change as we

continue to move through the expansion.

        These results are provided in panels B and C of Tables 2 and 3. Three important findings are

apparent from these results. First, in the post-welfare reform era the cyclical protection provided by

TANF has all but disappeared. Panel B of Table 2 shows that in the 1980s cycle, a one percentage

point increase in the unemployment rate led to a significant 7.2 percent increase in AFDC caseloads

per capita. During the Great Recession period, this has fallen to a statistically insignificant 0.3

percent increase and, as shown by the p-value reported below the parameter estimates in Panel B, we

can reject the equality of these coefficients at the 5 percent level. The findings for Panel C are

similar, the GR period percent effects (the percent effects from summing the coefficient for

contraction (expansion) and GR * contraction (expansion)) are insignificant and very close to zero.

The analysis of per capita AFDC/TANF expenditures echo this finding—Panels B and C in Table 3



                                                    16
shows a statistically significant reduction in the protection provided by TANF in the Great

Recession. In fact the results show that, during the Great Recession, an increase in unemployment

was associated with a (marginally significant) reduction in TANF cash benefits per capita. We also

ran similar models with a more comprehensive measure of TANF spending, which includes noncash

benefits (e.g., child care assistance) as well as cash benefits—and the results are similar to those

presented here. The results using EPOP (presented in Appendix Table 3) are quite similar.

        Second, despite the dramatic overall increase in Food Stamps in the Great Recession (Figure

3) we find that while point estimates suggest more protection in the GR, the GR period is only

statistically different when using the EPOP measure. For example, Panel C of Table 2 shows that the

responsiveness of per capita Food Stamp caseloads during the Great Recession is double that for the

full period (the coefficient on “UR x Contraction x GR” is 0.066 compared to the main effect of

0.064). Table 3 shows a similar doubling on the effect on Food Stamp expenditures per capita for the

Great Recession compared to the full period. This finding is echoed by Ganong and Liebman (2013)

who examine the determinants of food stamp caseloads and find that almost all of the increase after

2007 can be explained by state and county level labor market conditions. 19 Ziliak (2013) also finds

an important role for the weak labor market in explaining Food Stamp changes from 2007 to 2011,

while additionally finding a role for policy.

        Third, our main results show the response of UI appears to be larger in the Great Recession.

Results for per capita UI participation in Table 2 indicate that an increase in the unemployment rate

leads to a statistically significantly larger effect in the Great Recession (0.216 for UR X GR

compared to 0.153 for UR X 1980s in Panel B; we can reject equality at the 3 percent level) and this

seems to be driven primarily by the expansion out of the GR (the coefficient on UR x Contraction x

GR is an insignificant but positive 0.02 and the coefficient on UR x Expansion x GR is a statistically

significant 0.07 in Panel C). These results are largely echoed in Table 3, although the differences in


 When examining the earlier period, especially the Bush expansions in the early 2000s, Ganong and Liebman find
19

more of a role for policy changes in explaining the growth of food stamp caseloads.

                                                      17
per capita UI spending in the GR compared to earlier recessions are smaller and less likely to be

statistically different. For example, Table 3 shows that in panel C, UI spending per capita is a

marginally significant $911 higher per capita in the GR expansion, while Panel B shows no

statistically significant differences between the GR and the early 1980s period. However, when we

use the EPOP as the measure of the cycle, we find very small and statistically insignificant

differences between UI in the GR and the earlier recessions (Appendix Table 3). From this, we

conclude that the historic expansion in the duration of UI in the Great Recession provided an

increase, or at least no decline, in protection relative to that provided in previous experience.

        This analysis suggests important differences in how the safety net responded in the Great

Recession and how this response compares to historical experience. We have a clear finding that

protection through TANF has all but disappeared and the program no longer appears to be

responding to need (echoing the descriptive results in Figure 2). The experience for Food Stamps and

UI is more or less the opposite – there we find evidence of more protection or the same amount of

protection in the Great Recession compared to historical experience. For both Food Stamps and UI

the coefficients consistently suggest more protection but significance depends on how the cycle is

measured (significant for UI with the UR and for Food Stamps with EPOP). As a summary measure,

our final result is illustrated in the column 4 of Table 3, where we construct “total safety net

expenditures per capita,” which is the sum of TANF, Food Stamps, and UI. Interestingly, the net

effect seems to lean toward less protection in Great Recession, although not all of the differences are

statistically significant. This finding of less protection in the GR also hold for the more

comprehensive definition of TANF (including noncash expenditures).



4. Cycles, the Great Recession and Poverty

        The analysis of the social safety net provides important findings about how government

programs responded to shocks during the Great Recession. Here we extend that analysis by looking

more broadly at family well-being, in particular by examining the cyclicality of poverty and whether

                                                    18
the changes in Great Recession are consistent with historical experience. Given our findings above—

a reduction in protection through TANF and increases (or at least no decline) in protection through

UI and Food Stamps—we explore what is happening for the most disadvantaged as measured by the

ratio of income to poverty thresholds being very low (extreme poverty, less than 50% of the poverty

threshold) as well as higher income-to-poverty levels. We begin here by presenting the time series

evidence on poverty and then move on to our state panel data models in Section 5.

        For this analysis we use the Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC) of the Current

Population Survey (CPS) which is the main source of data used by Census for reporting annual

poverty rates and is administered to most households in March. The ASEC is an annual survey that

collects labor market, income, and program participation information for the previous calendar year,

as well as demographic information from the time of the survey. Our sample uses the 1981 through

2013 CPS surveys, corresponding to 1980-2012 calendar year outcomes (ending with the most recent

such data available).

        We begin, in Figure 4, by looking at the poverty rate for the non-elderly persons. We use a

measure of cash pre-tax income based on that in the official poverty measure. Official poverty in the

U.S. is determined by comparing total pre-tax family cash income to poverty thresholds, which vary

by family size, number of children, and presence of elderly persons. For example, in 2012, the

poverty threshold for a family of four (two adults, two children) was $23,283 and a family of two

(one adult, one child) was $15,825. All persons in the same family have the same poverty status. The

only change we make is to use household income and household composition rather than the Census

practice of using family income and family size. We do this because some key non-cash transfer

benefits (e.g., Food Stamps) are reported only for the entire household. For more information on the

ASEC and our construction of poverty see the data appendix.

        Figure 4 shows that official (cash) poverty closely follows changes in the unemployment rate,

rising in contractions and declining in expansions. Notable is the dramatic decline in cash poverty

rates in the long economic expansion of the 1990s. Also evident is a general trend upward in poverty

                                                  19
since 2000 until it flattens out during the slow recovery from the GR.

         Official poverty (and our measurement of it here) has numerous drawbacks. Of particular

relevance for our work, the measure of cash income is not a complete measure of resources. It

excludes non-cash government transfers (such as food stamps or housing subsidies or housing

vouchers); subtractions from income (such as income or payroll taxes); and additions to income

(such as the Earned Income Tax Credit) made through the tax system. Additionally, there is no

geographic variation in the thresholds, despite wide variation in costs and wages across regions. 20

These limitations and others have been noted by many, and a National Academy of Sciences (NAS)

panel made recommendations for revisions (Citro and Michael, 1995). Following the NAS report,

Census released experimental poverty measures beginning with data for 1999. This led to the

eventual release, in fall 2011, of the Census Supplemental Poverty Measure (SPM), which addresses

many limitations in the official poverty rate and is now released annually (Short, 2011).

         We construct an alternative poverty measure that is informed by the NAS report and the new

SPM measure (Bitler and Hoynes 2010). Our main alternative income measure adds to cash money

income the cash value of non-cash transfers (food stamps, school lunch, housing subsidies), and

subtracts taxes (FICA payroll taxes, property taxes, net federal and state taxes [including the EITC,

child and child care tax credits, and stimulus payments]). We then compare this enhanced resource

measure to the standard poverty thresholds. 21 As with cash poverty, we use household post-tax and

transfer income and household composition to assign the poverty threshold to calculate alternative

poverty status for each person. This approach allows us to define alternative poverty on a consistent

basis back to 1980 using the public-use CPS data while remaining as close as possible to the SPM




20
   Furthermore, the thresholds fail to adjust for many categories of expenses (e.g., shelter, clothing, work related
expenses, medical expenses, and utilities), and thus do not capture measures of needs. The thresholds are also
updated annually by the CPI-U, which may not well capture changes in needs.
21
   Many of the components needed to construct the SPM measure of poverty thresholds which measure expenses
such as child care and medical out of pocket spending are not available for our entire sample period, thus we stick
with the official poverty thresholds. Additionally, our results are extremely similar if we use a measure of alternative
poverty incorporating LIHEAP and the imputed value of Medicare and Medicaid.

                                                          20
(see data appendix for details). (The exception is calendar years 1987 and 1990 where, due to

missing data, we are unable construct our alternative poverty measure.) 22

         Along with the cash poverty measure for the non-elderly, Figure 4 also plots alternative

poverty for the non-elderly for 1980-2012. Alternative poverty rates are generally lower compared to

cash poverty, which is to be expected given that lower income households are net recipients of

government support (rather than being net taxpayers) and we have kept the poverty thresholds

constant. However, alternative poverty, like cash poverty, also is positively covarying with the

business cycle, although perhaps less so in the GR. To examine more closely the recent period,

Figure 5 presents cash and alternative poverty (left scale) and the unemployment rate (right scale) for

2007−2012. Notably, cash poverty increased by 24.6 percent between 2007 and 2010 (from 11.0 in

2007 to 13.7 in 2010). During the same period, the alternative poverty measure increased by 7.7

percent (from 9.1 in 2007 to 9.8 in 2010). This suggests that the safety net provided important

mediation of the effects of the Great Recession.



5. The Cyclicality of Poverty, Historically and in the Great Recession

         Using this information on cash and alternative poverty covering 1980-2012, we now move on

to estimate state panel data models similar to those presented above in our analysis of the safety net

(section 2). We use the sample of nonelderly persons and collapse the CPS data to state by year cells,

using March CPS weights. The models are estimated using state-year population weights

(constructed as the sum of the CPS weights in each state-year cell) and the standard errors are



22
  We are not the first to construct post-tax and transfer poverty measures back in time. Meyer and Sullivan (2012),
Wimer et al. (2013) and Fox et al. (2013) create measures of either income (Wimer et al., 2013; Fox et al 2013) or
consumption (Meyer and Sullivan) poverty that account for issues in the official poverty measure which led to the
development of the SPM. Wimer et al. (2013) take the SPM thresholds and carry them back in time by adjusting for
inflation. This “anchored SPM” approach may be problematic if the basket of goods that contribute to the SPM
thresholds change over time (that is, food, clothing, shelter and utilities might have accounted for a different share of
spending back in time). Further, there are potential issues associated with the appropriate measure of the CPI used to
backward anchor thresholds. Fox et al. use available CEX data to create similar thresholds to those in the SPM but
further back in time, but they themselves worry about the precision of these measures (this is what led to their
companion work, Wimer et al., 2013).

                                                           21
clustered by state. As above, we begin by estimating the full-period relationship between economic

cycles and poverty and test for a change in that relationship in the Great Recession. These models

are annual and use the state annual unemployment rate and the estimates are identified by variation in

the timing and severity of cycles across states. As above, we also present findings using the EPOP as

our measure of the cycle. 23

         Panel A of Table 4 presents the results of this model for data spanning years 1980−2012. The

table presents results for cash (official) poverty and our alternative post-tax post-transfer poverty. To

explore the impacts of the cycle at different points of the income distribution, and in light of the

varying results we find for AFDC/TANF and UI, we present models for the share of nonelderly

persons with household incomes below 50 percent, 100 percent, and 200 percent of the poverty level.

         The three columns of Table 4 show that cash poverty (“official poverty”) is highly cyclical.

The results show that a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate leads to a 0.72

percentage point increase in the share below 100 percent of poverty. This result is well in line with

the many prior studies that have examined this relationship (Bitler and Hoynes 2010, 2013; Blank

1989, 1993; Blank and Blinder 1986; Blank and Card 1993; Cutler and Katz 1991; Freeman 2001;

Gunderson and Ziliak 2004; Hoynes et al., 2006; Meyer and Sullivan 2011 24); our estimates here

update that work using data through 2012 and the GR. Panel A shows that the point estimates

increase as we move up the income-to-poverty distribution (across columns 1-3). However, given the

differences in the baseline rates of the various multiples of poverty (e.g., 0.047 for extreme poverty

compared to 0.297 for income less than 200% poverty), we also calculate and present percent

impacts which are defined as the estimated coefficients divided by the mean of the dependent




23
   We should note that we think of our analysis here, relying on poverty rates of the nonelderly, as corresponding to
the same population as we captured in our analysis of administrative data above. This is largely correct, with the
potential exception of Food Stamps which serves the elderly and nonelderly alike. The other programs
disproportionately accrue to the non-elderly.
24
   For example, Hines et al (2006) find a one percentage point increase in UR leads to a 0.6 percentage point
increase in cash poverty and Gunderson and Ziliak (2004) find that, controlling for lagged poverty rates, a one
percentage point increase in UR leads to a 0.45 percentage point increase in cash poverty.

                                                         22
variables (over the entire time period). These normalized coefficients (labeled “% impact” in the

table) show that the impact of a one percentage point increase in unemployment leads to larger

percent impacts at the bottom of the distribution (i.e., an 8.4 percent increase for less than 50% of

poverty) than higher up the distribution (i.e., increases of 5.9 percent and 3.5 percent at 100% and

200% of poverty, respectively).

         Columns 4 through 6 present similar models for alternative poverty. Mean poverty rates (for

the full period shown at the bottom of Panel A) incorporating the comprehensive tax and transfer

programs are lower than cash poverty rates, and are particularly so at the lowest income to poverty

levels. For example, 4.7% of the nonelderly are below 50% of cash poverty but only 2.8% are under

50% of alternative poverty, while the corresponding numbers for being under 200% of poverty are

29.7% (for cash poverty) versus 34.7% (for alternative poverty). This “tilting” of the income-to-

poverty gradient reflects the high levels of eligibility for and participation in various safety net

programs and tax credits at the lowest income levels and the potentially offsetting effects of taxes

and non-cash benefits for the higher income levels. 25

         The results for post-tax and transfer poverty also show substantial and statistically significant

cyclicality of poverty. For example, the results in column 5 shows that a one percentage point

increase in the unemployment rate leads to a 0.63 percentage point or 6.2 percent increase in 100% of

alternative poverty. By comparing the cash and post-tax and transfer poverty, we are able to explore

the impact of omission of these important features of the tax and transfer safety net. The biggest

change is for extreme poverty (below 50 percent poverty) whereby the results show that post-tax and

transfer extreme poverty is substantially less cyclical than is cash income extreme poverty: A one

percentage point increase in the unemployment rate leads to a 0.40 percentage point (8.4 percent)

increase in extreme cash poverty compared to a 0.17 percentage point (6.3 percent) increase in



25
   To be clear, the poverty thresholds are identical between the cash and alternative poverty measures. However the
adjustments to income will be positive for some (reflecting the value of non-cash benefits, value of tax credits such
as the EITC) and negative for others (reflecting the effect of taxes).

                                                         23
extreme alternative poverty. The responsiveness of 100% poverty is also lower for alternative

compared to cash poverty (although the percent impacts are very similar). Cash and alternative

measures of 200% poverty look very similar, reflecting the lower influence of the social safety net at

higher income levels. All of these qualitative findings are similar using EPOP instead of the

unemployment rate (results are reported in Appendix Table 4).

        We next modify the regression model to explore whether the cyclicality of poverty in the

Great Recession represents a significant change from historical patterns. We do so using the same

two models we used above in our analysis of the safety net (equations 2 and 3 above). In particular,

in Panel B, we compare the three periods allowing for a test of whether the responsiveness to

changes in the unemployment rate differs between Great Recession and the early-1980s recession. In

the second comparison, we test whether the contraction and expansion components of the Great

Recession differ from earlier contraction and recession periods, respectively.

        These results are presented in panels B and C of Table 4. Focusing on post-tax and transfer

alternative poverty, the results show that extreme alternative poverty (less than 50% poverty) is more

cyclical in the Great Recession. Panel B shows a larger point estimate for the period beginning in

2007 (0.208 for “UR x GR”) compared to the early 1980s cycle (0.124 for “UR x 1980s”) and the

difference is statistically significant at the 9-percent level. The results in Panel C indicate that this

increase in cyclicality of extreme alternative poverty is being driven by a much greater cyclicality in

the GR contraction period (the coefficient on “UR x Contraction x GR” is a statistically significant

0.130 compared to the full period effect of 0.079). The results for alternative 100% poverty show the

opposite findings—less cyclicality (more protection) during the GR compared to the earlier period—

but are never statistically significant. For alternative 200% poverty we have a return to the extreme

poverty results—the results in Panel B show a statistically significant increase in cyclicality in the

GR compared to the 1980s and Panel C shows that this is being driven by a statistically larger

response to the GR contractionary period.



                                                     24
        The results using EPOP mirror these qualitatively, although as above with the analysis of the

safety net, the statistical significance varies across the two labor market measures. Appendix Table 4

shows extreme alternative poverty in the GR is still more cyclical (but the difference loses statistical

significance) and 100% alternative poverty in the GR is still less cyclical (and now the difference

gains statistical significance). The differences for 200% alternative poverty become very small and

statistically insignificant.

        The analyses in this and the prior section show the safety net played an important mediating

role for households in the Great Recession. However, much of the response to the safety net was in

line with historical experience or somewhat more protective and was a direct result of a response to a

very large shock to the labor market. One very important exception and one of our most robust

findings is that extreme poverty increased by more in the Great Recession than we would have

expected based on prior experience. This increased effect for the most disadvantaged is closely tied

to the decline in basic cash assistance through welfare reform and the decline in TANF support. On

the other hand, although less robust, we find some evidence that UI and to a lesser extent Food

Stamps responded more in the Great Recession than we would expected from prior experience. This

is then reflected, although also less robustly so, in the reduction in cyclicality for 100% alternative

poverty. It is somewhat surprising, especially in light of the evidence on UI and Food Stamps

participation in Figure 2, that we don’t see a reduction in the cyclicality of income-to-poverty at

higher income levels (e.g., 200% poverty)..



6. The Role of the Safety Net in Providing Protection across Cycles

        Here we bring together our analysis of poverty and our analysis of the safety net to explore

how the safety net programs affect the cyclicality of poverty. To do so, we continue with the CPS

nonelderly sample and our alternative poverty measures. For each of the four safety net programs, we

(one at a time) “zero out” the income from that safety net program, recalculate alternative household

income, and recalculate alternative poverty. This is a “static” calculation and assumes nothing else

                                                    25
changes in the household. In particular, the counterfactual does not incorporate the behavioral

changes that would likely happen if the particular program did not exist. 26 Nonetheless, comparing

the cyclicality of the poverty with and without income from the safety net provides a useful

description of the extent of protection provided by these programs. Given data limitations in the

earlier years in the CPS, here our analysis labeled “UI” captures not only UI but also veteran’s

payments and worker’s compensation. 27

        Figure 6 presents some results of that exercise. There are three graphs in Figure 6, one each

for alternative income below 50%, 100%, and 200% poverty. For each safety-net program, we plot

the change (in percentage points) in the alternative poverty rates that is obtained by zeroing out the

safety net program and comparing the resulting income to the relevant share of the poverty threshold

(we plot the zeroed out poverty measure minus the base poverty measure). The blue bars on the left

of each pair provide these statistics for 2010, the year with the peak unemployment rate in the Great

Recession. The red bars on the right of each pair provide the same calculations for 1982, at the peak

of the 1980s recession. On the right end of each graph we plot the base alternative poverty rates for

the two years. For example, the top left graph shows that zeroing out food stamp benefits leads to a

little more than a 1 percentage point increase in extreme poverty, relative to a base rate of 3.2

percentage points in 2010. These results illustrate several important findings. First, the decline in

importance of cash welfare is evident: TANF has very small impacts on poverty in 2010 while in

1982 TANF provided important protection at 50% and 100% of poverty. Second, the growth of the

EITC is also evident: in 2010 the EITC has sizable poverty reduction impacts at 100% and 200% of

poverty. Third, Food Stamps contributes more to declines in poverty at 100% and 200% of the FPL

in 2010 (relative to 1982). Fourth, the effect of UI is evident at all poverty levels and rises in



26
   In the case of programs where they encompass negative work incentives, then the net effects incorporating the
behavioral component could be smaller. Ben-Shalom, Moffitt, and Scholz (2012) review existing literature on the
evidence about labor supply effects of these programs, suggesting effects are not large.
27
   Beginning in 1989, we can identify separately income from UI, veteran’s payments and worker’s compensation.
About 60 percent of the combined income comes from UI in non-recessionary periods, with larger shares (up to 70
percent or more) in the Great Recession.

                                                       26
importance with poverty level but its antipoverty impact in 2010 is not dramatically different from

1982.

        We then use these “zeroed-out” poverty rates and estimate the state panel data models as we

did for “base” alternative poverty above (in Table 4). We present these results for the full 1980-2012

period in Table 5. There are three panels in the table, one for each of the poverty levels (50%, 100%,

and 200%). For example, in Panel A we estimate models for extreme alternative poverty. The base

estimates, in column 1, show that a one percentage point increase in unemployment leads to a 0.17

percentage point or 6.3 percent increase in extreme poverty. This is identical to the result in Table 4

(panel A, column 4). The estimate in column 2 for Food Stamps shows that the point estimate

increases to 0.316—this shows that zeroing out the income from Food Stamps increases the

cyclicality of extreme poverty from 6.3 to 8.5 percent (for a one percentage point increase in

unemployment). We find similar results for AFDC/TANF and UI; for both, the results in Panel A

show that this static zeroing out of the safety net program leads to an increase in the cyclicality of

poverty. The exception is the EITC which affects overall poverty rates (as we showed above in

Figure 6) but does little to affect the cyclicality of poverty. The effects of the safety net on the

cyclicality of poverty are largest at the lowest poverty levels, with more modest changes at 100 and

200% of poverty. This illustrates the protection (against economic shocks) that the programs are

providing. The exception to this is UI, which is still (in this static sense) providing considerable

protection at 100% of poverty.

        Table 6 extends this analysis and presents estimates for the model that allows for different

effects of the unemployment rate during the 1980s recession and the Great Recession (as in Panel B

of Table 4). Because of our particular interest in the Great Recession period, we focus on the

estimates for that period (“UR x GR”). Figure 7 provides a summary of those results. On the x-axis

are the four safety-net programs, representing the regressions corresponding to zeroing out income

from each program. For each safety net program, there are three data points (bars), one for the each

of the poverty rates (50%, 100%, and 200%). Each of the data points provides the difference between

                                                    27
βGR (in equation 2) estimated with “base” case poverty and βGR estimated with the safety net

program zeroed out. A negative number here indicates that zeroing out this program leads to an

increase in cyclicality. For example, for Food Stamps and 50% poverty, we see in Table 7, base

alternative poverty cyclicality in the GR is 0.208, and poverty cyclicality after zeroing out food

stamps income the coefficient rises to 0.303 (showing that poverty is more cyclical in the absence of

Food Stamps). The difference is -0.095 and that is plotted as the far left bar on Figure 7. The Figure

shows that, in the Great Recession period, UI benefits are providing the most protection, in terms of

reducing the cyclicality of poverty. Food Stamps is important, but only at the lowest poverty levels

(50%, 100%). TANF, on the other hand, is providing little to no protection. An important caveat here

is that these changes happen in the absence of any counterfactual.



8. Conclusion

        After several decades of mild business cycles, the Great Recession led to unemployment

rates unseen since the deep recessions of the early 1980s. At the same time, significant changes in the

safety net both before and during this most recent downturn make it important to explore the role of

the safety net in protecting well-being during the Great Recession. Cash welfare for families with

children was transformed in the late 1990s from an entitlement program which functioned as an

automatic stabilizer to a time limited program funded by block grants. Over the 2000s, eligibility

rules for the food stamp program were made more generous, and participation rates rose even before

the start of the downturn. This is also the first severe recession since the EITC was made much more

generous in the mid-1990s. The Federal Government responded to this Great Recession through

generous expansions in the maximum duration of unemployment benefits to an unprecedented 99

weeks and a stimulus bill that raised temporarily Food Stamp, UI, and EITC benefits.

        In this paper, we explore the role of the safety net in buffering families against economic

shocks, and test whether this relationship has changed significantly during this most recent downturn.



                                                   28
We look at the relationship between our main measure of the cycle—the state unemployment rate—

and both official poverty and alternative poverty (which incorporates taxes and transfers) in a state-

year panel model where we identify the effects of the cycle using variation in the timing and severity

of shocks across states over time. We also explore an alternative measure of the cycle, EPOP. We

then test whether there is evidence that this relationship is different in the current recession. We take

the same approach and use high quality administrative data to examine the role of Food Stamps, cash

welfare, the EITC, and Unemployment Compensation in responding to the business cycle.

        We find strong and robust evidence that the most disadvantaged were more affected in the

Great Recession than we would have expected from prior cycles. Post welfare reform, the cash safety

net (TANF) was not responsive in the Great Recession. Reflecting this loss in protection from a

program that mostly pays benefits to those at the very bottom of the income distribution, extreme

poverty became more cyclical. On the other hand, the safety net programs receiving the most

attention through the Great Recession (Food Stamps and UI) show either more protection or behave

consistently with their performance during previous historical cycles (depending on the measure of

the labor market). These programs are more likely to affect households somewhat higher up the

income distribution and we find some evidence of a reduction in cyclicality at 100% of alternative

poverty during the Great Recession period, suggesting more protection.

        We conclude that the social safety net plays a critical role in protecting families from the

negative effects of recessions. When these programs are cut back, as in the case of TANF, the effects

of recessions are more severe. When these programs are expanded, as in Food Stamps and UI, the

effects of recessions are moderated.




                                                   29
8. References

Autor, David, and Mark Duggan. (2003), “The Rise in Disability Rolls and the Decline in
Unemployment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 157-206.

Autor, David and Mark Duggan. (2006). “The Growth in the Social Security Disability Rolls: A
Fiscal Crisis Unfolding.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20:3, 71-96.

Ben-Shalom, Yonatan, Robert Moffitt, and John Karl Scholz. (2012). “An Assessment of the
Effectiveness of Antipoverty Programs in the United States,” in, Phillip Jefferson, ed., The Oxford
Handbook of the Economics of Poverty, Oxford University Press.

Bitler, Marianne and Hilary Hoynes. (2010).”The State of the Safety Net in the Post-Welfare Reform
Era,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 71-127.

Bitler, Marianne and Hilary Hoynes. (2013). “Immigrants, Welfare and the U.S. Safety Net,” in
David Card and Steven Raphael, eds., Immigration, Poverty, and Socioeconomic Inequality. Russell
Sage Foundation, New York, NY.

Bitler, Marianne, Hilary Hoynes, and Elira Kuka. (2013). “Do In-Work Tax Credits Serve as a Safety
Net?” Working paper.

Black, Dan, Kermit Daniel and Seth Sanders. (2002). “The Impact of Economic Conditions on
Participation in Disability Programs: Evidence from the Coal Boom and Bust,” American Economic
Review 92, 27-50.

Blank, Rebecca. (1989). “Disaggregating the Effect of the Business Cycle on the Distribution of
Income,” Economica 56, 141-163.

Blank, Rebecca. (1993). “Why Were Poverty Rates so High in the 1980s?” in, Papadimitriou and
Wolff, eds, Poverty and Prosperity in the Late Twentieth Century, St Martin’s Press.

Blank, Rebecca. (2001). “What Causes Public Assistance Caseloads to Grow?” Journal of Human
Resources, 36:1, 85-118.

Blank, Rebecca and Alan Blinder. (1987). “Macroeconomics, Income Distribution, and Poverty,” in,
Sheldon Danziger and Daniel Weinberg, eds, Fighting Poverty: What Works and What Doesn’t.
Harvard University Press.

Blank, Rebecca and David Card. (1993). “Poverty, Income Distribution and Growth: Are They Still
Related?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2.

Bound, John, Richard V. Burkhauser, and Austin Nichols. 2003. “Tracking the Household Income of
SSDI and SSI Applicants.” in, S. Polachek, ed., Worker Well-Being and Public Policy, 113–58.
Research in Labor Economics, 22. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.

Citro, Constance and Robert Michael, eds., (1995). Measuring Poverty: A New Approach.
Washington D.C.: National Academy Press.

Congressional Budget Office. (2014). “The Slow Recovery of the Labor Market.” CBO Report
45011.

Congressional Budget Office . (2013). “The Distribution of Taxes and Spending in 2006.” CBO
Report 44698.


                                                 30
Corsetto, Lisa. (2012). “Food and Nutrition Program Cyclicality,” mimeo, UC Davis.

Currie, Janet (2006). "The Take-up of Social Benefits," in, Alan Auerbach, David Card, and John
Quigley, eds, Poverty, the Distribution of Income, and Public Policy, New York: Russell Sage. 80-
148.

Cutler, David and Larry Katz. (1991).”Macroeconomic Performance and the Disadvantaged.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1.

Cutler, David, Ellen Meara, and Seth Richards-Shubik. (2012). “Unemployment and Disability:
Evidence from the Great Recession.” Mimeo.

Employment Development Department, California. (2013). New Developments on Federal
Unemployment Extensions and Benefit Cuts.
http://www.edd.ca.gov/unemployment/Federal_Unemployment_Insurance_Extensions.htm, accessed
9/4/2013.

Erceg, Christopher, and Andrew Levin. (2013). “Labor Force Participation and Monetary Policy in
the Wake of the Great Recession.” IMF Working Paper WP 13-245.

Fallick, Bruce and Jonathan Pingle. (2007). “A Cohort-Based Model of Labor Force Participation.”
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion Series
Working Paper 2007-09.

Farber, Henry and Robert Valletta. (2013). “Do Extended Unemployment Benefits Lengthen
Unemployment Spells? Evidence from Recent Cycles in the U.S. Labor Market.” Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2013-09.

Fox, Liana, Irv Garfinkel, Neeraj Kaushal, Jane Waldfogel, and Christopher Wimer. (2013).
“Waging War On Poverty: Historical Trends in Poverty using the Supplemental Poverty Measure.”
Mimeo.

Fraker, Thomas M., Alberto P. Martini, James C. Ohls, Michael Ponza and Elizabeth A. Quinn.
(1992). The Evaluation of the Alabama Food Stamp Cash-Out Demonstration: Volume 1 Recipient
Impacts. Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.

Freeman, Richard. (2001). “The Rising Tide Lifts…?” in, Sheldon Danziger and Robert Haveman,
eds., Understanding Poverty, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 97-126.

Ganong, Peter and Jeffrey Liebman (2013). “The Decline, Rebound, and Further Rise in SNAP
Enrollment: Disentangling Business Cycle Fluctuations and Policy Changes.” NBER WP 19363.

Grogger, Jeffrey. (2003), “The Effects of Time Limits, the EITC, and Other Policy Changes on
Welfare Use, Work, and Income Among Female-Headed Families.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 85:2, 394-408.

Gundersen, Craig and James Ziliak. (2004). “Poverty and Macroeconomic Performance across
Space, Race, and Family Structure,” Demography, 41:1, 61-86.

Hardy, Bradley, Tim Smeeding, and James Ziliak. (2014). "The Changing Safety Net for Low-
Income Parents and Their Children: Structural or Cyclical Changes in Income Support Policy?"
Mimeo.




                                                31
Hotchkiss, Julie. (2014). “Adjusted Employment-to-Population Ratio as an Indicator of Labor
Market Strength.” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working Paper 2014-8.

Hoynes, Hilary W., Douglas Miller, and Jessamyn Shaller. (2012). “Who Suffers in Recessions and
Jobless Recoveries?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26:3, 27-48.

Hoynes, Hilary W., Marianne E. Page, and Ann Huff Stevens. (2006). “Poverty in America: Trends
and Explanations.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20, 47-68.

Hoynes, Hilary and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. (2009). “Consumption Reponses to In-Kind
Transfers: Evidence from the Introduction of the Food Stamp Program.” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 1:4, 109-139.

Krueger, Alan and Bruce Meyer. (2002). “Labor Supply Effects of Social Insurance,” in Alan
Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 4, Amsterdam: North-
Holland, 2327-2392.

Kydlyak, Marianna. (2013). “A Cohort Model of Labor Force Participation.” Economic Quarterly
99:1, 25-43.

Lindner, Stephan and Austin Nichols (2012). “The Impact of Temporary Assistance Programs on
Disability Rolls and Re-Employment,” http://www.urban.org/UploadedPDF/412503-The-Impact-of-
Temporary-Assistance-Programs-on-Disability-Rolls-and-Re-Employment.pdf.

Meyer, Bruce and James Sullivan. (2011). “Consumption and Income Poverty over the Business
Cycle,” Research in Labor Economics 32, 51-82.

Meyer, Bruce and James Sullivan. (2012). “Identifying the Disadvantaged: Official Poverty,
Consumption Poverty, and the New Supplemental Poverty Measure.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 26:3, Summer, 111-136.

Meyer, Bruce and James Sullivan. (2012). “Winning the War: Poverty from the Great Society to the
Great Recession” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Fall 2012.

Meyer, Bruce, Wallace Mok, and James Sullivan. (2009). “The Under-Reporting of Transfers in
Household Surveys: Its Nature and Consequences.” NBER Working Paper 15181.

Moffitt, Robert. (1983). "An Economic Model of Welfare Stigma." American Economic Review
73:5, 1023-35.

Moffitt, Robert. (1992). “Incentive Effects of the US Welfare System: A Review.” Journal of
Economic Literature 30:1, March 1992.

Moffitt, Robert. (2012). “The Reversal of the Employment-Population Ratio in the 2000s: Facts and
Explanations.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Fall 2012.

Moffitt, Robert. (2014). “Multiple Program Participation and the SNAP program. Mimeo.

Mulligan, Casey. (2012). The Redistribution Revolution: How Labor Market Distortions Contracted
the Economy. NY: Oxford University Press.

Mueller, Andreas, Jesse Rothstein, and Till von Wachter. “Unemployment Insurance and Disability
Insurance in the Great Recession.” NBER WP 19672.



                                                32
National Conference of State Legislators. (2013). Unemployment Insurance: State Trust Fund Loans.
http://www.ncsl.org/issues-research/labor/state-unemployment-trust-fund-loans.aspx, accessed
9/4/2013.

Ohls, James C., Thomas M. Fraker, Alberto P. Martini and Michael Ponza. (1992). The Effects of
Cash-Out on Food Use by Food Stamp Program Participants in San Diego. USDA, Food and
Nutrition Service, Office of Analysis and Evaluation.

Rothstein, Jesse. (2011). "Unemployment Insurance and Job Search in the Great Recession" (October
2011). Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 132-210.

Rothstein, Jesse (2013). “Unemployment Insurance and Disability Insurance in the Great Recession.”
working paper.

Rutledge, Matthew (2012). “The Impact of Unemployment Insurance Extensions on Disability
Insurance Application and Allowances Rates.” Working Paper 2011-17. Chestnut Hill, MA: Center
for Retirement Research at Boston College.

Short, Kathleen. (2011). “The Research Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2010.” Current Population
Reports P60-241. U.S. Census Bureau.

U.S. Department of Agriculture. (2013). Caseload Data. Unpublished data provided by Katie
Fitzpatrick and John Kirlin of the Economic Research Service.

U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2007). Food Stamp Program. GAO-07-465.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services/ (2014). “Welfare Indicators and Risk Factors:
Thirteenth Annual Report to Congress.” Administration of Children and Families, Washington D.C.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Administration for Children and Families. (2013).
Caseload Data. [online] Office of Family Assistance. Available at:
http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ofa/data-reports/index.htm.

U.S. Department of Labor. (2013). 1979-2011 Data. Unpublished data provided by DOL OSEC.

U.S. Department of Labor (2014). Frequently Requested Series
(http://workforcesecurity.doleta.gov/unemploy/frs.asp, accessed 8/24/2014), and Summary Data for
State Programs, ET Financial Data Handbook 394 reports
(http://workforcesecurity.doleta.gov/unemploy/hb394.asp, accessed 8/24/2014).

U.S. Internal Revenue Service. (2012). U.S. Individual Income Tax Public Use Sample. Statistics of
Income Division.

Von Wachter, Till, Jae Song, and Joyce Manchester. (2011). “Trends in Employment and Earnings of
Allowed and Rejected Applicants to the Social Security Disability Insurance Program.” American
Economic Review 101, 3308-3339.

Wimer, Christopher, Liana Fox, Irv Garfinkel, Neeraj Kaushal, and Jane Waldfogel. (2013). “Trends
in Poverty with an Anchored Supplemental Poverty Threshold.” Mimeo.

Ziliak, James (2013). “Why Are So Many Americans on Food Stamps? The Role of the Economy,
Policy, and Demographics.” mimeo.




                                                33
Ziliak, James, David Figlio, Elizabeth Davis, and Laura Connolly. (2000). “Accounting for the
Decline in AFDC Caseloads: Welfare Reform or the Economy?” Journal of Human Resources 35:3,
570-86.

Ziliak, James, Craig Gundersen, and David Figlio. (2003). “Food Stamp Caseloads over the Business
Cycle.” Southern Economic Journal 69:4, 903-19.




                                               34
Data Appendix (Intended to be published appendix)

A. Details of March CPS Data Construction
We use the March Current Population Survey (or ASEC) for years 1981 through 2013 (covering calendar
years 1980 through 2012). The main sample used in the paper measures income and poverty at the
household level, after dropping unrelated children (as does the Census bureau). Thus, total (cash or
alternative) income is summed across household members, and then the household income is compared to
various multiples of the poverty threshold, and this value is attached to all household members. Our
analysis is limited to the sample of nonelderly persons. State by year aggregate poverty rates are the
average of poverty rates, for the non-elderly sample, weighted by the supplement person weight.

Our cash poverty measure follows the Census approach and includes cash pre-tax income sources (earned
income; asset income; private transfers including child support, disability and pensions; and public cash
transfers including social security, disability, unemployment and welfare). The only change we make,
relative to Census definitions, is to use household income and household composition rather than the
Census practice of using family income and family size. We do this because some key non-cash benefits
(e.g., Food Stamps) are reported only for the entire household.

Our alternative poverty uses data provided in the public-use CPS data and available on a consistent basis
back to 1980 (Bitler and Hoynes 2010, 2013). We developed this measure based on the recommendations
in the National Academy of Sciences report (Citro and Michael, 1995); it is also closely related to the
resource measures in the Supplemental Poverty Rate first released in 2011 (Short 2011). In particular, we
assign poverty using an expanded “alternative income” measure which we then apply to the standard
poverty thresholds. Our alternative income measure adds to cash money income the cash value of major
non-cash programs (food stamps, school lunch, housing subsidies) and subtracts taxes (FICA payroll
taxes, property taxes, net federal and state taxes [including the EITC, child and child care tax credits, and
stimulus payments]). We are able to construct a consistent alternative poverty measure for calendar years
1980-1986, 1988-1990, and 1991-2011. We are using the “old” version of the 1988 data which does not
correspond to the 1988 data on these measures so data are missing on alternative poverty for 1988. None
of the components of alternative poverty were created in 1991, so this year also is missing alternative
poverty. All variables are consistently reported for the other years. We are omitting total dollars of
LIHEAP as it was not reported until 1982.

B. Measuring Periods of Contraction and Expansion
We identified annual periods of contractions as the range of years from the year after the lowest to the
year with the highest annual unemployment and the expansions as the range of years from the year after
the highest to the year with the lowest annual unemployment rates that are near the beginning and end
points of the various NBER recessions. We pooled the 2 early 1980s recessions into one contraction. The
annual contraction periods are 1980-1982 (NBER recessions: 1/1980-7/1980, 7/1981-11/1982), 1990-
1992 (NBER recession: 7/1990-3/1991), 2001-2003 (NBER recession: 3/2001-11/2001), and 2007-2010
(NBER recession 12/2007-6/2009). For more information see Appendix Table 2.

C. Sources for Administrative and Labor Market Data
AFDC/TANF administrative data: Caseloads are monthly counts of number of households receiving aid.
Caseloads for the AFDC period (1980-1996) are available at http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ofa/data-
reports/caseload/caseload_archive.html and caseloads for the TANF period (1997+) caseloads are from
http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ofa/resource/caseload/caseload-recent. During the TANF period,
beginning in 2000, our measure includes Separate State Program/Maintenance of Effort program data.
Expenditures are annual total program expenditures during the AFDC period and are expenditures on cash
benefits for the TANF period. AFDC expenditure data are not available online but were provided by Don
Oellerich at ASPE/HHS. TANF expenditures are from
http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ofs/data/index.html. TANF cash expenditures are defined as “Column
B of Table F-3, combined spending of federal and state funds with ARRA expended in Fiscal Year 2009,

                                                     35
line 5a, basic assistance.” The average monthly TANF benefit (used in Table 1) is the average family
benefit for 2006, inflated to be in 2010 real $ from http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ofa/data-
reports/annualreport8/TANF_8th_Report_111908.pdf , DHHS (2009). All AFDC and TANF data are for
the month or the Fiscal Year (year ending Sept 30).

Food Stamp administrative data: Caseloads are monthly counts of number of households receiving food
stamps. Expenditures are annual total food stamp expenditures. Caseload and expenditures come from
unpublished USDA data generously provided by Katie Fitzpatrick and John Kirlin, of the Economic
Research Service, USDA.
Data for Table 1 come from:
http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/SNAPsummary.htm
http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/16SNAPpartHH.htm
http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/34SNAPmonthly.htm

Unemployment Insurance administrative data: Data for calendar year 2012 comes from unpublished data
provided by the Office of the Chief Economist at the Department of Labor. Data for calendar years 1980-
2011 comes from various downloads at the Department of Labor Website (DOL, 2014).
Average caseload analog is the number of calendar years of UI benefits paid out, or the number of weeks
paid out divided by 52.

EITC: EITC caseloads are counts of the number of tax units receiving the credit and expenditures are the
total tax cost of the credit (including the reduction in taxes paid and the amount refunded).
Data on recipients and the total tax cost of the EITC for Table 1 and Figure 3 comes from the Tax Policy
Center downloaded from http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/taxfacts/displayafact.cfm?Docid=37 (1980-
2009). Data for 2010-2012 comes from various releases of the “Statistics of Income Individual Income
Tax Returns Publication 1304” U.S. Department of Treasury, Internal Revenue Service.
The state-year data for the state panel regressions come from our tabulations of the U.S. IRS Statistics of
Income file microdata, accessed through the NBER.

SSDI administrative data: SSDI data comes from the Annual Statistical Report on the SSDI Program.
Average monthly benefits are for workers. Source:
http://www.socialsecurity.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/di_asr/2011/sect01b.html#table3

SSI administrative data: SSI data comes from the Annual Statistical Supplement to the Social Security
Bulletin. Caseloads and expenditures include the federal and state programs and exclude the aged
recipients. Average monthly benefits are for disabled workers. Source:
http://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/ssi_asr/#editions

Unemployment Rates: The unemployment rate for U.S. and states, annually and by month, come from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics, accessed from: http://www.bls.gov/lau/. The monthly numbers used in the
paper are seasonally adjusted.

Population: U.S. population from the Economic Report of the President,
http://www.gpoaccess.gov/eop/2012/B34.xls. State population is from National Cancer Institute SEER
data (http://seer.cancer.gov/popdata/download.html) for 1980-2012.

Employment to Population Ratio: Employment for U.S. and states, annually and by month, come from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics, accessed from: http://www.bls.gov/lau/. The monthly numbers used in the
paper are seasonally adjusted. The employment to population ratio is equal to employment divided by the
population age 16 plus.

Deflator: The CPI-U is from the Economic Report of the President,
http://www.gpoaccess.gov/eop/2012/B34.xls.

                                                    36
Figure 1: Trends in Annual Unemployment and Employment to Population (16+) Ratio




Notes: Measures directly available from published sources; see data appendix.




                                                        37
Figure 2: Participation in Safety Net Programs by Ratio of Private Income to Poverty
(a) Program participation in 2010




(b) Program participation in 1982




Notes: Figure presents local linear regressions of participation in various safety net programs as a function of the
ratio of private income to the HH-level poverty threshold. The bandwidth is 1/20 of the range of private income to
poverty threshold for those between 0% of poverty and 800% of poverty (as measured with private income). The
sample is the non-elderly, using the ASEC for each year.


                                                          38
Figure 3: Per capita real expenditures on cash and near cash safety net programs, 1980-2012




Notes: Contractions are annual periods of labor market contraction that closely follow NBER official recessions.
Official recessions are dated monthly; we assigned our contraction periods to encompass the periods of rising
unemployment rates. See data appendix for details and data sources.

Figure 4: Annual Unemployment, Official Poverty, and Alternative Poverty, Non-elderly




Notes: Measures computed by authors using official poverty thresholds and household cash income (official
poverty) and net of tax and transfer income (alternative poverty). Poverty refers to percent of non-elderly persons
living in households with income below the poverty line for their household size and structure. Our alternative
poverty measure uses net of tax and transfer income compared to the same threshold as official poverty. For more
details, see data appendix.

                                                         39
Figure 5: Annual Unemployment, Official Poverty, and Alternative Poverty in the Great Recession,
Non-elderly




Notes: Measures computed by authors using official poverty thresholds and household cash income (official
poverty) and net of tax and transfer income (alternative poverty),. Poverty refers to percent of persons living in
households with income below the poverty line for their household size and structure. Our alternative poverty
measure uses net of tax and transfer income compared to the same threshold as official poverty. For more details,
see data appendix.




                                                         40
         Figure 6: Percentage Point Increase in Alternative Income Poverty, from Zeroing out Safety Net Incomes, 2010 and 1982




Notes: Authors’ calculations from 1983 and 2011 March Current Population Survey. Sample includes nonelderly and alternative poverty is assigned using household income.
Each data point is the difference between alternative poverty with safety net zeroed out from income minus “base” alternative poverty. On the right end of each figure are the
“base” alternative poverty rates for the two years.


                                                                                     41
Figure 7: Effect of Safety Net Programs on Cyclicality of Alternative Poverty




Notes: Author’s comparison of effect of unemployment rate on alternative poverty during the GR using the main alternative
poverty measure and one dropping the various safety net programs one at a time. Thus, these represent static calculations and not
ones which account for the counterfactual behavioral responses in the absence of the programs. See text for details.




                                                                42
Table 1: Expenditures and Participation in Cash or Near-Cash Safety Net Programs, 2010

                                                                       Number of     Total benefit
                                                                     recipient units  payments          Average monthly
                                                                      (thousands) (millions of 2012$)    benefit (2012$)
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, Cash Benefits                   1,893              $11,265           $413
Food Stamps                                                              19,315             $70,142           $300
Federal Earned Income Tax Credit                                         27,368             $59,562           $191
Unemployment Compensation, Total                                         8,962              $144,253         $1,279
   Regular State Benefits                                                                   $61,264
   Extended Benefits                                                                         $9,415
   Emergency Benefits                                                                       $73,573


Notes: Data for all programs refers to 2010 and are in real $2012. See data appendix for sources.




                                                                43
Table 2: Effect of Unemployment Rate on Safety Net Caseloads

                                      Caseload / Population, Monthly            Caseload / Population, Annual
                                                                                    UI
                                        AFDC/TANF          Food Stamps        [Reg.+Ext.+Em.]            EITC

                                                                  A. Pooled Estimates
UR                                        0.062***            0.131***           0.171***               0.036
                                           (0.016)             (0.045)            (0.010)              (0.044)
% impact                                    5.4%                3.4%              14.4%                 0.6%
Full Period Mean                            0.012               0.038              0.012                0.059
                                                   B. By Period (1980s, GR, Rest of Period)
UR x 1980s                                0.086***        0.084***          0.153***                    -0.024
                                           (0.024)         (0.030)           (0.011)                   (0.061)
UR x Rest of period                       0.075***        0.212***          0.161***                   0.155**
                                           (0.019)         (0.041)           (0.013)                   (0.069)
UR x GR                                     0.003           0.147           0.216***                    0.072
                                           (0.031)         (0.174)           (0.028)                   (0.082)

% Impact, 1980s                             7.2%                2.2%                12.8%               -0.4%
% Impact, rest of period                    6.3%                5.6%                13.4%                2.6%
% impact, GR                                0.3%                3.9%                18.0%                1.2%
p-value, GR = 1980s                         0.05                0.70                 0.03                0.32

                                                        C. By Expansion/Contraction and GR
UR x Contraction                          0.080***            0.064*         0.210***                   0.036
                                           (0.024)            (0.034)         (0.011)                  (0.068)
UR x Expansion                            0.082***           0.153***        0.129***                   0.028
                                           (0.017)            (0.033)         (0.013)                  (0.053)
UR x Contraction x GR                     -0.082**             0.066           0.020                    0.020
                                           (0.036)            (0.139)         (0.034)                  (0.122)
UR x Expansion x GR                       -0.084**             -0.019        0.070***
                                           (0.034)            (0.245)         (0.021)

% Impact, UR x Con.                          6.7%              1.7%                 17.5%               0.6%
% Impact, UR x Exp.                          6.8%              4.0%                 10.8%               0.5%
% Impact, URxCon + URxConxGR                -0.2%              3.4%                 19.2%               0.9%
% Impact, URxExp + URxExpxGR                -0.2%              3.5%                 16.6%
N                                           20191              20100                 1683               1581

Notes: Data cover 1980-2012 (or 2010 for the EITC). The dependent variables are safety net caseloads divided by the state
population. Sources for caseloads are in the appendix. The EITC and UI data are annual, the other programs are monthly. All
regressions include state and year (or year-by-month) fixed effects. The results are weighted by the state population. Standard
errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05,*** p<0.01.




                                                                 44
Table 3: Effect of Unemployment Rate on Safety Net Expenditures

                                                 Expenditures / Population, Annual (Real 2012$)
                                                                                                Programs
                                                                                   UI        [TANF+SNAP+UI
                                        AFDC/TANF          Food Stamps       [Reg.+Ext.+Em.]        ]

                                                                A. Pooled Estimates
UR                                           366              620***          3045***                4031***
                                            (276)              (104)            (244)                 (386)
% impact                                    4.2%               5.1%            16.6%                  10.3%
Full period Mean                             86                 121              184                   391
                                                      B. By Period (1980s, GR, Rest of Period)
UR x 1980s                                  769*             447***           3037***          4253***
                                            (449)             (109)             (273)           (469)
UR x Rest of period                        808***            903***           2475***          4186***
                                            (232)             (161)             (380)           (345)
UR x GR                                     -770*             750*            3493***          3473***
                                            (402)             (422)             (511)           (747)

% Impact, 1980s                              8.9%              3.7%               16.5%               10.9%
% Impact, rest of period                     9.4%              7.5%               13.5%               10.7%
% impact, GR                                -8.9%              6.2%               19.0%               8.9%
p-value, GR = 1980s                         0.016              0.489              0.438               0.344

                                                        C. By Expansion/Contraction and GR
UR x Contraction                            892**              346**         3737**                  4974***
                                            (375)              (135)          (333)                    (475)
UR x Expansion                              725**             705***         2448***                 3878***
                                            (303)              (129)          (294)                    (301)
UR x Contraction x GR                     -1613***              305             16                    -1292*
                                            (542)              (413)          (678)                    (673)
UR x Expansion x GR                       -1566***              63            911*                      -591
                                            (572)              (638)          (499)                    (931)

% Impact, UR x Con.                        10.3%                2.9%              20.3%               12.7%
% Impact, UR x Exp.                         8.4%                5.8%              13.3%               9.9%
% Impact, URxCon + URxConxGR               -8.4%                5.4%              20.4%               9.4%
% Impact, URxExp + URxExpxGR               -9.7%                6.4%              18.3%               8.4%
N                                           1683                1683               1683                1683

Notes: Data are annual and cover 1980-2012. The dependent variables are safety net expenditures divided by the state population.
Sources for expenditures are in the appendix. All regressions include state and year fixed effects. The results are weighted by the
state population. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05,*** p<0.01.




                                                                 45
Table 4: Effects of Unemployment Rate on Official Cash Poverty and Alternative Poverty
                                                    Official poverty                       Alternative poverty
                                                     (cash pre-tax)                      (post-tax, all transfers)
                                             <50%        <100%        <200%            <50%        <100%        <200%

                                                              A. Pooled Estimates
UR                                         0.397*** 0.719*** 1.035***     0.173*** 0.634*** 1.070***
                                            (0.052)  (0.067)  (0.130)      (0.028)  (0.069)  (0.155)
% impact                                     8.4%     5.9%     3.5%         6.2%     6.2%     3.1%
Full sample mean                             0.047    0.122    0.297        0.028    0.103    0.347

                                                       B. By Period (1980s, GR, Rest of Period)
UR x 1980s                                 0.380*** 0.654*** 0.814***        0.124*** 0.624*** 0.826***
                                            (0.061)  (0.076)    (0.156)       (0.037)     (0.094) (0.189)
UR x Rest of period                        0.503*** 1.046*** 1.471***        0.249*** 0.856*** 1.410***
                                            (0.074)  (0.152)    (0.241)       (0.053)     (0.166) (0.278)
UR x GR                                    0.348*** 0.600*** 1.147***        0.208*** 0.486*** 1.275***
                                            (0.070)  (0.077)    (0.144)       (0.027)     (0.057) (0.159)

% Impact, 1980s                             8.1%          5.4%         2.7%            4.4%         6.1%         2.4%
% Impact, rest of period                    10.7%         8.6%         5.0%            8.9%         8.3%         4.1%
% impact, GR                                7.4%          4.9%         3.9%            7.4%         4.7%         3.7%
p-value, GR = 1980s                          0.68         0.62         0.15            0.09         0.19         0.09
                                                         C. By Expansion/Contraction and GR
UR x Contraction                          0.256*** 0.530*** 0.697***       0.079** 0.400***                   0.624**
                                          (0.057)   (0.094)    (0.202)     (0.036)     (0.095)                (0.241)
UR x Expansion                            0.498*** 0.897*** 1.176***       0.210*** 0.858***                  1.219***
                                          (0.052)   (0.102)    (0.177)     (0.039)     (0.097)                (0.192)
UR x Contraction x GR                     0.087     0.047      0.358       0.130*** 0.116                     0.546*
                                          (0.060)   (0.128)    (0.297)     (0.043)     (0.096)                (0.316)
UR x Expansion x GR                       -0.193*** -0.390** -0.089        -0.042      -0.500***              0.042
                                          (0.067)   (0.147)    (0.267)     (0.051)     (0.129)                (0.267)

% Impact, UR x Con.                         5.4%          4.3%         2.3%            2.8%         3.9%         1.8%
% Impact, UR x Exp.                         10.6%         7.4%         4.0%            7.5%         8.3%         3.5%
% Impact, URxCon + URxConxGR                7.3%          4.7%         3.6%            7.5%         5.0%         3.4%
% Impact, URxExp + URxExpxGR                6.5%          4.2%         3.7%            6.0%         3.5%         3.6%
N                                            1683         1683         1683            1581         1581         1581

Notes: Data are from the CPS ASEC calendar years 1980-2012 and are collapsed to the state by year level (weighted). All
regressions include controls for state and year fixed effects. The results are weighted by the sum of the CPS weights in the cell.
Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                                 46
Table 5: Effect of Unemployment Rate on Alternative Poverty, With and Without Safety Net
                                          Zero out safety net, recalculate poverty
                                     Food       AFDC-                     UI
                          Base                               EITC                      All
                                    Stamps      TANF                   [Vet, WC]

                                                  A. 50% Poverty
UR                       0.173       0.316       0.321      0.189        0.259        0.549
                        (0.028)     (0.041)     (0.046)    (0.029)      (0.030)      (0.039)
Mean Y                   0.028       0.037       0.039      0.030        0.032        0.059
% impact                 6.3%        8.5%        8.1%       6.2%         8.2%         9.3%
                                                 B. 100% Poverty
UR                       0.634       0.678       0.674      0.689        0.795        0.898
                        (0.069)     (0.068)     (0.064)    (0.074)      (0.074)      (0.073)
Mean Y                   0.103       0.113       0.111      0.116        0.112        0.140
% impact                 6.1%        6.0%        6.1%       5.9%         7.1%         6.4%
                                                 C. 200% Poverty
UR                       1.070       1.076       1.074      1.074        1.211        1.213
                        (0.155)     (0.154)     (0.154)    (0.154)      (0.148)      (0.145)
Mean Y                   0.347       0.349       0.349      0.351        0.359        0.365
% impact                 3.1%        3.1%        3.1%       3.1%         3.4%         3.3%

N                         1581       1581        1581        1581        1581         1581
Notes: Data are from the CPS ASEC calendar years 1980-2012 and are collapsed to the state by year level (weighted). All
regressions include controls for state and year fixed effects. The results are weighted by the number of sum of the CPS weights for
the individuals in each cell. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01.




                                                                47
Table 6: Effect of Unemployment Rate on Alternative Poverty, With and Without Safety Net
                                          Zero out safety net, recalculate poverty
                                     Food       AFDC-                    UI
                          Base                               EITC                      All
                                    Stamps      TANF                  [Vet, WC]

                                                  A. 50% Poverty
UR x 1980s           0.124           0.294       0.391      0.130        0.215        0.602
                    (0.037)         (0.052)     (0.089)    (0.038)      (0.044)      (0.062)
UR x Rest of period 0.249            0.391       0.422      0.286        0.302        0.692
                    (0.053)         (0.069)     (0.097)    (0.061)      (0.060)      (0.114)
UR x GR              0.208           0.303       0.114      0.228        0.310        0.345
                    (0.027)         (0.038)     (0.054)    (0.028)      (0.029)      (0.048)
p-value, GR = 1980s 0.09             0.87        0.03       0.06          0.09        0.003
                                                 B. 100% Poverty
UR x 1980s           0.624           0.631       0.669      0.626        0.797        0.820
                    (0.094)         (0.097)     (0.088)    (0.088)      (0.107)      (0.096)
UR x Rest of period 0.857            0.982       0.989      0.946        1.021        1.293
                    (0.166)         (0.160)     (0.195)    (0.167)      (0.178)      (0.201)
UR x GR              0.486           0.539       0.449      0.617        0.623        0.749
                    (0.057)         (0.072)     (0.065)    (0.060)      (0.061)      (0.091)
p-value, GR = 1980s 0.19             0.44        0.05       0.92          0.15        0.60
                                                 D. 200% Poverty
UR x 1980s           0.826           0.828       0.832      0.822        0.974        0.970
                    (0.189)         (0.191)     (0.187)    (0.188)      (0.186)      (0.185)
UR x Rest of period 1.410            1.422       1.424      1.415        1.523        1.542
                    (0.278)         (0.279)     (0.282)    (0.280)      (0.265)      (0.267)
UR x GR              1.275           1.283       1.267      1.290        1.424        1.424
                    (0.159)         (0.157)     (0.160)    (0.157)      (0.163)      (0.158)
p-value, GR = 1980s 0.09             0.09        0.10       0.08          0.10        0.09

N                         1581       1581        1581        1581        1581         1581

Notes: Data are from the CPS ASEC calendar years 1980-2012 and are collapsed to the state by year level (weighted). All
regressions include controls for state and year fixed effects. The results are weighted by the number of sum of the CPS weights for
the individuals in each cell. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01.




                                                                48
Appendix Figure 1: Safety Net Program Benefits by Ratio of Private Income to Poverty
(a) Program benefits in 2010




(b) Program benefits in 1982




Notes: Figure presents local linear regressions of participation in various safety net programs as a function of the ratio of private
income to the HH-level poverty threshold. The bandwidth is 1/20 of the range of private income to poverty threshold for those
between 0% of poverty and 800% of poverty (as measured with private income). The sample is the non-elderly, using the ASEC
for each year.


                                                                  49
Appendix Table 1: Descriptive Statistics by Income and Program Participation Status, 2013 CPS
                                                                    Household Participating in
                                                                                    EITC
                               Full Sample <=200% FPL        TANF       SNAP (Imputed)            UI
 Cash Poverty                      0.161         0.438        0.582      0.563      0.290       0.153
 Post-tax and transfer poverty     0.098         0.267        0.351      0.298      0.134       0.086
 Any HH earnings                   0.916         0.799        0.669      0.754      0.999       0.929
 HH # of persons                   3.854         4.117        4.680      4.234      4.380       4.059
 HH # of kids                      1.576         1.997        2.480      2.145      2.017       1.588
 Householder is black              0.138         0.196        0.318      0.253      0.164       0.152
 Householder is white              0.586         0.426        0.323      0.398      0.448       0.585
 Householder is Hispanic           0.198         0.302        0.280      0.275      0.315       0.190
 Householder is other race         0.078         0.076        0.080      0.074      0.073       0.074
 Householder's age                42.266        40.130       38.917     39.625     39.895      42.705
 Householder never married         0.258         0.344        0.444      0.398      0.313       0.269
 Householder sep./wid./div.        0.218         0.269        0.316      0.310      0.273       0.235
 Householder married               0.524         0.388        0.240      0.292      0.413       0.496
 Householder male                  0.479         0.378        0.257      0.297      0.398       0.473
 Householder HS dropout            0.130         0.254        0.275      0.282      0.223       0.138
 Household HS grad.                0.265         0.345        0.352      0.358      0.339       0.311
 Householder some college          0.303         0.294        0.311      0.293      0.315       0.346
 HH receiving LIHEAP               0.045         0.117        0.207      0.198      0.083       0.079
 HH receiving SSI                  0.047         0.091        0.171      0.150      0.050       0.051
 HH receiving SSDI/SS              0.118         0.145        0.172      0.177      0.112       0.128
 HH receiving WIC                  0.073         0.165        0.326      0.246      0.160       0.102
 HH receiving housing benefits     0.054         0.134        0.287      0.209      0.085       0.056
 N                                178823         56445        4398      25480      49283       14925
Notes: Table presents summary statistics for 2013 CPS for the full sample of non-elderly (column 1), those under 200% of poverty
(column 2), those reporting TANF receipt in the HH (column 3), those reporting Food Stamp receipt in the HH (column 4), those
imputed to have EITC receipt in the HH (column 5), and those reporting UI (column 6). Statistics are weighted, and the sample is
the non-elderly.

Appendix Table 2: Dating of Contractions and Expansions

                                     Annual Data                            Monthly Data

                           Contraction           Expansion          Contraction         Expansion

1980s Cycle                1980 − 1982           1983 − 1989        − 11/1982       12/1982 − 3/1989
                                     1980 − 1989                               − 3/1989
Rest of Period             1990 − 1992           1993 − 2000     4/1989 − 6/1992 7/1992 − 4/2000
                           2001 − 2003           2004 − 2006     5/2000 − 6/2003 7/2003 − 10/2006
                                      1990-2006                           4/1989 − 10/2006
Great Recession            2007 − 2010             2011+       11/2006 − 10/2009          11/2009 +
                                         2007+                                11/2006 +

Notes: See text and data appendix.




                                                               50
Appendix Table 3: Effects of EPOP Rate on Safety Net Caseloads

                                         Caseload / Population, Monthly          Caseload / Population, Annual
                                                                                      UI
                                          AFDC/TANF          Food Stamps        [Reg.+Ext.+Em.]          EITC

                                                                   A. Pooled Estimates
EPOP                                        -0.049***          -0.106***         -0.069***               -0.043
                                             (0.015)            (0.037)           (0.014)               (0.041)
% impact                                      -4.2%              -2.8%             -5.8%                 -0.7%
Full Period Mean                              0.012              0.038             0.012                 0.059
                                                      B. By Period (1980s, GR, Rest of Period)
EPOP x 1980s                                -0.060***        -0.081*           -0.074***         0.034
                                             (0.020)         (0.037)            (0.019)         (0.060)
EPOP x Rest of period                       -0.051***       -0.092***          -0.064***        -0.072*
                                             (0.014)         (0.032)            (0.013)         (0.043)
EPOP x GR                                    -0.032*         -0.164*           -0.073***       -0.091**
                                             (0.016)         (0.060)            (0.017)         (0.042)

% Impact, 1980s                               -5.0%              -2.1%               -6.2%               0.6%
% Impact, rest of period                      -4.3%              -2.4%               -5.3%              -1.2%
% impact, GR                                  -2.7%              -4.3%               -6.1%              -1.5%
p-value, GR = 1980s                            0.14               0.07                0.97               0.01

                                                          C. By Expansion/Contraction and GR
EPOP x Contraction                          -0.045***            -0.040        -0.072***                 -0.029
                                             (0.015)            (0.028)         (0.017)                 (0.046)
EPOP x Expansion                            -0.050***          -0.061**        -0.066***                 -0.035
                                             (0.014)            (0.027)         (0.014)                 (0.043)
EPOP x Contraction x GR                       0.017            -0.060**          -0.001                 -0.057*
                                             (0.013)            (0.028)         (0.016)                 (0.034)
EPOP x Expansion x GR                        0.031**            -0.125*          -0.007
                                             (0.012)            (0.068)         (0.016)

% Impact, UR x Con.                           -3.8%              -1.1%               -6.0%              -0.5%
% Impact, UR x Exp.                           -4.2%              -1.6%               -5.5%              -2.9%
% Impact, URxCon + URxConxGR                  -2.3%              -2.6%               -6.1%              -1.5%
% Impact, URxExp + URxExpxGR                  -1.6%              -4.9%               -6.1%
N                                             20191              20100                1683               1581

Notes: Data cover 1980-2012 (or 2010 for the EITC). The dependent variables are safety net caseloads divided by the state
population. Sources for caseloads are in the appendix. The EITC and EPOP data are annual, the other programs are monthly. All
regressions include state and year (or year-by-month) fixed effects. The results are weighted by the state population. Standard
errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05,*** p<0.01.




                                                               51
Appendix Table 4: Effects of EPOP Rate on Official Cash Poverty and Alternative Poverty
                                                     Official poverty                             Alternative poverty
                                                      (cash pre-tax)                            (post-tax, all transfers)
                                             <50%          <100%         <200%              <50%          <100%         <200%

                                                                          A. Pooled Estimates
EPOP                                       -0.273***     -0.570***     -0.922***       -0.116***        -0.443***     -0.991***
                                            (0.052)       (0.073)       (0.148)         (0.027)          (0.073)       (0.174)
% impact                                     -5.8%         -4.7%         -3.1%           -4.1%            -4.3%         -2.9%
Full sample mean                             0.047         0.122         0.297           0.028            0.103         0.347
                                                              B. By Period (1980s, GR, Rest of Period)
EPOP x 1980s                               -0.291***     -0.634*** -0.994***          -0.083** -0.528***              -1.040***
                                            (0.070)       (0.089)     (0.172)          (0.037)     (0.095)             (0.193)
EPOP x Rest of period                      -0.285***     -0.573*** -0.929***         -0.127*** -0.429***              -0.994***
                                            (0.053)       (0.081)     (0.152)          (0.026)     (0.081)             (0.182)
EPOP x GR                                  -0.229***     -0.492*** -0.828***         -0.132*** -0.360***              -0.928***
                                            (0.056)       (0.073)     (0.157)          (0.029)     (0.071)             (0.189)

% Impact, 1980s                              -6.2%         -5.2%          -3.3%             -3.0%         -5.2%         -3.0%
% Impact, rest of period                     -6.1%         -4.7%          -3.1%             -4.5%         -4.2%         -2.9%
% impact, GR                                 -4.9%         -4.0%          -2.8%             -4.7%         -3.5%         -2.7%
p-value, GR = 1980s                           0.31          0.08           0.25              0.17          0.04          0.50

                                                                C. By Expansion/Contraction and GR
EPOP x Contraction                         -0.271***     -0.598*** -0.964***       -0.094*** -0.475***                 -1.003**
                                            (0.057)       (0.087)      (0.162)       (0.030)     (0.083)                (0.186)
EPOP x Expansion                           -0.293***     -0.593*** -0.947***       -0.118*** -0.466***                -1.013***
                                            (0.052)       (0.078)      (0.151)       (0.026)     (0.079)                (0.176)
EPOP x Contraction x GR                      0.050        0.132**       0.148         -0.024     0.125**                 0.087
                                            (0.040)       (0.052)      (0.097)       (0.025)     (0.054)                (0.101)
EPOP x Expansion x GR                        0.050*        0.040        0.088         -0.036      0.072                  0.057
                                            (0.026)       (0.058)      (0.097)       (0.022)     (0.057)                (0.109)

% Impact, UR x Con.                          -5.8%         -4.9%          -3.2%             -3.4%         -4.6%         -2.9%
% Impact, UR x Exp.                          -6.2%         -4.9%          -3.2%             -4.2%         -4.5%         -2.9%
% Impact, URxCon + URxConxGR                 -4.7%         -3.8%          -2.7%             -4.2%         -3.4%         -2.6%
% Impact, URxExp + URxExpxGR                 -5.2%         -4.5%          -2.9%             -5.5%         -3.8%         -2.8%
N                                             1683          1683           1683              1581          1581          1581

Notes: Data are from the CPS ASEC calendar years 1980-2012 and are collapsed to the state by year level (weighted). All
regressions include controls for state and year fixed effects. The results are weighted by the sum of the CPS weights in the cell.
Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                                 52
