                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        PRIVATE EQUITY, JOBS, AND PRODUCTIVITY

                                           Steven J. Davis
                                         John C. Haltiwanger
                                            Kyle Handley
                                            Ron S. Jarmin
                                             Josh Lerner
                                           Javier Miranda

                                         Working Paper 19458
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19458


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2013




We thank Chris Allen, Paul Bailey, Ronald Davis, and Sarah Woolverton for research assistance and
Per Stromberg for data on the classification of private equity transactions. Francesca Cornelli, Per
Stromberg, three anonymous referees, several practitioners, and numerous participants in conferences
and research seminars provided many helpful comments. The World Economic Forum, Kauffman
Foundation, Harvard Business School’s Division of Research, Initiative on Global Markets at the University
of Chicago Booth School of Business, and the US Census Bureau provided generous financial support
for this research. One of the authors has advised institutional investors in private equity funds, private
equity groups, and governments designing policies relevant to private equity. The analysis and results
herein are attributable to the authors and do not necessarily reflect concurrence by the US Census Bureau.
All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. All errors and
omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Steven J. Davis, John C. Haltiwanger, Kyle Handley, Ron S. Jarmin, Josh Lerner, and Javier
Miranda. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Private Equity, Jobs, and Productivity
Steven J. Davis, John C. Haltiwanger, Kyle Handley, Ron S. Jarmin, Josh Lerner, and Javier
Miranda
NBER Working Paper No. 19458
September 2013
JEL No. D22,D24,J3,J63

                                           ABSTRACT

Private equity critics claim that leveraged buyouts bring huge job losses and few gains in operating
performance. To evaluate these claims, we construct and analyze a new dataset that covers U.S.
buyouts from 1980 to 2005. We track 3,200 target firms and their 150,000 establishments before
and after acquisition, comparing them to controls defined by industry, size, age, and prior growth.
Relative to controls, employment at target establishments falls 3 percent over two years post buyout
and 6 percent over five years. However, target firms also create more new jobs at new establishments,
and they acquire and divest establishments more rapidly. Considering all adjustment margins, relative
net job loss at target firms is a modest one percent of employment over two years post buyout. In
contrast, the sum of gross job creation and destruction at target firms exceeds that of controls by 14
percent of employment over two years. Buyouts also bring TFP gains at target firms and reductions
in earnings per worker. Productivity gains arise mainly from an accelerated exit of less productive
establishments and greater entry of more productive ones – that is, from a directed reallocation of
jobs within target firms.


Steven J. Davis                                   Ron S. Jarmin
Booth School of Business                          Center for Economic Studies
The University of Chicago                         U.S. Census Bureau
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                        4600 Silver Hill Road
Chicago, IL 60637                                 Washington, DC 20233
and NBER                                          ron.s.jarmin@census.gov
Steven.Davis@ChicagoBooth.edu
                                                  Josh Lerner
John C. Haltiwanger                               Harvard Business School
Department of Economics                           Rock Center 214
University of Maryland                            Boston, MA 02163
College Park, MD 20742                            and NBER
and NBER                                          jlerner@hbs.edu
haltiwan@econ.umd.edu
                                                  Javier Miranda
Kyle Handley                                      U.S. Bureau of the Census
University of Michigan                            Center for Economic Studies
Ross School of Business - R3434                   4600 Silver Hill Road
701 Tappan St.                                    Washington, DC 20233
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                               javier.miranda@census.gov
handleyk@umich.edu
1.      Introduction

        Leveraged buyouts by private equity firms arouse intense concern and strongly held

views. For instance, former Danish Prime Minister Poul Rasmussen – architect of the European

Commission’s Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directive – contends that “‘leveraged buy-

outs’ leave the company saddled with debt and interest payments, its workers are laid off, and its

assets are sold, … benefiting neither workers nor the real economy.” The Service Employees

International Union, prominent critic of private equity on both sides of the Atlantic, offers this

assessment: “Typically it’s easier to decrease costs quickly by cutting heads, which is why

buyouts have typically been accompanied by layoffs.”1 Responding to similar contentions,

several industry-sponsored studies claim positive employment and other effects of private equity.

Examples include European Venture Capital Association (2005), British Venture Capital

Association (2006), A.T. Kearney (2007), and Shapiro and Pham (2008).

        Efforts to bring data to these issues are highly welcome, but these studies have serious

limitations. First, they rely on surveys with incomplete and perhaps selective responses, raising

doubts about representativeness and accuracy. Second, the underlying data offer little scope to

control for concurrent changes at comparable firms. When a firm backed by private equity sheds

5% of employment, the interpretation depends greatly on whether comparable firms grow by 3%

or shrink by 10%. Third, these studies do not distinguish cleanly between changes at firms

backed by venture capital and firms backed by other forms of private equity. Both are

interesting, but the controversy involves buyouts, not venture capital. Fourth, these studies face

major challenges in measuring organic job growth because they lack establishment-level data.

As a result, it is hard to disentangle organic changes from the acquisition and sale of particular


1
 See Rasmussen (2008) and remarks attributed to John Adler in Grace Wong, “Private Equity and the Jobs Cut
Myth”, CNNMoney.com, 2 May 2007 at http://money.cnn.com/2007/05/02/markets/pe_jobs/index.htm (accessed
August 25, 2011).
facilities and business units. Fifth, the lack of establishment-level data also precludes a

breakdown of firm-level employment changes into job creation and job destruction components,

i.e., gains and losses at the establishment level. As we show, private equity buyouts have quite

different effects on these two margins of employment change.2

        In this study, we construct and analyse a dataset that overcomes these limitations and, at

the same time, encompasses a much larger set of private equity buyouts and controls. We rely on

the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) at the U.S. Census Bureau to track employment and

earnings before and after buyouts at firms and establishments – i.e., specific factories, offices,

retail outlets and other distinct physical locations where business takes place. The LBD covers

the entire nonfarm private sector and contains annual data for about 5 million firms and 6 million

establishments. To obtain high-quality productivity measures, we turn to the Annual Survey of

Manufactures (ASM) and the Census of Manufactures (CM). In addition to their other strengths,

the establishment-level information in the LBD, ASM and CM enables us to explore important

aspects of within-firm restructuring activity in the wake of private equity buyouts.

        We combine the LBD, ASM and CM with data from CapitalIQ and other sources to

identify and characterize private equity transactions. The resulting matched sample contains

about 3,200 U.S. firms acquired in buyouts from 1980 to 2005 (“target firms”) and 150,000 U.S.

establishments operated by these firms as of the buyout year (“target establishments”). We match

each target firm to other firms that are comparable in terms of industry, age, size, and

single/multi-establishment status, and then follow targets and matched controls over time. We

take a similar approach to controls for target establishments.


2
  See Service Employees International Union (2007) and Hall (2007) for other critiques. We discuss the broader
academic literature on the economic effects of private equity in Section 2. Few academic studies of private equity
focus on employment outcomes, and the main exceptions consider data for France and the United Kingdom. To our
knowledge, no previous studies exploit linked firm-level and establishment-level data to examine the within-firm
reallocation effects of private equity buyouts and their relationship to productivity gains at target firms.
                                                                                                                2
       To clarify the scope of our study, we consider later-stage changes in ownership and

control executed and partly financed by private equity firms. In these transactions, the (lead)

private equity firm acquires a controlling stake in the target firm and retains a significant

oversight role until it “exits” by selling its stake. The buyout event typically involves a shift

toward greater leverage in the capital structure of the target firm and, sometimes, a change in its

management. We exclude management-led buyouts that do not involve acquisition by a private

equity firm. We also exclude startup firms backed by venture capitalists.

       Our establishment-level analysis yields three main findings: First, employment shrinks

more rapidly, on average, at target establishments than at controls after private equity buyouts.

The average cumulative difference in favor of controls is about 3% of initial employment over

two years and 6% over five years. Second, the larger post-buyout employment losses at target

establishments entirely reflect higher rates of job destruction at shrinking and exiting

establishments. In fact, targets exhibit greater post-buyout creation of new jobs at expanding

establishments. Adding controls for pre-buyout growth history shrinks the estimated employment

responses to private equity buyouts but does not change the overall pattern. Third, earnings per

worker at continuing target establishments fall by an average of 2.4% relative to controls over

two years post buyout.

       The establishment-level analysis misses job creation at newly opened establishments,

whether by target or control firms. To capture this activity, we move to a firm-level analysis and

identify new establishments opened post buyout. The combination of firm and establishment data

in the LBD is what enables us to isolate and quantify “greenfield” job creation at facilities

opened post buyout. For this part of our analysis, we shorten the time window to two years post

buyout. Lengthening the window involves a greater incidence and complexity of ownership

changes, threatening the integrity of our firm-level longitudinal linkages or forcing us to narrow

                                                                                                 3
the sample. We find that target firms engage in more greenfield job creation than control firms,

with a cumulative two-year difference of nearly 2% of initial employment. That is, greater

greenfield job creation partly offsets the relative employment drop at target establishments. Our

firm-level analysis also yields another interesting result: Private equity targets engage in more

acquisitions and more divestitures than controls. Summing over job creation and destruction at

continuing establishments, job losses at shuttered establishments, job gains at greenfield

establishments, and contributions of acquisitions and divestitures, employment shrinks by less

than 1% at target firms relative to controls in the first two years after private equity buyouts.

       We uncover a much larger response in the pace of job reallocation. Specifically, over the

first two years post buyout, establishment-level job gains and losses at target firms exceed gains

and losses at controls by 14% of initial employment. This extra job creation and destruction

activity amounts to 25% of baseline job reallocation at control firms. A more rapid pace of

organic job creation and destruction accounts for 45% of the extra reallocation activity at target

firms, and greater acquisitions and divestitures account for the rest. These results indicate that

private equity buyouts catalyze the creative destruction process, as measured by job creation and

destruction and by the transfer of production units between firms.

       Our productivity findings reinforce this view. Specifically, compared to control firms,

target firms more aggressively close manufacturing plants in the lower part of the total factor

productivity (TFP) distribution. They also open new plants in the upper part of the TFP

distribution at nearly twice the rate of control firms, and they are much less likely to open low

productivity establishments. On average, over the first two years post buyout, we estimate that

private equity buyouts raise TFP by 2.1 log points. (Baseline TFP growth for controls is slightly

negative.) Three quarters of the post-buyout TFP gains reaped by target firms reflect a greater

propensity to close low productivity plants and to open new, high productivity plants. In short,

                                                                                                    4
buyouts improve productivity mainly through the directed reallocation of resources across units

within target firms. These TFP results and our results on worker earnings imply that private

equity buyouts materially improve operating margins at target firms.

       The next section briefly reviews related research and offers additional motivation for our

study. Section 3 describes the construction of our analysis datasets, and Section 4 explains our

empirical methods. Sections 5 and 6 present our main establishment-level and firm-level

analyses of employment and job reallocation effects. Section 7 considers effects on TFP and

earnings per worker, and Section 8 offers concluding remarks.

2. Related Work and Additional Motivation

       Economists hold a longstanding interest in how ownership changes affect productivity

and employment. Examples include Lichtenberg and Siegel (1987), Long and Ravenscraft

(1993), McGuckin and Nguyen (2001), and Harris, Siegel and Wright (2005). One ownership

change that attracts particular attention is the acquisition of firms by professional private equity

firms. Jensen (1989) and Shleifer and Summers (1988), among others, discuss the economic

effects of private equity buyouts based largely on case study evidence. Kaplan and Strömberg

(2009) provide a useful overview of research on the economic effects of private equity.

       Few previous studies focus on the employment effects of private equity, and the

exceptions typically rely on small samples dictated by data availability. Kaplan (1989) considers

76 public-to-private leveraged buyouts (LBOs) during the 1980s. He finds that the median firm

lost 12% of employment on an industry-adjusted basis from the end of the fiscal year prior to the

private equity transaction to the end of the fiscal year after the transaction. After dropping target

firms with asset sales or purchases that exceed 10% of total value, the adjusted employment

decline is 6.2% for the remaining 24 firms. Muscarella and Vetsuypens (1990) consider 72 firms



                                                                                                   5
that completed an initial public offering (IPO) after an LBO between 1983 and 1987. For the 26

firms they can track, employment declines by an average of 0.6% between the LBO and the IPO.

        Lichtenberg and Siegel (1990) use U.S. Census Bureau data to examine changes in

employment at the manufacturing plants of 131 firms undergoing buyouts between 1981 and

1986. On an industry-adjusted basis, employment falls by 1.2% per year after buyout, as

compared to a 1.9% rate of decline beforehand. Declines are larger for non-production workers

than blue-collar workers. Wright, Thompson and Robbie (1992) and Amess and Wright (2007)

similarly find that buyouts in the UK lead to modest employment declines. These studies follow

overall employment at a set of firms, and contrast it with aggregate employment at matching

firms.3 Boucly, Sraer and Thesmar (2009) find that employment grows much more rapidly at

target firms than at controls in the wake of French private equity buyouts, a result they attribute

to an important role for private equity in relaxing financing constraints.

        These studies share certain weaknesses. First, most focus on the company-wide

employment of firms backed by private equity. Thus, the sale of a division or other business unit

is typically counted as an employment loss, even if the sold business unit continues with the

same number of employees under new ownership. Likewise, the acquisition of a division or other

business unit is counted as an employment gain, even if there is no employment change at the

business unit itself. Several studies attempt to address this issue by dropping buyouts that

involve substantial asset sales, but this sample restriction may greatly influence the results, given

the extent of “asset shuffling” by firms backed by private equity. The handful of previous U.S.

studies that treat establishments as the unit of observation are typically restricted to the

manufacturing sector, and even then have limited ability to track establishment or firm closings.


3
  The samples in these UK studies include management-led deals (management buyouts), which need not involve a
financial sponsor that acquires a controlling stake in the target firm. Management-led deals potentially differ
substantially from the traditional private equity buyouts that we consider.
                                                                                                             6
        Second, previous studies of U.S. private equity deals rely on highly selected samples –

potentially an important source of bias in the findings. The public-to-private buyouts that

dominate earlier samples account for less than one-quarter of the employees directly impacted by

private equity buyouts and only 12 percent of the deals (Table 2 below). Most previous U.S.

studies consider deals before the 1990s only, but fundraising by U.S. private equity groups rose

36-fold from 1985 to 1998 and more than 100-fold by 2006.4 The tremendous growth in private

equity activity allows us to examine a much larger set of deals. Moreover, the nature of private

equity activity has also changed over time – competition for attractive deals has intensified, and

many private equity firms now have a strong operational orientation, as opposed to the financial

engineering approach that characterized many groups during the 1980s.

        Our study overcomes these weaknesses, as we have explained. In addition, we exploit the

establishment-level aspect of our data to examine job creation and job destruction outcomes, as

well as net employment changes. In this regard, we are motivated in part by previous work that

documents a rapid pace of establishment-level job creation and destruction. Davis and

Haltiwanger (1999) review work in this area.              Earlier empirical work also shows that the

reallocation of jobs and workers across establishments plays a major role in medium-term

productivity gains. Many important theoretical models also feature distinct roles for the creation

and destruction margins of employment adjustment. Caballero (2007) provides an insightful,

detailed analysis and extensive references to the relevant literature.

        Numerous case studies provide detailed descriptions and analyses of particular private

equity deals. By our reading, these studies deliver four sets of insights.

        First, private equity groups sometimes generate few or no productivity gains because they

fail to achieve their goals for target firms. For instance, when Berkshire Partners bought

4
  Using inflation-adjusted dollars and data from Thomson Reuters VentureXpert, http://www.venturexpert.com
(accessed August 20, 2011).
                                                                                                             7
Wisconsin Central, it had an ambitious plan to raise productivity. However, technological

problems arose soon after the buyout and prevented the deployment of a computerized control

system that was crucial for planned cost savings. As a result, the numbers in an ambitious

business plan were never met (Jensen, Burkhardt and Barry, 1990). In the Revco transaction a

crippling debt load, management disarray, an inexperienced LBO sponsor, and a disastrous

midstream shift in strategy led to a failure to achieve performance goals (Wruck, 1991).

       Second, the Revco case also points to tax savings as the primary source of private value

creation in certain buyouts. Consistent with this view, Kaplan (1989b) provides evidence that

greater leverage and other organizational shifts imposed by private equity investors can yield

substantial tax savings that are “an important source of the wealth gains in leveraged buyouts.”

If tax savings are the principal motive for buyouts, there is no compelling reason to anticipate

positive effects on productivity at target firms.

       Third, many case studies find substantial productivity gains at target firms through

improvements to existing operations. In the Hertz buyout, for instance, Clayton, Dubilier and

Rice (CD&R) addressed operational inefficiencies to increase profitability. Specifically, CD&R

lowered overhead costs by reducing inefficient labor expenses and cutting non-capital

investments to industry standard levels, and more closely aligned managerial incentives with

return on capital (Luehrman, 2007). Similarly, the buyout of O.M. Scott & Sons led to

substantial improvements in the firm’s existing operations, partly through powerful incentives

offered to management and partly through specific suggestions by the private equity investors

(Baker and Wruck, 1989). In examples like these, profitability increases and private value

creation are likely to go hand in hand with productivity gains.

       Finally, in a number of other cases, private equity targets achieved substantial efficiency

improvements not by enhancing existing operations, but rather by divesting units. Beatrice had

                                                                                                8
acquired a large number of unrelated businesses as part of a conglomerate strategy, many of

which operated in segments in which it had little expertise. Its private equity investor, Kohlberg,

Kravis and Roberts, divested many of these laggard operations (Baker, 1992). Similarly, the

buyout group that purchased Kaiser Steel shut down its outdated and inefficient steel operations.

The group focused its operational attention on Kaiser’s coalmines, which it regarded as the

firm’s “hidden jewel” (Luehrman, 1992). Greater profitability and private value creation are also

likely to involve productivity gains in these examples, though mainly through productivity-

enhancing reallocation rather than operational improvements within continuing units.

        These case studies illustrate a wide range of motives for and effects of private equity

transactions. Our study can be seen as an effort to determine which of these stories best

characterizes the impact of private equity buyouts on average, especially with respect to

employment and productivity outcomes.

3.      Constructing the Analysis Samples

        Our analysis requires a comprehensive database of private equity transactions and the

matching of target firms to firm-level and establishment-level records in the LBD, ASM and

CM. This section describes the data construction process and the resulting samples.

A. Identifying private equity buyout transactions

        CapitalIQ has specialized in tracking private equity deals on a worldwide basis since

1999 and, through extensive research, backfilled transactions prior to 1999.5 We consider all

recorded transactions in CapitalIQ that closed between January 1980 and December 2005. We

then impose two sample requirements. First, we omit transactions that do not involve a financial

sponsor, i.e., a private equity firm. Second, we restrict attention to transactions that entail some


5
  Most data services tracking private equity transactions were not established until the late 1990s. The most
comprehensive exception, SDC VentureXpert, mainly focused on capturing venture capital transactions until the
mid-1990s. See Stromberg (2007) for a discussion of the completeness of the CapitalIQ database.
                                                                                                           9
use of leverage. Many transactions that do not involve leverage are venture capital investments

rather than investments in mature firms. Given our focus, we omit transactions not classified by

CapitalIQ as “going private,” “leveraged buyout,” “management buyout,” “platform,” or a

similar term. This approach excludes “growth buyouts” and “expansion capital” investments to

purchase a minority stake using little or no leverage. Such transactions may share some

characteristics of private equity deals but do not fit the classic profile of leveraged buyouts.

       After restricting the sample in these two ways, the resulting database contains about

11,000 transactions worldwide. Dropping transactions that involve firms with foreign

headquarters leaves about 5,000 U.S. target firms acquired in private equity buyouts between

1980 and 2005. (We do not consider U.S. establishments operated by foreign targets.) To fill out

our information about private equity transactions and target firms, we supplement the data drawn

from CapitalIQ with data from Dealogic, Thomson Reuters SDC, VentureXpert databases, and

news stories. Dealogic, in particular, often contains greater detail about transaction

characteristics. Other useful information in the supplementary sources includes alternative names

associated with target firms and their later acquisitions and sales.

B.     Matching to LBD Records

       The LBD derives from the Census Bureau’s Business Register, which contains annual

data on U.S. businesses with paid employees. The LBD covers the entire nonfarm private sector

from 1976 to 2005. In recent years, it contains over 6 million establishment records and almost 5

million firm records per year. The Business Register and the LBD draw on administrative

records and survey sources for data on firms and their establishments. Core data items include

employment, payroll, four-digit Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) or six-digit North

American Industrial Classification (NAICS), employer identification numbers, business names,



                                                                                                   10
and information about location.6 Identifiers in the LBD files enable us to compute growth rate

measures for establishments and firms and to track their entry and exit and ownership changes.

Firms in the LBD are defined based on operational control, and all establishments majority

owned by a parent firm are included in the parent’s activity measures.

           To merge data on buyouts into the LBD, we match names and addresses of private equity

portfolio firms (i.e., target firms) to LBD name and address records. To cope with timing

differences between datasets, we search over a three-year window in the LBD centered on the

transaction year for each target firm. We adopt a conservative approach to matching that requires

either an exact match on name and address or an approximate match on both name and address

according to probability-based matching algorithms. Our procedures match about 65% of target

firms to the LBD, 70% on a value-weighted basis, yielding about 3200 matched target firms.

Once matched, firm-establishment links in the LBD serve to identify all establishments owned

by target firms as of the private equity buyout year. Matched target firms operate about 150,000

U.S. establishments as of the buyout year. LBD longitudinal links allows us to follow firms and

establishments over time. Tracking firms is more challenging, as we discuss below, which

influences the design of our firm-level analysis sample.

           Given our interest in employment dynamics, the relationship of the LBD employment

measure to the timing of private equity transactions requires careful treatment. The LBD reports

total employment in the payroll period containing the week of March 12th. Accordingly, for

buyout transactions that close before October 1, LBD employment in March of the same

calendar year serves as our contemporaneous employment measure. We assign transactions that

close on or after October 1 in year t to year t + 1 for purposes of our analysis, treating the LBD




6
    Sales data in the Business Register are available annually from 1994 and once every five years in earlier years.
                                                                                                                       11
employment value in March of t + 1 as the contemporaneous measure. October is the natural

cutoff because it lies midway between March-to-March employment changes in the LBD.

        Figure 1 shows the number of U.S. target firms acquired by year and the number matched

to the LBD. It is apparent that the number of private equity buyouts grew rapidly beginning in

the mid-1990s. Table 1 shows the enterprise value (debt plus equity, as valued at the time of the

transaction) of all private equity targets and the matched targets by decade. The enterprise value

of private equity acquisitions is very large in the later years, reaching 420 billion in the 2000-

2005 period. Figure 2 displays employment data for our matched target firms. For example,

target firms acquired in 2005 and matched to the LBD account for 0.83% of total nonfarm

business employment in 2005. Given the extent of unmatched targets, the full set of firms that

came under private equity control in 2005 accounts for more than 1% of private sector

employment. Based on our data, we infer that more than 7% of private employment came under

private equity control at some point in the ten-year period from 1998 to 2007.7

C.      Analysis Samples

        Our study considers several related analysis samples. For descriptive statistics on the

number and volume of private equity buyouts and their distribution by industry and firm

characteristics, we consider all matched targets through 2005. For our main establishment-level

analysis, we consider buyouts from 1980 to 2000. This sample allows us to track target (and

control) establishments for five years before and after the buyout year. For our firm-level

analysis sample, we consider buyouts from 1980 to 2003, so that we can track firm-level

outcomes for two years post buyout. We also consider various subsamples, the most important of

which focus on buyouts in the manufacturing sector from 1980 to 2003. For the manufacturing


7
 We arrive at this inference by summing the employment percentages of matched targets from 1998 to 2005,
dividing the sum by 0.7 to account for unmatched targets, and making the assumption (supported by other data
sources) that private equity activity continued at record levels in 2006 and the first half of 2007.
                                                                                                               12
subsample, we draw on ASM and CM data to construct plant-level TFP measures. Table 2

reports summary statistics on matched targets for our analysis samples.

4.      Empirical Methods

        This section describes key methodological choices in our empirical study. The first

relates to the unit of analysis. Section 5 considers establishments owned by target firms in the

buyout year. We track these units over time, irrespective of their ownership in earlier or later

years. For example, if the target firm goes public or sells an establishment, we continue to track

that establishment and associate it with the buyout event. Section 6 takes a different approach,

treating the firm as the unit of analysis, which lets us capture greenfield job creation and the

acquisition and sale of establishments after the buyout event.

        The second key choice relates to controls. We need suitable controls because the

distribution of private equity buyouts across industries and business characteristics is not

random. For example, practitioner accounts often suggest a concentration of transactions in

industries undergoing significant restructurings due to regulatory action, foreign competition, or

technological change. Target firms in our data are disproportionately concentrated in

manufacturing, information services, and accommodation and food services, as shown in Figure

B.1 of the web appendix. Target firms are also considerably larger and older than the average

firm, as shown in Figure B.2.8 The literature on firm dynamics concludes that growth and

volatility vary systematically with firm size and age. See, for example, Caves (1998), Davis et

al. (2007), and Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda (2010). Thus, it is important to control for

these characteristics when evaluating the reallocation and other effects of private equity buyouts.




8
  Firms with 500 or more employees account for 96% of employment at matched targets, as compared to 51% of all
LBD employment in the 1980-2005 period. Firms 10 years or older account for 91% of employment at matched
targets as compared to 64% in the LBD.
                                                                                                            13
        The huge number of firms and establishments in the LBD allows us to control for a full

set of interactions among industry, size, age, multi-unit status, and year of the buyout transaction.

We sort target firms into cells defined by the cross product of these characteristics.9 We then

identify all firms in the LBD not backed by private equity that fall into the same cell as a given

target firm, and we treat those firms as controls. Specifically, we control for the interaction of 72

two-digit industries, 10 firm size categories, 6 firm age categories, a dummy for firms with

multiple establishments, and 24 distinct transaction years. The cross product of these categorical

variables yields over 8,000 control cells per year. Of course, many cells are unpopulated, but the

richness of our controls is evident. In our regression analysis, we also control for pre-buyout

employment growth histories. We follow the same approach in the establishment-level analysis.

To obtain controls for a given target establishment, we select all establishments in the same

control cell from among the set of active establishments in the transaction year, excluding

establishments owned by a firm under private equity control.

        A related choice involves our statistical approach to estimating the effects of buyouts on

employment outcomes. We consider nonparametric comparisons that control for the cross-

product of our categorical variables, semi-parametric regressions that include additional controls,

and propensity score methods. Ideally, we seek to estimate the average treatment effect on the

treated, i.e., the average effect of buyouts on target firms. As discussed in Woolridge (2002,

chapter 18), consistent estimation of average treatment effects requires conditional mean

independence: conditional on the controls and the treatment indicator, outcomes for the treated

and non-treated are independently distributed. Compared to previous research, our rich set of

controls lends greater plausibility to this identifying assumption. Even if one questions the


9
 We define industry for multi-unit firms based on the modal industry of their establishments, computed on an
employment-weighted basis.

                                                                                                               14
conditional mean independence assumption, our study yields a rich set of new findings about

outcomes at private equity targets. These findings throw light on alternative views about the

economic role of private equity, as we discuss below. Our findings also provide useful evidence

for formulating and evaluating theoretical models of private equity behavior and effects.

         A fourth choice relates to the time window around private equity transactions. Our

establishment-level analysis considers employment outcomes for five years on either side of a

private equity transaction. Five years is a typical holding period for target firms (Stromberg

2007).    For our firm-level analysis, we must confront the reorganization of firms through

mergers, ownership changes, partial divestitures, and acquisitions of establishments from other

firms. Because it tracks both firms and establishments over time and contemporaneously links

establishments to firms, the LBD offers greater scope for identifying these changes than most

other business-level datasets. Nevertheless, some private equity targets undergo complex post-

buyout restructurings that challenge the maintenance of high-integrity longitudinal links. We

deal with this challenge in two ways. First, our firm-level analysis considers a relatively short

window of two years after each buyout transaction, thereby limiting the linkage issues that arise

from complex firm-level reorganizations. Second, we use our establishment-level data to assess

the impact of potential sample selection bias in our firm-level analysis.

         Before proceeding, we define our employment and growth rate measures. Let Eit be

employment at establishment or firm i in year t; i.e., the number of workers on the payroll in the

pay period covering March 12. The employment growth rate is g it = ( Eit − Eit −1 ) / X it , where

X it = .5 * ( Eit + Eit −1 ) .10 Employment growth at any higher level of aggregation is the weighted



10
  This growth rate measure has become standard in analyses of establishment and firm dynamics, because it shares
some useful properties of log differences while also accommodating entry and exit. See Davis, Haltiwanger and
Schuh (1996) and Tornqvist, Vartia, and Vartia (1985) for discussion.
                                                                                                             15
mean of establishment or firm growth rates given by g t = ∑ ( X it / X t ) g it , where X t = ∑ X it .
                                                                         i                                  i


We consider the contributions of expanding and shrinking establishments, establishment entry

and exit, and acquisitions and divestitures to firm-level employment changes, and compare

outcomes between targets and controls on each of these adjustment margins.

5.      Establishment-Level Analysis of Employment Outcomes

A.      Nonparametric comparisons

        We begin with an “event study” that compares employment outcomes at target

establishments to outcomes at control establishments. To encompass a window of five years

before and after buyouts, we consider transactions in the 1980-2000 period. As discussed above,

we construct control cells as the cross product of industry, size of parent firm, age of parent firm,

multi-unit status, and buyout year. Our firm size categories are 1-4, 5-9, 10-19, 20-49, 50-99,

100-249, 250-499, 500-999, 1000-2499, 2500-4999, 5000-9999, and 10000 or more employees.

Our firm age categories are 0-5 years, 6-10, 11-15, 16-20, and 21 or more years.11 We use firm

size and age measures to facilitate comparisons to our firm-level analysis below. Replacing firm

size and age measures with measures based on establishment size and age yields similar results.

        The solid curve in Figure 3a shows the employment path of target establishments around

the buyout year. Establishments that came under private equity ownership between 1980 and

2000 employed 2.3 million workers as of the buyout year. The dashed curve shows the

counterfactual path of employment at targets had they grown at the same rate as controls. To

construct this counterfactual, we first rescale the employment of controls to match that of targets

cell by cell in the buyout year. We then apply the actual growth rates of the controls to generate



11
   Following Davis et al. (2009), when a firm first appears in the LBD, we assign it the age of its oldest
establishment. We then increment the firm’s age by one year for each year it continues as a legal entity in the LBD.
In this way, we avoid arbitrary increases or decreases in firm age due to the sale and purchase of establishments.
                                                                                                                 16
the dashed curve.12 Comparing the solid and dashed curves highlights the critical need to

evaluate target outcomes relative to controls. In particular, a simple comparison of outcomes at

target firms before and after buyout events would produce a highly misleading impression about

the employment effects of private equity.

        Figure 3b tracks mean employment growth rate differences between target and control

establishments from 5 years before to 5 years after the buyout year. Perhaps surprisingly, Figure

3b shows no systematic pattern of slower job growth at targets in the years leading up to buyouts.

In the buyout year itself, employment growth at targets is actually 2 percentage points higher

than at controls. However, there is a clear pattern of slower growth at targets post buyout, with

growth differentials ranging from 0.5% to 2% per year. The differentials cumulate to 3.2% of

employment in the first two years post buyout and 6.4% over five years. These results

accommodate heterogeneous treatment effects over the cross product of industry, firm size, firm

age, multi-unit status, and year of buyout. They recover the average treatment effect on the

treated under the assumption of conditional mean independence, as we discussed above.13

        Previous research finds large gross job flows relative to net employment changes (Davis

and Haltiwanger, 1999), raising the question of how employment responds to private equity

buyouts on job creation and destruction margins. Figure 4 tells an important story in this regard:

Slower employment growth at private equity targets post buyout entirely reflects a greater pace

of job destruction. Indeed, gross job creation rates are greater at target establishments in the

wake of buyouts. These results are interesting for at least two reasons. First, they indicate that

12
   To be precise, we calculate the weighted mean growth rate over cells using the weights defined at the end of
Section 4. The cell-level weights evolve over time in line with the growth experiences of targets (solid curve) and
controls (dashed curve). For cells with multiple controls, each control receives equal weight.
13
   To be sure, consistent estimation of treatment effects also rests on the stable unit treatment value assumption
(SUTVA): applying the treatment to one unit has no effect on outcomes at other units. This assumption fails if, for
example, treatment effects on targets systematically alter equilibrium output and employment at controls. Given that
controls greatly outnumber targets in our setting, equilibrium effects of this sort are unlikely to matter much.
Moreover, the productivity effects we estimate below work to offset any output changes implied by the estimated
employment effects on target firms, further lessening the scope for equilibrium employment effects on controls.
                                                                                                                 17
buyouts accelerate the pace of employment change on destruction and creation margins, a theme

we return to below. Second, Figure 4b confirms that jobs at target establishments are at greater

risk post buyout than jobs at controls. As seen in Figure 5, about half of this greater risk reflects

a higher post-buyout shutdown propensity at target establishments.

B.     Regression Analysis

       We turn now to a regression analysis that allows for additional controls and an easy

calculation of standard errors in the estimated effects of private equity buyouts. Table 3 reports

regression results for the buyout year and five subsequent years. Each regression involves the

matched target establishments in buyouts from 1980 to 2000 and their corresponding control

establishments. The dependent variable is the employment growth rate in the indicated year

following the buyout. The first column in Table 3 reports the mean growth rate differentials from

Figure 3b. The second and third columns report results for semi-parametric regressions that

include controls for the pre-buyout growth history of parent and target firms.

       We include two variables to control for pre-buyout history. One variable considers the

set of establishments owned by the target firm as of year 0 (the buyout year). We set the value of

this variable to the employment growth rate of these establishments from year -3 to year -1. A

second variable considers the parent firm that owned these establishments in year -3.              If

ownership was split across multiple firms in year -3, we select the firm with the largest share of

employment among these establishments. We then set the second variable to the employment

growth rate of that firm from year -3 to year -1. Often, but not always, these two control

variables take on the same value.

       The Table 3 regressions contain a large battery of additional controls. The column headed

“ATE=ATE1” includes a fully interacted set of controls for two-digit industry, firm size, firm

age, multi-unit status, and year. This specification posits a common treatment effect, given by

                                                                                                  18
the coefficient on an indicator variable for target establishments in private equity buyouts. The

column headed “ATE1 Heterogeneous” includes the same set of controls, but relaxes the

assumption of uniform treatment effects by interacting the private equity indicator with the 6

firm age categories, 10 firm size categories, and the two measures of pre-buyout growth

history.14 This specification is more restrictive than the nonparametric specification in some

respects but less restrictive in the inclusion of controls for pre-buyout growth history and in

allowing the treatment effect to vary with pre-buyout employment growth. To recover the

average treatment effect on the treated in this case, we compute a weighted average of the

heterogeneous estimated treatment effects, using cell-level employment weights of targets in the

transaction year. We calculate standard errors by the Delta method.

        As seen in Table 3, the nonparametric and semi-parametric specifications deliver similar

results. The two semi-parametric regressions also yield small standard errors and tightly

estimated effects of private equity buyouts. Five-year cumulative employment losses at targets

range from -4.7% to -6.4%, depending on specification, with somewhat smaller losses in the

semi-parametric specifications.15           In short, the evidence says that target establishments

experience deeper job losses after private equity buyouts than control establishments.

6.      Firm-Level Analysis of Employment Outcomes

A. Tracking Firms

        Section 5 considers outcomes for establishments owned by target firms at the time of the

buyout deal. We now shift to a firm-level analysis to capture new establishments opened after

the deal as well as post-buyout acquisitions and divestitures. By necessity, we restrict attention to

14
  See the web appendix for explicit statements of the regression specifications in mathematical form.
15
  Smaller losses in the semi-parametric specifications point to a modest tendency for private equity to target firms
with weaker employment growth prospects, which differs somewhat from the inference suggested by the pre-buyout
comparison in Figure 3b. Recall that Figure 3 involves a comparison of growth rates between target and control
establishments. In contrast, the semi-parametric regressions reported in Table 3 contain controls for the pre-buyout
growth history of parent firms.
                                                                                                                 19
target firms that we can track post buyout. While we can readily track establishments over time

in the LBD, tracking firms is more challenging for two reasons: the disappearance of firm

identifiers (IDs) in some circumstances, and irregularities in Census Bureau tracking of private

equity targets involved in divisional sales.

       The disappearance of a firm identifier (ID) in the LBD can occur for various reasons. One

is the death of a firm and closure of its establishments. Firm death in this sense presents no

problem for our analysis, and we capture such events whether they involve target or control

firms. A more difficult situation involves a firm ID in year 0 that disappears in later years, even

though some of the establishments owned by the firm in year 0 continue to operate. This

situation can arise because of a merger or complex reorganization (e.g., different components of

the original firm are bought by multiple existing firms). It is inherently difficult to define and

measure firm growth when the original legal entity ceases to exist, and we exclude these

observations in our firm-level analysis. To reduce the number of observations lost for this

reason, we limit our firm-level analysis to years 1 and 2 after the buyout.

       In the course of our data development and analysis, we discovered that the Census

Bureau did not accurately track firm IDs in certain private equity transactions. Inaccuracies

sometimes arose when a private equity group acquired one or more divisions of a corporate

entity, but not the whole firm. In principle, the Annual Company Organization Survey (sent to

all large multi-unit companies) lets Census track these divisional sales. However, we identified

divisional sales in which the firm ID of the (new) target firm remained the same as the ID of the

selling firm. This problem did not affect the establishment-level analysis in Section 5, because

we could rely on an alternative identifier – the Employer Identification Number (EIN) – to

accurately identify, as of the transaction year, establishments involved in divisional sales.

Unfortunately, EINs are unsuitable for tracking firms because new and acquired establishments

                                                                                                20
may obtain new EINs. We therefore exclude divisional cases from our firm-level analysis for

those cases when Census does not provide an accurate ID for the target firm.16

        For the firm-level analysis, we expand the sample period of buyout events to run through

2003. (A firm-level analysis for the period running from 1980 to 2000 yields similar results.) As

reported in Table 2, our full matched sample contains 2265 target firms from 1980 to 2003. They

account for about 4.3 million workers and 104,000 establishments as of the buyout year.

Excluding the divisional, EIN cases that lack accurate firm IDs yields 1874 target firms with

about 3.4 million workers and 79,000 establishments.17 Further restricting attention to firms that

we can track for two years after the buyout year, including deaths, yields a sample of 1,374 firms

and 3.2 million workers. This sample represents 73 percent of the matched sample with accurate

firm IDs and 93 percent of their employment. The latter statistic is more relevant given our focus

on employment-weighted outcomes.

B. Firm-Level Employment Results

        Our firm-level analysis considers the same type of semi-parametric regression

specifications as in Table 3. Now, however, we explore employment responses on several

adjustment margins, including the entry of new establishments post buyout. As before, the

regressions include the pre-buyout growth variables and the cross product of industry, firm size

categories, firm age categories, multi-unit status, and buyout year as controls. We weight

observations by employment, as before. To obtain the effect of interest, we rely on indicator

variables for target firms.

16
   We more fully discuss tracking issues related to divisional sales and our use of EINs in the web appendix. Table
A.1 repeats the Section 5 analysis excluding establishments owned by divisional targets with inaccurate IDs,
yielding results similar to Table 3 in Section 5, but with somewhat smaller relative employment losses at targets.
The similarity of establishment-based results for the full sample and the subsample suggests that our firm-level
analysis is not seriously distorted by the inability to accurately track firm IDs for some divisional sales.
17
   Although our firm-level analysis sample excludes some transactions covered by the establishment-level analysis,
extending the sample period through 2003 captures a large number of more recent buyouts, as seen in Figures 1 and
2. As a result, the firm-level analysis sample actually covers more employment.

                                                                                                                21
        Table 4 presents firm-level regression results for cumulative responses over the first two

years post buyout. Again, we report results for an ATE=ATE1 specification that posits a uniform

treatment effect, and for an ATE1 Heterogeneous specification that allows treatment effects to

vary with pre-buyout history and across firm age and size categories. The top row in Table 4 says

that target firms shrink more rapidly than controls in the two-year period after buyouts – by 0.88

percentage points in the ATE=ATE1 specification and 0.65 percentage points in the ATE1

Heterogeneous specification. These estimated effects are much smaller than the cumulative two-

year difference of 2.9 points for both specifications in Table 3. This comparison suggests that

the additional adjustment margins captured by the firm-level analysis alter the picture of how

private equity buyouts affect employment outcomes.

        The remaining rows in Table 4 address the issue directly in the firm-level sample. Focus

on the ATE1 Heterogeneous specification, and consider first the results for “Continuers” and

“Deaths”, two adjustment margins captured by the establishment-level analysis.18 Summing

these two components yields a two-year employment growth rate differential of -5.49 percentage

points (-1.36 – 4.13) for targets, a large difference. But target firms create more new jobs at new

establishments in the first two years after buyouts, a difference of 1.87 points in favor of targets.

Combining these three adjustment margins yields a differential of -3.62 percentage points for

targets.19 Finally, bringing in the role of acquisitions and divestitures reduces this differential to




18
   Unlike the establishment-level analysis, however, the firm-level analysis does not encompass post-divestment
employment changes at divested continuing establishments.
19
   The two-year differential of -5.49% for continuers plus deaths in Table 4 (ATE1 Heterogeneous) is larger than the
corresponding two-year differential of -2.91% in Table 3. Recall that these two tables address different questions
and use somewhat different samples. Table 4, unlike Table 3, excludes (a) EIN cases and other firms that we could
not track post buyout and (b) the employment changes of establishments divested in years one and two post buyout.
Table 3, however, does not capture employment at post-buyout establishment births. To obtain an estimated target-
control growth differential that captures all organic adjustment margins (and only organic margins), sum the
greenfield job creation differential in Table 4 (1.87% of initial employment in favor of targets) and the two-year
growth differential from Table 3 (2.91% in favor of controls). This calculation yields an estimated 1.04%
employment contraction at targets relative to controls over the first two years post buyout.
                                                                                                                 22
-0.81 points, close to the estimated differential in the top row. Thus, the overall impact of private

equity buyouts on firm-level employment growth is quite modest.

        As a robustness check, we also estimate the average treatment effect of private equity

buyouts on firm-level employment growth using propensity score methods.                            We construct

propensity scores by fitting logit specifications, one for each buyout year, for the likelihood that

a firm becomes a private equity target. The logit specification includes the pre-buyout growth

variables and the cross product of industry, firm size categories, firm age categories, and multi-

unit status. Our second-stage regression includes an indicator for private equity targets, as before,

plus the propensity score measure interacted with year effects. Using this second-stage

regression, we estimate that a private equity buyout raises firm-level employment growth by

0.26 percentage points in the first two years post buyout, with a standard error of 0.18 points.20

Thus, under the propensity score approach, we cannot reject the hypothesis that private equity

buyouts have zero net impact on employment growth at target firms.

          It is worth stressing that our firm-level and establishment-level regression analyses

answer different questions. The establishment-level analysis tells us what happens to

employment at establishments owned by target firms as of the buyout year. The firm-level

analysis tells us what happens to employment at target firms, overall and on various adjustment

margins. In practice, the main difference is that the firm-level analysis picks up large

differentials between targets and controls in job creation at newly opened establishments and in

employment changes associated with acquisitions and divestitures.




20
   The standard error is not adjusted for the first-stage estimation. As Woolridge (2002) notes, an advantage of
including controls directly in the main regression is that it simplifies the computation of standard errors. He also
points out that propensity score methods often yield similar results to methods that use controls in the main
regression. When estimated with a linear probability model, a propensity score approach is equivalent to a one-stage
approach that introduces the controls directly into the main regression, as in Table 4.

                                                                                                                 23
C. Private Equity: Agents of Reallocation within Firms?

         Table 4 and Figure 4 suggest that buyouts act as catalysts for creative destruction. Target

firms exhibit more job destruction in establishment shutdowns and more job creation in

establishment births, larger job losses through divestment and larger job gains through

acquisition. This evidence is consistent with two distinct hypotheses. One hypothesis holds that

private equity acts as an agent of change – inducing some target firms to expand relative to

controls and others to retrench. According to this hypothesis, the evidence reflects a combination

of (a) upsizing target firms that add establishments and jobs more rapidly than controls and (b)

downsizing target firms that shed jobs and establishments more rapidly than controls. The

positive effects of buyouts on job creation and destruction then result by aggregating over

upsizing and downsizing cases. A second hypothesis holds that private equity acts as an agent of

restructuring within target firms, accelerating the reallocation of jobs across establishments in

these firms and their pace of acquisition and divestment. These hypotheses are not exclusive

because private equity could accelerate both types of creative destruction.

        To evaluate these hypotheses, we now estimate buyout effects on firm-level reallocation

measures. A firm’s job reallocation is the sum of its gross job gains due to new, expanding, and

acquired establishments and gross job losses due to exiting, shrinking, and divested

establishments. Its excess reallocation is the difference between job reallocation and the absolute

value of its net job growth.21 If a given firm changes employment in the same direction at all of

its establishments, it has zero excess reallocation. To the extent that a firm expands employment

at some units and contracts employment at others, it has positive excess reallocation. If the firm

adds jobs at some of its establishments and cuts an equal number of jobs at other establishments,

21
  This concept of excess reallocation is used often in the literature on gross job flows to quantify job reallocation
within industries, regions and business categories. See Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson (1989), Davis and
Haltiwanger (1992), and, for a review of the literature, Davis and Haltiwanger (1999). Our approach here applies
the same concept to the reallocation of jobs across production units within firms.
                                                                                                                  24
excess reallocation equals job reallocation. So, if private equity acts exclusively as agents of

change, the entire creative destruction response of target firms involves higher job reallocation

but no impact on excess reallocation. At the other extreme, if private equity acts exclusively as

agents of restructuring within target firms, firm-level job reallocation and excess reallocation

rates respond by the same amount to buyouts.

         Table 5 reports regression results for firm-level job reallocation and excess reallocation

rates using the same specifications and two-year horizon as in Table 4. In the ATE1

Heterogeneous specification, the job reallocation rate is 13.9 percentage points higher at target

firms, and the excess reallocation rate is 9.3 points higher. Thus, two-thirds of the extra job

reallocation associated with private equity buyouts reflects an accelerated pace of restructuring

within target firms. For organic changes, the impact of buyouts on excess reallocation – 6.4% of

initial employment over two years – is actually greater than the impact on total job reallocation.22

In short, and especially for organic employment changes, Table 5 implies that private equity acts

predominantly as an agent of (accelerated) restructuring within target firms.

         The regression results in Tables 3, 4, and 5 identify only the differential responses of

targets relative to controls. To recover information about the levels of creation and destruction

activity, we return to the nonparametric approach of section 5.A and consider a counterfactual

exercise along the lines of Figure 3. Specifically, we sort target and control observations in our

1980-2003 firm-level analysis sample into cells defined by the same cross product of industry,

size, age, multi-unit status, and buyout year as before. For each cell, we calculate cumulative

two-year changes post buyout for each employment adjustment margin. We then generate the

weighted average outcomes for targets and controls using the same approach to weighting as in


22
  By definition, overall job reallocation equals or exceeds excess job reallocation for a given firm or group of firms.
Our comparison here, however, involves the difference between job reallocation and excess reallocation responses
for two distinct sets of firms, targets and controls.
                                                                                                                   25
Figure 3. These calculations reveal the extent of creation and destruction activity on each

adjustment margin at target firms, and they tell us how target firm activity would differ if targets

exhibited the same behavior as controls.

       Table 6 reports the results of these calculations. They show high rates of creation and

destruction at target firms in the wake of private equity buyouts. The two-year cumulative job

reallocation at target firms is 52 percent of initial employment for organic changes (Panel A) and

69 percent inclusive of acquisitions and divestitures (Panel B). According to the “Difference”

column in Panel A of Table 6, buyouts raise job creation, destruction and reallocation rates by,

respectively, 2.0, 4.3 and 6.3 percent of initial employment, which amount to 9, 19 and 14

percent of the base rates at control firms. Panel B shows that the increases in creation,

destruction, and reallocation associated with buyouts are considerably larger, in both absolute

and relative terms, when including acquisitions and divestitures. To check the consistency of

these results with Tables 4 and 5, the two rightmost columns in Panels A and B report the semi-

parametric regression estimates of target-control differences. The two approaches yield similar

estimated differences, and the differences are precisely estimated.

       Table 6 also reveals that excess reallocation accounts for more than 95 percent of overall

job reallocation for both target and control firms, whether considering organic changes or

including acquisitions and divestitures. About two-thirds of excess reallocation occurs within

firms for organic employment changes, 56-58 percent when including acquisitions and

divestitures. Excess job reallocation within the same firm and county (not shown in the table)

accounts for half of all excess job reallocation within control firms, and slightly less within target

firms. Putting these results together, the movement of job positions across locations within the

same firm and county account for about one-third of all excess job reallocation for organic

adjustment margins and about one-quarter when including acquisitions and divestitures.

                                                                                                   26
D. Differential Employment Responses by Time Period, Industry, and Buyout Type

       The foregoing analyses could mask important differences in private equity effects by time

period, industry, or type of buyout. Descriptive accounts suggest that private equity groups

shifted to a more operational orientation over time, which could lead to time-varying effects on

target employment. The scale of private buyout activity also increased enormously over time,

which could alter the character of the marginal target and its post-buyout performance.

Motivated by these observations, Figure C.2 in the appendix displays the evolution of target-

control growth rate differences for buyouts that took place in the 1980s, 1990-94, and 1995-

2000. In each period, employment contracts more rapidly at targets than at controls in the years

following private equity buyouts.

       Some accounts of private equity paint a picture of aggressive cost cutting through layoffs.

This characterization suggests a potential for greater post-buyout job destruction rates in labor-

intensive industries, reflecting a view that cost cutters focus on the largest cost sources. More

generally, there are major differences in factor cost shares, market structure, demand conditions,

and labor relations that might lead to important industry differences in the responses to private

equity buyouts. Motivated by these ideas, Appendix Figure C.3 displays the evolution of target-

control growth differences for three industry sectors that cover most private equity buyouts.

Employment falls modestly at target establishments relative to controls post buyout in

Manufacturing. Retail Trade exhibits a markedly different response pattern. In the years leading

up to buyout transactions, controls and targets in Retail Trade exhibit similar growth rates. Post

buyout, however, employment at target establishments falls by nearly 12 percent relative to

controls over five years. The Service sector exhibits yet a different pattern. Targets grow much

rapidly than controls before the buyout year but more slowly afterwards. These large industry



                                                                                               27
differences serve as a caution against painting with an overly broad brush when characterizing

employment outcomes in the wake of private equity buyouts.

         There are also good reasons to think employment effects vary by type of buyout. Public-

to-private deals may be more likely to involve target firms with a strong need for cost cutting, as

in the Beatrice case (Baker, 1992). Better funding access and relaxed constraints on capital

investment and job creation are more likely to motivate deals for privately held firms. In light of

these arguments, Table 7 reports estimated average effects on two-year post-buyout rates of

employment growth and excess job reallocation by type of buyout. In public-to-private deals,

target employment contracts more than 10 percent relative to controls over two years. As

reported in appendix Table C.3, target firms in these deals experience much greater job losses

due to establishment deaths and divestitures and less job creation through births. Along with the

high visibility of public-to-private deals, these results help understand concerns about job loss

related to private equity buyouts.            In striking contrast, employment at independent targets

(private-to-private deals) expands 10 percent relative to controls in the first two years post

buyout.     More rapid employment growth at independent targets reflects a higher pace of

acquisition, consistent with the view that private equity investments facilitate firm-level

expansion.23 Most U.S. buyout transactions involve independent targets, even though public-to-

private transactions garner much more attention.                    In terms of buyout-year employment,

independent targets account for about 63 percent more jobs than publicly held targets (Table 2).

         One common pattern emerges for all deal types in Table 7: excess reallocation rates are

higher at target firms than at controls. The magnitude of the target-control difference in excess

reallocation varies greatly by type of transaction, but it is positive and highly statistically

significant in all cases.

23
  Our evidence for private-to-private deals in the United States is broadly consistent with the evidence on French
buyouts and its interpretation in terms of relaxed capital constraints offered by Boucly, Sraer and Thesmar (2009).
                                                                                                                  28
7.      Effects on Productivity and Worker Earnings

A. Productivity Measurement and Sample Weights

        Our productivity analysis considers plant-level observations covered by the Census of

Manufactures (CM) and the Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM). The CM surveys all but the

smallest manufacturing plants once every five years. The ASM, a rotating panel of

manufacturing plants, samples the largest units with certainty and other units with probabilities

increasing in size. Following Baily, Hulten, and Campbell (1992) and others, we compute plant-

level log TFP as 𝑙𝑛𝑇𝐹𝑃!" =   𝑙𝑛𝑄!" −    𝛼! 𝑙𝑛𝐾!" −    𝛼! 𝑙𝑛𝐿!" −    𝛼! 𝑙𝑛𝑀!" , where i and t index plant

and year, respectively, Q is real output, K is real capital, L is labor input, M is materials, and α

denotes factor elasticities. Operationally, we measure plant output as shipments plus the change

in inventories, deflated by industry-level price indices. We measure capital separately for

structures and equipment using perpetual inventory methods. Labor is total hours of production

and non-production workers. We measure and deflate energy and other materials separately, and

we measure the factor elasticities using industry-level cost shares.24

        Because the CM takes place every five years and the ASM over samples larger plants,

our study of productivity outcomes adjusts for the probability that a given observation appears in

a given analysis sample. To do so, we first create indicator variables for whether each

observation appears in a given analysis sample.25 We then fit year-by-year logit models to the

indicator variables, obtaining estimated sample inclusion probabilities for each observation.

Explanatory variables are dummies for industry (4-digit SIC or 6-digit NAICS), payroll size

24
   See Foster, Grim and Haltiwanger (2013) for details on our measurement of inputs and outputs. As discussed in
Syverson (2011), alternative methods for measuring the factor elasticities tend to yield similar plant-level TFP
values even when they produce somewhat different elasticity values.
25
   Our assignment of controls to target plants for the productivity analysis is similar to the approach adopted in
Section 5. Starting from our establishment-level analysis sample, we restrict attention to manufacturing plants
operated by two-year continuing firms (i.e., two years from the buyout year) and industry-year cells for which the
ASM/CM data contain at least one target and one control observation. We drop a few observations for which the
ASM/CM employment figure differs from the LBD figure by more than 1,000. We also drop control observations
on plants with more than 10,000 employees, of which there are none among target manufacturing plants.
                                                                                                                 29
classes, employment size classes, multi-unit status, target status, and interactions between multi-

unit status and industry. The LBD contains data on these explanatory variables for every plant-

year observation. We set the propensity weight for each observation to the reciprocal of its

model-implied sample inclusion probability.26

B. Do Target Firms Direct Reallocation To More Productive Plants?

        Section 6 shows that private equity buyouts accelerate job reallocation. Much of the extra

reallocation involves establishment births and deaths. We now consider whether target firms

direct this reallocation activity in ways that affect productivity. To that end, we first sort target

plants and controls into terciles of the same-industry/same-year TFP distribution. We then

investigate how plant entry and exit probabilities vary by location in the TFP distribution for

targets in comparison to controls.

        Panel A in Table 8 reports estimated exit probabilities in the first two years post buyout.

We obtain these probabilities from a logit model fit to an exit indicator variable, where the

explanatory variables are dummies for TFP terciles interacted with target and control dummies.

Two results stand out: First, exit probabilities decline much more steeply with TFP for target

plants than for controls. Second, targets exhibit greater exit probabilities in the bottom and

middle terciles of the own-industry TFP distribution. The target-control exit differential is 5

percentage points in both terciles and significant at the 2.5% level in the bottom tercile.

        Panel B provides information about the location of new plants in the TFP distribution,

where new plants are those that enter in the first or second year post buyout. We obtain entry

probabilities from a logit model fit to an entry indicator variable, where, as before, the


26
  Plant and firm age measures did not improve the logit models for sample inclusion – perhaps not surprisingly,
given that Census mainly relies on industry, size, and multi-unit status in the ASM sample design. We checked that
the propensity-weighted analysis samples adequately match the firm size, firm age and industry distributions of
employment in the populations of targets and controls, and that they adequately reproduce changes along each
adjustment margin – births, deaths, continuers, etc.
                                                                                                                30
explanatory variables are dummies for TFP terciles interacted with target and control dummies.

The Panel B results uncover a striking contrast between targets and controls in the productivity

of new plants: The prevalence of new plants in the bottom TFP tercile is only half as large for

targets as controls, and the prevalence of new plants in the top tercile is nearly twice as large for

targets. New plants are concentrated in the upper part of the TFP distribution at firms backed by

private equity. The opposite pattern holds at control firms.27

C. Quantifying Buyout Effects on Total Factor Productivity

        We can briefly summarize the evidence in Tables 5, 6, 7 and 8 as follows: Private equity

buyouts accelerate job reallocation within target firms, and target firms direct reallocation

activity in ways that raise TFP. We now develop additional evidence on the relationship of

private equity buyouts to TFP. We then pull together several results to quantify and decompose

the effects of buyouts on firm-level TFP growth.

        Table 9 reports results for propensity-weighted OLS regressions that compare log TFP

between target and control plants in the same industry-year. In addition to the full set of industry-

year effects, the regressions include an extensive set of firm size and age effects.28 Panels A and

B consider productivity outcomes in buyout years t and t+2, respectively, and Panel C considers

TFP log changes for continuers. The most striking results involve entrant productivity: target

entrants are 18 log points more productive in year t+2 than continuing control plants and 22 log

points more productive than control entrants. These large TFP advantages reflect a concentration

of target entrants in the upper part of the TFP distribution and the opposite pattern for control


27
   Previous work by Foster, Haltiwanger and Krizan (2001), among others, highlights rapid productivity gains
among young plants through learning and selection effects. Thus, the concentration of control entrants in the bottom
tercile of the TFP distribution should not be seen as evidence that entry lowers industry-level TFP over time.
Nevertheless, Table 8.B reveals that new plants opened by private equity targets significantly out perform new
plants opened by control firms – at least with respect to early-life TFP.
28
   Adding covariates for firm size and age moves us away from an exact matching estimator but, in our view, is
preferable to (a) omitting the size and age effects or (b) a pure matching estimator that uses very coarse size-age-
industry-year cells. See Chapter 3 in Angrist and Pischke (2009) for discussion of this issue.
                                                                                                                 31
entrants (Table 8). Although the effects are smaller and the evidence less powerful, Table 9 also

confirms that plant exit patterns raise TFP at target firms, absolutely and relative to control firms.

In contrast, we find no evidence that target continuers experience more rapid TFP growth than

control continuers. Panel C makes this point directly: the estimated target-control differential for

TFP growth is one log point, with a standard error of 11 log points. If private equity buyouts

improve relative TFP in continuing plants, the effects are either too small to reliably discern in

our sample, or the gains mount too slowly to capture in our two-year tracking interval.29

         To quantify the overall effect of private equity buyouts on firm-level TFP and assess the

                                                                                  , where
role of various adjustment margins, consider the difference-in-difference ΔPt − ΔPt



                       ΔPt = #$St+2
                                C     C
                                    Pt+2 − StC Pt C %& + #$St+2
                                                             N    N
                                                                Pt+2 − StX Pt X %& + #$St+2
                                                                                         A    A
                                                                                            Pt+2 − StD Pt D %&

is the average two-year change in TFP among target firms, S denotes an employment share, P

denotes a TFP value, and C, N, X, A and D denote continuers, entrants, exits, acquisitions, and

divestitures, respectively. For example, Pt+2
                                           C
                                              is the average TFP among continuing target plants

two years post buyout, where each plant’s TFP is expressed as a deviation from mean log TFP in

                                                                                   , is defined
the same industry-year cell. The average two-year TFP differential for controls, ΔPt



analogously. Now express the TFP terms as deviations about same-year TFP values for control

                                    , and rearrange to obtain:
continuers, cancel terms in ΔPt − ΔPt



                 = SC PC − P t+2               Ct
         ΔPt − ΔPt   t+2   (
                         t+2
                               C
                                             ) (
                                   − StC Pt C − P           )
                                        t+2
                          N
                      + St+2(P   N
                                t+2   −P
                                         C
                                              ) − S (P − P ) − S (P
                                                   N
                                                   t+2
                                                          N
                                                          t+2
                                                                   C
                                                                   t+2       t
                                                                              X
                                                                                   t
                                                                                       X     Ct + S tX P
                                                                                           −P ) (         tX − P
                                                                                                                 Ct
                                                                                                                   )   (1)

                                        t+2
                          A
                      + St+2(P   A
                                t+2   −P
                                         C
                                              ) − S (P − P ) − S (P
                                                   A
                                                   t+2
                                                          A
                                                          t+2
                                                                   C
                                                                   t+2       t
                                                                              D
                                                                                   t
                                                                                       D     + S P
                                                                                           −P ) (
                                                                                               C
                                                                                               t
                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                            D
                                                                                                            t
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                −P )
                                                                                                                   C
                                                                                                                   t




29
   A recent study by Bharath, Dittmar and Sivadasan (2013) considers 406 publicly held U.S. manufacturing firms
that went public in recent decades, including 115 through private equity buyouts. Consistent with our results, they
find no evidence that public-to-private transitions generate productivity gains in continuing plants.
                                                                                                                             32
The top line of (1) isolates the contribution of target-control differences among continuing

plants, the second line isolates the contribution of plant entry and exit (births and deaths), and the

third line isolates the contribution of acquisitions and divestitures.

       This decomposition is new to the literature to our knowledge and has some attractive

features. It shows how to combine diff-in-diff estimates with an accounting decomposition that

appears often in the empirical literature on firm-level productivity dynamics. To see this point,

note that the expressions in parentheses can be read directly from Table 9. The shares S can be

retrieved from the job creation and destruction statistics reported in Appendix Table C.2, the

manufacturing analog to Table 6. Related, (1) lets us exploit the full LBD to compute the share

variables, while relying on the ASM-CM sample to obtain the diff-in-diff estimates. The

decomposition also sidesteps any need to compare TFP across industries or years, because all

productivity terms in (1) are based on plant-level TFP deviations about industry-year means.

        Table 10 exploits (1) to obtain the average TFP growth differential between target and

control firms and its decomposition by margin of adjustment. Target firms out perform controls

with respect to post-buyout TFP growth by 2.14 log points over two years, a large gain compared

to the change of -0.38 log points among control continuers. Summing over terms in the second

line of (1) yields a value of 1.59, implying that plant entry and exit effects account for 74 percent

of the superior TFP growth at target firms. This result confirms the importance of the target-

control differences on the entry and exit margins documented in Tables 8 and 9.

        For additional insight into the nature of the entry and exit effects, we replace S N and S
                                                                                                    N




with their average in (1), do the same for S X and S , and then recalculate the second line of (1)
                                                     X




to obtain a value of 1.56 log points. This calculation corresponds to a counterfactual that turns

off target-control differences in the pace of job reallocation to isolate the role of differences in its


                                                                                                     33
direction. The message is clear: The stronger directedness of job reallocation in target firms

accounts for almost all of the entry and exit contribution to (1) and, indeed, more than 70 percent

          .
of ΔPt − ΔPt



       Two other remarks help put this finding in perspective. First, while directional

differences are central to our explanation for superior TFP growth at target firms, they matter

because entry and exit involve sizable rates of job creation and destruction. In this respect, both

the pace of job reallocation and the target-control directional differences are essential. Second,

reallocation rates are considerably higher outside the manufacturing sector, as readily seen by

comparing Tables 6 and C.2. This fact has potentially important implications for the TFP effects

of buyouts in the private sector as a whole. If we plug private sector share values from Table 6

into (1) alongside diff-in-diff estimates from Table 9, the implied TFP growth advantage of

targets is 3.05 log points, 81 percent of which is due to entry and exit effects.

D. Effects on Earnings Per Worker

   Tables 8-10 provide strong evidence that, on average, private equity buyouts improve

operating performance, at least in the manufacturing sector. To investigate whether buyouts also

affect operating margins via unit input costs, we now consider LBD data on annual earnings per

worker (EPW) at the establishment level. (“Earnings” encompass all taxable forms of

compensation.) We follow the same approach to selecting control establishments as in Section 5,

and we again exploit the size of the LBD to include an extensive set of controls in the regression

specifications. Table 11 reports the results, following the same layout as Table 9. As before, the

units of the estimated effects are log deviations about industry-year means.

   There are several noteworthy results. First, among plants destined to exit within two years

post buyout, average EPW are 9-12 log points lower than at control continuers. This evidence

rejects the view that firms backed by private equity tend to close establishments with high EPW.
                                                                                                34
Second, target firms divest establishments with high EPW, whereas controls do not. The EPW

difference for divestitures is 22 log points in favor of reduced labor costs for targets, a huge

difference. Third, Panel C reports that average EPW shrink by 2.4 log points at target continuers

relative to control continuers over the first two years post buyout. Fourth, we also applied

equation (1) to the diff-in-diff estimates in Table 11 and reallocation rates in Table 6 to construct

the EPW counterpart to Table 10 above. That exercise reveals an overall two-year post-buyout

EPW decline of 4.0 log points for target firms (relative to controls).30 Continuers account for 79

percent of the relative EPW reduction at target firms, acquisitions and divestitures account for 29

percent, and net entry effects actually raise relative EPW at target firms.

     Appendix Table C.4 reports additional EPW regressions. Continuing establishments operated

by target firms experience large post-buyout EPW cuts of 6-8 log points (relative to controls) in

Wholesale, Retail, and Services – industries that rely heavily on less skilled labor – while FIRE

shows a large EPW gain of 9 log points, and Manufacturing shows virtually no change. EPW at

target continuers decline by 7 log points in public-to-private deals and by 2 points in private-to-

private deals. Divestitures contribute to relative EPW reductions at targets firms for all private

equity deal types, with an especially pronounced divestiture effect in private-to-private deals. In

summary, while the details of the EPW results differ somewhat by industry and buyout type, the

prevailing pattern is one of reduced EPW at target firms in the wake of private equity buyouts.

Related work by Neumak and Sharpe (1996) and Bertrand and Mullainathan (1999), for

example, finds mixed results for the effects of hostile takeovers on worker earnings. We believe

there is much room for additional research on how ownership changes affect labor costs and

worker earnings.

30
  Our data do not let us decompose EPW changes into the effects of hours worked and wages per unit time. The
wage per unit time could fall because of either wage reductions for workers of a given quality or a shift to less
skilled workers who command lower wages. However, if wages decline at target firms because of a shift to lower
skill workforces (relative to concurrent changes at controls), then our results understate buyout-driven TFP gains.
                                                                                                                  35
8.     Concluding Remarks

       Our study develops new evidence on the responses of employment, job reallocation,

productivity, and worker earnings to private equity buyouts. Compared to previous research, we

exploit a much larger sample of buyouts, a much more extensive set of controls, and a novel

ability to track outcomes at firms and establishments. These advantages enable us to overcome

important limitations in previous research and address controversies about the effects of private

equity buyouts on jobs and operating performance. We also exploit the strengths of our data to

explore new questions about private equity’s role in the creative destruction process and its

impact on restructuring activity inside target firms.

       Our findings support the view that private equity buyouts lead to greater job loss at

establishments operated by target firms as of the buyout year. Employment at these

establishments shrinks by 3 percent relative to controls in the two-year period post buyout and by

6 percent over five years. Gross job destruction at target establishments outpaces destruction at

controls by a cumulative 10 percentage points over five years post buyout. Thus, pre-existing

employment positions are at greater risk of loss in the wake of private equity buyouts.

       While noteworthy, these results make up only part of a richer and more interesting story.

Using our ability to track each firm’s constituent establishments, we examine how jobs respond

to buyouts on several adjustment margins, including job creation at greenfield establishments

opened post buyout. This aspect of our analysis reveals that target firms create new jobs in

newly opened establishments at a faster pace than control firms. Accounting for the purchase and

sale of establishments as well, the target-control growth differential is less than 1 percent of

initial employment over two years.

       Private equity buyouts involve much larger effects on the gross creation and destruction

of jobs. The job reallocation rate at target firms exceeds that of controls by 14 percentage points

                                                                                                36
over two years post buyout. About 45 percent of the extra job reallocation reflects a more rapid

pace of organic employment adjustments, and the rest reflects acquisitions and divestitures. We

find greater job reallocation in the wake of private equity buyouts for public-to-private deals,

private-to-private deals, divisional sales, and secondary sales. These novel findings provide

evidence that private equity buyouts catalyze the creative destruction process as measured by

gross job flows and the purchase and sale of business establishments. Digging deeper, we also

address two distinct hypotheses about the nature of the increased reallocation activity associated

with private equity buyouts. One hypothesis sees private equity as agents of change in the sense

that buyouts accelerate retrenchments at some target firms, while accelerating expansion at

others. Another hypothesis sees private equity as agents of restructuring in the sense that buyouts

accelerate the reallocation of jobs across establishments within target firms. We show the

restructuring effect predominates, and it is the entire story for organic employment changes.

       Our investigation into the effects of private equity buyouts on TFP growth in the

manufacturing sector yields a highly complementary set of results. Relative to controls, target

firms more aggressively close plants with low TFP, and they more aggressively open new plants

with high TFP. In other words, target firms direct job reallocation activity on the plant entry and

exit margins in ways that raise TFP. On average, target firms out perform control firms with

respect to TFP growth by 2.1 log points over two years post buyout. More than 70 percent of the

estimated TFP gains arise from private equity influence on the direction of job reallocation on

plant entry and exit margins. These results refute the view that the returns to private equity rest

entirely on private gains to financial engineering and wealth transfers from other stakeholders.

       We also find sizable reductions in earnings per worker in the first two years post buyout.

Specifically, we estimate an average two-year post-buyout reduction in earnings per worker of 4

log points at target firms relative to controls, mostly due to reductions at continuing plants. In

                                                                                                   37
sum, our evidence indicates that private equity buyouts improve operating margins at target firms

by raising productivity and by lowering unit labor costs. The resulting gains in profitability are

magnified in their impact on corporate earnings per share by the leveraged capital structures that

characterize firms acquired in private equity buyouts.

       By identifying a large sample of private equity transactions and linking them to the LBD,

ASM and CM, this paper also sets the stage for new research into buyout effects on capital

expenditures, other input costs, profitability, and other outcomes. A rich array of input and

outcome measures are available at the firm and establishment level in Census Bureau data sets

that can be linked to the LBD and our data on private equity transactions. Our plans for future

work also include further investigation into how and why buyout effects differ by industry and

type of buyout, and an examination of outcomes in corporations that sell to private equity

groups. Many divisional buyouts involve divestitures of underperforming units that may place

heavy demands on senior management. Schoar (2002) documents that acquisitions can lead

managers to neglect core businesses, what she calls the “new toy” effect. The LBD allows us to

investigate whether the same phenomenon operates in reverse when firms sell underperforming

or poorly fitting divisions, thereby freeing senior management to focus on core activities.


                                           References

Amess, K. and M. Wright (2007), “The Wage and Employment Effects of Leveraged Buyouts in
the UK,” International Journal of the Economics of Business 14 (2), 179-195.

Angrist, J. and J.-S. Pischke (2009), Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s
Companion, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Baily, Martin Neil, Charles Hulten, and David Campbell. 1992. Productivity Dynamics in
Manufacturing Plants. In Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, ed. Clifford
Winston and Martin Neil Baily. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.

Baker, G.P. (1992), “Beatrice: A Study in the Creation and Destruction of Value,” Journal of
Finance 47 (3), 1081-1120.

                                                                                               38
Baker, G.P. and K. Wruck (1989), “Organizational Changes and Value Creation in Leveraged
Buyouts: The Case of the O.M. Scott & Sons Company,” Journal of Financial Economics 25 (2),
163-190.

Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan (1999), “Is There Discretion in Wage Setting? A Test Using
Takeover Legislation,” Rand Journal of Economics, 30, no. 3, 535-554.

Bharath, S., A. Dittmar and J. Sivadasan (2013), “Do Going Private Transactions Affect Plant
Productivity?” working paper, April.

British Venture Capital Association (BVCA) (2006), The Economic Impact of Private Equity in
the UK, London, BVCA.

Boucly, Q., D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar (2011), “Growth LBOs,” Journal of Financial Economics
102 (2), 432–453.

Caballero, Ricardo (2007), Specificity and the Macroeconomics of Restructuring, Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.

Caves, Richard E. (1998), “Industrial Organization and New Findings on the Turnover and
Mobility of Firms,” Journal of Economic Literature 36 (4), 1947-1982.

Davis, S.J. and J. Haltiwanger (1992), “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and
Employment Reallocation” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (3), 819-863.

Davis, S.J., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, J. Lerner and J. Miranda (2011), “Private Equity and
Employment,” NBER Working Paper no. 17399.

Davis, S.J., J. Haltiwanger, K. Handley, R. Jarmin, J. Lerner and J. Miranda (2012), “Private
Equity, Jobs and Productivity,” Unpublished working paper, University of Chicago.

Davis, S.J., J. Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1996), Job Creation and Destruction, Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.

Davis, S.J. and J. Haltiwanger (1999), “Gross Job Flows," in Card, D. and O. Ashenfelter (eds.),
Handbook of Labor Economics, New York, North-Holland.

Davis, S.J., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, C.Z. Krizan, J. Miranda, A. Nucci, and K. Sandusky
(2009), “Measuring the Dynamics of Young and Small Businesses: Integrating the Employer and
Non-employer Business Universes,” in Dunne, T., J.B. Jensen and M.J. Roberts (eds.), Producer
Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data, University of Chicago Press, 329-368.

Davis, S.J., J.C. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2007), “Volatility and Dispersion in
Business Growth Rates: Publicly Traded versus Privately Held Firms,” in Acemoglu, D., K.
Rogoff and M. Woodford (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 21, 107-180.


                                                                                             39
Dunne, T., M. Roberts, and L. Samuelson (1989) “Plant Turnover and Gross Employment Flows
in the U.S. Manufacturing Sector,” Journal of Labor Economics 7 (1), 48-71.

European Private Equity and Venture Capital Association (EVCA) (2005), Employment
Contribution of Private Equity and Venture Capital in Europe, Zaventum, Belgium: EVCA.

Foster, Lucia, Cheryl Grim and John Haltiwanger (2013), “Reallocation in the Great Recession:
Cleansing or Not?” Working paper, 1 May.

Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J. and Krizan, C. Aggregate Productivity Growth: Lessons from
Microeconomic Evidence. In Dean, E., Harper, M. and Hulten, C. (eds.). New Directions in
Productivity Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001.

Hall, D. (2007), “Methodological Issues in Estimating the Impact of Private Equity Buyouts on
Employment,” Unpublished working paper, Public Services International Research Unit,
Business School, University of Greenwich.

Haltiwanger, J., R. Jarmin and J. Miranda (2010), “Who Creates Jobs? Small vs. Large vs.
Young,” Working Paper no. 16300, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Harris, R., D.S. Siegel and M. Wright (2005), "Assessing the Impact of Management Buyouts on
Economic Efficiency: Plant-Level Evidence from the United Kingdom,” Review of Economics
and Statistics 87 (1), 148-153.

Jensen, M.C. (1989), “The Eclipse of the Public Corporation,” Harvard Business Review 67 (5,
September-October), 61-74.

Jensen, M.C., W. Burkhardt and B. Barry (1990), Wisconsin Central Ltd. Railroad and Berkshire
Partners (A): Leveraged Buyouts and Financial Distress, Harvard Business School Case no. 9-
190-062.

Kaplan, S.N. (1989a), “The Effects of Management Buyouts on Operating Performance and
Value,” Journal of Financial Economics 24 (2), 217-254.

Kaplan, S.N. (1989b) “Management Buyouts: Evidence on Taxes as a Source of Value,” Journal
of Finance 44 (3), 611-632.

Kaplan, S.N. and P. Strömberg (2009), “Leveraged Buyouts and Private Equity,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 23 (1), 121-146.

Kearney, A.T. (2007), Creating New Jobs and Value with Private Equity, Chicago: A. T.
Kearney.

Lichtenberg, F.R. and D. Siegel (1987), “Productivity and Changes in Ownership of
Manufacturing Plants,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics 643-683.

Lichtenberg, F.R. and D. Siegel (1990), "The Effects of Leveraged Buyouts on Productivity and
Related Aspects of Firm Behavior,” Journal of Financial Economics 27 (1), 165-194.
                                                                                           40
Long, W. and D. Ravenscraft (1993), “The Financial Performance of Whole Company LBOs,”
Working paper no. CES-WP-93-16, Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau.

Luehrman, T. (1992), Kaiser Steel Corporation, 1987, Harvard Business School Case no. 293-
019.

Luehrman, T. (2007), The Hertz Corporation (A), Harvard Business School Case no. 208-030.

McGuckin, R.H. and S.V. Nguyen (2001), “The Impact of Ownership Changes: A View from
Labor Markets,” International Journal of Industrial Organization 19 (5), 739-762.

Muscarella, C.J. and M.R. Vetsuypens (1990), “Efficiency and Organizational Structure: A
Study of Reverse LBOs,” Journal of Finance 45 (5), 1389–1413.

Neumark, D. and S.A. Sharpe (1996), “Rents and Quasi Rents in the Wage Structure: Evidence
from Hostile Takeovers,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 35, no. 2, 145-179.

Rasmussen, P.N. (2008), “Taming the Private Equity ‘Locusts’,” Project Syndicate/Europe’s
World 8 (Spring), 130-133.

Schoar, A. (2002), “Effects of Corporate Diversification on Productivity,” Journal of Finance 57
(6), 2379-2403.

Service Employees International Union (SEIU) (2007), Behind the Buyouts: Inside the World of
Private Equity, Washington: SEIU.

Shapiro, R.J., and N.D. Pham (2008), American Jobs and the Impact of Private Equity
Transactions, Washington: Private Equity Council.

Shleifer, A. and L. Summers (1988), "Breach of Trust in Hostile Takeovers,” in Auerbach, A.J.
(ed.), Corporate Takeovers: Causes and Consequences, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Strömberg, P. (2007), “The New Demography of Private Equity,” Unpublished working paper,
Swedish Institute for Financial Research.

Tornqvist, L., P. Vartia, and Y. Vartia (1985), “How Should Relative Change Be Measured?,”
American Statistician 39 (1), 43-46.

Woolridge, J. M. (2002), Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, Cambridge:
MIT Press.

Wright, M., S. Thompson, and K. Robbie (1992), “Management-Led Leveraged Buy-Outs: A
European Perspective,” Journal of Business Venturing 7 (1), 45-71.

Wruck, K. (1991), “What Really Went Wrong at Revco?” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance
4 (2), 79-92.

                                                                                             41
Figure 1: Number of Target Firms in U.S. Private Equity Buyouts, 1980 to 2005


 900
 800
 700
 600               All Targets
 500               Matched Targets
 400
 300
 200
 100
      0
          1980
          1981
          1982
          1983
          1984
          1985
          1986
          1987
          1988
          1989
          1990
          1991
          1992
          1993
          1994
          1995
          1996
          1997
          1998
          1999
          2000
          2001
          2002
          2003
          2004
          2005
Figure 2: Employment at Matched Targets as of the Buyout Year, 1980 to 2005


0.9                                                                             1200
0.8
                Percent of LBD Employment                                       1000
0.7
0.6                                                                             800
                Target Employment in Thousands,
0.5             Right Axis
                                                                                600
0.4
0.3                                                                             400
0.2
                                                                                200
0.1
  0                                                                             0
          1980
          1981
          1982
          1983
          1984
          1985
          1986
          1987
          1988
          1989
          1990
          1991
          1992
          1993
          1994
          1995
          1996
          1997
          1998
          1999
          2000
          2001
          2002
          2003
          2004
          2005




                                                                                       42
Figure 3A: Comparison of Employment Trajectory for Target Establishments to Controls,
Buyouts from 1980 to 2000

2,400,000

                        Targets
2,200,000               Controls

2,000,000


1,800,000
                            Employment in Controls Normalized
                        to Target Level as of Year 0, the Buyout Year
1,600,000
                 -5    -4    -3    -2     -1      0     1      2      3      4      5


Figure 3B: Employment Growth Rate Differences before and after the Buyout Year, Target
Establishments Minus Controls, Buyouts from 1980 to 2000

Difference, Percent of Employment
 3.00

 2.00

 1.00

 0.00

-1.00

-2.00

-3.00
            -5    -4    -3    -2     -1     0     1      2     3      4     5




                                                                                         43
Figure 4A: Job Creation Rates before and after Buyout Year, Target Establishments
Minus Controls, Buyouts from 1980 to 2000

 4.00
 3.00
 2.00
 1.00
 0.00
-1.00
           -5       -4    -3        -2   -1      0      1       2      3      4         5

Figure 4B: Job Destruction Rates before and after Buyout Year, Target Establishments
Minus Controls, Buyouts from 1980 to 2000

 4.00
 3.00
 2.00
 1.00
 0.00
-1.00
           -5       -4    -3        -2   -1      0      1       2      3      4         5

Figure 5: Emloyment-Weighted Establishment Exit Rates Post Buyout, Targets Minus Controls,
Buyouts from 1980 to 2000

2.00

1.50

1.00

0.50

0.00
                1               2               3                4                  5




                                                                                             44
Table 1. Value of Private Equity Targets, Total and Matched by Decade ($millions)

                           1980-1989           1990-1999                2000-2005
Matched                    73,209              169,271                  291,824
Total                      122,115             211,615                  420,245


Table 2. Private Equity Buyouts in the Analysis Samples

                            Number of          Value of              Target         Target
                           Transactions      Transactions,       Establishments, Employment,
                             (Target          Millions of         Transaction     Transaction
                              Firms)         2005 Dollars             Year           Year
All, 1980-2005                    3,218             573,224              151,529    5,828,532
      Private to Private          1,350              88,919               59,865    2,224,530
       Public to Private            390             261,164               36,717    1,371,129
       Divisional Sales             918             132,330               35,259    1,359,139
       Secondary Sales              396              72,969               13,455      637,591
                  Other             164              17,841                6,233      236,143

All, 1980-2003                    2,265            431,871             103,671        4,323,558
Excluding EIN cases               1,874            377,303              79,131        3,410,598
Two-year continuers,
excluding EIN cases               1,374            272,325               76,271       3,187,171
      Private to Private            686             58,287               37,283       1,470,447
       Public to Private            248            129,382               20,380         872,206
       Divisional Sales             206             38,874                7,922         391,705
       Secondary Sales              160             35,474                7,957         353,325
                  Other              74             10,309                2,729          99,488

All, 1980-2000                    1,306            315,007               54,729       2,385,163
      Private to Private            647             60,865               24,593         901,284
       Public to Private            171            162,567               18,454         854,779
       Divisional Sales             342             60,615                6,557         416,055
       Secondary Sales              107             23,010                3,885         161,557
                  Other              39              7,951                1,240          51,488

Mfg., 1980-2003                    539	           109,644	              9,174	       805,328	  
Multi-Unit Firms Only              427	           105,843	              9,062	       792,864	  
 Multi-Unit with TFP               286	            68,442	              2,053	       496,699	  

Notes:
   1. We exclude single-unit matched targets from our analysis of the manufacturing sector. They
       account for only 112 of 9,744 target manufacturing establishments and less than 1.5 percent of
       target manufacturing employment.
   2. The last row in the table reports data for matched multi-unit targets for which we can obtain data
       on total factor productivity in the transaction year from the Census of Manufactures or the
       Annual Survey of Manufactures.


                                                                                                      45
   Table 3. Post-Buyout Employment Growth Rates at Target Establishments Relative
   to Controls, Buyouts from 1980 to 2000

                                 Nonparametric         Semi-Parametric Regressions
                                  Comparison          ATE=ATE1            ATE1
                                 From Figure 3b                       Heterogeneous
                 Buyout Year          2.17                 2.08                2.28
                                                         (0.17)              (0.17)
             Buyout Year +1           -0.93               -0.72               -1.15
                                                         (0.20)              (0.20)
                           +2         -2.23               -1.74               -1.76
                                                         (0.20)              (0.21)
                           +3         -0.55                0.00                0.08
                                                         (0.21)              (0.21)
                           +4         -1.64               -1.31               -1.16
                                                         (0.22)              (0.22)
                           +5         -1.09               -0.95               -1.23
                                                         (0.22)              (0.23)
    Cumulative, Years 1 to 5          -6.44               -4.72               -5.22

Notes:
1. Table entries report estimated employment growth rate differences between targets and controls in the
   buyout year and following years. For example, the entries for “Buyout Year +2” report the estimated
   growth rate difference from Year 1 to Year 2 following the buyout. Each reported coefficient is for a
   different nonparametric comparison or regression. Standard errors are in parentheses. They are
   computed by the delta method in the “ATE1 Heterogeneous” regression.
2. The nonparametric comparison reflects the patterns displayed in Figure 3b. As explained in the text, this
   comparison allows for heterogeneous treatment effects and controls for the fully interacted cross product
   of 72 industries, 10 firm size categories, 6 firm age groups, multi-unit status, and buyout year.
3. The semi-parametric regression specifications include fully interacted industry, year, firm age, firm size
   and multi-unit effects plus additional controls for pre-buyout growth history. The “ATE=ATE1”
   specification imposes a uniform treatment effect, while the “ATE1 Heterogeneous” specification allows
   the treatment effect to vary by firm size, firm age, and the two measures of pre-buyout growth history.
4. The average number of establishment-level observations in each regression or nonparametric
   comparison is about 4.9 million. The observation count falls with each successive year following the
   transaction year because of target deaths and deleted observations for the corresponding control
   establishments.




                                                                                                          46
   Table 4. Buyout Effects on Employment Growth Rate at Target Firms
   Relative To Controls, Buyouts from 1980 to 2003

                                                   Regression Specification
                                            ATE=ATE1                    ATE1
             Dependent Variable                                    Heterogeneous
           Firm-level Employment        Buyout Effect 𝑅!       Buyout Effect     𝑅!
                Growth Rate from            -0.88     0.07         -0.65        0.07
              Buyout Year t to t+2         (0.18)                 (0.16)

            By Adjustment Margin
           Continuers                       -1.57      0.09          -1.36         0.09
                                           (0.12)                   (0.11)
                            Creation        -1.07      0.16          -0.93         0.16
                                           (0.08)                   (0.08)
                          Destruction        0.71      0.09           0.64         0.09
                                           (0.07)                   (0.07)
           Deaths                            4.12      0.06           4.13         0.06
                                           (0.09)                   (0.08)
           Births                            1.80      0.22           1.87         0.22
                                           (0.05)                   (0.05)
           Acquisitions                      5.62      0.12           5.56         0.13
                                           (0.05)                   (0.05)
           Divestitures                      2.77      0.06           2.75         0.06
                                           (0.05)                   (0.04)

Notes:
1. Employment-weighted regressions on Target and Control firms, with rates calculated over the two-year
   horizon from the event year t to t+2. Standard errors in parentheses.
2. The semi-parametric regression specifications include fully interacted industry, year, firm age, firm size
   and multi-unit effects plus additional controls for pre-buyout growth history. The “ATE=ATE1”
   specification imposes a uniform treatment effect, while the “ATE1 Heterogeneous” specification allows
   the treatment effect to vary by firm size, firm age, and the two measures of pre-buyout growth history.
3. Each regression has 1,985,489 observations.




                                                                                                           47
   Table 5. Buyout Effects on Firm-Level Job Reallocation and Excess Reallocation,
   Buyouts from 1980 to 2003
   Estimated Responses Relative to                  Regression Specification
   Controls from Buyout Year t to t+2          ATE=ATE1           ATE1 Heterogeneous
                                                         !
                                            Buyout     𝑅         Buyout        𝑅!
           Dependent Variable               Effect                Effect
   Firm-level Excess Reallocation –           9.25          0.37         9.29          0.37
   All Adjustment Margins                    (0.08)                     (0.09)
   Firm-level Excess Reallocation –           6.38          0.38         6.40          0.39
   Births, Deaths & Continuers               (0.08)                     (0.08)
   Firm-level Job Reallocation –             13.81          0.21        13.89          0.21
   All Adjustment Margins                    (0.15)                     (0.15)
   Firm-level Job Reallocation –              5.47          0.22         5.62          0.22
   Births, Deaths & Continuers               (0.14)                     (0.14)

Notes:
1. Employment-weighted regressions on a sample of Target and Control firms, with rates calculated over
   the two-year horizon from the event year t to t+2. Standard errors in parentheses.
2. The semi-parametric regression specifications include fully interacted industry, year, firm age, firm size
   and multi-unit effects plus additional controls for pre-buyout growth history. The “ATE=ATE1”
   specification imposes a uniform treatment effect, while the “ATE1 Heterogeneous” specification allows
   the treatment effect to vary by firm size, firm age, and the two measures of pre-buyout growth history.
3. Each regression has 1,985,489 observations.




                                                                                                           48
   Table 6. Cumulative Two-Year Job Reallocation at Target Firms and Controls,
   Buyouts from 1980 to 2003
   A. Organic Changes, Excluding Acquisitions and Divestitures
   Rates Expressed as a       Target         Control                            From Tables 4 and 5
   Percent of Employment      Firms          Firms        Difference         Difference         Standard Error
   Job Creation                  24.96	        22.96	           2.00	               0.94	           (0.10)	  
                  Continuers     11.51	        11.74	        -­‐0.22	            -­‐0.93	           (0.07)	  
            Births (Entrants)    13.44	        11.22	           2.22	               1.87	           (0.05)	  
   Job Destruction               26.89	        22.62	           4.27	               4.69	           (0.11)	  
                  Continuers     13.28	        12.65	           0.63	               0.64	           (0.06)	  
               Deaths (Exits)    13.60	         9.96	           3.64	               4.13	           (0.08)	  
   Employment Growth             -­‐1.93	       0.34	        -­‐2.27	            -­‐3.75	           (0.16)	  
   Job Reallocation              51.85	        45.58	           6.27	               5.62	           (0.14)	  
   Excess Reallocation           49.91	        45.23	           4.68	                   	  
                 Within-Firm     33.09	        27.02	           6.06	               6.40	           (0.08)	  

   B. All Adjustment Margins, Including Acquisitions and Divestitures
   Rates Expressed as a        Target       Control                       From Tables 4 and 5
   Percent of Employment       Firms        Firms        Difference Difference           Standard Error
   Job Creation                   35.86	      28.42	         7.44	           6.25	            (0.11)	  
   Job Destruction                33.21	      26.67	         6.53	           7.03	            (0.13)	  
   Employment Growth               2.65	       1.75	         0.90	        -­‐0.65	            (0.16)	  
   Job Reallocation               69.07	      55.10	        13.97	        13.89	              (0.15)	  
   Excess Reallocation            66.41	      53.35	        13.07	               	  
                 Within-Firm      38.82	      29.82	         9.01	           9.29	            (0.09)	  

   Notes:
   1. For Target Firms and Control Firms, we aggregate over cells using the employment shares of targets.
      For cells with multiple controls, each control receives equal weight.


   Table 7. Buyout Effects on Target Firms Relative to Controls by Type of Buyout, 1980 to 2003

                                                                 Type of Private Equity Buyout
                                             Public to     Independent       Divisional       Secondary              Other
   Dependent Variable                         Private       to Private        Buyout           Buyout
   Employment Growth Rate                     -10.36          10.51             -1.47            7.15             -6.45
   from Buyout Year t to t+2                  (0.42)          (0.24)           (0.45)           (0.58)           (0.80)
   Excess Reallocation Rate from               5.09            4.69            20.32            29.79              6.16
   Buyout Year t to t+2                       (0.24)          (0.10)           (0.19)           (0.27)           (0.40)
   Number of Observations                    289,228        1,269,396         456,135          168,508          122,613

Notes:
1. Results are based on the semi-parametric ATE1 Heterogeneous specifications of Tables 4 and 5, fit
   separately to target and control observations for each type of private equity buyout.




                                                                                                                             49
   Table 8. Entry and Exit of Manufacturing Plants by Location in Own-Industry
   Distribution of Total Factor Productivity, Buyouts from 1980 to 2003

A. Plant Exit Probabilities in the First Two Years Post Buyout (Logistic Specification)
   Location in Own-Industry                                             P-value for Difference
   TFP Distribution as of the     Probability of Plant Exit by Year t+2  Between Targets and
   Buyout Year t                     Targets             Controls             Controls
   Bottom Tercile                     0.143                 0.091               0.025
                                     (0.023)              (0.002)
   Middle Tercile                     0.112                 0.062               0.139
                                     (0.034)              (0.002)
   Top Tercile                        0.078                 0.067               0.487
                                     (0.015)              (0.002)

B. Plant Entry Probabilities in the First Two Years Post Buyout (Logistic Specification)
   Location in Own-Industry     Probability that a Plant Operating in P-value for Difference
   TFP Distribution in t+2,           t+2 Entered in t+1 or t+2        Between Targets and
   Two Years After Buyout           Targets             Controls            Controls
   Bottom Tercile                    0.056                0.121               0.000
                                    (0.015)              (0.006)
   Middle Tercile                    0.071                0.078               0.590
                                    (0.016)              (0.003)
   Top Tercile                       0.127                0.072               0.058
                                    (0.029)              (0.003)

Notes:
1. Predicted probabilities implied by logistic regressions, using the propensity weights described in Section
   7.A. Standard errors are in parentheses.
2. The dependent variable in panel A equals 1 if the plant exits in the first or second year after the buyout
   year, zero otherwise. The dependent variable in panel B equals 1 if the establishment enters in the first
   or second year post buyout, zero otherwise. Entry and exit outcomes are determined using the full LBD.
3. Explanatory variables are terciles of the own-industry*year TFP distribution interacted with target and
   control dummies. Terciles are defined based on a plant’s position in the same-industry/same-year
   distribution of total factor productivity, using 4-digit SIC and 6-digit NAICS industry definitions.
4. The Panel A regression has about 107,000 observations, and the Panel B regression has about 91,000
   observations.




                                                                                                          50
      Table 9. Productivity of Manufacturing Plants, Targets and Controls,
      Buyouts from 1980 to 2003

           A. TFP In Buyout Year t by Plant Status in Year t+2
Dependent Variable: Plant-level Log TFP in Year t                P-Value for
                                                             Difference Between
Plant Status                      Targets       Controls    Targets and Controls
Continuers                         0.016    Omitted Group
                                  (0.012)                           0.180
Exits                              -0.075          -0.032
                                  (0.035)         (0.008)           0.232
Divestitures                       -0.023          -0.044
                                  (0.027)         (0.007)           0.462
R-Squared                      0.538

         B. TFP In Year t+2, Two Years After Buyout, by Plant Status in Year t+2
      Dependent Variable: Plant-level Log TFP in Year t+2           P-Value for
                                                                Difference Between
      Plant Status                      Targets       Controls  Targets and Controls
      Continuers                         0.020    Omitted Group
                                        (0.011)                        0.076
      Entrants                           0.182          -0.039
                                        (0.055)        (0.011)         0.000
      Acquisitions                       -0.010         -0.030
                                        (0.047)        (0.007)         0.668
      R-Squared                      0.523

         C. TFP Growth at Continuing Plants, from Buyout Year t to t+2
      Dependent Variable: Change in Plant-level Log TFP from         P-Value for
      Buyout Year t to t+2                                       Difference Between
                                       Targets       Controls    Targets and Controls
      Continuers                        0.001      Omitted Group        0.954
                                       (0.011)
      R-Squared                     0.071

   Notes:
   1. OLS regressions using the propensity weights described in Section 7.A. The omitted group is continuing
      control plants. All specifications include industry-year effects as well as firm size and age effects.
      Standard errors in parentheses.
   2. There are about 107,000 observations in the Panel A regression, 91,000 in the Panel B regression, and
      62,000 in the Panel C regression. On a propensity-weighted basis, 83% of the target observations in
      Panel A are continuers, 8 percent are entrants and 7 percent are divestitures. Continuers account for 86
      percent of target observations in Panel B, entrants for 8 percent, and acquisitions for 6 percent. Plant
      status is determined using the full LBD. Since target plants are overwhelmingly (99 percent) part of
      multi-unit firms, this analysis focuses on targets and controls part of multi-unit firms.
   3. By design, this table considers firms that continue from the buyout year t to t+2. If we add firm exits to
      the sample, the “Exits” row of Panel A changes slightly: the coefficient becomes -0.085 (0.034) for
      Targets and -0.042 (0.007) for Controls.


                                                                                                             51
Table 10. Impact of Private Equity Buyouts on Total Factor Productivity
in the Manufacturing Sector, Buyouts from 1980 to 2003

       Estimated Average Two-Year Post-Buyout Change in TFP
       at Target Firms Relative to Controls, Log Points

       TFP Log Change Differential               2.14
       Excluding Acquisitions & Divestitures     2.01

       Share of Total TFP Two-Year Change
       Differential By Margin of Adjustment
       Continuing Establishments                 0.20
       Entry and Exit                            0.74
       Acquisitions and Divestitures             0.06


Notes:
1. Table entries are calculated according to Equation (1) using diff-in-diff estimates from Table 9 and
   share measures retrieved from Table B.1 in the online appendix, as discussed in the main text. The
   lower panel in the table reports the shares of the TFP log change differential on the left side of
   equation (1) accounted for by each term on the right side of the equation.
2. The baseline average two-year TFP change for control firms is an estimated -0.38 log points with an
   estimated standard error of 0.24. This estimate is obtained from a propensity-weighted regression of
   the two-year log change in TFP on a constant and target status dummy in the sample of continuing
   target and control plants, the same sample used for Panel C in Table 9.




                                                                                                     52
Table 11. Earnings per Worker (EPW) at Target and Control Establishments,
Buyouts from 1980 to 2003

       A. EPW In Buyout Year t by Establishment Status in Year t+2

   Dependent Variable: Establishment Log Real EPW in Year t                     P-Values for
                                                                            Difference Between
   Establishment Status                  Targets            Controls        Targets and Controls
   Continuers                              0.011            Omitted                0.000
                                         (0.003)             Group
   Exits                                  -0.085             -0.115                 0.000
                                         (0.006)            (0.004)
   Divestitures                            0.163             -0.055                 0.000
                                         (0.009)            (0.006)
   R-Squared                         0.448

       B. EPW in Year t+2, Two Years After Buyout, by Establishment Status in Year t+2

   Dependent Variable: Establishment Log Real EPW in Year t+2                   P-Values for
                                                                            Difference Between
   Establishment Status                  Targets          Controls          Targets and Controls
   Continuers                             -0.031        Omitted Group              0.000
                                         (0.003)
   Entrants                                0.015             -0.011                 0.000
                                         (0.006)            (0.004)
   Acquisitions                            0.010             -0.015                 0.000
                                         (0.007)            (0.006)
   R-Squared                         0.421

       C. EPW Growth at Continuing Establishments, from Buyout Year t to t+2

   Dependent Variable: Change in Establishment Log Real EPW                 P-Values for Difference
   from Buyout Year t to t+2                                                 Between Targets and
                                             Targets        Controls                Controls
   Continuers                                 -0.024        Omitted                  0.000
                                             (0.002)         Group
   R-Squared                              0.200
Notes:
1. All specifications include the full cross product of industry, year, firm size, and firm age effects.
2. The reported results are for weighted regressions equivalent to a nonparametric matching estimator in
   Panel C and approximately equivalent in Panels A and B. The observation for each control
   establishment is weighted by the ratio of targets to controls in the same industry-year-size-age cell.
   Similar results obtain with equal weighting of all observations.
3. There are about 1.7 million observations in the Panel A regression, 1.8 million in the Panel B regression,
   and 1.3 million in the Panel C regression. Like Table 9, this analysis focuses on target and control
   plants part of multi-unit firms. Results (available upon request) including SU plants are very similar.
4. By design, this table considers firms that continue from the buyout year t to t+2. If we add firm exits to
   the sample, the “Exits” row of Panel A changes slightly: the coefficient remains -0.085 (0.006) for
   Targets and becomes -0.120 (0.004) for Controls.

                                                                                                          53
                          For Online Posting; Not Intended for Publication

Private Equity, Jobs, and Productivity: Appendix                                     15 September 2013

    A. 	  Matching Issues and Robustness to EIN Cases

    We consider private equity transactions that involve U.S. firms as buyout targets. Our
analysis relies on a unique new dataset that combines information on private equity transactions
from CapitalIQ and other sources with establishment-level and firm-level data from the Census
Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) and Annual Surveys and Censuses of
Manufactures (ASM and CM). The linkage is accomplished by matching name and address
information for target firms in private equity buyout transactions to name and address data of
their establishments in the Census Bureau’s Business Register (BR).1 The BR, LBD, ASM and
CM all contain common identifiers that facilitate easy linking of establishment and firm data
across each source. We use the LBD to follow target firms and their establishments over time,
obtaining annual observations. We also use the BR and LBD to identify controls (comparable
firms and establishments) and follow them over time as well. Our productivity analysis involves
additional matching to observations in the CM and ASM.

    The LBD tracks establishments and their parent firms using a combination of administrative
records and survey collections that include the Company Organization Survey (COS), the
Economic Censuses and the Annual Surveys of Businesses (e.g., the ASM). Information about
the company structure is incorporated in the LBD by attaching firm identifiers to records for
establishments (physical locations where economic activity occurs). Ownership changes are
identified when establishments switch parent firm through mergers, acquisitions and divestitures.

    The Census Bureau assigns a unique firm ID to all the establishments under common
ownership and control in a given year, including establishments that belong to subsidiaries under
control of the parent corporation. This firm ID is distinct from a taxpayer ID such as the
employer identification number (EIN). The relationships among the various IDs are as follows.
In any given year, an establishment is uniquely associated with a single taxpayer ID and a single
firm ID. Moreover, each taxpayer ID is uniquely associated with a firm ID. In the case of
multi-establishment firms, a parent firm ID has multiple affiliated establishment IDs and
potentially multiple EINs. Put differently, the EIN as a unit of observation is somewhere
between an establishment and a firm.

    To match deals and target firms in the Capital IQ data to the Census Business Register, our
main method works as follows. First, we use name and address information in the two data
sources to match a particular deal to a specific unit in the BR. Because the matching algorithm
relies partly on address information, this step identifies a specific matched establishment owned
by the target firm – often but not always a headquarters facility. In a second step, we use the BR
link between that establishment’s ID and its firm ID to identify the target firm in the BR. In
most cases, this method accurately identifies the target firm in the BR and all of its activity.

   For divisional buyouts, we could not always identify the correct target firm in the BR after
matching the deal to a specific establishment. These instances arose because, in some cases, the
Census firm ID associated with the matched establishments did not change to reflect the
1
  The LBD is actually a value-added product constructed by longitudinally linking annual BR snapshots. The LBD
is engineered to link trivially to the BR.

                                                                                                                 1
                        For Online Posting; Not Intended for Publication

ownership change of the division or subsidiary involved in the deal. We identified these
problematic cases by observing that the matched target establishment remained affiliated with
the parent seller firm even after the transaction. It is our understanding that the Census Bureau
on occasion had difficulty tracking the new firm in divisional buyouts because of nonresponse on
the COS or other survey instruments. In considering these cases, it is important to note that the
BR still accurately tracks the activity of the target establishments over time.

    We thus had two types of divisional cases. The first are those where we could accurately
identify the target firm using our main method. The second are those where we could not
accurately identify the target firm using our main method. Even in those cases, we were able to
link the matched establishment to at least a part of the target firm through the EIN (taxpayer ID).
The complete target firm may or may not be identified in such cases, because the divisional
business involved in the buyout may have operated with multiple EINs. In the main text and this
appendix, we refer to such cases as EIN cases. In these EIN cases, we can accurately identify a
part of the target firm in the transaction year and at least some of the corresponding target
establishments.

    Given the presence of EIN cases in our matched data samples, we proceed as follows. In the
establishment-level analysis that tracks the pre and post outcomes of target and control
establishments, we use both firm ID cases based on our main method and EIN cases.
Longitudinal establishment links in the BR allow us to track the pre and post outcomes
regardless of ownership, so the inclusion of EIN cases involves no issues for our establishment-
level analysis.

    We exclude the EIN cases in the firm-level analysis, because the EIN is not suitable for
tracking firms over time. For example, a target firm that adds a new establishment may obtain a
new EIN for that establishment for accounting or tax reasons. Table 2 in the main text reports
statistics for the EIN cases in the sample for the 1980-2003 period. There are 391 EIN cases
over this period out of a total of 2265 target firms.

    To check the sensitivity of our results to the EIN cases, we repeated the establishment-level
analysis in Section 5 of the main text for the subsample that excludes the EIN cases. Figures A.1
to A.3 and Table A.1 below report the results. In all cases, they are quite similar to those reported
in the main text. We conclude that omission of the 391 EIN cases is unlikely to cause a serious
bias in the firm-level analyses reported in the main text.

   We also encountered other matching problems when integrating the Census Business
Register and Capital IQ data. In a few case cases where we retimed the transaction forward, we
could not accurately identify the target firm in the forward year. These 16 cases are excluded
from our analysis.




                                                                                                   2
                      For Online Posting; Not Intended for Publication

Figure A.1A: Comparison of Employment Trajectory for Target Establishments to Controls,
Buyouts from 1980 to 2000, Excluding EIN Cases

2,200,000
                     Targets
2,000,000
                     Controls
1,800,000

1,600,000

1,400,000
               -5    -4     -3       -2    -1   0     1      2     3      4     5


Figure A.1B: Employment Growth Rate Differences before and after the Buyout Year, Target
Establishments Minus Controls, Buyouts from 1980 to 2000, Excluding EIN Cases

 Difference, Percent of Employment
 3.00
 2.00
 1.00
 0.00
-1.00
-2.00
-3.00
          -5    -4     -3    -2       -1    0    1      2     3      4     5




                                                                                           3
                        For Online Posting; Not Intended for Publication

Figure A.2A: Job Creation Rates before and after Buyout Year, Target Establishments Minus
Controls, Buyouts from 1980 to 2000, Excluding EIN Cases
 4.00
 3.00
 2.00
 1.00
 0.00
-1.00
          -5       -4     -3     -2     -1     0      1      2      3      4       5

Figure A.2B: Job Destruction Rates before and after Buyout Year, Target Establishments Minus
Controls, Buyouts from 1980 to 2000, Excluding EIN Cases
 4.00
 3.00
 2.00
 1.00
 0.00
-1.00
          -5       -4     -3     -2     -1     0      1      2      3      4       5

Figure A.3: Employment-Weighted Establishment Exit Rates Post Buyout, Targets Minus
Controls, Buyouts from 1980 to 2000, Excluding EIN Cases
 1.60

 1.20

 0.80

 0.40

 0.00

-0.40
               1               2               3               4               5




                                                                                               4
                   For Online Posting; Not Intended for Publication



Table A.1 Post-Buyout Employment Growth Rates at Target Establishments
Relative to Controls, Buyouts from 1980 to 2000, Excluding EIN cases.

                         Non-Parametric               Regression Approaches
                        Comparison From          ATE=ATE1             ATE1
                          Figure A.1B                             Heterogeneous
            Buyout Year       2.59                   2.75               2.97
                                                   (0.18)             (0.19)
        Buyout Year +1           -0.67              -0.45              -0.94
                                                   (0.21)             (0.21)
                      +2         -1.94              -1.39              -1.44
                                                   (0.22)             (0.22)
                      +3         -0.60              -0.09              -0.01
                                                   (0.22)             (0.23)
                      +4         -0.45               0.13               0.25
                                                   (0.23)             (0.23)
                      +5         -1.33              -1.32              -1.55
                                                   (0.24)             (0.24)
Cumulative, Years 1 to 5         -4.99              -3.13              -3.69

Notes:
   1. See notes 1, 2 and 3 to Table 3 in the main text.
   2. The average number of establishment-level observations in each regression or
       nonparametric comparison is about 4.3 million. The observation count falls with
       each successive year following the transaction year because of target deaths and
       deleted observations for the corresponding control establishments.




                                                                                          5
                            For Online Posting; Not Intended for Publication

     B. Supplemental Descriptive Statistics Referenced in Section 4 of the Main Text

     Figures B.1 and B.2 referenced in Section 4 of the main text are displayed below.

Figure B.1A: Industry Distribution of Employment, Buyout Targets Compared to the Full
LBD, 2002 to 2005

            20
            18
            16
            14
            12
            10
  Percent




             8
             6
             4
             2
             0




                 Full LBD   Buyout Targets Only


Figure B.1B: Industry Distribution of Employment, Buyout Targets Compared to the Full
LBD, 1981 to 2001

            40
            35
            30
            25
            20
  Percent




            15
            10
             5
             0



                                                  Full LBD




                                                                                         6
                       For Online Posting; Not Intended for Publication


Figure B.2A: Distribution of Employment by Firm Size (Number of Employees), Buyout
Targets Compared to Full LBD, 1980-2005

      120

      100
                 Full LBD
            80
                 Buyout Targets Only

            60
  Percent




            40

            20

             0
                   a. 0 <100             b. 100-499             c. 500+



Figure B.2B: Distribution of Employment by Age of Firm’s Oldest Establishment,
Buyout Targets Compared to Full LBD, 1980-2005

      100
            90
            80
            70      Full LBD
            60
                    Buyout Targets
            50      Only
  Percent




            40
            30
            20
            10
             0
                     a. 0-4                b. 5-9               c. 10+




                                                                                 7
                    For Online Posting; Not Intended for Publication


   C. Semi-Parametric Regression Specifications and Supplemental Results Referenced
      in Sections 5, 6 and 7 of the Main Text

    Table 3, 4 and 5 report results for two types of semi-parametric regression
specifications: an ATE=ATE1 specification that imposes uniform treatment effects and
an ATE1 Heterogeneous specification that allows treatment effects to vary by firm size,
firm age and our two measures of pre-buyout growth history.

   The ATE=ATE1 specification can be written

        𝑌!,!!! = 𝛼! +     ! 𝐷!"# 𝜃!,!   + 𝜆!,! 𝐿𝐹𝐼𝑅𝑀!" +    𝜆!,! 𝐿𝐸𝑆𝑇!" + 𝛾! 𝑃𝐸!" + 𝜀!,!!! ,

where 𝑌!" is the outcome variable (e.g,. rate of growth, job creation, or job destruction)
for firm i at time t+j for some j ∈ {−5,−4,...,0,...4,5}, , 𝐷!"# is a set of dummy variables
for cell 𝑐 for firm i at time t where the cells are defined in by the full cross product of
buyout year t, industry, firm size category, firm age category and multi-unit status,
𝐿𝐹𝐼𝑅𝑀!"    is the growth rate from t-3 to t-1 of the parent firm as of t-3, 𝐿𝐸𝑆𝑇!" is the
growth rate from t-3 to t-1 for the establishments that constitute the target firm in year t,
and 𝑃𝐸!" is a dummy variable equal to 1 for a target firm.

       The ATE1 Heterogeneous specification is

    𝑌!,!!! = 𝛼! +       𝐷!"# 𝜃!,! + 𝜆!,! 𝐿𝐹𝐼𝑅𝑀!" +    𝜆!,! 𝐿𝐸𝑆𝑇!"
                    !
                    +        𝐷!"# 𝑃𝐸!" 𝛾!,! + 𝛾!,! 𝐿𝐹𝐼𝑅𝑀!" 𝑃𝐸!" +    𝛾!,! 𝐿𝐸𝑆𝑇!" 𝑃𝐸!" + 𝜀!,!!!
                         !

All variables are defined as above, but the ATE1 heterogeneous specification allows the
treatment effect to vary by characteristics including a set of cell-based variables k (in
practice by firm size and by firm age – not interacted) and the lagged growth terms. To
recover the average treatment effect on the treated in this case, we compute a weighted
average of the heterogeneous estimated treatment effects, using cell-level employment
weights of targets in the buyout year. We calculate standard errors by the Delta method.

    As remarked in Section 5 of the main text, employment expands at target and control
establishments before the buyout year, and it shrinks at both sets of establishments after
the buyout. This pattern is evident in Figure C.1 below.

    Tables C.1 and C.2 provide additional information related to Table 6 of Section 6.
Figures C.2 and C.3 and Table C.3 report results referenced in Section 6.D in the main
text. Figure C.2 shows that target-control employment growth rate differences are
negative for buyouts that took place in the 1980s, from 1990 to 94, and from 1995 to
2000. Figure C.3 shows the evolution of target-control employment growth rate
differences before and after buyouts from 1980 to 2000 in three major industry sectors:
Manufacturing, Retail Trade, and Services. Table C.3 provides an expanded version of



                                                                                                 8
                      For Online Posting; Not Intended for Publication


Table 7 in the main text. Table C.4 reports results referenced in Section 7.D for EPW
regressions by type of private equity buyout and by major industry sector.




Figure C.1: Employment Growth Rates before and after the Buyout Year, Targets and
Controls Compared, Buyouts from 1980 to 2000

                               Net Job Creation Rates: Targets vs Controls
                                         Before and After Event

  15.00


  10.00


   5.00


   0.00
           -5    -4       -3         -2        -1              0              1      2      3        4         5
   -5.00


  -10.00

                                                    Buy Outs       Controls




Table C.1: Cumulative Two-Year Reallocation at Target Firms and Controls,
Buyouts from 1980 to 2003, Role of Within-Firm/Within-County Reallocation

                                                                                  Target   Control
Rates Expressed as a Percent of Employment                                        Firms    Firms         Difference
Organic Changes Only, Excluding Acquisitions and
Divestitures
Job Reallocation                                                                   51.85     45.58             6.27
Excess Within-Firm Job Reallocation                                                33.09     27.02             6.06
Excess Within-Firm/Within-County Job Reallocation                                  16.10     13.52             2.58
All Adjustment Margins
Job Reallocation                                                                   69.07     55.10           13.97
Excess Within-Firm Job Reallocation                                                38.82     29.82            9.01
Excess Within Firm/County Job Reallocation                                         18.08     14.57            3.51

Notes: See notes to Table 6 and Section 6.C in the main text.




                                                                                                                      9
                      For Online Posting; Not Intended for Publication


Table C.2: Cumulative Two-Year Job Reallocation at Target Firms And Controls,
Buyouts from 1980 to 2003, Manufacturing Only

       A. Organic Changes, Excluding Acquisitions and Divestitures
       Rates Expressed as a Percent of     Target Control
       Employment                          Firms Firms               Difference
       Job Creation                         13.34	      14.62	          -­‐1.29	  
                               Continuers       7.81	      9.25	        -­‐1.45	  
                                    Births      5.53	      5.37	           0.16	  
       Job Destruction                      19.73	      19.44	             0.29	  
                               Continuers 11.35	        11.50	          -­‐0.15	  
                                   Deaths       8.38	      7.93	           0.45	  
       Employment Growth                     -­‐6.39	   -­‐4.81	        -­‐1.58	  
       Job Reallocation                     33.07	      34.06	          -­‐0.99	  
       Excess Within-Firm Reallocation      17.13	      17.70	          -­‐0.57	  

       B. All Adjustment Margins, Including Acquisitions and Divestitures
       Rates Expressed as a Percent of       Target Control
       Employment                            Firms Firms              Difference
       Job Creation                           22.01	     20.17	             1.84	  
       Job Destruction                        30.22	     23.80	             6.42	  
       Employment Growth                      -­‐8.22	   -­‐3.63	        -­‐4.58	  
       Job Reallocation                       52.23	     43.97	             8.26	  
       Excess Within-Firm Reallocation        23.63	     21.78	             1.86	  

Notes: See notes to Table 6 in the main text.




                                                                                         10
                       For Online Posting; Not Intended for Publication


Figure C.2: Employment Growth Rate Difference before and after the Buyout Year, Target
Establishments Minus Controls, by Time Period of Buyout Event

                       Comparison of Net Growth Rates -- Targets less Controls
                                   Before and After Event, 1980s


   5.00
   4.00
   3.00
   2.00
   1.00
   0.00
   -1.00   -5     -4        -3       -2      -1      0       1          2       3       4       5
   -2.00
   -3.00
   -4.00
   -5.00




                       Comparison of Net Growth Rates -- Targets less Controls
                                Before and After Event, 1990-1994


   5.00
   4.00
   3.00
   2.00
   1.00
   0.00
   -1.00   -5     -4        -3      -2      -1      0       1       2       3       4       5
   -2.00
   -3.00
   -4.00
   -5.00




                       Comparison of Net Growth Rates -- Targets less Controls
                                   Before and After Event, 1995+


   5.00
   4.00
   3.00
   2.00
   1.00
   0.00
   -1.00   -5     -4        -3      -2      -1      0       1       2       3       4       5
   -2.00
   -3.00
   -4.00
   -5.00




                                                                                                    11
              For Online Posting; Not Intended for Publication

 Figure C.3: Employment Growth Rate Difference for Selected Industry Sectors, Target
 Establishments Minus Controls, Buyouts from 1980 to 2000



                    Comparison of Net Growth Rates -- Targets less Controls
                            Before and After Event, Manufacturing


8.00

6.00

4.00

2.00

0.00
        -5     -4        -3      -2      -1      0       1       2       3    4   5
-2.00

-4.00

-6.00

-8.00



                    Comparison of Net Growth Rates -- Targets less Controls
                                Before and After Event, Retail


8.00

6.00

4.00

2.00

0.00
        -5     -4        -3      -2      -1      0       1       2       3    4   5
-2.00

-4.00

-6.00

-8.00




                    Comparison of Net Growth Rates -- Targets less Controls
                              Before and After Event, Services


8.00

6.00

4.00

2.00

0.00
        -5     -4        -3      -2      -1      0       1       2       3    4   5
-2.00

-4.00

-6.00

-8.00




                                                                                       12
                         For Online Posting; Not Intended for Publication



   Table C.3: Buyout Effects on Target Firms Relative to Controls by Type of Buyout
   and Adjustment Margin, Buyouts from 1980 to 2003 (An Expanded Version of
   Table 7)

                                                       Type of Private Equity Buyout
                                      Public to      Independent     Divisional     Secondary      Other
   Dependent Variable                  Private        to Private      Buyout         Buyout
   Employment Growth Rate               -10.36          10.51           -1.47          7.15         -6.45
   from Buyout Year t to t+2            (0.42)          (0.24)         (0.45)         (0.58)       (0.80)


   Adjustment Margin
   Continuers                             1.40            1.44          -1.42           3.11        -1.84
                                        (0.25)          (0.16)         (0.31)         (0.38)       (0.56)
   Divestitures                           6.80            0.15           5.34          -0.06        -1.52
                                        (0.13)          (0.05)         (0.11)         (0.16)       (0.19)
   Deaths                                 5.95            1.50           5.97         12.14          9.28
                                        (0.19)          (0.12)         (0.23)         (0.30)       (0.44)
   Births                                -3.12           -0.38           3.32         17.23          1.5
                                        (0.14)          (0.07)         (0.13)         (0.19)       (0.25)
   Acquisitions                           3.98          10.98            7.61          -1.21         1.7
                                        (0.25)          (0.06)         (0.12)         (0.16)       (0.21)
   Job Creation All                      1.15	         11.02	        12.08	        17.22	       1.70	  
                                        (0.24)	        (0.14)	       (0.27)	       (0.37)	     (0.50)	  
   Job Destruction All                  11.62	          0.55	        13.81	        11.23	       8.12	  
                                        (0.26)	        (0.17)	       (0.30)	       (0.40)	     (0.56)	  
   Excess Reallocation All               5.09	          4.69	        20.32	        29.79	       6.16	  
                                        (0.24)	        (0.10)	       (0.19)	       (0.27)	     (0.40)	  
   Number of Observations              289,228        1,269,396       456,135        168,508       122,613


   Notes:
1. The results are based on semi-parametric regressions that include fully interacted
   industry, year, firm age, firm size and multi-unit effects plus additional controls for pre-
   buyout growth history. The specification allows the treatment effect to vary by firm size,
   firm age, and the two measures of pre-buyout growth history.




                                                                                                   13
                                                For Online Posting; Not Intended for Publication



        Table C.4: Earnings per Worker (EPW) at Target and Control Establishments, Buyouts from 1980 to 2003,
        By Type of Buyout and Selected Industry Sector

                                                                      A. Type of Private Equity Buyout
                                       Public to Private Private to Private      Divisional          Secondary  Other
                                                                                  Buyout               Buyout
Dependent Variable: Establishment-    Targets Controls Targets Controls Targets Controls Targets Controls Targets Controls
Level Log Real EPW in Year t
Continuers                             0.030     Omitted    -0.024   Omitted     0.184   Omitted    0.045    Omitted    -0.091   Omitted
                                      (0.006)     Group    (0.003)    Group    (0.009)    Group    (0.008)    Group    (0.011)    Group
Exits                                  -0.039     -0.184    -0.163    -0.106    -0.081    -0.107    0.026     -0.014    -0.075    -0.166
                                      (0.012)    (0.010)   (0.010)   (0.005)   (0.018)   (0.011)   (0.014)   (0.010)   (0.030)   (0.012)
Divestitures                           0.079      -0.112     0.251    -0.029     0.178     0.032    0.200     -0.173     0.155     0.136
                                      (0.013)    (0.010)   (0.017)   (0.009)   (0.018)   (0.014)   (0.059)   (0.017)   (0.066)   (0.023)
Dependent Variable: Establishment-
Level Log Real EPW in Year t+2
Continuers                             -0.057    Omitted    -0.060   Omitted     0.148   Omitted    0.089    Omitted -0.105      Omitted
                                      (0.007)     Group    (0.003)    Group    (0.009)    Group    (0.008)    Group (0.011)       Group
Entrants                               0.017      0.008     -0.067    0.039      0.005    -0.217    0.131     -0.001 0.113        -0.024
                                      (0.012)    (0.014)   (0.009)   (0.005)   (0.017)   (0.011)   (0.012)   (0.010) (0.030)     (0.015)
Acquisitions                           -0.238     0.039      0.062    0.038     -0.191    -0.119    0.180     -0.003  -0.040      -0.066
                                      (0.026)    (0.016)   (0.009)   (0.007)   (0.022)   (0.013)   (0.026)   (0.013) (0.060)     (0.026)
Dependent Variable: Change in Log
Real EPW from t to t+2
Continuers from t to t+2               -0.072    Omitted    -0.023   Omitted    -0.004   Omitted    0.048    Omitted    0.016    Omitted
                                      (0.005)     Group    (0.003)    Group    (0.008)    Group    (0.007)    Group    (0.009)    Group
                                                 For Online Posting; Not Intended for Publication



                                                                       B. Major Industry Sector
                                        Manufacturing   Wholesale Trade     Retail Trade        FIRE           Services
                                       Targets Controls Targets Controls Targets Controls Targets Controls Targets Controls

Dependent Variable: Establishment-
Level Log Real EPW in Year t
Continuers in Year t                    -0.004    Omitted    0.140    Omitted     0.032   Omitted     -0.090   Omitted    0.072    Omitted
                                       (0.010)     Group    (0.008)    Group    (0.004)    Group     (0.006)    Group    (0.006)    Group
Deaths                                  -0.035     -0.079    0.058     -0.070    -0.069    -0.112     -0.176    -0.126    0.096     -0.152
                                       (0.017)    (0.012)   (0.025)   (0.012)   (0.012)   (0.007)    (0.014)   (0.006)   (0.014)   (0.012)
Divestitures                            -0.030     -0.017    0.027      0.002     0.324    -0.129      0.107     0.046    0.253     -0.318
                                       (0.015)    (0.011)   (0.074)   (0.016)   (0.014)   (0.007)    (0.055)   (0.012)   (0.028)   (0.017)
Dependent Variable: Establishment-
Level Log Real EPW in Year t+2
Continuers in Year t+2                  -0.012    Omitted    0.041    Omitted    -0.059   Omitted     -0.024   Omitted     0.020   Omitted
                                       (0.011)     Group    (0.009)    Group    (0.004)    Group     (0.007)    Group    (0.007)    Group
Entrants                                0.028       0.016    0.134     -0.124    -0.028    0.030       0.081     0.024     0.184    -0.042
                                       (0.022)    (0.011)   (0.030)   (0.009)   (0.010)   (0.006)    (0.012)   (0.006)   (0.013)   (0.019)
Acquisitions                            -0.066     -0.064    0.102     -0.098     0.048    0.152       0.215    -0.039    -0.030     0.071
                                       (0.021)    (0.017)   (0.036)   (0.016)   (0.009)   (0.011)    (0.058)   (0.007)   (0.022)   (0.018)
Dependent Variable: Change in Log
Real EPW from t to t+2
Continuers from t to t+2                0.009     Omitted    -0.081   Omitted    -0.074   Omitted     0.092    Omitted    -0.064   Omitted
                                       (0.006)     Group    (0.009)    Group    (0.003)    Group     (0.006)    Group    (0.006)    Group

     Notes: See notes to Table 11. Panel A reports results by type of buyout, and Panel B reports results by industry for industries with
     large numbers of buyouts. In Panel B we assign establishments to the industry of its parent firm, defined by the model industry of the
     establishments operated by that firm. We exclude single-unit firms and firms that exit in the first two years post buyout. These
     sample selection criteria have little impact on the results, because target firms are predominantly multi-unit continuers.




                                                                                                                                         15
