NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS ADJUSTMENT
MECHANISM IN A RATIONAL
EXPECTATIONS MODEL

Richard H. Clarida

Working Paper No. 1945

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1986

I would like to thank members of the NBER Summer Institute in
Financial Markets for useful comments and the National Science
Foundation Grant No. SES-8420227 for research support. All
remaining errors are my responsibility. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Working Paper #1945
June 1986

The Balance of Payments Adjustment Mechanism
in a Rational Expectations Equilibrium

ABSTRACT

This paper provides a choice theoretic, general equiljbri
account of the balance of payments adjustment

process and the determination

of national price levels in a woriñ comprised of countries populated

rational households. Balance of

by

payments adjustment dynaniics arise in the

equilibrium of this model from the

precautionary saving behavior of risk—

averse households who self—insure against random

productivity fluctuations

by accumulating, via balance of payments surpluses in

productive

periods, buffer stocks of domestic money which can be drawn down to finance
payments deficits, and thus a less variable profile of
to output, when productivity is

is shown to exhibit the

consumption relative

unexpectedly low. Precautionary saving

Partial_adjustment_to_target behavior typically

postulated in the monetary approach literature. The existence of a rational
expectations equilibrium in which the distribution of international reserves
among central banks is stationary is established.

Richard H. Clarida
The Cowles Foundation
Yale University
Box 2125, Yale Station
New Haven, CT 06520

ThE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS ADJUSThENT MECHANISH

IN A RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS EQUILIBRIUM
Richard

1.

H. Clarida

Introduction

This paper provides a choice theoretic, general equilibrium account
of the balance of payments adjustment process and the determination of
national price levels in a world comprised of countries populated by rational

households. The setting is similar in some respects to that proposed by
Mundell (1968) and Dornbusch (1973) in that households consume and produce
a single good, save by accumulating balances of domestic money, and exchange
domestic for foreign currencies at rates which are fixed by central bank

intervention. However, in contrast to the approaches prevalent in the
modern monetary approach literature (as surveyed by Frenkel and Johnson
(1976) and Frenkel and Mussa (1984)), we study the balance of payments ad-

justment process in an explicit general equilibrium framework in which
expenditure, saving, and money demand relationships are based upon the intertemporal, utility maximizations nroblerns of risk-averse, forward looking

households who confront random fluctuations in their labor productivities.
Non-trivial balance of payments adjustment dynamics arise in the
equilibrium of this model from the Precautionary saving behavior of risk-.

averse households who attempt to self-insure against unanticipated, country
specific productivity fluctuations by accumulating, via balance of payments
surpluses in relatively productive periods, buffer stocks of domestic money

1

2

balances which can be drawn down to finance payments deficits, and thus

a less variable profile of spending relative to income, when productivity
is unexpectedly low.' An appeal of our inventory theoretic approach is that
we are able to derive the typically postualted properties of

savings behavior in a rational expectations general equilibrium framework
which does not require that money holdings yield Dositive utility. In particular, the balance of payments adjustment process exhibited in the equilibrium of this model is driven by the precise sort of partial-adjustmentto-target savings behavior typically postulated in the monetary approach
literature.

The model developed here is adapted from the work of Foley and

Heliwig (1975) and Lucas (1980) and employs the device of a continuum of
countries which experience independently andidentically distributed productivity fluctuations in each period. With no fluctuations in the per
capita world supply of output, there exists a rational exnectations equilibrium which is characterized by a stationary distribution of international
reserves among countries and constant national price levels which depend
in an explicit way on household's attitudes toward risk and the probability

distribution of productivity shocks. Thus, our analysis makes rigorous
the key role played by the distribution of international reserves among
countries, and not just their aggregate supply, in the determination of
national price levels--a role often emphasized in the monetary approach.
literature Csee especially Dornbusch (1973)).

The plan of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we set UP the
general equilibrium model of international trade and reserve flows, establish the homogeneity and monctonicity properties of optimal expenditure
and savings functions, and establish the existence of a stationary rational

expectations equilibrium. In Section 3, we show that equilibrium savings
behavior exhibits the partial-adjustment-to-target properties postulated

in the monetary approach literature. In particular, there exists in each
country a unique target stock of money balances at which planned savings

is zero and expenditure equals expected nominal income. We show that riskaverse households strive to accumulate money balances in excess of those

required

buffer

to finance a spending flow equal to expected nominal income. Such

stocks of liquidity are held in

discount

equilibrium, even though households

future utility, for self-insurance against unexpected productivity

shocks and allow households to attain a less variable profile of consumption

relative to output. However, in equilibrium, self-insurance is not complete:
real expenditure is shown to

productivity

be positively correlated with unanticipated

shocks and is in fact ?darkovian even though shocks are assumed

to be i.i.d. A key result is that, in equilibrium, planned saving in
each country is strictly less than the gap between actual and target money

balances. These properties of equilibrium saving behavior are used to place
restrictions on the non linear stochastic difference equation which is shown
to

govern

the time path of the balance of payments in each country. In

particular, payments imbalances which result from an unanticipated, transitory productivity shock are shown to exhibit persistence which results from
each household's attempt to restore its cash balance position to target

only partially in any given Deriod. Section 4 provides some concluding
remarks.

4

The Model

2.

We study a world economy comprised of a continuum of countries, in-

dexed i

[0,1] ,

each with its own central bank and a representative

household. Households have an infinite planning horizon, are risk averse,
and have access to a stochastic, Ricardian technology which transforms labor
into

the single, tradable consumption good. We assume that labor is not

mobile internationally and that no utility is attached to leisure. Time

is

discrete, and in each period t = 0, 1, 2, ...

the

labor input require-

ment in each country is randomly shocked. These shocks are assumed to be
independently and identically distributed both across countries and time

so

that, with a continuum of countries, there is no fluctuation in the per

capita world supply of output. Normalizing the labor endowment in each
country to unity, let
Formally,

denote the output of country i at date t

is a drawing from a finite set of non-negative random vari-

ables from the fixed c.d.f. G such that G(O) > 0

and G()

The

1 .

only asset available to each household is domestic money which is the liability of the domestic central bank and is backed entirely by fiat inter-

national reserves. Denote by H and R the monetary liabilities and
international reserve holdings of the central bank in i at date t

,

and

let 1/el be the rate at which that bank stands ready to exchange reserves
for balances of its monetary liabilities acquired by central banks in other

countries as the asset of foreign purchases by domestic residents. The

balance shett of the central bank in country i is given in Figure 1.
Trading arrangements are as follows. At the beginning of each period,
before the realization of the productivity shock is known, each household

makes a spending-savings decision. Nominal spending is constrained by
beginning-of-period money balances. One member of each household, the shopper,

5

takes a portion of the beginning-of-period money balances and visits other
countries to purchase the consumption good. Purchases must be made in the

seller's

-

.

2

.

currency. Upon arriving in a foreign country with goods to sell,

the shopper exchanges domestic for foreign balances with that country's

central bank at the rate of 0f,0h units of foreign currency per unit of
domestic currency. The shopper then uses the foreign currency acquired
to purchase the consumption good in that country. The process continues
until each shopper exhausts the money balances with which he began. While
the shopper is away, the worker in each country learns the productivity
shock and produces output which is sold to shoppers from other countries who
exchange their home currencies for domestic money balances with the domes-

tic central bank. At the end of the period, shoppers return home, divide
their purchases with workers, and consume, while central banks settle claims
among

themselves. Central banks in countries in which sales (exports) ex-

ceed purchases (imports) gain reserves since foreign currencies acquired

through trade are convertible to reserves at fixed rate. Given our assump-.
tion that monetary liabilities are backed entirely by foreign exchange
reserves, the fixed exchange rate regime is sustainable with certainty.

Denote by p the money price of goods in i at t

.

We shall

assume sufficient goods market arbitrage so that national price levels are
linked by the purchasing power parity condition

p = (o1/e3)p
for all i, j

[O,lJ and t = 0,

(1)

1, 2

An equivalent interpreta-

tion of (1) is that the implicit rate of exchange between reserves and the

consumption good

6
K.t =

is

11

(2)
[0,1] in each period t = 1, 2, .,.

equal across all countries i

Following

Lucas (1980), we shall study a world economy with a constant per

capita supply of international reserves

and seek an equilibrium in which

national price levels are constant. We note, however, that the equilibrium
time paths of spending and the balance of payments will fluctuate in equi-

librium as countries are continually shocked by new drawings of c .

In

Section 3, we investigate the persistence of these fluctuations, However,
we must first establish the existence of a stationary rational expectations

equilibrium. We begin with the intertemporal optimization problem of a
representative household.

Each household acts so as to3

(3)

max toBtut)
s.t. 0 <

pc
=

where 0 <

u : R -

R

<1

..

-

Ht

(4)

pc

(5)

+

is the rate at which future utility is discounted,

is a bounded, strictly concave, and twice differentiable utility

function with u'(O) =

,

time t .

=

Let

H

Denote by

v(H;

and

pc

c. is consumption of the household at

nominal spending at time t

p; G) be the value of (2) for a household which begins

the period with nominal balances H

,

faces the constant domestic price

level p in the current and all future periods, and behaves optimally.
The household's current period decision problem is

7

max

v(H;p;G) =

u(c/p) +8fV(H-cz+pc; p; G)dG()

(7)

.

O<a<H

The following proposition, which is proven in the appendix, establishes the
relevant properties of optimal spending behavior implied by (7).

Proposition 2.1: Under the assumptions on u and G

,

there exists a

unique, Continuous, strictly increasing, and strictly concave value function and a unique, continuous, linearly homogeneous expenditure function

ci(H;p;G) which solves (2). The marginal propensity to spend is strictly

positive and less-than unity. That is, for all A > 0
0 < a(H+A; p; G) - cz(H;p;G) <

A

(8)

.

We note that expenditure depends upon money balances, the price level,
and the probability distribution of productivity shocks, since actual produc-

tivity and thus output is unknown at the time the spending decision is made.

Let s(H;p; ;G) p - a(H;p;G) denote the household's planned accumulation

by

of money

s(H;p; ;G)

Planned

pe

balances over the period where
-cL(H;p;G)

Ec , and denote

realized accumulation of money balances.

and actual saving will differ whenever actual productivity differs

from mean productivity. The following corollary follows immediately from
Proposition 2.1.

Corollary 2.2: There exists a unique, continuous savings function

s(H;p; ;G) which is linearly homogeneous in H and p . The marginal
propensity to save is strictly negative and less than unity in absolute

value. That is, for all A > 0
0 <

s(H;p;c;G)

-

s(H+A; p; G) < A

.

(9)

8

As demonstrated in the appendix, the result that the marginal propen-

sity

to spend is strictly less than unity follows from the Inada condition

on preferences and

the

assumption that there is a strictly positive prob-

ability that the household will have no output to sell at the end of the

period. Under these conditions, it is never optimal to allow the stock of

money

balances to be drawn down to zero, or to consume all

ment to

for

money balances. If u'(O) <

or G(0) =

0

,

of any invest-

it will be optimal

a household to spend all of its beginning-of-period money balances when.

the latter falls below the threshold level
solution to u'(ll/p) =

11

, where

11

is

the unique

fv'(pE)dG(c)

The international reserve holdings of each central bank evolve according to the Markov process

=

R

-

Kc(R/K;

G) +

Ket

where we have used the fact that H/p = R/K
in

(10)

;

and the result, established

the appendix, that optimal consumption--real expenditure--is a time in-

variant function of real balances. In equilibrium, the per capita demand
for reserves by all central banks must equal the given supply

at the

assumed constant national price levels and implicit rate of exchange between reserves and the consuinption.good. The per capita end of period
demand for reserves depends upon the beginning-of-period distribution of

reserves among central banks, J(R) .

is

Given

J ,

the per capita demand

9

(11)

ff(R- uc(R/K; G) +Ke)dJ(R)dG(c) .

Substituting m H/p
the

= R/K

into (11) and

letting

F(m)

J(Km) denote

beginning-of-period distribution of real balances among countries, we

obtain the following equilibrium condition
ff(m_c(m;G) +c)dF(m)dG(e) =

(12)

R/K

From the goods-market arbitrage relationship (2), we know that national price levels are proportional to K ,

the

implicit reserves price

of goods. The value of K which satisfies (12) will depend upon the distribution of real reserves F(in) over countries. For households' expectations that national price levels be constant over time to be rational, we

require that F(m) be a stationary distribution for the Markov process
which governs the evolution of real balances in each country

=

flit

-

c(m;

(13)

G) +

The existence of a stationary rational expectations equilibrium is established in the following proposition.

Proposition 2.3: There exists a unique, stationary rational expectations

The equilibrium distribution of international reserves among

equilibrium.

countries does not change over time and is given by J(R) =
F

F(R/ K)

where

is the unique stationary distribution for (13) and K is the equilibrium

(implicit) rate of exchange between reserves and the consumption good
K

In
I

= L'ff(m-c(m;G) +c)dF(m)dG(c)

equilibrium,

[0,1]

national

price

levels

(15)

are constant and satisfy, for all

10

=

e'/ff(m_c(m;G)

+c)dF(m)dG()

(16)

Proof: Foley and Heliwig (1975), Proposition 4, pp. 335-336, establish

the existence of a unique stationary F for the Markov process (13) in a
two-state model in which Prob(c = 0) = q

;

= 1-q

Prob(c =

.

The ex-

tension to the case in which c takes on more than two values is trivial

and will be omitted. Given F ,
the equilibrium K ,
reserves among

K

is uniquely determined by (15). Given

the unique stationary distribution of international

countries

is defined by J(R) = F(R/K)

.

Since

F is a

stationary distribution, we have

fmidF(m) - fmdF(m)
for all t = 0, 1, 2, ...

=

- fc(m.;

(17)

;

so that the goods market clears in every period

at the constant national price levels p1 = 01K

for all i, 5

G)dF(m) = 0

and exchange rates

Q.ED.

[0,1] .

The interpretation of the stationary equilibrium established in

Proposition 2.3 is as follows. If international reserves are initially
distributed among countries according to J ,
p' = 01K

[0,1] will clear the goods and asset markets in each

,

period t =

then national price levels

0,

1, 2, ...

and the distribution of international reserves

among countries will not change. In this equilibrium, the balance of payments in each country will be shown to fluctuate in a persistent manner

as national productivities are continually shocked. These payments imbalances will induce reserve flows among countries, but in the aggregate, the

of countries with international reserves less than or equal to
any particular value will remain constant. Alternatively, if international
reserves are initially distributed according to some other J0(R) J(R) ,
fraction

11

the system will converge to the stationary rational expectations equilibrium

if households have static expectations. Of course, in this case, static
expectations will only be rational in the limit.5 This convergence under
static expectations is exactly analogous to the properties of the two-country
model studied by Dornbusch ((1973); 1980, Ch. 8) based upon postulated ex-

penditure and savings functions and static expectations.

However, in

Dornbusch's analysis the long-run equilibrium in which static expectations
are rational is characterized by a zero balance of payments in each country..

We now investigate the balance of payments adjustment process exhibited
in the rational expectations equilibrium of our model.

3. The Balance of Payments Adjustment Process
In the stationary, rational expectations equilibrium, the time path

of

the balance of payments in each country is completely characterized by

the following

non-linear stochastic difference equation

s1 = s((s;
where

+(s;c)

)

+ s; cr1)

s(s(H;p;c;G) + p(p—c))

=

(18)

;

s(s(H;p;;G)

= H

.

The bal-

ance of payments is not Harkov: knowledge of s alone is not sufficient
to determine the probability distribution of

{s = s;

=

s÷

However given

we can calculate

Prob{s1 <s'ls = s;

=

= G((s(s')

-s—(s;c))/p). (19)

In order to obtain sharper results, we must first establish additional

properties of optimal precautionary savings behavior. We now show that
saving in each country exhibits the precise set of partial-adjustment-to-

12

target behavior typically postulated in the monetary approach literature

(Dornbusch (1973)). We begin with the following proposition.

Proposition 3.1: There exists a unique target stock of money balances,

Ht

,

and

at which spending equals expected nominal income c&(Ht; p; G) =
planned

saving is zero, s(H; p; i'; G) = 0

.

(See Figure 2.)

Proof: We seek a fixed point to the transition equation
-

Hi = Ht

c1(H; p; G) +

pu

(20)

.

From Proposition 2.1, the rhs of (20) is a continuous, strictly increas-

ing function of H with slope less than unity. It follows that there is

that

exactly one H such
T

s(H

; p; .i;

(see Figure 3)

G) = 0

(21)

.

Furthermore, since saving is a strictly decreasing function of money bal-

ances, planned saving is strictly positive (negative) when H < (>)

H
Q,E.D.

Corollary 3.2: Target money balances strictly exceed target expenditure:
>

cz(H'r;

p;

G)

In the economies studied in this paper, money serves both as a

medium of exchange and

as

a buffer stock against future unanticipated pro-

ductivity disturbances. For this reason, risk averse households strive
to accumulate money balances which are more than sufficient to finance a

spending flow equal to expected nominal income. In the event of an unanticipated, transitory decline in productivity, households are able to draw
down their inventories of cash balances in excess of target expenditure

13

to finance a less variable profile of consumption relative to productivity.

However, in equilibrium, self-insurance is not complete: expenditure is
strictly positively correlated with unanticiapted productivity shocks.

This is most easily seen by expressing expenditure at time t as a function of time t-l desired end-of-period money balances and the unanticipated productivity shock

c$(H; p; G) =

cz(Hti +s(H

p; p; G)

+p(1 —n); p; G) .

(22)

The observation follows from the Proposition 2.1 result that expenditure is

a strictly increasing function of H and thus P(c..1 We

now investigate the extent to which households attempt to close

the gap between actual and target money balances via planned saving. The
following proposition establishes that planned saving (in absolute value)
is strictly less than the difference between actual and target money

balances.

Proposition 3.3: Planned saving is strictly less (in absolute value) than
the gap between actual and target money balances. That is, for all

H H

(see Figure 4)

o

s(H;p;ji;G)

1

(23)

Ht - H

Proof: H +

s(H;p;;G)

is strictly increasing in H with slope less than

unity. Thus, for H < Ht
+

s(H1;p;i.i;G)

> H1

.

,

H1 = H +

Exactly

s(H;p;p;G)

> H

and

similar argument applies for H >

Ht

Q.E.D.

14

The derivation of a partial-adjustment accumulation policy from the
intertemporal optimization problem of a risk-averse agent who receives no
direct unity from asset stocks and who faces no cost of adjusting these
stocks is, to our knowledge, new.

optimal

Dornbusch and Mussa (1975) obtain an

partial-adjustment policy in a

mization

framework in

deterministic, interteniporal maxi-

which money balances yield positive utility and show

that saving is actually proportional to the gap between actual and target
money balances.

We again note that the individual

saving behavior derived

above is consistent with a general equilibrium in which aggregate saving
is zero in each period at the constant national price levels given by (16).
These results place restrictions on the non linear stochastic dif-

ference equation (18) which characterizes the equilibrium time path of the

balance of payments in each country. These restrictions are now summarized
in the following propositions.

Proposition 3.4.1: The expected current-period balance of payments surplus
is of the same sign and of smaller absolute magnitude than last period's

payments surplus if, last period, there was no unanticipated productivity
shock

,
o<

i;

E(st 1Ic =

St = s)/st < 1

.

(24)

Proposition 3.4.2: The expected current-period balance of payments surplus

is

of the opposite sign and of smaller absolute magnitude than last period's

payments surplus if, last period, the balance of payments was equal to the
innovation

in nominal income (planned savings was zero);

—l < E(st+il

=

c; s =

p(_.i))/s < 0 .

(25)

15

Proposition 3.4.3: The expected current-period balance of payments surplus

is

zero if, last

period,

there

was no

unanticipated productivity stock and

the balance of payments was zero;

=

i;

St = 0) = 0

(26)

.

Proposition 3.4.4: The expected current-period balance of payments surplus
is of Opposite sign and of smaller absolute magnitude than last period's
nominal

income innovation if,

last period, the balance of payments was zero;

0 < E(s1k = c; s =
O)/p(P_c

< 1 .

(27)

The intuition behind the non-Markovian behavior of the balance of

payments is now apparent. If last period's payments surplus was positive
because the household was attempting to replenish its money balances to
target, this period's surplus will, on average, be positive (but smaller)
since only a partial adjustment to target is planned in any given period.
If however, last period's surplus was

positive

due to an unanticipated in-

crease in exports, this period's payments surplus will, on average, be
negative as the household temporarily raises spending above expected
nominal income, attempting to draw down only gradually its excess cash
balances to target (c.f. Frenkel and Mussa (1984), p. 6). Thus, it is

necessary to know both
Although

realizations of

and s to determine the distribution of

s11

the conditional distribution of s1 depends upon the

and s. ,

we

now show that the expected asymptotic

balance of payments surplus in each country is zero.

16

Proposition

3.5: The expected asymptotic balance of payments surplus is

zero in each country:
=

urn E(StISt = s;

Proof: E(s+Is = s;
=

4,(s;E)Ip

+s/p .

=

But,

any initial

Prob(m =

•/p

+

= pE(m++i!mt)

-

E(m+Jm))

distribution of real
s/p)

= 1

(28)

-

pE(m+!1nt)

where

fromProposition 2.3and Feller (1971) Theoremi, p.249

liin

for

=0

=

Q

;

(29)

balances including

.

Q.E.D.

4. Concluding Remarks
This paper has provided a choice theoretic account of the balance of

payments adjustment process in a stochastic, general equilibrium. Clearly,
the model abstracts from much which is relevant to the functioning of actual

fixed exchange rate regimes: capital mobility, the possibility of exchange
crises, the choice of a reserve currency to name just three. Yet, we would
argue that our approach provides a useful first step towards more refined
general equilibrium models which capture these and other features.

17

APPENDIX

In this appendix, we establish the properties of the optimal expenditure function stated in the text.

Consider the intertemporal optimization problem

max to8tt)

s.t.

0 <

c
=

where a = H/p

<

m

(2)

,

-c

+

(3)

Ct;

Facing a constant price level, household consumption in

.

each period is constrained by real balances which evolve according to the

stochastic difference equation (3). Schechtman ((1976);

)

and Foley and Hellwig ((1975; Proposition 1, p. 330) prove that there is a
unique value function

v(rn) =

max {u(c) .4-fv(m-c+c)dv(c)}
0<c<m

(4)

which solves (4). v inherits all the properties of u except that it is
not necessarily twice differentiable; it is strictly concave. It follows
that the optimal

consumption

policy is uniquely defined by

u'(c) = 8fu'(m—c+c)dv(c)

.

(5)

From strict concavity,

0 < c(m+A) - c(m) <

A

.

(6)

18

Furthermore,

c(in) < m

2(a), p. 330). Since

H and p .

Viii > 0

,

=

pc(H/p)

(Foley and Hellwig (1975); Proposition
,

spending is linearly homogeneous in

The results in Section 3 on optimal partial adjustment savings

behavior are new since Foley and Hellwig consider a two state model in which
it is never optimal to hold.the existing stock of cash balances.

19

NOTES

'c.f. Samuelson (1968, p. 8)

[Putting money in the utility function] is not the
only way of introducing the real convenience of cash
balances. An even better way would be to let [the
utility function] depend directly only on time
stream of [consumptions}, and then to show that hold-

ing

to

an inventory of [cash balances] does contribute

a more stable and greatly preferable stream of
consumptions.
2Recall that a fraction
period.

3m

G(O) of countries are not productive in any given

ease notation, we drop the

sult.

shall assume that c =

"i" superscripts when no confusion will re-

is one of the possible drawings from G

5This argument is made rigorously by Lucas (1980; p. 140).

REFERENCES

Dornbusch, R., "Money, Devaluation, and Non—Traded Goods," American
Economic Review (63), 1973.

_____________

Open Economy Macroeconomics. New York: Basic Books, 1980.

_____________

and N. Mussa, "Consumption, Real Balances and the Hoarding
Function," International Economic Review (16), 1975.

Feller, W., An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications.
New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1971.
Foley, D. and N. Heliwig, "Asset Management with Trading Uncertainty,"
Review of Economic Studies (43), 1975.
Frenkel, J. and H. Johnson, The Monetary Approach to the Balance of

Payments. London: Allen and Unwin, 1976.
___________ and N. Mussa, "Asset Markets, Exchange Rates, and the
Balance of Payments," NBER Working Paper, March 1984.
Lucas, R., "Equilibrium in a Pure Currency Economy," J. Kareken and
N. Wallace, eds., Models of Monetary Economies,
Minneapolis: Minnesota Press, 1980.

Mundell, R., International Economics. New York: MacMillan, 1968.
Schechtman, J., "An Income Fluctuations Problem." Journal of Economic
Theory (12), 1976.

A

—

t

p

4tL

WV.

4tti 5+II: .'

4L

)

I.'t

/

(0

N..

j(L1 Lf4/, 4ô•

