                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         PARENTAL LEAVE AND CHILDREN’S SCHOOLING OUTCOMES:
  QUASI-EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM A LARGE PARENTAL LEAVE REFORM

                                           Natalia Danzer
                                            Victor Lavy

                                        Working Paper 19452
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19452


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2013




We benefited from valuable comments from Jonathan Wadsworth, René Böheim, Andrew Clark,
Alexander M. Danzer, Peter Dolton, Analía Schlosser, Christian Dustmann, Uta Schönberg, and Anna
Vignoles and participants at the EALE 2012, EEA 2012, ESSLE 2012, RES 2013 and SOLE 2013.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Natalia Danzer and Victor Lavy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Parental Leave and Children’s Schooling Outcomes: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from a
Large Parental Leave Reform
Natalia Danzer and Victor Lavy
NBER Working Paper No. 19452
September 2013
JEL No. J13,J22,J24

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the question whether long-term human capital outcomes are affected by the
duration of maternity leave, i.e. by the time mothers spend at home with their newborn before returning
to work. Employing RD and difference-in-difference approaches, this paper exploits an unanticipated
reform in Austria which extended the maximum duration of paid and job protected parental leave from
12 to 24 months for children born on July 1, 1990 or later. We use test scores from the Austrian PISA
test of birth cohorts 1990 and 1987 as measure of human capital. The evidence suggest no significant
overall impact of the extended parental leave mandate on standardized test scores at age 15, but that
the subgroup of boys of highly educated mothers have benefited from this reform while boys of low
educated mothers were harmed by it.


Natalia Danzer
ifo Institute
Labour Market Research and Family Economics
Poschingerstraße 5
81679 Munich
Germany
danzer@ifo.de

Victor Lavy
Department of Economics
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Mount Scopus
Jerusalem 91905
ISRAEL
and University of Warwick, England
and also NBER
msvictor@mscc.huji.ac.il
    1   Introduction
         This paper investigates whether prolonged paid and job protected parental leave has
effects on the offspring‟s cognitive development. The potential channel is reduced maternal
employment in the first years of a child‟s life that has likely increased maternal time for child-
rearing. In many industrialized countries, the provision of parental leave is one of the main
policy instruments aimed at helping young families reconcile working life with family life.
This topic has become increasingly important and prominent in the public debate as female
labor force participation rates have been growing over the past decades in many industrialized
countries. While proponents of (more generous) parental leave entitlements assert positive
consequences for the health and well-being of children and their mothers as well as for the
position of women in the workplace, opponents fear that parental leave mandates diminish
market flexibility, thereby leading to inefficiencies and lower rates of employment growth
(Ruhm 1998, 2000).
         The lack of an academic and societal consensus about the potential effects of parental
leave on maternal labor market performance and on the development of new-borns is also
partly reflected in the large cross-country variation in the generosity of parental leave
entitlements in terms of duration of job protection and income replacement level.1 Since the
length of the granted parental leave is relevant for the return-to-work decision, these cross-
country differences in legislation help to explain why new mothers in some countries return to
work much sooner and spend less time at home with their child compared to mothers in other
countries (Ruhm 2000; Tanaka 2005).
         Overall, previous empirical studies in psychology and economics have produced
mixed evidence regarding the impact of early maternal employment on child outcomes. If
anything, the majority of studies seem to support the hypothesis that the labor force
participation of mothers during their children‟s first year of life has potentially adverse effects
on their subsequent development (Ruhm 2008). In addition, there is some indication for
heterogeneous effects across subgroups: children from higher socio-economic backgrounds
are potentially more likely to be negatively affected by maternal employment, while children
from low income families might benefit if maternal employment raises family income (Currie
2005). Hence, depending on the specific design of the laws regarding the length of granted
leave, the income replacement level during the leave period as well as the medium- to long-

1
  For instance, the US federal Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) from 1993 grants a maximum duration of
unpaid, job protected leave of 12 weeks (Berger, Hill and Waldfogel 2005). The FMLA regulations apply to only
about half of the female workforce; parental leave for the other half is determined in individual employer
regulations. In contrast, most European countries provide much longer durations of job protected maternity and
parental leave (some of which is even compulsory) with partial or full income compensation (Neyer 2003).

                                                      1
term labor market consequences for the mother, parental leave mandates might affect child
outcomes through time effects (more maternal time investments) and potentially through
income effects (if household income is reduced due to foregone wage earnings of the mother
in the short-run and potentially in the long-run).
       The difficulty in estimating the causal effect of early maternal employment on child
development is that maternal employment, fertility behaviour and the timing of labor market
re-entry after childbirth are choice variables and might be driven by unobserved mother or
child characteristics (e.g., ability, fertility and work preferences, role models, regional
differences in availability and costs of alternative child care). If particular types of women
return to work sooner than others, differences in child outcomes between these groups of
mothers might reflect differences in maternal characteristics and intergenerational
transmission of ability rather than the causal effect of maternal employment. Reverse
causality might be an additional problem, since certain health conditions of a child are likely
to impede its mother‟s return to work.
       This study analyses the effects of duration of maternal time at home on long-term
cognitive child outcomes in Austria by using an unexpected and unanticipated policy reform
that extended the maximum duration of job protected and paid parental leave by twelve
months for all eligible mothers giving birth on July 1, 1990 or afterwards. Employed women
having a child before this cut-off date were only eligible for job protected and paid parental
leave until the child‟s first birthday while those giving birth afterwards were granted parental
leave until the child‟s second birthday. The reform had a strong impact on the time new
mothers stayed at home before returning to work since (a) female labor force participation in
Austria in 1990 was already comparatively high, (b) most employed women generally
satisfied the eligibility criteria, (c) take-up rates were extremely high and (d) most mothers
exhausted the full duration of their leave entitlements (about 80 percent of mothers) (Lalive
and Zweimüller 2009; Lalive, Schlosser, Steinhauer and Zweimüller forthcoming). However,
although the reform caused mothers to substantially delay their return to work in the short-
run, it did not adversely affect medium- or long-run employment and earnings of mothers
(Lalive and Zweimüller 2009; Lalive, Schlosser, Steinhauer and Zweimüller forthcoming).
       The aim of this paper is to assess the effect of this twelve-months expansion of paid
and job-protected parental leave on cognitive skills of affected children, measured at age 15
by test scores from standardized assessments in mathematics, reading and scientific literacy
from the international PISA study (Programme for International Student Assessment). The
main empirical strategy is based on a Regression Discontinuity (RD) and a related Difference-


                                                2
in-Differences (DID-RD) which exploit the variation in the duration of parental leave created
by the specific cut-off date of the reform. 2 Specifically, we first compare differences in
average test scores of children born shortly before and shortly after the reform (born in
May/June 1990 versus July/August 1990, respectively). Secondly, we compare these
differences with the test score differences in a control year in which there was no reform
(children born in May/June 1987 versus July/August 1987). The inclusion of an additional
pre-reform control year is motivated by the fact that outcome comparisons across birth
months within a given year could be confounded by season of birth or simple age effects
(older children being more potentially advantaged at any given test date).
         This study contributes to the existing literature in several ways: First, in comparison to
the previous quasi-experimental studies, the Austrian reform assessed in this paper is by far
the most extensive and generous as it offered 12 additional months of paid and job protected
leave and might thus have a stronger impact on child outcomes. Moreover, only a few papers
have assessed the effect of maternal care during the child‟s second year of life. Second, in
contrast to the study for Germany by Dustmann and Schönberg (2012) which comes closest to
the Austrian case in terms of cultural and institutional background, this analysis contains
information on parental background and can thus distinguish between heterogeneous effects
across subgroups, a distinction to be shown as very important. Third, the analysis sheds light
on the causal relationship between maternal employment in the first years of the child‟s life
and the child‟s cognitive development in a country where most non-parental child care of
under three-year-olds is provided informally, for instance, by grandparents, instead of formal
day care centres (in contrast to countries like Sweden and Denmark where children participate
in formal care-centres already at very young ages). Against this background, the reform most
likely caused a replacement of informal care through maternal care, which might have
different implications than switching from formal to maternal care.
         The overall effect of this large parental leave extension on test scores for the pooled
sample of all children is close to zero and statistically insignificant, in line with most of the
previous quasi-experimental studies from other countries. However, the subgroup analyses by
maternal education and child gender points to significant positive reform effects for children

2
  The majority of previous studies dealt with the endogeneity problem of the maternal return-to-work decision by
including as pre-birth controls, by estimating family fixed effects models and comparing sibling differences, by
implementing propensity score matching or by employing instrumental variable techniques (Blau and Grossberg
1992; Currie 2005; Almond and Currie 2011; Hill, Waldfogel, Brooks-Gunn and Han 2005). As Currie (2005)
notes, each of these studies has severe limitations for causal inference and conclusions drawn from single studies
have to be put in specific context and compared to results using other methods. A few recent papers try to tackle
the identification problem by exploiting exogenous changes in parental leave mandates (Baker and Milligan
(2010, 2011) focus on Canada, Carneiro, Løken and Salvanes (2010) on Norway, Dustmann and Schönberg
(2012) on Germany, Liu and Nordstrom Skans (2010) on Sweden, Würtz Rasmussen (2010) on Denmark).

                                                        3
of highly educated mothers, especially for boys. In contrast, schooling outcomes of children
from lower educated mothers seem to have been harmed (boys have lower test scores and
girls have a higher likelihood of being in a lower grade). Hence, in an institutional setting
with no formal child care system for very young children, early maternal employment of
highly educated women might have detrimental effects for their offspring. To what extent
such potential negative effects can be mitigated or reversed through a high-quality formal day
care system is an open question.
       The paper is organized as follows: the next section introduces the underlying
theoretical framework and highlights and compares the findings and setup of previous quasi-
empirical studies of early maternal employment on child outcomes. This is followed by an
overview of the institutional background in Austria in Section 3. The section includes details
of the Austrian reform as well as a summary of findings from previous studies which
evaluated this reform with respect to labor market and fertility outcomes. Section 4 explains
the identification strategy and discusses critical assumptions and empirical challenges. Section
5 describes the data and outcome variables. The results of the main specification are presented
and discussed in Section 6, while Section 7 contains several robustness checks and sensitivity
analyses. Section 8 concludes.


 2    Parental Leave, Maternal Employment and Child Development

2.1   The role of maternal employment in the cognitive ability production function
       It is helpful to structure the discussion and analysis of potential effects of maternal
employment on child outcomes using the following cognitive ability production function
(Bernal and Keane 2011; Dustmann and Schönberg 2012).

                                                                                           (4.1)

       Cognitive ability of child i at age t (Yit) is determined by several inputs, namely
maternal (parental) time investment, T, up through age t, market-purchased goods and
services other than non-parental child care, G, which depend on family income (examples are
quality of housing, additional educational material, nutrition, health expenditure), time
investment through non-parental caregivers, C, (i.e. time in non-parental child care), any
direct effect of family composition, F, e.g. number of siblings (interaction between siblings;
quantity-quality trade-off), birth order, time intervals between siblings, public investments in
children and child development, P, (e.g., early child development programmes, public child
care facilities and schools, state child health programmes and health insurance) and an
idiosyncratic ability endowment,    , e.g., through intergenerational transmission of genes. As
                                               4
the function differentiates between different child ages it allows for varying effects of certain
inputs at particular stages of child development.
         In this framework, there is a clear trade-off between maternal time investment and
maternal earned income which could be used to buy market-based inputs. It is possible that
the reduction in maternal time inputs of working mothers can be at least partly compensated
by other goods (e.g., health investments, better nutrition) or by higher quality time
investments of other caregivers. Generally though, the time-income trade-off can be mitigated
to the extent that mothers receive compensating parental leave payments while on leave.
         Several potential mechanisms through which increased maternal time might positively
affect child development are discussed in the literature. One is prolonged breastfeeding which
could lead to better health outcomes of children (Baker and Milligan 2008). 3 Increased
maternal care time might improve children‟s cognitive development by improving their
health, for example, by better monitoring of their health status and more timely doctor visits
(Berger, Hill and Waldfogel 2005), by preparing healthier meals and lowering risk of injuries
and infectious disease (Morrill 2011). Early maternal employment, especially when exceeding
10 hours per week, might also negatively influence the attachment of mother and child and
might lead to children‟s behavioural problems (Brooks-Gunn, Han and Waldfogel 2002). It is
also possible that the physical burden of market-based work leaves mothers with less energy
for stimulating and nurturing their children (Ruhm 2004; Waldfogel, Han and Brooks-Gunn
2002). Conversely, a prolonged absence from work might raise the risk of social detachment
and of depressions by mothers who stay at home, which in turn lowers the quality of maternal
time and might have adverse effects for children (Baum II 2003).4

2.2    Empirical evidence
         All recent studies exploit an unexpected extension of the granted parental leave
duration which significantly increases the time mothers stay at home before returning to work
after childbirth.5 Most of these studies find either no or only negligible effects of prolonged
parental leave on cognitive child outcomes. One exception is Carneiro, Løken and Salvanes
(2010) who find for Norway significant positive effects of prolonged maternal time at home
during the child‟s first year on medium-run schooling achievement, IQ measures and height.
The effects are stronger for children of mothers with low educational attainment. However,

3
  However, despite a significant impact of prolonged parental leave entitlements on breastfeeding duration in
Canada, most of Baker and Milligan‟s (2008) results do not reveal any positive health effects for children.
4
  In this simplified framework we implicitly hold partner‟s labour supply and child care input constant. This
assumption is less restrictive in countries where the bulk of parental child care is traditionally supplied by the
mother and family life follows the „male bread-winner model‟ as in Austria in 1990.
5
  See Table A1 in the Online Appendix for a summary of these studies and their findings.

                                                        5
Liu and Nordstrom Skans (2010) report for Sweden a zero average effect based on the whole
sample but positive effects for children of better-educated mothers. Interestingly, we in this
study also find zero average effect but large and significantly positive effect for children of
highly educated mothers. In order to reconcile these seemingly contradictory findings it is
important to highlight the essential differences between these studies which complicate
straightforward comparisons. The analyses vary predominantly with respect to: (1) The
affected age group of children: Does the particular extension of parental leave allow women
to stay at home longer during the first year of life (e.g., an extension from 8 to 12 months) or
does it affect the period when the child is more than two years old? This point is highly
relevant if the importance of maternal care varies over the different development stages of the
child. (2) The length of the extension: The analysed parental leave extensions vary between
six weeks and 18 months. The granted length of the extension is likely to influence the
additional time that mothers stay home. If there is a positive effect of maternal time on child
outcomes and this effect is increasing with time input, then one would expect differential
effects depending on leave duration. (3) The measure of cognitive development and age at its
measurement: While some studies focus on short-run effects measured before the first
birthday (parent-reported assessments or psychological tests), others compare medium- or
long-term outcomes up to age 29 (e.g., using completed educational attainment). (4) Different
institutional environments: There are strong differences across countries (and over time) in
terms of prevailing non-parental child care arrangements (formal centre-based or informal
care by relatives) which determines the type of care likely to be substituted by prolonged
maternal care. (5) The type of reform and any indirect effects on other supposedly relevant
determinants of child outcomes like income and fertility: e.g., does the reform expand the
duration of fully, partly and/or unpaid leave? These indirect effects could alter the
(opportunity) costs of children and also enhance or change the „quantity-quality‟ trade-off. (6)
The precision of the data and the estimations: Can eligible mothers be identified (only
possible in the Norwegian study) or can children be linked to parents? Are the studies based
on representative surveys or administrative datasets? (7) The estimation strategies: the exact
implementation of the DID and RD estimations differs across studies as do the control groups.
       To sum up, the institutional background and the details of the reforms vary widely
across countries and seem to play an important role for the effect of parental leave on child
outcomes. In terms of institutional and cultural set-up, Austria comes closest to Germany,
while the type of reform (paid leave extension between the child‟s first and second birthday)
is more similar to the evaluated reform in Sweden where, however, participation rates of one-


                                               6
to two-year-olds in formal child care are very high. Nevertheless, the reform in Sweden led
only to a three months extension of parental leave, while in Austria the extension comprised
12 months. This way the analysis in this paper helps to shed more light on the influence of
maternal employment beyond the child‟s first birthday when formal day care for this age
group is generally not available. Furthermore, the Austrian reform is unique in that it involves
an exceptionally long extension of paid parental leave.


    3   Institutional setting and background
         The history of parental leave in Austria dates back to 1957 when working women
became entitled to an unpaid, but job protected leave of up to six months on top of the paid
mandatory maternity leave of 12 weeks, making Austria the first country in Europe to
introduce parental leave (Neyer 2003).6 1974 saw an introduction of a monthly flat-rate cash
benefit to all mothers on parental leave. In 1990, the amount of the regular flat-rate parental
leave payment was about 340 Euros per month corresponding to 31 (40) percent of gross (net)
median female earnings (Lalive and Zweimüller 2009).
         The empirical analysis will exploit a quasi-experiment that was created by the
amendment to the parental leave legislation that came in effect on July 1, 1990
(Karenzurlaubserweiterungsgesetz, June 27, 1990, BGBl. Nr. 408/1990). The main aspect of
this reform was the extension of the maximal duration of the optional paid and job protected
leave from the child‟s first up to the child‟s second birthday.7 This extension was only granted
to mothers whose children were born on or after the cut-off date of July 1, 1990. There were
no „transition rules‟ allowing mothers who gave birth before July 1, 1990 to benefit from the
new regulations. This increase of 12 months of paid and job protected parental leave is much
larger than any of the comparable reforms that took place in other countries and that have
been evaluated in terms of child outcomes. The reform was announced and implemented only
shortly before it came into effect. Therefore it was not possible for parents to adjust their
fertility timing in order to take advantage of the more generous parental leave regime (i.e.
there were no anticipatory fertility effects).
         The fact that the duration of the leave entitlement before and after the reform in
Austria was actually binding and thereby exogenously determining the minimum length of

6
  Fathers became eligible for parental leave only as of January 1, 1990. Their entitlement to parental leave was
conditional on the mother meeting all eligibility criteria. The take-up rate of parental leave of fathers remained
close to zero during the 1990s (0.2 percent in 1990, 1 percent in 1997; BMUJF 1999).
7
  In Austria, in 1990, working mothers were subject to a compulsory maternity leave of 8 weeks before and after
delivery (job protected leave with 100% replacement of the average net earnings of the proceeding 13 weeks).
Following this compulsory maternity leave, mothers were entitled to a job protected and paid leave up to the
child‟s first (second) birthday for those born before (after) July 1, 1990.

                                                        7
leave take-up has been demonstrated by Lalive and Zweimüller (2009) and Lalive, Schlosser,
Steinhauer and Zweimüller (forthcoming). Overall, the reform has had a significant impact on
the time mothers take parental leave after birth. Only about ten percent of mothers return to
work immediately after the end of the mandatory maternity leave, i.e. two months after
childbirth, and this pattern holds generally true before and after the reform (see Figure 1,
Lalive and Zweimüller 2009).8 The figure reveals also a jump of roughly 20 percentage points
at the time when the legal leave entitlement expires (at 12 months before the reform and at 24
months after the reform). The reform reduced the short term (within two years) return to work
by approximately 35 percentage points. The average duration of parental leave take-up and
receiving benefits (after mandatory maternity leave) increased from 10 to 20 months and most
mothers exhaust the full duration of their leaves (Lalive, Schlosser, Steinhauer and
Zweimüller forthcoming; Lalive and Zweimüller 2009). A rough estimate of the overall share
of mothers who were eligible for parental leave in 1990 can be attained by calculating the
share of mothers on mandatory maternity leave among all mothers. For 1990, this figure is
about 77 percent (the corresponding figure in 1987 is 73.8 percent).9 Estimated parental leave
take-up rates of eligible mothers range between 93 and 96 percent (Kreimer 2002).
           Despite the substantial changes in return-to-work behaviour, there are no medium-
term effects on alternative labor market outcomes like average number of months in
employment or earnings per month (Lalive and Zweimüller 2009). Even though in the short-
run post-reform mothers work significantly fewer months on average and have lower earnings
than pre-reform mothers, there are no significant differences in these outcomes after ten years.
           The reform had also a positive and significant impact on fertility outcomes in the short
(within three years after the previous birth) and medium-run (after ten years) (Lalive and
Zweimüller 2009). However, high-wage mothers seem to have reacted to the extended leave
period mainly by changing the spacing between births, but not overall fertility (reducing very
short birth intervals and longer intervals at the same time), while low-wage mothers have
additionally increased the total number of births in the next ten years. These heterogeneous
fertility effects play an important role for the interpretation of our empirical results.

3.1      Possible effects of the Austrian reform on child outcomes
           There seem to be two potential channels through which the 1990 parental leave
extension in Austria could have affected child development: first, a „quality channel‟ which
works through the potentially superior quality of maternal care as opposed to alternative,


8
    See Figure A 1 in the Online Appendix.
9
    Calculations are based on numbers in the Austrian Family Report 1999 (BMUJF 1999), p. 152-157.

                                                       8
informal forms of child care, and second, the „fertility channel‟, which works through changes
in the fertility behaviour, i.e. the number of children and the spacing between births.
          As noted, the parental leave reform in 1990 significantly raised the time new mothers
stayed at home after childbirth between the child‟s first and second birthday, but it did not
affect medium- to long-run income and labor market outcomes of the average mother. Thus, it
is unlikely that the reform exerted a negative income effect on child outcomes driven by
medium- to long-term income losses; if anything, the leave extension generated a relatively
small and only short-term income loss caused by foregone earnings during the additional
leave months.10 At the time of the reform the prevailing form of child care for children under
two years of age was almost exclusively informal care provided by grandparents or other
persons.11 Under the hypothesis that maternal care is superior to informal care for very young
children, one would expect that the prolonged parental leave period had a positive impact on
child outcomes. This could be especially true for better educated mothers if they are able to
provide higher quality and more „productive‟ maternal care, for instance, through better
access to knowledge on how to foster cognitive development of children (Grossman 2006).
          However, the reform may also alter the fertility behaviour of parents. If shorter
spacing between births reduces the time and material resources that are allocated to each
child, this effect could have negative implications for child development and cognitive
outcomes. On the contrary, if the relation between spacing and child outcomes is non-linear, a
positive effect of the reduction in extremely short birth intervals could outweigh a negative
effect from the average reduction in spacing. If the reform increased the total number of births
per woman, this could work in the opposite direction and diminish or reverse a potentially
positive time effect.


     4   Empirical approach
          Given the unexpected and strict implementation of the prolonged parental leave period
for all children born on July 1, 1990 or later, it is possible to use a Regression Discontinuity
methodology and also a Difference-in-Differences analysis based on this RD setup (RD-DID)

10
   However, for those women who would not have returned to work after the child‟s first birthday under the old
regime anyways, the prolonged parental leave payments might have implied a gain in short term income as these
mothers would not have earned any income during the second year. Furthermore, it is difficult to assess to what
extent this short-term income loss from working mothers translates into a potentially negative income shock for
the child: if non-parental child care is costly, a fraction of the mother‟s earned income will be spent on child care
and it is not clear whether the remaining amount of maternal income is actually larger or smaller than the
parental leave payments. Only if the reform leads to a significant short-term income loss, there might be negative
income effects which could work against any positive time effect.
11
   Only about 2.5 percent of children aged zero to two were enrolled in formal day care (own calculations of
gross enrolment rates based on birth numbers and children in formal child care; official statistics on early child
care are recorded since 1995).

                                                         9
to identify the effect of extended maternal care on child outcomes.12 The RD-DID regression
specifications that we estimate are the following:

                                                                                                (4.2)
                                                                                                (4.3)

              is the measure for cognitive child outcome (i.e. test scores from standardized tests),
Post June is a dummy indicator for children whose birthday is on or after July 1 (July –
December) and the coefficient              captures all possible permanent and general differences
between children born in the first and the second half of a given year; bc1990 is a dummy
indicator for the birth cohort 1990; the interaction effect between Post June and bc1990
identifies all children whose mothers were affected by the reform and eligible to a longer
parental leave –         is the coefficient of interest and measures the treatment effect; to account
for possible season of birth effects as well as age effects the regressions include a set of birth
month dummy variables. To control for possible differences in sample composition over time,
equation (4.3) contains additionally a set of parental and other background characteristics (X).
           If the assignment into treated (=post reform; 24 months PL) and control group (=pre
reform; 12 months PL) is „as good as random‟, a simple representation of the estimated
treatment effect         (estimated by OLS) is

                                                                                     .          (4.4)

           This is the difference in average cognitive outcomes (test scores) of children born after
versus before the reform (whose mothers were eligible to 24 versus 12 months of paid
parental leave respectively) less the difference in outcomes of children born before and after
July 1, 1987 who were not subject to the reform. The advantage of this RD-DID approach is
that potentially confounding systematic differences between children born before and after
July 1 which could otherwise exert a bias are differenced out: First, the test scores used in the
analysis stem from tests that took place within a certain month (e.g. April) and children born
in January 1990 will be about 12 months older at the time of the test than children born in
December 1990. If age in itself has a positive effect on outcomes, any potentially positive
effects of the reform will be downward biased, since post-reform children are always younger
than pre-reform children. Second, there might be systematic season of birth effects affecting
the composition of children and their parents over the year. If certain types of couples are
more likely to have babies in particular months of the year this might also impact upon the
distribution of test scores across birth months.

12
     Dustmann and Schönberg (2012) used a similar approach to study the German reform.

                                                      10
         An important identifying assumption in this approach is that mothers could not self-
select into treatment or control group. This basically requires that mothers could not
manipulate the date of childbirth around the cut-off date of July 1, 1990. Lalive and
Zweimüller (1999) provide several arguments and evidence in support of this assumption:
first, an assessment of newspaper reports about a potential reform of parental leave duration
revealed that the public discussion did not start before November 11, 1989 and that it was not
clear until April 5 whether and when such a reform would be implemented. This timing of
policy decision and implementation makes anticipatory adjustments to fertility plans highly
unlikely, especially when taking into account that successful conception and date of
childbirths cannot be perfectly controlled and planned by parents. Furthermore, as also argued
by Würtz Rasmussen (2010), it is biologically infeasible to postpone the expected date of
delivery with the exception of planned Caesarean sections. However, an analysis of number of
births during the days shortly before and after the reform did not indicate a higher density of
births on July 1 or the days after (Lalive and Zweimüller 2009).
         Another assumption is the common trend assumption which requires seasonal patterns
or age effects to be constant across years. The common trend assumption might be
problematic if there are changes over time. Certainly, this assumption becomes less restrictive
if one limits the sample to children born extremely close to the cut-off date as these children
are very similar in age as well as in season of birth. Another advantage of narrowing the
window of birth months before and after the reform would be that these children are more
likely to face identical kindergarten and schooling regulations and rules, e.g., the Austrian
school year typically runs from September to August. Furthermore, their mothers were
exposed to similar macroeconomic conditions and labor market developments. However, this
strategy would require a very large data set. Unfortunately, the available test scores data base
does not meet this criterion. Hence, given the data at hand, there is a trade-off between
limiting the analysis on children who are as similar as possible (which would also reduce the
likelihood of violating the common trend assumption) and having a sufficiently large sample
size. Therefore, we estimate each specification several times while successively narrowing
down the window of birth months.13


13
   Another reason for narrowing the sample window around the cut-off date as much as possible is the proximity
of the reform cut-off date to the Austrian school entry cut-off date. All children having their sixth birthday before
September 1 are obliged to start school in the same year (typically at the beginning of September). However,
until 1999, enforcement of this school entry cut-off date was not strict, conceding some discretionary power to
parents regarding the decision whether their child was „ready‟ for school or whether it should start one year later.
A comparison of the distribution of children in lower than regular grades across birth months for the cohorts
1990 and 1987 (PISA data 2006 and 2003) reveals that this phenomenon is relatively consistent over time which
is an important prerequisite for our RD-DID estimation strategy (figures available by the authors upon request).

                                                        11
           Since the data neither allow identifying children whose mothers were actually eligible
for the more generous parental leave entitlements nor contain information on actual duration
of leave taking of mothers, the estimated effect will represent the intention-to-treat effect of
the reform, i.e., the reduced form effect of being eligible to 24 instead of 12 months of
parental leave. This intention-to-treat effect will be a lower bound estimate of the effect of
prolonged parental leave and maternal care on child outcomes, since it is estimated on the full
sample including children of mothers who did not change their behaviour because of the
reform. This latter group consists of non-working mothers as well as working mothers, who
stop working post-birth for much longer than the granted parental leave period irrespective of
the actual legislation, and of mothers who return to work very early irrespective of the
generosity of the system, either non-eligible working mothers or working mothers would
return to work immediately after the compulsory maternity leave period independent of the
additional parental leave provision. Furthermore, the intention-to-treat estimate will represent
an overall net effect of the reform combining all possible channels through which the parental
leave extension might have affected child outcomes.
           In the empirical part we will perform subgroup analyses by educational attainment of
the mother for two reasons. First, stratifying the sample by mother‟s education might yield
estimates closer to the actual effect of the reform. Mothers with higher (lower) education have
on average higher (lower) labor force participation rates and, hence, a higher (lower)
likelihood of parental leave eligibility. We will therefore distinguish between mothers having
completed post-secondary or tertiary education, 89 percent of whom participate in the labor
force (employed or unemployed) and mothers whose highest educational degree is higher
secondary school or less, of whom 78 percent are in the labor force.14 We label these groups
as High Educ. Mothers and Low Educ. Mothers, respectively. However, apart from the
employment channel, we do not expect maternal education to have any differential effect on
the likelihood of eligibility, since – conditional on employment – parental leave eligibility
was almost universal (Lalive, Schlosser, Steinhauer, Zweimüller forthcoming). Second, as
discussed in Section 3, the parental leave extension had heterogeneous effects on fertility and
spacing between births of low- and high-wage mothers which in turn might lead to differential
child outcomes (quality-quantity trade-off). Furthermore, an analysis of the Austrian time use
survey 1992 shows that, all else equal, highly educated mothers devote on average almost one
hour more to child care than mothers with compulsory education (Neuwirth 2004). Hence,



14
     Numbers calculated based on the Austrian Census from May 1991 (see Table A2 in the Online Appendix).

                                                      12
there might be also quantity differences in time investments between low and high educated
mothers (and possibly quality differences).


 5    Data
       We use in this study data from the OECD‟s Programme for International Student
Assessment (PISA) for Austria. The PISA studies from 2006 and 2003 capture the relevant
„reform‟ birth cohort born between January and December 1990 as well as the „control‟ birth
cohort from 1987. Several important features make the PISA data especially suitable for our
analysis: first, the PISA data provide results from standardized tests of cognitive skills in
terms of reading, mathematical and scientific literacy. The focus of PISA is less a pure
assessment of curriculum based knowledge, but more an evaluation of general skills needed
for adult life and of the ability to apply knowledge to real-life problems. Second, the tests are
administered to a nationally representative sample of 15-year old students independent of
their current grade level in school. In contrast, other international studies like TIMSS and
PIRLS assess students in particular grade levels, e.g. 4th and 8th grade, and are thus not
representative for a particular birth cohort. Comparisons of outcomes across birth months
would be biased if, for example, the propensity of grade retention or early or late school entry
differs between children born closer or further away from the school entry cut-off date. Third,
the PISA data files contain important student-reported background information on the student
(e.g., gender, birth year and month, nationality, attitudes), the student‟s parents (educational
achievement, nationality, occupational information) and the school (e.g., school programme,
location, school size, resources).
       However, the Austrian PISA data have also several disadvantages: there is no
retrospective information on maternal labour market participation at the time of birth which
prevents a clear identification of mothers who were truly eligible for parental leave.
Moreover, PISA does not contain publicly available information on exact birth dates which
prevents any refinement of the analysis beyond the month level.
       To increase the cohesiveness of the data for the analysis we first dropped from the
sample students whose mothers are highly unlikely to have been eligible for parental leave or
affected by the reform. This included children who were not born in Austria and whose
mothers were thus unlikely to work in Austria at the time of the reform in 1990. Furthermore,
a few observations had missing information on maternal education. A small number of
students in schools for children with special needs were also excluded from the sample to




                                               13
increase consistency across students and across years, since these children have a completely
different curriculum and were administered special test items.
          The variables used in the analysis are described in Table 1. The main outcome
variables measuring cognitive skills are test scores in mathematics, reading and science. The
test scores in each subject are rescaled by the OECD so that the mean across all participating
countries is 500 points and the standard deviation is 100 points. 15 Two other outcome
variables are binary variables indicating i) whether a student is in a lower than the regular
grade level given his or her birth month and ii) whether the student is enrolled in a school
track giving access to university or college education (academic track). 16 Student‟s level data
includes gender, month of birth, an indicator for school location in an urban area, mother‟s
and father‟s highest completed level of education, and migration status of the family (whether
the family speaks German at home and whether mother and father were born in Austria; the
base category are non-German speaking families).
          The mean values of the outcome variables and variables of the PISA 2006 and 2003
data are presented in Table 1, separately for children born in May and June and for children
born in July and August. The evidence in the table show that there are no significant
systematic differences between pre- and post-reform children in 2006, which supports the
important assumption that the 1990 reform was unexpected and that there was no systematic
self-selection of particular types of parents or families across the cut-off date.


     6   Empirical results
          A first graphical impression of the RD-DID setup for all three test subjects is provided
in Figure 1.The figure plots average test scores by birth month together with fitted lines of the
predicted test scores to the left and to the right of the reform cut-off date (July 1, vertical line)
for both, the reform cohort 1990 and the control cohort 1987. Overall, there is a slightly
negative trend in average test scores across birth months which could be explained by
possible age effects as discussed earlier. Crucial, however, is the fact that there is no jump in
test results for children from the 1990 reform cohort born immediately before and after the
reform cut-off date. Indeed, for all three test subject, the predicted fits to the left and to the


15
   To ease comparison of results across survey years, the test results were rescaled such that the reading and
mathematics reporting scales of 2006 are equal to those in 2003. The test results in science are rescaled such that
the mean is 500 and the standard deviation is 100 for the 30 OECD countries participating in PISA 2006 (see
OECD 2009, pp. 157-158). However, any general differences in test scores across years and subjects will be
accounted for in the analysis by controlling for years and by running separate regressions for each subject.
16
   In Austria, students are allocated to different educational tracks after the fourth grade (i.e. at age 10 or 11)
which is relatively early compared to other European countries (Schneeweis and Zweimüller 2009). Starting with
grade level nine, a further differentiation into specific tracks takes place.

                                                       14
right of the reform date are continuous at the cut-off, suggesting no effect of the parental leave
reform on test scores. This zero finding is substantiated by the virtual overlap of the test
scores and fitted lines of the 1990 reform cohort with those of the control cohort from 1987
(except for scientific literacy).
        Repeating this graphical analysis separately for male and female students produces the
same continuous pattern indicating no reform effect, neither for boys nor for girls.17 However,
these findings of no average effects for the entire group as well as for the gender subgroups
mask quite substantial reform effect heterogeneity with respect to child gender in combination
with maternal education. Figure 2 and Figure 3 show the RD-DID graphs for boys and girls,
respectively, and differentiate between children of mothers with higher and lower educational
attainment. In particular, when focusing on the black fitted line for sons of highly educated
mothers born in the reform year 1990 (Figure 2, top panel), it appears that there is a clear
positive jump in test scores immediately after the reform. The overall downward sloping
curve is simply shifted upward for those children born after the cut-off date. In contrast, the
grey fitted lines for the corresponding subgroup of children from the control cohort 1987 are
continuous around the cut-off indicating no systematic differences in test scores between
children born before and after July 1 in the absence of the parental leave reform. Turning to
the lower panel of Figure 2, this pattern is different for sons of mothers with lower
educational attainment: the predicted fit for this subgroup shows either no reform effect
(mathematics) or a negative, but very small jump in reading and science test scores after the
reform. The corresponding grey lines for the 1987 control cohort are once again continuous at
the cut-off date. Overall, the graphs in Figure 2 suggest a positive reform effect only for boys
of higher educated mothers and a zero or slightly negative effect for sons of less educated
mothers. These heterogeneous reform effects with respect to maternal education do not seem
to hold for girls, though. None of the separate graphs for girls do show any substantial jumps
at the cut-off date (Figure 3).
        To test whether the test score gap between June and July children is significantly
different from zero, we regress test scores from the three different subjects on a set of birth
month indicators with June as the excluded base category (controlling for parental
background). The estimated „born in July‟ coefficients are reported in Table 2 for separate
regressions by subject, maternal education and child gender. The first two columns in Table 2
show the results from the full sample of mothers. As the graphs in Figure 1 suggested the
average test scores do not differ significantly between pre- and post-reform children in the full
17
  See Figure A2 in the Online Appendix. Separate graphs by maternal education (Figure A3, Online Appendix)
reveal a positive jump in test scores at the reform cut-off for children from highly educated mothers.

                                                    15
sample and this applies to all three tested subjects. Furthermore, the estimated coefficients
change only marginally after controls for parental background are included in the regression
(although standard errors become slightly smaller). Comparing the results by gender (columns
1 and 2, middle and bottom panel) reveals that there might be gender differences as the
estimated coefficients for boys tend to be positive (but insignificant), while the estimated
coefficients for girls tend to be negative.
        Restricting the sample to the subsample of children of higher educated mothers
(columns 3 and 4) confirms the graphical impression of a positive effect: the estimated effects
become much larger and are significantly different from zero (at the five percent level) for
reading and science. The separate analyses by gender reveal that the differences are
significantly different from zero only for boys. For completeness, the two columns on the
right show the respective results for children of mothers with lower educational attainment.
Most of the coefficients have a negative sign implying a decline in test scores after the
reform; however, none of these effects is statistically significant.

6.1   Regression Discontinuity-Difference-in-Differences estimations (RD-DID)
        As a next step, we refine the analysis by estimating RD-DID models in order to take
account of potentially confounding age, seasonality and school-entry effects. The results of
the main RD-DID estimates of the effect of the parental leave extension on PISA test scores
are presented in Table 3 for the full sample (all mothers) and separately by maternal
education. The estimation window covers children born two months before and after the
reform (May to August). For each of the three samples the first column shows the results
without any control variables (columns 1, 3 and 5), while the second column contains results
after controlling for background variables to account for potential changes in sample
composition across years (and possibly across months). This more refined estimation
approach confirms the findings from the simple graphs shown earlier: the treatment effects of
the reform (being born post June in the year 1990) are close to zero in the full sample
(columns 1 and 2). Adding background controls changes the coefficients slightly, but given
the size of the standard errors these differences are not statistically significant.18 The average
effect on reading test scores is a little bit larger and negative, but still not significantly
different from zero.
        In contrast to these neutral findings are the results from the regressions based on the
subsample of children of mothers with higher education. The average effect for all three test

18
  Standard errors were clustered by school programme, school location and gender to account for the fact that
test scores of students in the same programme, location and gender are likely to be correlated and not
independent of each other.

                                                     16
subjects is significantly positive and of remarkable size, indicating that the extended parental
leave period raised test scores by about 22 percent of a standard deviation (a little bit less in
mathematics).19 It is possible that these differences in results between the full sample and
children of highly educated mothers are partly related to the different levels of parental leave
eligibility (due to differences in labour force participation rates). More importantly though,
the results for this subgroup are more likely to show the pure time and care effect of the
parental leave extension, since the reform did not affect overall fertility or labour market
success of mothers with higher earnings (proxied here by higher educational attainment). In
comparison, the effects for children of mothers with lower education are generally negative
and even statistically significant for the reading test scores. Although the fraction of affected
mothers in this group is smaller, it seems that these children have not benefited from the
reform. Furthermore, the statistically significant negative coefficients suggests that the
heterogeneous reform effects with respect to maternal education are not driven by differential
levels of parental leave eligibility, but by other mechanisms. For instance, the negative effect
could be attributed to the increased levels of fertility of low-wage mothers and to less
available resources (time and market goods) per child (i.e. a possible „quantity-quality‟ trade-
off), to shorter time intervals between births or maybe to a lower quality of maternal time in
the sense of ability to foster cognitive child development.
         To shed more light on potential gender differences regarding the effects of maternal
employment on the cognitive development of children, we run separate regressions for boys
and girls (Table 4). Even though sample sizes become rather small in this subgroup analysis,
the estimates seem to indicate that boys react more strongly to the reform than girls,
especially when looking at those with higher maternal education (columns 3 and 4). While
both, post-reform girls and boys, have higher test scores on average, only the coefficients for
the boys are statistically significant from zero and are almost three times as large as that for
girls (the effect on reading and science test scores for males corresponds to about 0.3 and 0.4
standard deviations). These results would be in line with potential differences in needs and in
development between girls and boys at very young ages causing boys to benefit
comparatively more from maternal vis-à-vis informal care between the age of one and two.
For instance, Brooks-Gunn, Han and Waldfogel (2002) state that boys seem to be more
„vulnerable to early stressors‟ and react more adversely to non-maternal child care. Similarly,


19
  As a further refinement, we add a set of dummy variables for the different school programs (which are highly
correlated with different average test scores). As expected, their inclusion helps to increase the precision of the
estimates. The treatment effects get larger and more significant. However, due to the potential endogeneity of
these variables these results are only reported in the Online Appendix, Table A 3.

                                                       17
two US studies on the effect of early maternal employment on children‟s health outcomes find
that boys are more adversely affected than girls (Gennetian, Hill, London and Lopoo 2010;
Morrill 2011). As before, the results for the pooled sample are rather small and insignificant
(columns 1 and 2) and the results for children of mothers with lower educational attainment
(columns 5 and 6) show negative coefficients which are even significantly different from zero
for boys in some specifications.
        Given the trade-off between raising the sample size and the need to keep the
estimation window as narrow as possible to reduce the influence of possibly confounding
factors, we re-run the regressions symmetrically while gradually reducing the window of
included birth months to the left and to the right of the cut-off date (four/three/two months
before and after).20 The results in Table 5 are reported separately by mother‟s education. The
results for children of mothers with higher education (columns 1 to 3) reveal that increasing
the sample size symmetrically to the left and to the right of the cut-off leads to positive, but
smaller and insignificant coefficients in the pooled sample on boys and girls (top panel).
However, the estimated effects for boys remain highly significant and positive. Those for girls
become much smaller and even switch signs. The results for children of lower educated
mothers become less negative (or more positive) the more months are included in the analysis.
For this subgroup, most of the results remain negative and become generally insignificant; the
strongest effects are still found for boys.21
        To test whether these results are influenced by children born after the school-entry cut-
off date (September 1), who are thus in lower grade levels than students born before
September, we alternatively added further birth months only to the left of the cut-off date,
while holding the number of months to the right constant (July and August). 22 The results
change only marginally indicating that the previous results were not confounded by the
school-entry cut-off regulation.




20
   We also estimated our main RD-DID specification as well as the robustness checks and placebo tests using a
one-month window. However, especially for our subsample analyses, the sample sizes became too small to
derive solid and meaningful results.
21
   As a rough check of whether the reform effect was mainly due to replacing informal by maternal care, we re-
estimated the regressions from Table 5 excluding students from Vienna, where the proportion of children aged 0-
2 enrolled in childcare during the 1990s was much higher than in the rest of Austria. The results in Table A 4
(Online Appendix) seem to support this hypothesis: the estimated effects for children of highly educated mothers
are slightly larger, while the negative coefficients for sons of low educated mothers get closer to zero. This is
what one could expect if the reform implied more of a trade-off between formal versus maternal child care in
Vienna with more severe effects for children (especially sons) of mothers with lower education. Excluding this
region from the sample should consequently reduce the pronounced negative effect of the reform.
22
   For results, see Table A 5 in the Online Appendix.

                                                      18
6.2      Difference-in-Difference-in-Differences estimations (RD-DDD)
           The RD-DID estimation strategy assumes that age-related differences across birth
months (season-of-birth, age-at-test, school-entry effect) are constant over time or at least
over the three years that lie between the two birth cohorts in the PISA waves 2006 and 2003.
As a further check, we add the German PISA sample as an additional control group
participating in both relevant years without being affected by the Austrian parental leave
reform in 1990. We chose Germany as control region as it is very similar to its neighbouring
country Austria not only in terms of its schooling and tracking system (Schneeweis and
Zweimüller 2009). Both countries are also very close in terms of their child care institutions
as well as cultural values and attitudes towards the role of families and mothers (Neyer 2003).
Furthermore, the PISA test language in both countries is German.
           By including a further control group to the analysis the effect of the parental leave
reform on child outcomes will be estimated using a Regression Discontinuity in a triple
difference estimation design (RD-DDD). In addition to the previous RD-DID regressions, the
regressions contain a further country variable „Austria‟, as well as interaction effects between
this country variable and „Post June‟ births and the birth cohort dummy variable „bc1990‟ and
the triple interaction term of the „Post June‟, „bc1990‟ and „Austria‟ dummy variables.




                                                                                           (4.5)

The OLS estimate of the treatment effect             now becomes:23



                                                                                            (4.6)

           Table 6 displays the estimated treatment effect of the parental leave reform in Austria
based on the RD-DDD specifications. Generally, the RD-DDD results correspond to the
previous RD-DID estimates. Children of higher educated mothers seem to have benefited
from the parental leave extension – the estimated coefficients are positive for all children, but
only significant and larger for boys (the estimated coefficients are slightly larger than the RD-
DID estimates, corresponding to approximately between 0.4 and 0.7 standard deviations).In
contrast, the results for children of lower educated mothers become more negative in the
pooled sample of boys and girls and are even statistically significantly for the reading test
scores. Splitting the sample into male and female students reveals that this negative effect is
23
     AUT indicates Austria; GER indicates Germany.

                                                     19
mainly driven by boys. In contrast to the previous RD-DID results, the RD-DDD estimates for
boys now become much larger and more significant. The estimates for the girls are generally
not very large (albeit positive) and insignificant.24


     7   Further robustness checks and alternative outcome variables
          As a robustness check of our estimates we use only data from PISA 2006 and repeat
the RD-DID regressions using German students as control group (instead of Austrian students
from the pre-reform year 2003). This estimation strategy replaces the assumption of a
common month of birth trend across years by the assumption of a common month of birth
trend across regions. Again, the results for the children of higher educated mothers are
generally consistent with the main previous findings (see Table 7; the estimated effects for
boys become even more significant).25 For children of lower educated mothers the estimated
effects in the pooled sample remain insignificant. However, the estimated coefficients for
boys become insignificant; those of the girls increase in size and become positive in the
extended samples (including three or four pre- and post-reform birth months). When using the
two-months window sample, these positive effects are much smaller and only marginally
significant for scientific literacy.26
          Table 8 presents the results of two placebo RD-DID analyses using our original RD-
DID estimation strategy based on the Austrian sample and the 1990 and 1987 birth cohorts,
but using May 1, 1990, and September 1, 1990, as pseudo reform cut-off dates.27 In each case,
the estimations are based on children born two months before and after the pseudo reform
date. None of the estimated placebo effects is significantly different from zero for the sample
of boys (irrespective of maternal educational background). Generally, this is also true for the
subsample of girls (the exceptions are a significantly negative (positive) coefficient for the
reading (science) score of daughters from highly educated mothers, columns 2 and 5). Thus,
overall, but especially regarding the male subsample, the placebo tests seem to verify that our


24
   Re-running the RD-DDD regressions holding the number of post-reform months constant, while extending the
number of pre-reform months produces very similar results (see Table A 6, Online Appendix).
25
   To reduce the extensiveness of the tables, we only report results from the subgroup regressions by gender.
26
   In contrast to Austria, the general school-entry cut-off date in Germany for the cohort born in 1990 (same for
the 1987 cohort) is June 30, which would coincide with the Austrian parental leave reform cut-off date, July 1.
This could potentially lead to a violation of the common trend assumption if this causes a drop in average test
scores around this threshold in the German sample. While the RD-DDD regressions accounted for this potential
drop by differencing also across years, this might be a problem in the RD-DID regression set up (by artificially
raising the „treatment effect‟).
27
   Due to several data and sample problems we cannot exploit the two other existing PISA waves for Austria
from the years 2000 and 2009 for further robustness check and to analyse the common trend assumption (e.g., a
biased sampling frame in the Austrian PISA 2000, and a stricter enforcement of the school entry cut-off date that
affected the birth cohort tested in 2009 violating the common trend assumption).

                                                       20
main RD-DID results are not confounded by particular patterns in the data and can indeed be
interpreted as the causal effect of the parental leave reform.
          To better understand potentially underlying mechanisms of our main findings we
analyze two alternative schooling outcomes. Using our basic RD-DID setup, we test whether
the parental leave extension affects the likelihood that a student is i) in a lower than regular
grade level given his or her birth month and ii) enrolled in an academic track school (Table
9).28 After all, the estimated treatment effect on test scores might partly be driven by these
underlying mechanisms. As regards the school track, the estimated reform effects are very
small and not significantly different from zero. The same is true for grade retention in the
pooled sample and in the subsample for children of higher educated mothers. However, for
children of mothers with lower educational attainment the results suggest that the extended
leave significantly increased the likelihood of being in a lower than regular grade level. This
effect is significantly positive in the pooled sample of boys and girls, but seems to be
particularly driven by the reform effect on girls.


     8   Conclusions
          The objective of this paper is to investigate whether a substantial extension of a paid
and job-protected parental leave mandate – from a child‟s first to its second birthday – has
any long-term effects on human capital of children. What makes the Austrian parental leave
reform particularly compelling for such a causal analysis is that it was implemented with a
strict and unanticipated cut-off date: only those mothers who gave birth to their child on or
after July 1, 1990 became eligible for the more generous 24 months parental leave duration.
As a consequence of this unexpected cut-off date the allocation of mothers and their children
into treatment (24 months parental leave entitlements) and control (12 months parental leave)
group was sharp and quasi random. This exogenous discontinuity in parental leave duration
helps to control for the problem of the otherwise endogenous return-to-work decision.
Another advantage of this particular Austrian reform is that it did not seem to have had any
effects on medium or long-term labour market outcomes of mothers and only a small positive
effect on fertility of low-wage mothers.
          We use mathematics, reading and science test scores from the standardized PISA test
at age 15 (using the cohort born in the year of the reform 1990 as well as a control birth
cohort born 1987 which was not subject to the parental leave reform). The results of the RD
and RD-DID analyses and several robustness checks reveal that there are heterogeneous

28
   As PISA data do not contain information grade repetition or age at school entry we cannot disentangle whether
a student is in a lower than should-be grade level due to deferred school entry or grade repetition.

                                                      21
effects of the parental leave reform on PISA test scores across subgroups. When using the full
sample, the estimates suggest no statistically significant causal effects on cognitive skills.
This finding for Austria is in line with the results of most of the studies using changes in
parental leave mandates to identify the causal effect of early maternal employment on child
outcomes. However, when splitting the sample into two groups of mothers with higher and
lower educational attainment, interesting findings emerge: for the children of higher educated
mothers, we find significantly positive effects of the parental leave extension on the PISA test
scores at age 15. This positive result is especially driven by the large and significant effect on
boys. We also find negative reform effects for boys of mothers with lower education. These
results are in contrast to findings reported in Carneiro, Løken and Salvanes (2010) for Norway
where an extension of maternal leave during the first 12 months since birth had positive effect
for children of low educated mothers and not effect on others. Furthermore, Liu and
Nordstrom Skans (2010) also find positive effects for their assessed parental leave extension
in Sweden when restricting the sample to children of mothers with higher education.
However, in contrast to Sweden with a well-established formal child care system for under-
two-year olds, the reform in Austria took place at a time when formal childcare for very
young children was virtually non-existent. Hence, our empirical results suggest that maternal
care of mothers with higher education might be superior to different informal care
arrangements for children aged one to two years. The negative effects for children from
mothers with lower education might be caused by reduced time and material resources as low
wage mothers reacted to the parental leave reform with increased fertility rates and shorter
time intervals between births. Our study thus adds unique and policy relevant evidence on
heterogeneous effects of a parental leave extension with respect to maternal educational
status. The same is true for gender differences: while there exists some evidence of
heterogeneous health outcomes of girls and boys with respect to early maternal employment
in the empirical literature, the previous evaluation studies of parental leave on cognitive child
outcomes have not tested or not found corresponding gender effects. Against this background,
the presumably stronger effect of the Austrian parental leave extension on boys points to an
interesting aspect which should be explored in more detail in future research. Our empirical
results – in particular, those for children from mothers with higher educational background –
are robust to various sensitivity checks – including triple DID estimates using Germany as an
additional control region which was not affected by the 1990 parental leave reform and
several placebo tests.



                                               22
References

Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie. 2011. “Human Capital Development Before Age Five.” in
       David Card and Orley Ashenfelter (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4b,
       Chapter 15: 1315-1486.

Baker, Michael and Kevin Milligan. 2008. “Maternal employment, breastfeeding, and health:
       evidence from maternity leave mandates.” Journal of Health Economics, 27 (4): 871-
       887.

Baker, Michael and Kevin Milligan. 2010. “Evidence from maternity leave expansions of the
       impact of maternal care on early child development.” Journal of Human Resources, 45
       (1): 1-32.

Baker, Michael and Kevin Milligan. 2011. “Maternity Leave and Children‟s Cognitive and
       Behavioral Development”, NBER Working Paper No. 17105

Baum II, Charles L. 2003. “Does Early Maternal Employment Harm Child Development? An
       Analysis of the Potential Benefits of Leave Taking.” Journal of Labor Economics, 21
       (2): 409-448.

Berger, Lawrence M., Jennifer Hill and Jane Waldfogel. 2005. “Maternity Leave, Early
       Maternal Employment and Child Health and Development in the US.” The Economic
       Journal, 115 (501): F29-F47.

Bernal, Raquel and Michael P. Keane. (2011). “Child Care Choices and Children‟s Cognitive
       Achievement: The Case of Single Mothers.” Journal of Labor Economics, 29 (3): 459-
       512.

Blau, Francine D. and Adam J. Grossberg. 1992. “Maternal Labor Supply and Children's
       Cognitive Development.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 74 (3): 474-481.

BMUJF. 1999. “Österreichischer Familienbericht 1999 - Band 2, Partnerschaften zur
       Vereinbarkeit und Neuverteilung von Betreuungs- und Erwerbstätigkeit”; Federal
       Ministry of Environment, Youth and Family; Austria. [Austrian Family Report 1999 -
       Vol.                      2]                      available                        at:
       http://www.bmwfj.gv.at/Familie/Familienforschung/Seiten/4Familienbericht1999.aspx

Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, Wen-Jui Han and Jane Waldfogel. 2002. “Maternal Employment and
       Child Cognitive Outcomes in the First Three Years of Life: The NICHD Study of
       Early Child Care.” Child Development, 73 (4): 1052-1072.


                                           23
Carneiro, Pedro, Katrine Løken and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2010. “A flying start? Long Term
      Consequences of Maternal Time Investments in Children During Their First Year of
      Life”, IZA Discussion paper No. 5362 (December 2010).

Currie, Janet. 2005. “When Do We Really Know What We Think We Know? Determining
      Causality”, in Bianchi, Suzanne M., Lynne M. Casper, and Rosalind B. King (eds),
      “Work, Family, Health and Well-Being.” Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
      Associates, Chapter 19: 279-296.

Dustmann, Christian and Uta Schönberg. 2012. “Expansions in Maternity Leave Coverage
      and Children‟s Long-Term Outcomes”, American Economic Journal: Applied
      Economics, 4(3): 190-224.

Gennetian, Lisa A., Heather D. Hill, Andrew S. London and Leonard M. Lopoo. 2010.
      “Maternal employment and the health of low-income young children.” Journal of
      Health Economics, 29 (3): 353-363.

Grossman, Michael. 2006. “Education and nonmarket outcomes.” in Hanushek, Eric A. and
      Finis Welsh, “Handbook of the Economics of Education”, Volume 1, Chapter 10: 577-
      633.

Hill, Jennifer L., Jane Waldfogel, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, and Wen-Jui Han. 2005. “Maternal
      Employment and Child Development: A Fresh Look Using Newer Methods.”
      Developmental Psychology, 41(6): 833-850.

Kreimer,     Margareta.   2002.   “Paternal    Leave”   Working   paper,   available   at
      http://elliscambor.mur.at/pdf/vaeterkarenz.pdf.

Lalive, Rafael, Analía Schlosser, Andreas Steinhauer and Josef Zweimüller. forthcoming.
      “Parental Leave and Mothers‟ Careers: The Relative Importance of Job Protection and
      Cash Benefits”, Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

Lalive, Rafael and Josef Zweimüller. 2009. “How does Parental Leave Affect Fertility and
      Return to Work? Evidence from Two Natural Experiments.” The Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, 124 (3): 1363–1402.

Liu, Qian and Oskar Nordstrom Skans. 2010. “The Duration of Paid Parental Leave and
      Children‟s Scholastic Performance.” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy,
      10(1) (Contributions), Article 3.




                                              24
Morrill, Melinda S. 2011. “The effects of maternal employment on the health of school-age
        children.” Journal of Health Economics, 30 (2): 240-357.

Neuwirth, Norbert. 2004. “Parents‟ Time, Allocated for Child Care? An Estimation System
        on Parents‟ Caring Activities”, Austrian Institute for Family Studies Working Paper,
        No. 46.

Neyer, Gerda R. 2003. “Family policies and low fertility in Western Europe.” Journal of
        Population and Social Security: Population Study, Supplement to Volume 1: 46-93.

OECD.     2009.    “PISA    2006      Technical    Report”,   Paris,   France.   Available   at:
        http://www.pisa.oecd.org/dataoecd/0/47/42025182.pdf

Ruhm, Christopher J. 1998. “The Economic Consequences of Parental Leave Mandates:
        Lessons from Europe.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113 (1): 285-317.

Ruhm, Christopher J. 2000. “Parental leave and child health.” Journal of Health Economics,
        19 (6): 931-960.

Ruhm, Christopher J. 2004. “Parental Employment and Child Cognitive Development.”
        Journal of Human Resources, 39 (1): 155-192.

Ruhm, Christopher J. 2008. “Maternal employment and adolescent development.” Labour
        Economics, 15 (5): 958-983.

Schneeweis, Nicole and Martina Zweimueller. 2009. “Early tracking and the misfortune of
        being young”, The Austrian Center for Labor and Economics and the Analysis of the
        Welfare State, Working Paper No. 0920.

Tanaka, Sakiko. 2005. “Parental Leave and Child Health Across OECD Countries.” The
        Economic Journal, 115 (501): F7-F28.

Waldfogel, Jane, Wen-Jui Han and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. 2002. “The Effects of Early
        Maternal Employment on Child Cognitive Development.” Demography, 39 (2): 369-
        392.

Würtz Rasmussen, Astrid. 2010. “Increasing the length of parents' birth-related leave: The
        effect on children's long-term educational outcomes.” Labour Economics, 17 (1): 91-
        100.




                                              25
Table 1: Mean comparisons of outcomes and characteristics of students born in
          May/June versus July/August in the reform year 1990 and the control year
          1987


                               PISA 2006 (birth cohort 1990)              PISA 2003 (birth cohort 1987)
                                 Pre      Post                             Pre     Pre
                               reform    reform                          reform reform
Birth months                     May-     July-                           May-    July-
                                  June    Aug.                             June    Aug.
                                 Mean     Mean     Diff. Std.             Mean    Mean       Diff.  Std.
                                   (1)      (2)   (2)-(1) error             (1)     (2)     (2)-(1) error
Mathematics score                 521.20 519.80 -1.45 5.23                 515.90 515.10 -0.74 5.92
(Std. deviation: 92.8)
Reading score                     507.20    500.70      -6.46 5.74         501.10     501.70      0.62     5.73
(Std. deviation: 101.1)
Science score                     526.90    523.70      -3.18 5.09         504.40     502.50     -1.87     5.65
(Std. deviation: 90.6)
Retained                            0.21       0.34 0.13** 0.03              0.25       0.33 0.08**        0.03
Academic track                      0.54       0.52 -0.02 0.03               0.46       0.51   0.04        0.03
Male                                0.52       0.50 -0.02 0.03               0.50       0.49 -0.01         0.03
Age in years                       15.92      15.75 -0.17** 0.00            15.93      15.76 -0.17**       0.00
City                                0.41       0.41 -0.01 0.03               0.34       0.35   0.01        0.03
Metropolitan area                   0.14       0.13 -0.01 0.02               0.16       0.14 -0.02         0.02
Mother‟s education:
          Lower secondary           0.09       0.09      0.00 0.02            0.13      0.09 -0.04**       0.02
          Upper secondary           0.54       0.56      0.02 0.03            0.59      0.56 -0.03         0.03
                    Tertiary        0.37       0.35     -0.02 0.03            0.28      0.34 0.07**        0.03
Father‟s education
          Lower secondary           0.06       0.06      0.00   0.01          0.09      0.07     -0.02     0.02
          Upper secondary           0.47       0.46     -0.01   0.03          0.51      0.48     -0.03     0.03
                    Tertiary        0.45       0.46      0.02   0.03          0.37      0.41      0.05     0.03
         Educ. father: miss.        0.02       0.02      0.00   0.01          0.03      0.04      0.01     0.01
Migration family type 1             0.09       0.07     -0.02   0.02          0.06      0.06      0.00     0.01
Migration family type 2             0.85       0.86      0.01   0.02          0.90      0.91      0.01     0.02
School programme:
     Vocational (low track)         0.05       0.07     0.02    0.02          0.05      0.07      0.02     0.02
             Apprenticeship         0.26       0.23    -0.04    0.02          0.26      0.24     -0.02     0.03
                       BMS          0.13       0.16    0.03*    0.02          0.20      0.17     -0.03     0.02
                        BHS         0.33       0.30    -0.03    0.03          0.31      0.32      0.01     0.03
                        AHS         0.23       0.24     0.01    0.02          0.18      0.21      0.03     0.02
Number of observations              716        764                            680       680
Notes: Estimations weighted by individual inverse probability weights provided in the PISA data set. The
standard deviations refer to the 2006 data using the pooled sample from May to August. Significance levels are
denoted by: ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. “Migration family type 1” indicates families speaking the test language at home
and in which at least one of the parents is foreign-born. “Migration family type 2” indicates families speaking the
test language at home and where both parents are native-born. The base category are non-German speaking
families.




                                                       26
Table 2: Simple OLS regressions on test score differences between children born in June
           versus July 1990
                                Full sample            High Educ. Mothers            Low Educ. Mothers
                              (1)           (2)            (4)             (5)         (7)            (8)
                                                            BOYS + GIRLS
Mathematics                   3.0           3.3            15.7       15.3            -3.4            -2.9
                             (7.0)         (6.2)          (11.0)     (11.1)           (8.4)          (7.5)

Reading                       3.3           4.0         28.9**         28.6**         -10.1           -8.9
                             (6.9)         (6.0)        (13.5)         (13.7)         (8.7)          (7.4)

Science                       3.9           3.8         23.7**         22.1**         -6.4            -5.8
                             (6.3)         (5.4)        (10.4)         (10.2)         (8.1)          (6.9)

Observations                 1,480        1,480            523             523         957           957
                                                                   BOYS
Mathematics                  11.7           8.6            27.9            21.9        2.9            1.9
                             (9.0)         (8.0)          (17.3)          (14.8)      (8.8)          (9.1)

Reading                      12.5          10.5         50.3**            44.3*       -7.8            -5.0
                             (9.2)         (7.9)        (22.4)            (22.0)     (10.8)          (9.8)

Science                       7.7           4.7         40.8**         34.6**         -9.9          -10.5
                             (8.6)         (7.3)        (15.5)         (14.4)         (8.7)         (7.9)

Observations                  752          752             265             265         487           487
                                                                   GIRLS
Mathematics                   -5.8         -2.3            3.5             5.8        -9.6           -4.5
                             (10.0)        (9.8)          (14.7)          (15.5)     (14.0)         (13.1)

Reading                       -6.1         -3.0            8.2             11.8      -12.2           -8.2
                             (9.8)         (8.7)          (15.3)          (15.4)     (13.7)         (11.1)

Science                       -0.1          2.8            7.1             7.3        -2.8           2.2
                             (9.3)         (8.6)          (14.3)          (14.5)     (14.1)         (12.6)

Observations                  728          728             258             258         470           470

Controls for parental
                                -                          -                          -             
background
Notes: The presented numbers are the estimated effects of „being born in July‟ as opposed to „being born in
June‟ using the 2006 PISA data. The results in the top panel stem from the pooled sample of males and females,
the middle panel from the male and the bottom panel from the female sample. All regressions include children
born between May 1 and August 31 and control for birth months (dummy variables) and gender (top panel). The
control variables on parental background include dummy variables for mother‟s and father‟s educational
attainment, school location, and migration background. Robust standard errors in parentheses (clustered by
school programme, school location, and gender). Estimations weighted by individual inverse probability weights
provided in the PISA data set. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: PISA data set (OECD), own calculations.




                                                     27
 Table 3: RD-DID estimation results (boys and girls)

                                   Full sample             High Educ. Mothers               Low Educ. Mothers
                              (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
Mathematics
Treatment effect            -0.4             2.0            17.2*           16.1*            -7.1            -5.0
                            (6.9)           (6.7)           (9.7)           (9.2)           (9.6)           (8.8)
Post June                    0.2            -2.5           -21.7*          -19.5*             8.3             6.0
                            (7.0)           (6.8)          (10.9)           (9.9)           (8.6)           (8.0)
Born May                    -2.3            -4.2            -11.7           -14.1             1.0             0.2
                            (5.9)           (5.6)           (8.9)           (8.6)           (6.0)           (5.7)
Born July                   -3.8            -2.9              8.4             5.1           -10.0            -8.4
                            (5.2)           (4.8)           (8.8)           (8.6)           (6.7)           (5.2)
BC 1990                      5.0             3.9             -6.7            -6.2             8.1             8.3
                            (6.4)           (5.8)          (10.4)           (8.9)           (6.8)           (6.4)
Constant                  503.8***        418.5***        528.2***        457.1***        494.8***        407.6***
                           (12.4)          (19.0)          (14.2)          (23.3)          (12.4)          (20.8)
Reading
Treatment effect            -7.4            -4.1            22.7*           21.2*          -19.8*          -17.1*
                            (8.6)           (8.1)          (12.4)           (11.7)         (10.4)           (9.5)
Post June                    4.6             1.3           -24.6*          -22.4**          15.4*           13.5*
                            (7.6)           (7.3)          (12.4)           (11.1)          (7.9)           (7.5)
Born May                     6.9             4.7              0.6             -2.7           8.4              8.2
                            (4.9)           (4.7)          (10.1)            (8.9)          (5.7)           (5.8)
Born July                   -1.8            -0.9             17.0            13.3           -11.3            -9.9
                            (5.7)           (5.3)          (10.2)           (10.0)          (7.9)           (6.0)
BC1990                       6.5             4.8            -13.5           -12.2           13.0*           12.8*
                            (7.0)           (6.4)          (11.8)           (11.2)          (7.5)           (7.1)
Constant                  515.9***        408.7***        545.7***        447.5***        505.3***        399.3***
                           (13.0)          (22.2)          (15.7)           (27.5)         (13.6)          (24.8)
Science
Treatment effect             -1.0            2.1            23.7**          23.0**          -11.1             -8.5
                             (7.6)          (7.4)           (10.3)          (10.0)           (9.9)           (9.0)
Post June                     0.7           -2.7           -22.0**         -20.7**             9.0             6.4
                             (7.0)          (6.8)           (10.6)           (9.7)           (8.6)           (8.0)
Born May                      3.9            1.6              0.5             -2.7             4.2             3.4
                             (5.9)          (5.7)            (7.8)           (6.9)           (6.9)           (6.8)
Born July                    -1.1           -0.1             13.1              9.6            -8.2            -6.6
                             (5.3)          (5.0)            (8.7)           (8.7)           (7.5)           (5.8)
BC1990                     22.1***        20.5***             5.2              5.4         27.6***         27.2***
                             (6.8)          (6.2)           (10.2)           (8.8)           (7.3)           (6.9)
Constant                  495.0***        388.4***        520.5***        419.7***        485.9***        380.3***
                            (12.7)         (18.1)           (14.6)          (24.0)          (12.9)          (18.7)
Observations                2,840           2,840             943             943            1,897           1,897

Background controls            -                              -                              -               
 Notes: All regressions control for gender. The control variables on parental background include dummy variables for
 mother‟s and father‟s educational attainment, school location, and migration background. Robust standard errors in
 parentheses (clustered by school programme, school location, and gender). Estimations weighted by individual inverse
 probability weights provided in the PISA data set. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: PISA data set (OECD), own
 calculations.



                                                         28
Table 4: RD-DID estimation results by gender.
                             (1)           (2)              (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
                               Full sample             High Educ. Mothers              Low Educ. Mothers
                                                                  BOYS
Mathematics                  0.1           0.3            17.9             15.8         -8.4           -9.0
                            (7.9)         (8.1)          (12.4)           (12.3)       (13.2)         (11.8)

Reading                      -7.3          -6.8         34.0**            33.1**       -27.7*        -26.6**
                            (9.8)         (9.7)         (15.2)            (15.0)       (14.5)         (12.9)

Science                      -2.1          -1.2        41.0***         40.4***         -23.7          -23.3*
                            (9.2)         (9.2)         (10.9)          (11.4)         (15.4)         (13.4)

Observations               1,426          1,426             482            482          944            944
                                                                  GIRLS
Mathematics                 -0.5          4.1             18.2             16.0         -5.6           -2.0
                           (11.1)        (10.7)          (15.5)           (15.2)       (14.3)         (13.3)

Reading                     -7.4          -1.9            13.4             13.9        -12.8           -8.9
                           (13.7)        (12.6)          (19.7)           (19.1)       (15.5)         (14.0)

Science                     0.6           5.8             7.8              6.3          1.7            5.8
                           (12.1)        (11.9)          (16.7)           (15.8)       (14.1)         (13.1)

Observations               1,414          1,414             461            461          953            953

Background                    -                             -                           -             
controls
Notes: Each cell reports the estimated treatment effect from a separate regression. The upper panel includes only
male, the lower panel only female students. All regressions include dummy variable controls for survey year,
birth months and for all children born post June. The control variables on parental background include dummy
variables for mother‟s and father‟s educational attainment, school location, and migration background. Robust
standard errors in parentheses (clustered by school programme, school location, and gender). Estimations
weighted by individual inverse probability weights provided in the PISA data set. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1. Source: PISA data set (OECD), own calculations.




                                                       29
Table 5: RD-DID estimates based on symmetrically extended estimation samples (up to
          four pre- and post-reform birth months)
                           High Educ. Mothers                               Low Educ. Mothers
                       (1)        (2)         (3)                       (4)       (5)         (6)
                     Mar-Oct    Apr-Sep     May-Aug                   Mar-Oct   Apr-Sep    May-Aug
                                 BOYS + GIRLS                                    BOYS + GIRLS
Mathematics             5.7             9.9            16.4*             2.2            0.5            -5.6
                       (7.7)           (7.3)           (9.3)            (6.5)          (7.3)          (9.1)

Reading                 9.2            13.1            20.6*            -8.1            -9.7          -16.3*
                       (9.5)           (9.8)           (11.7)           (6.8)          (7.7)           (9.2)

Science                11.7            15.9*          23.1**            -3.1            -5.1           -8.8
                       (8.7)           (8.9)          (10.1)            (7.1)          (7.7)          (9.1)

Observations           1,887           1,425            943            3,772          2,840           1,897
                                      BOYS                                            BOYS
Mathematics             13.3           13.5             15.8            -3.0           -3.6            -9.0
                       (11.2)          (9.7)           (12.3)           (8.9)         (10.3)          (11.8)

Reading               27.2**          28.9**          33.1**           -16.8          -20.9*         -26.6**
                      (11.6)          (12.0)          (15.0)           (10.1)         (12.2)          (12.9)

Science               32.6***        34.4***         40.4***           -16.9*         -19.0           -23.3*
                       (10.4)         (9.9)           (11.4)            (9.7)         (11.1)          (13.4)

Observations            953             716             482            1,866          1,397            944
                                      GIRLS                                          GIRLS
Mathematics             -0.2            6.0             16.0             7.3           4.9             -2.0
                       (10.6)          (11.0)          (15.2)           (9.0)         (10.0)          (13.3)

Reading                 -9.7            -1.3            13.9             4.0            2.3            -8.9
                       (14.5)          (14.6)          (19.1)           (9.1)          (9.9)          (14.0)

Science                 -8.2            -2.6            6.3             11.6           9.3             5.8
                       (11.6)          (12.6)          (15.8)          (10.1)         (11.1)          (13.1)

Observations            934             709             461            1,906          1,443            953
Notes: Each cell reports the estimated treatment effect from a separate regression. All regressions include
dummy variables for month of birth, a year dummy for 2006, a dummy variable for all children born after June.
Estimations from columns 1, 2, 4, and 5 include a further dummy variable for all children born between
September and December to account for the school entry cut-off date in Austria and an interaction effect of this
dummy variable with the year 2006 variable to account for potential general trends in school entry or repetition
norms. The control variables on parental background include dummy variables for father‟s educational
attainment, school location, and migration background of the family. Robust standard errors in parentheses
(clustered by school programme, school location, and gender). Estimations weighted by individual inverse
probability weights provided in the PISA data set. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: PISA data set
(OECD), own calculations.




                                                      30
Table 6: RD-DDD estimations including German students as further control group
                           High Educ. Mothers                              Low Educ. Mothers
                       (1)        (2)         (3)                      (4)          (5)        (6)
                     Mar-Oct    Apr-Sep    May-Aug                   Mar-Oct     Apr-Sep     May-Aug
                                BOYS + GIRLS                                    BOYS + GIRLS
Mathematics            19.2*          22.2*           22.8              -6.2            -9.9           -17.1
                       (9.9)          (11.3)         (14.8)            (10.0)          (11.7)          (14.1)

Reading                 18.6           20.6           25.1            -23.2*           -26.5*         -31.0*
                       (13.5)         (15.2)         (17.3)           (12.3)           (13.4)         (15.5)

Science               29.1**         33.5**          37.8**            -14.9           -17.0           -20.9
                      (11.8)         (13.3)          (15.3)            (11.3)          (13.1)          (14.8)

Observations           4,228          3,212          2,158             6,519           4,968           3,325
                                     BOYS                                             BOYS
Mathematics           28.5**         32.7**          38.1**           -33.1**          -34.1*         -37.2**
                      (13.0)         (13.4)          (18.2)            (15.8)          (17.2)          (16.7)

Reading                32.2*          36.1*          40.0*           -55.2***         -56.8**         -57.1**
                       (16.7)         (18.3)         (22.6)            (19.3)          (21.2)          (22.1)

Science              48.6***         56.6***        66.9***          -51.5***        -53.2***        -53.1***
                      (10.6)          (12.1)         (15.8)            (16.2)          (18.6)          (18.6)

Observations           2,157          1,634          1,113             3,209           2,438           1,636
                                     GIRLS                                            GIRLS
Mathematics             11.1           11.6           9.4               16.2            10.1            2.6
                       (16.4)         (19.0)         (23.6)            (11.3)          (15.0)          (21.7)

Reading                 0.9            3.2            13.6              7.9             1.6             -8.5
                       (18.4)         (21.2)         (21.2)            (12.6)          (16.2)          (23.9)

Science                 9.3            9.5            10.4              16.9            14.0            9.9
                       (18.9)         (21.5)         (23.3)            (13.3)          (17.3)          (22.1)

Observations           2,071          1,578          1,045             3,310           2,530           1,689
Notes: Each cell reports the estimated treatment effect from a separate regression. All regressions include
dummy variables for month of birth, year and country fixed effects, a dummy variable for all children born after
June, interaction effects between year and the „post June‟ dummy, year and country, country and „post June‟.
Estimations from columns 1, 2, 4, and 5 include a further dummy variable for all children born between
September and December to account for the school entry cut-off date in Austria (and a year interaction). The
control variables on parental background include dummy variables for father‟s educational attainment, school
location, and migration background of the family. Robust standard errors in parentheses (clustered by country,
school track (more/less academic), school location, and gender). Estimations weighted by individual inverse
probability weights provided in the PISA data set. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: PISA data set
(OECD), own calculations.




                                                       31
Table 7: Robustness check. RD-DID estimations using only PISA 2006 data and
          Germany as a control group.

                          High Educ. Mothers                             Low Educ. Mothers
                      (1)        (2)         (3)                     (4)          (5)        (6)
                    Mar-Oct    Apr-Sep    May-Aug                  Mar-Oct     Apr-Sep     May-Aug
                               BOYS + GIRLS                                  BOYS + GIRLS
Mathematics           18.7*         23.9**         27.2**          14.2**           10.6            -0.1
                      (10.0)        (10.2)         (11.1)           (6.5)           (8.0)          (9.7)

Reading               19.6*         22.9*          27.5*              5.8            1.1            -4.1
                      (11.4)        (12.0)         (14.5)            (8.3)          (9.0)          (9.9)

Science              21.5**         26.7**        31.9***             8.1            4.6            -1.2
                     (10.2)         (10.2)         (11.5)            (6.3)          (7.2)          (8.3)

Observations          2,353          1,799         1,214            3,296           2,487          1,669
                                    BOYS                                           BOYS
Mathematics           22.9*         31.9**         34.0**            6.2             1.7           -10.3
                      (11.0)        (11.2)         (14.8)           (13.3)          (15.4)         (15.7)

Reading               31.7*         40.4**         44.2*             -2.7            -7.6          -15.9
                      (16.6)        (17.2)         (22.6)           (16.1)          (17.2)         (17.5)

Science              34.8**        44.8***        52.0***            -4.4           -11.0          -21.2
                     (13.1)         (12.2)         (16.2)           (11.3)          (12.5)         (12.5)

Observations          1,202           911           618             1,621           1,226           826
                                   GIRLS                                           GIRLS
Mathematics            15.4          15.9           21.9           22.3***         18.0**           11.5
                      (16.7)        (17.8)         (18.4)           (5.8)           (8.2)          (11.3)

Reading                5.4           5.0            12.3           14.5**            9.9            8.1
                      (14.2)        (15.3)         (15.1)           (6.9)           (9.4)          (12.2)

Science                8.7           9.2            13.5           20.1**           18.5*          19.1*
                      (14.3)        (15.3)         (15.2)           (8.0)           (9.6)          (11.0)

Observations          1,151           888           596             1,675           1,261           843
Notes: Each cell reports the estimated treatment effect from a separate regression. All regressions include
dummy variables for month of birth, a dummy variable for all children born after June. Estimations from
columns (1)–(4) include a further dummy variable for all children born between September and December to
account for the school entry cut-off date in Austria. The control variables on parental background include
dummy variables for father‟s educational attainment, school location, and migration background of the family.
Robust standard errors in parentheses (clustered by country, school programme, school location, and gender).
Estimations weighted by individual inverse probability weights provided in the PISA data set. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: PISA data set (OECD), own calculations.




                                                     32
Table 8: RD-DID placebo tests
                                     (A)                                             (B)
                        Pseudo cut-off is May 1, 1990                    Pseudo cut-off is Sep 1, 1990
                             RD-DID 2006+2003                                RD-DID 2006+2003
                       Full    High Educ. Low Educ.                Full sample High Educ. Low Educ.
                      sample     Mothers       mothers                            Mothers         mothers
                        (1)         (2)           (3)                   (4)          (5)             (6)
                      Mar-Jun    Mar-Jun        Mar-Jun              Jul-Oct       Jul-Oct         Jul-Oct
                                     BOYS                                             BOYS
Mathematics           4.007          -5.903          10.418             -3.8            9.5            -10.5
                     (10.081)       (14.688)        (12.885)           (8.8)          (15.2)          (10.9)

Reading               7.702         -14.833          19.133             -6.6           -0.8            -8.9
                     (11.491)       (17.469)        (14.598)           (10.8)         (14.7)          (14.4)

Science               1.185         -15.328          10.248             -3.7           -2.8            -3.1
                     (11.928)       (13.059)        (15.292)           (9.1)          (15.6)          (11.6)

Observations           1,432           462            970              1,387            491             896
                                     GIRLS                                            GIRLS
Mathematics           1.437         -26.332          18.209             -5.6            6.7            -10.4
                     (11.353)       (15.491)        (16.229)           (12.0)         (13.0)          (16.1)

Reading               2.017        -39.974**         25.166             -4.2           10.3            -9.9
                     (13.365)       (15.263)        (19.199)           (11.0)         (14.3)          (12.3)

Science               -1.225        -23.605          12.143             1.4           23.8*            -8.6
                      (9.896)       (13.953)        (12.958)           (11.3)         (13.6)          (13.4)

Observations           1,361           450            911              1,479            484             995

Notes: Each cell reports the estimated pseudo treatment effect from a separate regression. The left (right) three
results are based on the sample of children born between April 1 and July 31 (July 1 and October 31) of 1987
and 1990. All regressions include a year dummy (bc1990) and control for mother‟s and father‟s educational
attainment, school location, and migration background of the family. Furthermore the regressions include
controls for birth months, a dummy variable for all children born after the pseudo cut-off dates May 1 (May and
June) or September 1 (September and October) as well as year-pseudo reform interaction effect. Robust standard
errors in parentheses (clustered by school programme, school location, and gender). Estimations weighted by
individual inverse probability weights provided in the PISA data set. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source:
PISA data set (OECD), own calculations.




                                                       33
Table 9: Probability of being in lower than regular grade level (grade retention) or being
           enrolled in the academic track (linear probability models)
                                             (1)                     (2)                       (3)
                                        Full sample           High Educ. Mothers         Low Educ. Mothers
                                                                BOYS + GIRLS
Retained                                    0.055                    -0.022                     0.089**
                                           (0.035)                   (0.059)                    (0.041)

Academic track                             -0.042                     0.004                     -0.067
                                           (0.034)                   (0.059)                    (0.043)

Observations                                2,840                      943                       1,897
                                                                     BOYS
Retained                                    0.019                    -0.031                      0.042
                                           (0.051)                   (0.090)                    (0.049)

Academic track                             -0.044                    -0.005                     -0.064
                                           (0.036)                   (0.062)                    (0.047)

Observations                                1,426                      482                        944
                                                                     GIRLS
Retained                                  0.089**                     0.002                     0.137**
                                          (0.040)                    (0.077)                    (0.062)

Academic track                             -0.047                     0.019                     -0.065
                                           (0.057)                   (0.091)                    (0.073)

Observations                                1,414                      461                        953
Notes: Each cell reports the estimated treatment effects from separate DID regressions controlling for the
standard set of background variables as in the original DID regressions in the main specification (e.g., Tables 3
and 4). The samples consists of children born between May 1 and August 31 of 1987 or 1990. The dependent
variables are two dummy variables indicating whether a student is enrolled in a lower than regular grade level
given his birth date and whether the student is enrolled in the academic track. Robust standard errors in
parentheses (clustered by school programme, school location, and gender). Estimations weighted by individual
inverse probability weights provided in the PISA data set. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: PISA data set
(OECD), own calculations.




                                                       34
Figure 1: Local averages by subject and parametric fit (RD-DID graphs)


                           Mathematics
     400 450 500 550 600




                           Jan   Feb   Mar   Apr   May   Jun    Jul   Aug   Sep   Oct   Nov   Dec

                           Reading
     400 450 500 550 600




                           Jan   Feb   Mar   Apr   May   Jun    Jul   Aug   Sep   Oct   Nov   Dec

                           Scientific Literacy
     400 450 500 550 600




                           Jan   Feb   Mar   Apr   May   Jun    Jul   Aug   Sep   Oct   Nov   Dec
                                                   Month of birth
                                   Local averages 1987                      Local averages 1990
                                   Fitted values 1987                       Fitted values 1990


Notes: Average test scores by birth month plotted for the reform cohort 1990 and the control cohort 1987 (using
official individual weights). The vertical line indicates the month of the parental leave reform (July 1, 1990). The
curved line shows the predicted fit from two regressions of test scores on birth month and its square based on (1)
all observations born between January and June and (2) born between July and December.



                                                               35
Figure 2: Local averages and parametric fit for boys, by maternal LFP group (RD-DID graphs)


     400 450 500 550 600   High LFP mothers, Mathematics                     High LFP mothers, Reading                         High LFP mothers, Scient. Literacy




                           Low LFP mothers, Mathematics                      Low LFP mothers, Reading                          Low LFP mothers, Scient. Literacy
     400 450 500 550 600




                           Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec   Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec   Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

                                                                                      Month of birth
                           Local averages 1987                           Fitted values 1987              Local averages 1990                         Fitted values 1990


Notes: Sample restricted to male students. Average test scores by birth month and mother‟s LFP group plotted for the reform cohort 1990 and the control cohort 1987 (using
official individual PISA weights). The vertical line indicates the month of the parental leave reform (July 1, 1990). The curved line shows the predicted fit from two
regressions of test scores on birth month and its square based on (1) all observations born between January and June and (2) born between July and December.




                                                                                                    36
Figure 3: Local averages and parametric fit for girls, by maternal LFP group (RD-DID graphs)


     400 450 500 550 600   High LFP mothers, Mathematics                     High LFP mothers, Reading                         High LFP mothers, Scient. Literacy




                           Low LFP mothers, Mathematics                      Low LFP mothers, Reading                          Low LFP mothers, Scient. Literacy
     400 450 500 550 600




                           Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec   Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec   Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

                                                                                      Month of birth
                           Local averages 1987                           Fitted values 1987              Local averages 1990                         Fitted values 1990


Notes: Sample restricted to female students. Average test scores by birth month and mother‟s LFP group plotted for the reform cohort 1990 and the control cohort 1987
(using official individual PISA weights). The vertical line indicates the month of the parental leave reform (July 1, 1990). The curved line shows the predicted fit from two
regressions of test scores on birth month and its square based on (1) all observations born between January and June and (2) born between July and December.




                                                                                                    37
                               Online Appendix
                                    to the paper



          Parental Leave and Children‟s Schooling Outcomes:
  Quasi-Experimental Evidence from a Large Parental Leave Reform

                                September 10, 2013




          Natalia Danzer                                     Victor Lavy
             Ifo Institute,                               Hebrew University,
LMU University of Munich and IZA Bonn              University of Warwick and NBER
            danzer@ifo.de                                msvictor@huji.ac.il
Figure A 1: Share of pre- and post-reform mothers returning to work after birth




Source: Figure 5.B. taken from Lalive and Zweimüller (2009, p. 1387) [Lalive, Rafael and Josef Zweimüller. 2009.
“How does Parental Leave Affect Fertility and Return to Work? Evidence from Two Natural Experiments.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124 (3): 1363–1402.]




                                                        1
Figure A 2: Local averages and parametric fit, by student gender (RD-DD graphs)


     400 450 500 550 600   Boys, Mathematics                                 Boys, Reading                                     Boys, Scientific Literacy




                           Girls, Mathematics                                Girls, Reading                                    Girls, Scientific Literacy
     400 450 500 550 600




                           Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec   Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec   Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

                                                                                      Month of birth
                           Local averages 1987                           Fitted values 1987             Local averages 1990                          Fitted values 1990


Notes: Average test scores by birth month and student‟s gender plotted for the reform cohort 1990 and the control cohort 1987 (using official individual PISA
weights). The vertical line indicates the month of the parental leave reform (July 1, 1990). The curved line shows the predicted fit from two regressions of test
scores on birth month and its square based on (1) all observations born between January and June and (2) born between July and December.



                                                                                                    2
Figure A 3: Local averages and parametric fit, by maternal education (RD-DD graphs)


    400 450 500 550 600   High LFP mothers, Mathematics                     High LFP mothers, Reading                         High LFP mothers, Scient. Literacy




                          Low LFP mothers, Mathematics                      Low LFP mothers, Reading                          Low LFP mothers, Scient. Literacy
    400 450 500 550 600




                          Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec   Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec   Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

                                                                                     Month of birth
                          Local averages 1987                           Fitted values 1987             Local averages 1990                          Fitted values 1990




                                                                                                 3
   Table A 1: Overview of existing quasi-experimental studies using reforms in parental leave legislations to identify causal effects of ma-
              ternal employment on child outcomes

Publication   Country and        Year & Substance of PL re-        Assessed child out-           Main empirical       Results on ef-      Heterogenous ef-        Institutional back-
(Authors      Data Source        form                              come(s)                       method               fect of reform      fects                   ground: provision of
and Year)                                                          (Short/Medium/Long run                             on child out-                               child care
                                                                   effects)                                           comes
Baker and     Canada:             December 31, 2000                SR effects:                   Test of differ-        Overall small      Not tested               Centre-based care
Milligan                          Max. duration of maternity       Children between 7 and        ences between          and mostly in-                              for children under
(2010)        National Longi-     leave benefits raised from 25 to                               average out-           significant ef-                             12 (24) months very
                                                                   24 months
              tudinal Study       50 weeks (out of which 10 and                                  comes of birth         fects on the                                low (4 % and 6 %)
                                                                   Parent-reported measures
                                  respectively 35 weeks can be     of temperament, motor         cohorts born           development                                 Mainly informal
              of Children and     claimed by mother or father)                                   before and after       variables                                   care (about 39%
                                                                   and social development
              Youth               Pre-reform job protected ma-                                   the reform;                                                        and 41%)
              (NLSCY);            ternity leave varied between 18                                (regressions
              about 2,000         and 70 weeks across regions.                                   based on six
              children per        Post-reform maternity leave                                    yearly values)
              cohort              duration increased to at least
                                  52 weeks in all regions.
Baker and     Canada:             See Baker and Milligan (2010) SR effects:                      See Baker and         No significant      None                   See Baker and Milli-
Milligan                                                                                         Milligan (2010)       positive effects    (No differences by     gan (2010)
(2011)        National Longi-                                       At ages 4 or 5                                     Negative ef-        child gender or
              tudinal Study                                         Cognitive development                              fects on some       parental educa-
                                                                    (e.g., Peabody Picture                             cognitive out-      tion)
              of Children and                                       Vocabulary or Number                               comes
              Youth (NLSCY);                                        Knowledge Test)
              about 2,000                                           Parent-reported behav-
              children per                                          ioural development (e.g.,
              cohort                                                hyperactivity)
Carneiro,     Norway:             July 1, 1977                     MR & LR effects:              Non-parametric        Significant,        Yes, stronger            Extremely low
Løken and                         Introduction of paid PL for 18                                 RD (1977 co-          positive effect     positive effects for     enrolment rates of
Salvanes      Administrative      weeks (4.5 months) with 100%       Dropout rates from high     hort; local linear    on high school      children from            zero- to two-year-
(2010)        register data on    income replacement as well as      school (measured at age     regression) and       graduation,         households with          olds in public child
              schooling and       extension of unpaid PL from 3      29)                         non-parametric        college attend-     lower maternal           care in 1977; main-
              family events       to 12 months (on top of paid       College attendance          RD-DID (co-           ance and IQ         education (less          ly informal child
              and military        PL) [de facto increase in PL       (measured at age 29)        horts 1977 and        (males) for eli-    than 10 years of         care through rela-
              records (linked     take-up from 8 to 12 months]       IQ (males aged 18-19)       1975)                 gible mothers       schooling)               tives
              child-parent                                           Teenage pregnancy                                 Insignificant       No differences by
              data)                                                  (females with birth be-                           effects when        child gender or
                                                                     fore age 20)                                      including inel-     pre-birth house-
                                                                     Height (males aged 18-19)                         igible mothers      hold income

                                                                                         4
Dustmann      Germany:           Three reforms: 1979, 1986,        MR & LR effects:              DID and TS-       No significant    Not tested            Enrolment in formal
and Schön-                       1992                                                            2SLS              effects or only                         day care centres low
berg (2010)   Administrative     May 1, 1979:                        1979 reform: wages and      (RD and RD-       extremely                               (5% for under 18-
              data on public     Extension of paid+job protect-      educational attainment at   DID as robust-    small positive                          months-olds); Child
              schools in three   ed PL (flat rate) from 2 to 6       age 28 or 29                ness check)       effects                                 care mainly informal
              federal states     months                              1986 reform: Graduation                       Effect of ex-                           through grandpar-
              (information on    January 1, 1986:                    from academic track                           pansion of 18                           ents or other relatives
              type of school/    Extension of paid+job protect-      (before age 20)                               to 36 months                            (29 %)
              track and grad-    ed PL (flat rate up to month 6;     1992 reform: Choice of                        even slightly
              uation); social    means-tested from month 7 to        school track at age 14                        negative
              security data on   10) from 6 to 10 months             (8th grade)
              educational        January 1, 1992:                    (most/medium/least aca-
              attainment         Extension of unpaid job pro-        demic track)
                                 tected PL from 18 to 36
                                 months (maternity leave pay-
                                 ments up to month 18)
Liu and       Sweden:            August–October 1988               MR effects:                   OLS regression    Average effect    Positive effect for   Established public
Nordstrom                        Extension of paid PL benefits                                   of child out-     on child out-     well-educated         child care system: 40-
Skans         Administrative     from 12 to 15 months               Test scores from nation-     comes on legal    comes is in-      mothers (some         50% of children aged
(2010)        register data      Gradual extension by 30 days       al tests during last com-    number of PL      significant       tertiary education)   1-2 in formal day care
                                 in each of three consecutive       pulsory school year          months (accord-                     No differences        or family centres; only
                                 months in 1988: 1st of Au-         Compulsory school            ing to birth                        between boys and      few children in infor-
                                 gust/September/October             grades (GPA scores)          month of child)                     girls                 mal care
                                                                    scores at age 16
Würtz         Denmark:           March 26, 1984                    MR effects:                   RD                No significant    None                  Publicly subsidized
Rasmussen                        Extension of paid PL from 14                                    (DID as robust-   effects           (No differences       day care system even
(2010)       Administrative      to 20 weeks                       High school enrolment         ness check)                         by child gender or    for very young chil-
             register data                                         High school GPA                                                   parental educa-       dren available
             (linked child-                                        Reading test scores of 15-                                        tion)
             parent data);                                         year-old students (PISA
             PISA 2000                                             test in 2000)
   Notes: PL – Parental leave; RD – Regression Discontinuity; DID – Difference-in-Difference; TS-2SLS – Two-Sample Two-Stage-Least-Squares; IV – Instrumental Varia-
   bles; GPA – Grade Point Average; SR/MR/LR – short-run/medium-run/long-run effects




                                                                                        5
Table A 2: Female employment ratio by highest education completed, Census Aus-
           tria 1991

                                                  Born in Austria                 Born anywhere
                                              Employment                      Employment
ISCED Highest education completed               ratio              N            ratio              N

1. Group of mothers with lower labour force participation

2         Compulsory secondary school             60.8%          2,020            57.2%          2,528
3C        Intermediate technical & voca-
          tional secondary school (short          67.7%           136             67.2%           137
          form)
3B        Upper secondary                         75.3%          3,828            74.6%          3,970
3A        Higher general secondary                65.9%           437             60.8%           523
          school
          Total                                   70.0%          6,421            67.3%          7,158

2. Group of mothers with higher labour force participation

4         Post-secondary (not tertiary)           81.7%           699             79.7%           744
          (Intermediate or higher tech-
          nical & vocational secondary
          school)
5B        Post-secondary college (ter-            90.7%           333             90.0%           341
          tiary)
5A/6      University, Polytechnic (ter-           81.6%           305             76.8%           358
          tiary)
          Total                                   83.9%          1,337            81.4%          1,443
Notes: Subsample of all mothers aged 18 to 39 years with a child younger than one year (Austria, Census
date May 15, 1991). The „employment ratio‟ is calculated as the ratio of persons working for an employer,
self-employed persons, unpaid workers engaged in the production of economic goods, and persons who
have a job but are temporarily absent for some reason (e.g. maternity or parental leave) divided by the
total number of people in this age group. Employment measure does not include unemployed individuals,
since the focus of the following analysis is on working mothers. Including unemployed women in the
employment measure changes the ratios only slightly (they become larger). The educational classification
is according to ISCED 1997. Source: Census Austria 1991 (Minnesota Population Center. 2011. Integrat-
ed Public Use Microdata Series, International: Version 6.1 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota. Original data provided by the National Bureau of Statistics, Austria.); own cal-
culations.




                                                   6
Table A 3: RD-DID estimates controlling for school programme



                                       Full sample             High Educ.             Low Educ.
                                                                Mothers                Mothers
                                            (1)                   (2)                    (3)
                                                            BOYS + GIRLS
Mathematics                                 5.8                 20.3***                    -1.8
                                           (4.6)                 (6.7)                    (6.6)

Reading                                     -0.5                 24.8**                  -13.3*
                                           (6.3)                 (10.2)                   (6.6)

Science                                     5.8                 26.3***                    -5.1
                                           (5.6)                 (7.8)                    (6.8)
                                                                 BOYS
Mathematics                                 6.5                  19.0**                    -1.6
                                           (6.2)                  (8.8)                   (9.3)

Reading                                     -1.8                 32.9**                  -19.9*
                                           (8.3)                 (14.4)                   (9.7)

Science                                     4.5                 41.7***                   -16.3
                                           (7.3)                 (9.2)                   (10.1)
                                                                 GIRLS
Mathematics                                 6.0                    17.7                    -1.1
                                           (6.8)                  (12.1)                  (9.1)

Reading                                     0.2                    15.9                    -6.7
                                           (9.4)                  (16.9)                  (8.6)

Science                                     7.8                    7.9                     7.3
                                           (8.2)                  (12.7)                  (9.9)

Controls
Parental background                                                                       
School programme                                                                          
Notes: The reported estimated treatment effects stem from separate estimations of different specifications.
The regressions are based on different subsamples of all children born between May 1 and August 31 of
1987 or 1990. All regressions include dummy variable controls for survey year, birth months and for all
children born post June. The control variables on parental background include dummy variables for
mother‟s and father‟s educational attainment, school location, migration background and for the five
different school types. The sample size for the pooled samples (top panel; row 1 and 3) are 2,840 and
1,386 respectively. Robust standard errors in parentheses (clustered by school programme, school loca-
tion, and gender). Estimations weighted by individual inverse probability weights provided in the PISA
data set. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: PISA data set (OECD), own calculations.




                                                    7
Table A 4: RD-DID estimations excluding observations from Vienna.



                          High Educ. Mothers                        Low Educ. Mothers
                      (1)        (2)         (3)                  (4)       (5)       (6)
                    Mar-Oct    Apr-Sep    May-Aug               Mar-Oct   Apr-Sep   May-Aug
                               BOYS + GIRLS                                BOYS + GIRLS
  Mathematics          8.2           12.8          18.7            3.0            3.3           0.2
                      (8.6)          (8.6)        (11.5)          (6.9)          (7.8)         (9.7)

  Reading              15.4         20.4*         30.1**          -4.6            -4.2         -4.9
                      (10.8)        (11.4)        (14.4)          (7.4)          (8.0)         (8.8)

  Science              12.6          18.0         24.8*           -1.2            -1.3         -1.4
                      (10.0)        (10.8)        (12.5)          (7.4)          (7.8)         (9.1)

  Observations        1,569         1,188          787            3,285         2,478          1,669
                                   BOYS                                         BOYS
  Mathematics          15.8          17.1          15.9            3.1            6.1          1.9
                      (12.8)        (11.9)        (15.9)          (9.1)          (9.9)        (10.9)

  Reading            32.5**        36.8**         42.0**          -12.5         -11.8         -15.6
                     (13.6)        (14.1)         (16.7)          (10.9)        (12.4)        (11.6)

  Science           35.2***        40.4***       44.3***          -9.6            -7.1         -9.2
                     (12.2)         (12.7)        (14.2)          (9.6)          (9.3)        (10.8)

  Observations         784           586           391            1,590         1,205           824
                                   GIRLS                                       GIRLS
  Mathematics          6.7           11.0          24.2            2.7           0.8           -2.3
                      (10.7)        (11.8)        (16.9)          (9.4)         (10.8)        (14.9)

  Reading              -1.8          3.7           20.1            5.6           2.5           0.5
                      (15.2)        (15.2)        (20.8)          (10.0)        (11.0)        (15.0)

  Science              -4.0          -0.9          9.8             8.5           5.8           6.5
                      (12.9)        (13.8)        (17.7)          (10.8)        (12.0)        (14.7)

  Observations         785           602           396            1,695         1,273           845
Notes: The reported estimated treatment effects stem from separate estimations of different specifications
based on the Austrian PISA data 2006 and 2003. The sample excludes children living in Vienna. All
regressions include dummy variables for month of birth, a year dummy for 2006, a dummy variable for
all children born after June. The control variables on parental background include dummy variables for
father‟s educational attainment, school location, and migration background of the family. Robust standard
errors in parentheses (clustered by school programme, school location, and gender). Estimations weighted
by individual inverse probability weights provided in the PISA data set. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Source: PISA data set (OECD), own calculations.




                                                    8
Table A 5: RD-DID estimates based on sample adding more pre-reform birth
           months while holding the number of post-reform birth months constant


                          High Educ. Mothers                        Low Educ. Mothers
                      (1)        (2)         (3)                  (4)       (5)       (6)
                    Mar-Aug    Apr-Aug May-Aug                  Mar-Aug Apr-Aug May-Aug
                               BOYS + GIRLS                                BOYS + GIRLS
  Mathematics           6.0          10.4          16.4*            2.4           0.8            -5.6
                       (7.7)         (7.4)         (9.3)           (6.5)         (7.4)          (9.1)

  Reading               9.6          13.8          20.6*            -8.1         -9.5          -16.3*
                       (9.4)         (9.7)         (11.7)          (7.0)         (7.8)          (9.2)

  Science              12.1          16.6*         23.1**           -3.0         -5.0            -8.8
                       (8.6)         (8.9)         (10.1)          (7.2)         (7.8)          (9.1)

  Observations        1,407          1,178          943            2,830         2,367         1,897
                                    BOYS                                        BOYS
  Mathematics          13.6          13.6           15.8            -2.6         -3.1           -9.0
                      (11.1)         (9.8)         (12.3)          (8.8)        (10.2)         (11.8)

  Reading             27.6**        28.9**         33.1**         -16.4         -20.2         -26.6**
                      (11.6)        (12.2)         (15.0)         (10.1)        (12.2)         (12.9)

  Science            33.4***       35.3***        40.4***         -16.9*        -18.7          -23.3*
                      (10.5)        (10.1)         (11.4)          (9.7)        (11.1)         (13.4)

  Observations         718            594           482            1,424         1,174          944
                                    GIRLS                                      GIRLS
  Mathematics          0.9            6.8           16.0            7.3          4.7            -2.0
                      (10.9)         (11.2)        (15.2)          (9.3)        (10.3)         (13.3)

  Reading              -8.0           0.1           13.9            4.1          2.2            -8.9
                      (14.5)         (14.8)        (19.1)          (9.3)        (10.1)         (14.0)

  Science              -6.8           -1.7          6.3            12.0          9.3            5.8
                      (11.7)         (12.7)        (15.8)         (10.5)        (11.3)         (13.1)

  Observations         689            584           461            1,406         1,193          953
Notes: The reported estimated treatment effects stem from separate estimations of different specifications.
All regressions include dummy variables for month of birth, a year dummy for 2006, a dummy variable
for all children born after June. The control variables on parental background include dummy variables
for father‟s educational attainment, school location, and migration background of the family. Robust
standard errors in parentheses (clustered by school programme, school location, and gender). Estimations
weighted by individual inverse probability weights provided in the PISA data set. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1. Source: PISA data set (OECD), own calculations.




                                                    9
Table A 6: RD-DDD estimates, expanding the sample to the left of the cut-off


                        High Educ. Mothers                           Low Educ. Mothers
                    (1)        (2)         (3)                   (4)        (5)         (6)
                  Mar-Aug    Apr-Aug May-Aug                   Mar-Aug    Apr-Aug     May-Aug
                             BOYS + GIRLS                                 BOYS + GIRLS
Mathematics         19.0*         21.9*           22.8            -5.6            -9.3          -17.1
                    (10.0)        (11.3)         (14.8)          (10.1)          (11.8)         (14.1)

Reading              18.5          20.4           25.1           -22.2*         -25.9*          -31.0*
                    (13.4)        (15.2)         (17.3)          (12.4)         (13.4)          (15.5)

Science            29.0**         33.4**        37.8**           -14.1           -16.3          -20.9
                   (11.9)         (13.3)        (15.3)           (11.5)          (13.3)         (14.8)

Observations        3,143         2,645          2,158           4,877           4,111          3,325
                                  BOYS                                          BOYS
Mathematics        28.3**         32.9**        38.1**           -32.1*         -33.3*         -37.2**
                   (13.1)         (13.5)        (18.2)           (16.1)         (17.3)          (16.7)

Reading             32.1*         36.2*          40.0*          -54.0**         -55.9**        -57.1**
                    (16.6)        (18.2)         (22.6)          (19.9)          (21.5)         (22.1)

Science            48.5***       57.0***        66.9***        -50.2***         -52.2**       -53.1***
                    (10.7)        (12.0)         (15.8)          (16.7)          (18.7)         (18.6)

Observations        1,615         1,350          1,113           2,410           2,014          1,636
                                 GIRLS                                          GIRLS
Mathematics          11.3          11.6           9.4             16.8            11.1           2.6
                    (16.2)        (18.8)         (23.6)          (11.6)          (15.4)         (21.7)

Reading              1.2           3.6            13.6            8.6             2.5            -8.5
                    (18.5)        (21.4)         (21.2)          (12.8)          (16.4)         (23.9)

Science              9.5           9.6            10.4            17.3            14.9           9.9
                    (19.2)        (21.7)         (23.3)          (13.7)          (17.7)         (22.1)

Observations        1,528         1,295          1,045           2,467           2,097          1,689
Notes: The reported estimated treatment effects stem from separate estimations of different specifications.
All regressions include dummy variables for month of birth, year and country fixed effects, a dummy
variable for all children born after June, interaction effects between year and the „post June‟ dummy, year
and country, country and „post June‟. The control variables on parental background include dummy vari-
ables for father‟s educational attainment, school location, and migration background of the family. Robust
standard errors in parentheses (clustered by school track (more/less academic), school location, and gen-
der). Estimations weighted by individual inverse probability weights provided in the PISA data set. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: PISA data set (OECD), own calculations.




                                                    10
