NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WAGES, PENSIONS, AND PUBLIC-PRIVATE SECTOR COMPENSATION DIFFERENTIALS
FOR OLDER WORKERS
Philipp Bewerunge
Harvey S. Rosen
Working Paper 19454
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19454

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013

We are grateful to Orley Ashenfelter, Bobray Bordelon, Henry Farber, Daniel Feenberg, Alexis Furuichi,
Michael Geruso, Alan Gustman, Yan Lau, Jonathan Meer, Olivia Mitchell, Ulrich Mueller, Linda
Oppenheim, Nahid Tabatabai, Oscar Torres, Mark Watson, Madeline Young, and seminar participants
at the University of Uppsala and Texas A&M University for useful comments. Support from Princeton’s
Griswold Center for Economic Policy Studies is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Philipp Bewerunge and Harvey S. Rosen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Wages, Pensions, and Public-Private Sector Compensation Differentials for Older Workers
Philipp Bewerunge and Harvey S. Rosen
NBER Working Paper No. 19454
September 2013
JEL No. H72,J31,J32
ABSTRACT
We use a sample of full-time workers over 50 years of age from the 2004 and 2006 waves of the Health
and Retirement Study to investigate whether workers in federal, state, and local government receive
more generous wage and pension compensation than private sector workers, ceteris paribus. With
respect to hourly remuneration (wages plus employer contributions to defined contribution plans),
federal workers earn a premium of about 28 log points, taking differences in employee characteristics
into account. However, there are no statistically discernible differences between state and local workers
and their private sector counterparts, ceteris paribus. These findings are about the same whether or
not indicators of occupation are included in the model. On the other hand, pension wealth accumulation
is greater for employees in all three government sectors than for private sector workers, even after
taking worker characteristics into account. As a proportion of the hourly private-sector wage, the hourly
equivalent public-private differentials are about 17.2 percent, 13.4 percent, and 12.6 percent for federal,
state, and local workers, respectively. We find no evidence that highly-educated individuals are penalized
by taking jobs in the public sector, either with respect to wages or pension wealth.

Philipp Bewerunge
Neuss Associates
64 MacDougal Street, Apt 16
New York, NY 10012
pbewerunge@gmail.com
Harvey S. Rosen
Department of Economics
Fisher Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
HSR@princeton.edu

1. Introduction
For the public sector to compete effectively for workers, compensation needs to
be comparable to that in the private sector. For many years, both academics and public
policy makers have debated whether public sector workers are over- or underpaid relative
to their private sector counterparts. This issue has recently received particular attention
because of the severe budgetary constraints facing governments at all levels. For
example, former Governor Mitch Daniels of Indiana argued, “We have a new privileged
class in America…We used to think of government workers as underpaid public servants.
Now they are better paid than the people who pay their salaries…Who serves whom
here? Is the public sector — as some of us have always thought — there to serve the rest
of society? Or is it the other way around?” [Garofalo, 2010]. At the same time, some
public employees maintain that they are underpaid. A seventh-grade English teacher
demonstrating against Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker’s plan to reduce public sector
benefits told the Huffington Post, “I can't get a home loan. I set my thermostat at 62. No
cable at my house, no internet…I'm also $36,000 in debt from becoming a teacher”
[Delaney, 2011].
New Jersey Governor Chris Christie [2010] captured the essence of the issue
nicely when he said, “at some point, there has to be parity between what is happening in
the real world and what is happening in the public-sector world." But determining what
“parity” means in this context is challenging for two reasons. First, the human capital of
public and private sector workers may differ. If, for example, public sector workers have
more education than private sector workers, then it is neither surprising nor objectionable
that they earn higher wages. This is precisely the argument made by former White House

2
budget director Peter Orszag regarding federal government compensation: “Basically the
entire delta between private sector and public sector federal government average pay can
be explained by education and experience…while there may be some remaining
disparities, I think some of the more dramatic newspaper stories I’ve seen about that
disparity are somewhat misleading” [Tuutti, 2010]. The second reason why public-private
sector comparisons are problematic is that compensation consists of more than just wages
and salaries. Pension benefits comprise an important part of compensation, so that
comparisons of just wages and salaries may be misleading. Indeed, sectoral differences in
pension benefits have recently drawn considerable attention. According to Cook [2011],
“union chiefs can downplay their pension benefits all they want. The fact is, most of their
members have been guaranteed a millionaire's retirement.” Public-sector unions argue
that such criticism is hyperbolic and unjustified. In the words of Hetty Rosenstein, New
Jersey Director of the Communications Workers of America, “there’s pension envy
because people who are working in the private sector, they're being denied pensions”
[Mulvihill, 2011].
In any case, it is clear that a sensible approach to measuring an overall
compensation differential requires considering both wages and pension benefits. Further,
the analysis of pension differentials needs to take into account that, because pensions are
a form of compensation, their magnitude is determined in part by employee
characteristics, just as is the case for wages and salaries. Simply examining average
pension benefits across sectors is not an appropriate way to estimate sectoral differentials.
As noted below, a great deal of research on public-private sector wage
differentials has been done, including careful analysis of micro-level data on individual

3
employees that takes into account differences in human capital endowments. In contrast,
there has been little work using micro-level data on differences in pension wealth across
sectors. Furthermore, the few attempts to integrate wages and pension benefits into more
comprehensive measures of sectoral compensation differentials use different data sets
from different time periods to estimate the wage and pension components of the
differential. In this paper, we use a single data set and a unified econometric approach to
estimate wage and pension wealth differentials between public and private sector
workers. Compensation packages, of course, have other components, including
employment security, paid vacation, health insurance benefits, and so on.1 Our analysis
focuses on wages and pension benefits because they are of major importance and micro
data are relatively accessible.
Section 2 surveys the existing research on public-private sector compensation
differentials. Section 3 discusses our dataset, the Health and Retirement Study (HRS),
and presents summary statistics for the key variables. A great advantage of the HRS is
that it allows us to study wages and pensions within a unified statistical framework. A
drawback is that it surveys individuals who are 50 years and older. Such workers are
unlikely to be representative of the entire workforce because, for example, the publicprivate pension differential for older workers may differ from that of their younger
counterparts because of changes in public sector pensions that have grandfathered the
former group.

1

In 2006, the year that we study, 70.1 percent of compensation came in the form of wages and salaries.
Another 9.5 percent consisted of monetary compensation such as paid vacations and overtime pay.
Contributions to defined benefit and defined contribution retirement saving plans were 4.3 percent. For
further details on the composition of compensation see
http://www.bls.gov/news.release/archives/ecec_06212006.pdf

4
That said, older workers are not an inconsequential component of the labor force-our tabulations from the 2006 Current Population Survey (CPS) indicate that the
proportion of the workforce over 50 years exceeds 30 percent.
Section 4 presents the econometric setup and basic results. We find that the hourly
wages of federal government workers are about 28 log points more than private sector
workers with similar characteristics, ceteris paribus. However, there are generally no
statistically discernible differences between state and local workers and their private
sector counterparts with similar characteristics. On the other hand, pension wealth
accumulation is generally greater for employees in all three government sectors than for
private sector workers, even after taking worker characteristics into account. As a
proportion of the hourly private-sector wage, the hourly equivalent public-private
differentials are 17.2 percent, 13.4 percent, and 12.6 percent for federal, state, and local
workers, respectively.

Section 5 presents several alternative econometric specifications to assess the
robustness of the results. We find that controlling for occupation leaves our substantive
conclusions unaffected. Further, there is no evidence that highly educated workers are
disadvantaged by working in the public sector. Section 6 concludes with a discussion of
the implications of our results for the ongoing public debate about public-private sector
compensation differentials and suggestions for future research.
2. Previous Literature
The relevant literature can be classified into three broad categories: public-private
sector wage differentials, pension benefit differentials, and total compensation

5
differentials, which include both wages and pension benefits. We now discuss each of
these topics in turn.
2.1 Wage Differentials
The literature on wage differentials between public and private sector employees
spans roughly four decades, originating with Smith’s [1976a, 1976b, 1977] seminal series
of papers. The core of her analysis is the estimation of conventional human capital
earnings functions. For example, in Smith [1976b] she uses 1973 CPS data to estimate for
each gender a regression of the logarithm of the wage on various worker characteristics
such as years of schooling and race, including a series of dichotomous variables
indicating whether each individual worked in the federal, state, or local government
sectors (the private sector is the omitted category). For males, she finds wage differentials
relative to the private sector of 19 percent in federal government and –4.9 percent in local
government. The coefficient on the state government variable is statistically insignificant.
The differentials for female workers are 31 percent in federal government, 12 percent in
state government, and 3.6 percent in local government. In a variation on this approach, in
Smith [1977] she estimates separate equations for each sector, in effect relaxing the
constraint that coefficients on the right hand side variables are the same across sectors.
This modification does not change the qualitative results.
Papers subsequent to Smith’s have modified her approach by trying to correct for
self-selection of workers into various sectors,2 by using panel data to estimate fixed
effects models,3 and by estimating models on a state-by-state basis to allow for the
possibility that labor market institutions, and hence public-private wage differentials,

2
3

See Quinn [1979], Gyourko and Tracy [1986], Venti [1987], and Moore and Raisin [1991].
See Krueger [1988].

6
vary across states.4 A fair way to summarize the findings in this literature is as follows: a
robust result, found in almost all the research from Smith’s early papers on, is that there
is a substantial positive wage differential for federal employees, even after controlling for
worker characteristics in the standard way.5 On the other hand, there is less agreement
with respect to state and local government workers. Positive, negative, and zero
differentials have all been estimated, sometimes within the same paper.
2.2 Pension Differentials
Data are available on average pension characteristics by sector, including the
proportion of plans that are defined benefit (DB), that is, plans in which future benefits
are based on a formula involving years of service, age, and so on, and defined
contribution (DC), that is, plans in which future benefits are based on a cash balance in a
pension account. (See, for example, Clark, Craig, and Ahmed [2010].) However,
sophisticated econometric analyses using micro data like those described above for
sectoral wage differences are rare. A notable exception is Quinn’s [1982] important study
of a sample of older workers from the 1969 Retirement History Study. He calculates
pension wealth by discounting a stream of expected pension benefit cash flows from age
of eligibility through age 100, using standard mortality tables to adjust for the probability
of receiving a benefit in any given year.6 Quinn estimates a regression of his pension
wealth measure on dichotomous variables designating federal, state, local, and postal
workers, and includes the number of years of job tenure and the final wage rate as control

4

See Belman and Heywood [1995], Schmitt [2010], and Lewis and Galloway [2011].
Hence, the opposite characterization of the literature by Peter Orszag (see Section 1 above) and Paul
Krugman [2010] seems rather curious.
6
Quinn’s calculation eliminates the average sectoral portions of pension wealth that are associated with
workers’ contributions.
5

7
variables. He estimates pension wealth differentials of 72 percent for federal workers, 80
percent for state workers, and 30 percent for local workers.
A limitation of Quinn’s analysis is that he does not control for differences in
worker characteristics such as schooling, gender, and race. In addition, his computation
of pension wealth excludes DC plans. While such a decision was sensible at the time
Quinn was writing, this is no longer the case, as DC plans have become an important
component of pension wealth, particularly in the private sector. According to Munnell
and Perun [2006], the share of private DC plan assets out of all private pension plan
assets increased from 22 percent in 1980 to 50 percent in 2004, and the corresponding
share of active participants increased from 35 percent to 70 percent over the same period.
As noted below, our analysis takes advantage of a more suitable estimate of pension
wealth that encompasses both DB and DC plans.
2.3 Aggregating Wage and Pension Differentials
Some recent research has sought to integrate wages with fringe benefits in order
to obtain a broad measure of sectoral compensation differentials. In an important paper
using data from the Health and Retirement Study for 1992-2000, Ramoni-Perazzi and
Bellante [2007] combine federal, state, and local employees to form a single “public”
category, and use the standard approach to estimate a public-private sector wage
differential that ranges from 3.5 to 11 percent. They next compute the difference in the
average sectoral fringe benefit share of total compensation from Bureau of Labor
Statistics data (which are not corrected for differences in the demographic composition of
workers across sectors). Adding this figure to their estimated wage differential, Ramoni-

8
Perazzi and Bellante find a total public-private sector compensation difference that
ranges from 6 to 14 percent.7
Keefe’s [2010] similar approach begins by estimating wage differentials in the
conventional fashion (using CPS data for 2009). To incorporate fringe benefits, Keefe
marks these wage differentials up by average benefits based on the employee’s
occupation and establishment size, as reported in the Employer Costs for Employee
Compensation Survey. He finds fringe-inclusive differentials of –10.7 percent for state
workers and –4.1 percent for local workers. The adjustment for fringe benefits does not
take into account employees’ personal characteristics. Other studies following the same
general approach are Allegretto and Keefe [2010], Bender and Heywood [2010],
Thompson and Schmitt [2010], Cannon [2010] and Gittleman and Pierce [2012], all of
whom study sub-federal levels of government, and the Congressional Budget Office
[2012], which examines federal government compensation. To our knowledge, no
analysis of public versus private sector compensation patterns has estimated both wage
and pension wealth differentials using a unified multivariate econometric framework
based on micro-level data. Our data allow us to apply the same econometric approach for
analyzing pension differentials as has been used to study wage differentials.
3. Data
Our analysis sample comes from the 2006 wave of the Health and Retirement
Study (HRS), a longitudinal study of Americans aged 50 and over, who are interviewed

7

This calculation includes fringe benefits other than pensions, such as sick leave, paid vacation, and the
value of differences in unemployment probabilities.

9
every two years by the Institute for Social Research at the University of Michigan.8 As
stressed above, there are reasons to believe that public-private compensation differentials
for these older individuals are not typical of the workforce as a whole. But as we also
noted, they are an important part of the labor force; more than 30 percent of all workers
are over 50 years old. According to our tabulations using the 2006 CPS, the proportions
of employees who were 50 years or older in the private, federal, state, and local sectors in
2006 were 29.3 percent, 39.5 percent, 34.8 percent, and 36.5 percent, respectively.
Because the HRS is primarily based on older workers, our results might not apply to
employees throughout the age distribution.9 However, in addition to standard
demographic data, the HRS has information on sector of employment10 as well as a rich
set of variables on pension benefits, which makes it invaluable for making compensation
comparisons that go beyond wage and salaries.
All variables relating to worker characteristics, hourly pay, pension plan types,
and employer pension contributions are either included or directly calculated from the
original 2006 Core dataset and tracker file. Data on pension wealth are obtained from a

8

We use the unrestricted HRS sample, which, unlike the restricted sample, does not include pension plan
descriptions provided by employers. As noted by Gustman, Steinmeier and Tabatabai [2010, Chapter 4],
there are advantages and disadvantages to each dataset, and for a study like ours, it is not obvious whether
one would be better than the other. For example, individuals’ self-reports in the unrestricted data are
subject to error, especially when it comes to identifying plan type. But in the restricted data, other pension
attributes are erroneously reported by employers. Further, the proportion of HRS respondents for whom it
is possible to obtain employee information is relatively low in the restricted sample. In the 2005 employer
survey, for example, employer-provided plan descriptions were available for only 49 percent of the
respondents who reported having a pension (p. 64).
9
In addition, public employees may leave public sector employment in their 50s and then switch to private
sector jobs. However, in our sample, we find little evidence for this phenomenon. Out of 392 government
workers with non-zero sample weights whom we are able to track over time, only 6 individuals made such
transitions between 2006 and 2008. Relatedly, the propensity to leave the workforce altogether because of
health reasons or retirement might differ systematically across sectors, but our data do not allow us to
investigate this phenomenon.
10
Starting in 2006, the HRS clearly identifies government sector affiliation through questions KJ720 (“Are
you employed by the government at the federal, state, or local level?”) and KJ721 (“Would that be the
federal, state, or local government?”).

10
supplement constructed by Gustman, Steinmeier, and Tabatabai [2010]. They note that
there is some evidence of errors in reports of pension values, and the accuracy of the
reports does not improve over time (p. 213). However, Gustman, Steinmeier and
Tabatabai argue that the estimates do not appear to be systematically biased. If the
reporting errors differed systematically by sector of employment then this would bias our
estimates of pension differentials. There is no evidence with respect to whether pension
wealth estimates for public sector employees are more or less accurate than their private
sector counterparts.
A total of 4,759 respondents provide salary and wage information. Respondents
are also asked about the number of hours worked in a typical week and the number of
weeks worked per year, allowing us to calculate total hours worked per year and hourly
pay. This information is available for 4,344 respondents. We drop from the sample the
self-employed as well as part-time workers, defined as individuals who worked fewer
than 1,500 hours per year.11 This leaves us with 3,199 observations. Furthermore, we
exclude respondents who, while earning a positive hourly wage, earned less than the
minimum wage or characterized themselves as retired12. Finally, we drop workers for
whom information is missing for any of our right hand side variables, leaving us with
2,496 observations, which comprise our basic analysis sample. There are 1,907
respondents in the private sector, 115 in federal government, 225 in state government,
and 249 in local government. Compared to the entire sample of 4,759 individuals who
11

There is, of course, some arbitrariness to the selection of a cutoff for what constitutes full-time work. We
experimented with a lower cutoff, 1,250 hours per year, and found that our substantive results were not
affected.
12
Question KJ005 on the 2006 HRS questionnaire reads “Are you working now, temporarily laid off,
unemployed and looking for work, disabled and unable to work, retired, a homemaker, or what?”
Respondents are allowed to give multiple responses to this question. We excluded all workers who
indicated “retired” as one of their responses. There were a total of 333 workers who did so (including parttime workers). Retired individuals were not asked their sector of employment during their working years.

11
reported wage and salary information, this sample is slightly younger (mean age of 58.2
years versus 59.5) and has fewer black workers (9.0 percent versus 9.7 percent) and
female workers (47.8 percent versus 51.4 percent).
Table 1 presents definitions and summary statistics for our dependent variables.
WAGE is hourly pay in 2006 dollars. Federal and state government employees earn
substantially more than either private sector employees or employees in local
government. Three dichotomous variables indicate whether a given respondent has a
primary (most important) pension plan of a specific type. DBPlan indicates a primary
defined benefit plan, DCPlan indicates a primary defined contribution plan, and HPlan
indicates a hybrid plan, which has attributes of both DB and DC plans. Respondents who
either refused to or did not know how to answer the question about their primary pension
plan were excluded from the part of our analysis that involves these variables (37
respondents did not know their primary plan type or refused to identify it). Local
government workers are the most likely to have a DB plan and private sector workers are
the most likely to have a DC plan.
EmpC is the amount contributed by the employer to all of the worker’s DC plans
per hour (in 2006 dollars), conditional on it being positive. It includes both the basic
contribution and any matching amounts. Respondents can provide information on
employer pension contributions for up to four DC plans as either a percentage of pay (in
which case EmpC is calculated as the reported fraction multiplied by WAGE) or as an
amount per some unit of time (in which case the conversion to an hourly basis proceeds
along the same lines as for WAGE). A number of respondents either did not know their

12
employer’s contribution or refused to answer the question.13 In total, we were able to
calculate positive hourly employer contributions for 806 workers out of the 1,262
workers who reported having at least one DC plan.
WAGE+DC is defined as the sum of WAGE and EmpC, that is, wages and salaries
plus employers’ contributions to DC plans. There is not much difference between the
average values of WAGE+DC and the figures for WAGE in the first row. Differences in
DC coverage are not large enough to exert substantial effects on wage and salary
differences.
PensionW is pension wealth as calculated by Gustman, Steinmeier, and Tabatabai
(GST) [2010]. It is defined as the sum of the present value of future pension benefits
based on work to date from a respondent’s most important DB plan14 and the cash
balances in all DC plans on the current job in 2004 (in 2006 dollars). More precisely,
GST take a worker’s expected annual DB payments while in retirement and discount
them back to the expected time of retirement.15 They then further discount these figures
back to 2004. The specific discount rate, of course, plays a central role in these

13

A respondent with several DC plans might only know his employer’s contribution to one of them. In this
case, EmpC would only capture a fraction of the total employer contribution. Given that DC plans are
relatively more important in the private sector, the lack of information on employer contributions to DC
plans might have different impacts in the public and private sectors. However, we have no way to quantify
the possible importance of this phenomenon.
14
The proportion of workers who have more than one DB plan is relatively small: 2.2 percent in the private
sector, 5.5 percent in the federal government, 3.0 percent in the state government, and 4.0 percent in the
local government. Gustman, Steinmeier and Tabatabai [2010] do not include the present value of a
worker’s second DB plan in their calculations because there is a higher probability of confusion among
workers with two DB plans who are asked to report plan details (p.337).
15
Some public employees are not covered by Social Security. They neither contribute to Social Security on
their jobs nor collect Social Security benefits. Therefore, their wealth upon entering retirement is lower
than their private sector counterparts, but so are the payroll tax contributions they made during their work
lives. However, according to Gustman, Steinmeier and Tabatabai [2013, Table 7], the present values of
Social Security benefits and taxes experienced by our HRS cohort are virtually identical, so there should be
little to no effect on our findings.

13
calculations. GST [2010] use a discount rate of 5.8 percent, consistent with the figure
used by the Social Security Administration in its long-term projections (p.338). 16
Since the value of a DC plan in 2004 is a cash balance that has been accumulated
based on work to date, the value of a DB plan in 2004 also needs to reflect the fraction of
its total value that has accrued to it based on work to date. In order to make this
adjustment, GST [2010] assume that a given worker will continue to work for his
employer up to retirement and multiply the total present value of the DB plan by the
number of years of service for the current employer in 2004, divided by the total
(anticipated) number of years of service at the time of retirement. Adding the DC cash
balances to this adjusted DB present value yields a measure of total pension wealth.
We use the 2004 value because 2004 is the most recent year that GST calculate it
for all workers.17 PensionW is available for respondents in our analysis sample who were
interviewed in both 2004 and 2006, and worked for the same employer in both years-2,100 of the 2,496 respondents in our analysis sample.
The variable PositivePW is one if the individual has positive pension wealth and
zero otherwise. According to the figures in Table 1, employees in all levels of
government are more likely to have positive pension wealth than private sector workers,
and conditional on having pension wealth, their average values are also higher. Both the
probability of having positive pension wealth and the conditional mean are greatest for
federal government workers.
16

Further, they make a mortality adjustment to account for variability in the probability of receiving a
benefit. However, there is no correction for the possibility of financial insolvency. Given that both public
and private sector entities might renege on part or all of their obligations, it is not clear how this would bias
estimates of public-private differentials.
17
For some observations, GST [2010] impute values using mixed, hot-decking, and replacement methods.
See “Imputations for Pension Wealth, Final Version 2.0, December 2006” at
https://ssl.isr.umich.edu/hrs/files.php?versid=64 for more detail.

14
The sectoral differences among the various compensation measures are striking.
However, one must be cautious in interpreting them, given that the characteristics of
workers might “explain” these differences. Table 2 shows weighted means and standard
deviations of the key demographic variables for workers in the private sector and various
levels of government. The figures indicate that, indeed, worker characteristics differ
substantially across sectors. For example, on average, government employees at all levels
have more education than private sector employees, which gives some credence to the
notion that the compensation differentials in Table 1 might be due to differences in
human capital.
Public and private sector workers also differ with respect to gender, race, marital
status, age, and whether they live in highly populated areas.18 Women account for a large
share of the state government workforce (61 percent), but smaller shares of the federal
(49 percent), local (47 percent), and private sector workforces (46 percent), respectively.
Federal and state government have the highest proportions of black workers (15 and 14
percent, respectively), followed by local government (9.6 percent), and the private sector
(8.0 percent). With regards to marital status, state government has the largest proportion
of married workers (73 percent), while the proportions in federal government (67
percent), local government (68 percent) and the private sector (67 percent) are nearly
identical. Workers’ ages are essentially the same across sectors, although one must keep
in mind that our data set includes only individuals who are 50 years of age or older.19 In

18

The indicators for size of metropolitan area are meant to provide a rough control for differences in the
price level across areas. We are grateful to a referee for this suggestion.
19
In all sectors, most workers are between 50 and 59 years of age. The proportions of workers who are
between the ages of 50 and 59 in the private, federal, state, and local sectors are 67.7 percent, 63.2 percent,
67.7 percent, and 72.6 percent, respectively. The proportions who are between the ages of 60 and 69 in the
private, federal, state, and local sectors are 29.4 percent, 33.0 percent, 30.6 percent and 24.8, respectively.

15
this context, an important question is whether our analysis sample is plausibly nationally
representative (conditional on the screens used to generate it). The issue is cogent
because the 2006 survey does not have many of the respondents included when the HRS
was started as a nationally representative data set of individuals who were 51 to 61 years
of age in 1992.
This is an empirical issue, and a sensible way to approach it is to apply to a
nationally representative data set the same screens that we use to generate our HRS
analysis sample, and compare summary statistics of the key variables that are available in
both samples. To that end, we took the 2006 CPS, applied the screens described above,
computed the relevant (weighted) summary statistics, and compared them to the HRS.
The results, reported in the appendix, indicate that the summary statistics for the two
samples are quite close. Indeed, for none of the variables can one reject the hypothesis
that the respective HRS and CPS means are equal.
4. Econometric Specification and Results
While informative, the figures in Table 1 are only suggestive because they fail to
account for the fact that, as documented in Table 2, employee characteristics differ
substantially across sectors. This section presents the results from multivariate models.20
4.1 Hourly Wages
Basic setup. To begin, we estimate regressions of the log of hourly pay
(LOG(WAGE)) on worker characteristics and dichotomous variables for sector of
20

The HRS sample includes features such as stratification, clustering, and differential selection
probabilities. All regressions use the HRS respondent sample weights. The HRS contains design-specific
sampling error codes in order to facilitate the computation of standard errors. Following the suggestion in
the HRS documentation, we use the SVY command set in STATA to incorporate these sampling error
codes into the calculation of the standard errors. For further details, see pages 5 and 6 of the HRS document
Sample Evolution: 1992-1998 ( http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/sitedocs/surveydesign.pdf).

16
employment. This is sometimes called the “people approach” to analyzing public/private
compensation differentials, and is based on the notion that differentials should be
computed by comparing the wages of public and private sector workers who have the
same characteristics (Gittleman and Pierce [2012, p. 225]).21 Specifically, we regress the
logarithm of the hourly wage on a set of indicators for sector of employment (with the
private sector as the excluded category) as well as educational attainment, gender, race,
marital status, and a quadratic in age.22,23 In effect, this specification constrains all the
coefficients, except those on the sectoral variables, to be the same across sectors. A more
flexible approach, suggested by Blinder [1973] and Oaxaca [1973], allows all the
coefficients to vary across sectors. We choose the more constrained model because it
generates essentially the same results as the Blinder-Oaxaca approach and is simpler to
exposit.

21

The alternative approach is to match individuals in the public and private sectors whose job descriptions
are comparable. Our data do not permit us to take this approach, and in any case, as Gittleman and Pierce
[2012, p. 221] point out, it is problematic because some occupations, such as sales, are almost all in the
private sector, while other job categories are almost all public. An appendix table available upon request
shows the occupational distribution by sector in our data.
22
A subset (2,174 workers) of our observations provided responses to the question , “How long have you
been with your current employer?” Specifically, we can calculate it for 1,668 workers in the private sector,
92 federal workers, 192 state workers, and 222 local workers. If the 2006 response was not available, we
added two years to the 2004 response provided that the worker was still on the same job in 2006 as in 2004.
The average tenure by sector is 12.6 in the private sector, 17.7 years in the federal government, 14.8 years
in state government, and 17.4 years in local government. However, Altonji and Williams [2005] have
argued persuasively that including tenure in an OLS model is inappropriate, because it is positively
correlated with the error term in the likely event that individuals with low productivity have high quit and
layoff propensities. Similarly, including tenure on the right-hand side in modeling the determinants of
pension wealth could also lead to inconsistent estimates—where pensions are more generous, individuals
are likely to stay on the job longer, ceteris paribus.
23
In principle, one could take advantage of the panel nature of the data to estimate a fixed effects model.
We do not take this tack for two reasons. First, we would lose 802 observations: only 1,694 workers in the
2006 basic sample were re-interviewed and had a positive hourly wage in 2008. Second, in a fixed effects
model, the coefficients on the sectoral variables are identified off of worker transitions between
employment sectors, of which there are very few between 2006 and 2008. Out of 1,302 private-sector
workers in 2006, 2 move into federal government, 5 move into state government, and 5 move into local
government in 2008. Out of 75 federal workers in 2006, 1 moves into the private sector, and 1 moves into
state government in 2008. Out of 145 state workers in 2006, 2 move into the private sector in 2008. Out of
172 local workers in 2006, 3 move into the private sector. This paucity of sectoral transitions would result
in imprecise estimates of the sectoral differentials.

17
Unlike some previous studies, we do not include occupational variables in our
canonical model. As Gittleman and Pierce [2012, p. 227] point out, there is no consensus
on this matter. We choose not to include occupation, because occupational choice could
very well be jointly determined with wages and it is available only for a subset of our
sample.24 However, as shown in Section 5 below, when we include occupation on the
right hand side, the results with respect to sectoral differences are nearly identical.
Results. The estimates are reported in Table 3. In the first column we show the
results when only the sectoral variables are included. Substantial positive differentials are
present for all government levels: federal government employees earn approximately
37.1 log points more than private sector employees, state government employees earn
16.3 log points more, and local government employees earn 8.6 log points more. All of
this is just a different way of characterizing the information from Table 1.
The estimates in column (2) show the results when employee characteristics are
taken into account. The federal-private differential falls to 0.278 (s.e. = 0.045),
considerably smaller than the corresponding figure in column (1), but still significantly
different from zero. In contrast, the state and local government differentials are generally
rendered small and statistically insignificant when worker characteristics are included in
the model. Taken together, the results in columns (1) and (2) are consistent with the claim
that looking at public-private wage differences without taking into account worker
characteristics can be misleading. Our finding of a large and statistically significant
federal differential is generally in line with previous results, most notably by Smith
24

We cannot control for union coverage because the HRS does not include this information in the 2006
wave. In any case, as Gittleman and Pierce [2012, p. 226] argue, controlling for unionization status does
not seem appropriate, “because union wage premia probably do not reflect ability differences, and those in
the public workforce would not likely take their public sector unionization rates with them if they were to
move to the private sector.”

18
[1976a, 1976b, 1977], Venti [1987], Krueger [1988], and Moore and Raisian [1991].
However, our point estimate is somewhat larger than theirs. This raises the question of
whether our finding with respect to the federal differential is idiosyncratic to the HRS
dataset. To investigate this possibility, we applied to the CPS the same screens as we
used to generate our analysis sample, and then replicated the specification in column (2)
as closely as we could. The results, reported in the appendix, indicate that the estimated
federal differential using the CPS is somewhat smaller than our estimate in Table 3, but
one cannot reject the hypothesis that they are equal. Thus, our estimate of the federal
hourly earnings differential does not appear to be an artifact of the HRS sample.
Turning to the other covariates listed toward the bottom of column (2), the signs
and magnitudes of the coefficients are sensible and in line with the results of previous
econometric work on wage determination. Hourly pay increases with educational
attainment; for example, compared with workers who have no degrees, those with a fouryear college degree earn approximately 64 log points more. Married workers enjoy an
earnings premium of about 8 log points, and the wage rate decreases with age throughout
the relevant range.25 Workers in urban and suburban areas have higher hourly wages than
those who live in less densely populated areas.
4.2 Hourly Wages and Employer Contributions to DC Plans
We now turn to differences in compensation that come in the form of pensions.26
Integrating employer contributions to defined contribution plans with wages is fairly

25

The negative quadratic term on Age starts to dominate the positive term at 49 years of age.
Recall from Table 1 that, on average, government workers at all levels of government are more likely to
have DB plans and less likely to have DC plans than their private sector counterparts. These findings
continue to hold in multivariate models that include the demographic variables in Table 3 (results are
available upon request). The dramatic differences in the incidence of DB and DC pensions in the public and
private sectors cannot be attributed to differences in worker characteristics.
26

19
straightforward. (We return later to issues associated with incorporating defined benefit
plans.) We create a variable, WAGE+DC, which equals the sum of the (hourly) dollar
amount of employer DC pension contributions (if any)27 and hourly pay. The last two
columns in Table 3 show the results when we use our standard earnings function to
analyze this broader measure of compensation. Comparing column (1) to column (3)
suggests that including employer contributions to DC plans has little effect on the raw
sectoral coefficients. The results after taking demographic characteristics into account
(columns (2) and (4)) are similarly very much the same. We conclude that incorporating
employers’ DC contributions into the analysis does not substantively change the results
one obtains by looking at wages only.
4.3 Pension Wealth
So far, our focus has been on flows of compensation associated with wages and
employer contributions to DC plans. In principle, one would also want to include the
incremental accrued value of employer contributions to defined benefit plans during the
relevant time period, which is also a flow. Such a variable is not included in the public
version of the HRS data. However, a useful stock measure, total pension wealth, has been
calculated by Gustman, Steinmeier, and Tabatabai [2010]. It is defined as the sum of the
present value of future benefits from a worker’s most important DB plan on the current
job and the cash balances in all DC plans on the current job, based on work to date.

27

State and local government employees are significantly less likely to receive employer contributions
(state workers are 17.4 percentage points and local workers are 19.4 percentage points less likely than
private sector employees), but there is no statistically discernible difference between federal employees and
their private sector counterparts along this dimension. In results not reported here, we show that apart from
the case of federal workers, differences in the likelihood and amount of an employer contribution to a
worker’s DC plan(s) cannot be attributed to differences in demographic characteristics.

20
This section examines how total pension wealth depends on sector of
employment. As previously noted, just like wages, pension wealth likely depends on an
employee’s personal characteristics. Gittleman and Pierce [2012, p. 224], for example,
conjecture that public sector workers might demand compensation packages skewed
towards benefits because they have more education. Hence, a multivariate approach is
needed to ascertain the independent effect of sector of employment upon pension wealth.
We include the same set of right hand side variables as in the wage regressions. A
substantial proportion of individuals in our sample have zero pension wealth (see Table
1). There is some controversy with respect to the best econometric strategy in this
situation. Some argue that in the presence of a limited dependent variable, a nonlinear
estimator such as probit or Tobit should be employed. However, we follow Angrist and
Pischke [2009, p. 94], who note that ordinary least squares provides the best linear
approximation to the conditional expectations function, and hence, in a context like ours
where censoring is not present, is the appropriate estimator.28
Column (1) of Table 4 shows the estimates from a linear probability model of the
impact of sector of employment on the probability of having positive pension wealth
without any additional covariates. Compared to private sector employees, federal workers
are 21.6 percentage points more likely to have positive pension wealth, state workers are
14.8 percentage points more likely, and local workers are 12.9 percentage points more
likely. All the coefficients are statistically significant. The corresponding pension wealth
differentials are in column (2). Workers in all government sectors have more pension
wealth than their private sector counterparts: on average, federal workers have $111,000

28

However, when we re-estimated the model using a Tobit estimator, the marginal effects were
qualitatively quite similar to those from OLS.

21
more pension wealth, state workers have $89,800 more, and local workers have $80,800
more.
Columns (3) and (4) add in our other covariates. The most striking result is that
the uncorrected pension wealth differentials from column (2) are reduced yet remain
substantial and statistically significant. Specifically, column (4) shows federal, state and
local pension differentials of $93,600, $62,900, and $65,800, respectively. Because
wages are a flow variables and pension wealth is a stock variable, the results from Tables
3 and 4 are not directly comparable. To allow comparisons, we begin by computing the
hourly annuity value of the pension wealth differential in each government sector.
Suppose that the pension wealth differential in sector s is Ds. Suppose further that the
average number of years of service for workers in that sector is Ts. Then we compute the
annuity value of Ds over Ts years, assuming an interest rate of 5.8 percent, the rate used
by Gustman, Steinmeier, and Tabatabai [2010] in their calculations.29
The mean years of service with the current employer for our 2004 pension wealth
subsample30 are: 13.1 for private sector workers, 17.1 for federal workers, 14.0 for state
workers, and 16.4 for local workers. Using these values and the respective pension wealth
differentials from Table 4, the annuitized differentials are $8,778, $6,685 and $6,323 for
federal, state, and local workers, respectively. The mean yearly number of hours worked
for our pension wealth sample in 2006 is 2,256 for private sector workers, 2,192 for
federal workers, 2,148 for state workers, and 2,156 for local workers. Therefore, the

29

We also did the calculations assuming a lower interest rate, 3 percent, and the results were substantively
very similar.
30
As was mentioned in section 3, some respondents in our sample changed jobs between 2004 and 2006,
which makes it impossible to determine whether their pension wealth in 2004 can be associated with a
federal, state, local, or private sector job. For this reason, the sample for this analysis includes only those
individuals who worked in the same job in 2004 and 2006.

22
annuitized pension wealth differentials per hour come to $4.00, $3.11 and $2.93 for
federal, state, and local workers, respectively. As a proportion of the hourly private-sector
wage, these amount to 17.2 percent, 13.4 percent, and 12.6 percent for federal, state, and
local workers, respectively.
4.4 Preliminary Conclusions
Summary. Taken together, this section’s results suggest several preliminary
conclusions. (1) Once differences in worker characteristics are taken into account, there
are no statistically significant differences in hourly wages between state and local
workers and their private sector counterparts. There is, however, a substantial wage
differential for federal workers, ceteris paribus, of about 28 percent. (2) The results for
hourly wages are essentially unchanged when employer contributions to employee DC
plans are included in the measure of hourly compensation. (3) Employees of all levels of
government generally have substantially more pension wealth than their private sector
counterparts.
Toward a comprehensive measure of compensation differentials. One way to
generate comprehensive compensation differentials would be to take the sum of the
hourly equivalent pension wealth differentials computed above and the wage differentials
from the second column of Table 3.31 However, doing so could be misleading; seeing
why brings us to the next complication in interpreting the pension wealth differentials.
Suppose that a given individual’s DB pension is funded entirely by her own
contributions; the employer puts in nothing. In that case, pension wealth would not

31

We add the annuitized pension wealth differentials to the differentials from the second rather than the
fourth column of Table 3 because the latter embody employer DC contributions, which are already
included in the pension wealth variable. In effect, adding the pension differentials to the differentials in
log(WAGE+DC) would be double counting.

23
represent any additional compensation; it would just be a use to which the individual puts
her wages. Hence, it would be inappropriate to add the pension wealth and wage
differentials to obtain a total compensation differential.
More generally, as long as a portion of contributions to DB pension plans come
from employees, then to some extent double-counting will occur if one simply adds the
wage and pension differentials. This observation immediately leads to the question of
how much pension wealth is due to employer and to employee contributions,
respectively. Our data do not provide an answer. However, using information from
several sources, a back-of-the-envelope estimate is possible. The steps in this calculation
are as follows:
First, obtain an estimate of the average hourly amount of DC contributions made
by employers and employees in each sector. As noted in Section 3 above, this
information is available in the HRS data.
Second, obtain an estimate of the hourly amount of DB contributions made by
employers and employees. The HRS data do not have this information. However, Bureau
of Labor Statistics data allow us to make a rough imputation. Specifically, BLS data
report the average hourly employer cost for state and local workers’ DB plans ($2.27 in
2006)32 and the average required employee contribution rate for state and local workers’
DB plans (6.3 percent in 2007)33. Given that the average required employee DB
contribution rate is computed only over the set of state and local employees with DB
plans requiring an employee contribution, we multiply the 6.3 percent figure by the

32

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Employer Cost for Employee Compensation - March 2006, June 2006,
p.8.
33
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, National Compensation Survey: Employee Benefits in State and Local
Governments in the United States, September 2007, March 2008, p.8.

24
percentage of DB plans that require a contribution (77 percent in 2007)34, which yields an
average employee contribution rate of 4.85 percent across all workers. For federal
workers, the website of the Office of Personnel Management indicates that the
contribution rate is 7.0, 7.5 or 8.0 percent for both employers and employees; we use 7.5
percent, the midpoint of this range35. By multiplying the employee’s average required DB
contribution rate with the mean hourly wages listed in Table 1 and the average number of
DB plans per worker in each sector in our sample, we calculate hourly employee DB
contributions of $1.60 for federal workers, $1.55 for state workers, and $0.89 for local
workers.
Third, multiply our respective estimated hourly pension wealth differentials by
the ratio of the sum of the employer DC and DB contributions to the sum of employer
and employee DC and DB contributions. This yields a set of differentials due to employer
contributions. An appendix available upon request provides details.
The last step is to add these figures to the wage differentials from column (2) of
Table 3. Given that one cannot reject the hypothesis that the state and local differentials
are zero, for this purpose we simply treat them as zero. This yields total compensation
differentials of 34.2 percent for federal employees36, 7.49 percent for state employees,
and 8.29 percent for local employees.
5. Alternative Specifications

34

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, National Compensation Survey: Employee Benefits in State and Local
Governments in the United States, September 2007, March 2008, p.7.
35
See http://www.opm.gov/retirement-services/csrs-information/. Employee contributions are mandatory.
36
For purposes of this calculation, we use the method suggested by Blackburn [2008] to convert the
coefficient on the Federal variable from Table 3 to a percentage change.

25
In order to assess the robustness of our results, in this section we estimate several
alternate specifications of the basic model.
5.1 Differential Effects by Education
In our model, sectoral compensation differentials are independent of education.
This specification runs counter to longstanding concerns that because of inflexibilities in
government pay schedules, highly educated public sector workers earn less than their
private sector counterparts.37 We explore this hypothesis by augmenting our basic model
with interaction terms between the sectoral dichotomous variables and a binary variable,
CollegePlus, which equals one if a worker has a four-year college or higher degree, and
zero otherwise. We report here only the key results. In the equation for WAGE + DC, the
interactions of the sectoral dichotomous variables with CollegePlus are all statistically
insignificant. For pension wealth, the interaction term between STATE and CollegePlus is
positive and significant at $75,820 (s.e. = $27,906), while the other two sectoral
interaction terms are insignificant. Thus, we find no evidence in our data that highly
educated workers are disadvantaged by working in the public sector.
This specification constrains the coefficients on all the other right hand side
variables to be the same across education groups. As an alternative approach, we relax
this assumption and estimate the model for WAGE + DC separately for each education
group. In no education group is there a negative and statistically significant coefficient on
either the federal or state sectoral variable. In the very highest education group, there is a
statistically significant negative coefficient on the local variable, but we are not inclined
to make too much of a single anomalous estimate. In short, our basic conclusion that

37

See Congressional Budget Office [2002, 2012] and Blue Mass Group [2011] for discussions of this
phenomenon at federal and sub-federal levels of government, respectively.

26
there is no penalty for highly educated workers who work in the public sector is robust to
this change in the specification of the model.38
5.2 Controlling for Occupation and Firm Size
As noted above, it is controversial whether occupation should be included in
models of public sector compensation differentials. We chose not to include controls for
occupation, because of concerns that it might be jointly determined with compensation.
In addition, in our data, occupation is reported for only 1,453 observations, considerably
fewer than the 2,496 used to estimate our basic model in Table 3. Nevertheless, it is of
some interest to see if our results change qualitatively when we augment the model with a
set of dichotomous variables designating occupational categories.39 Table 5 displays the
results for the logarithm of (WAGE+DC). In columns (1) and (2) we establish a baseline
by using the smaller sample to estimate the models from the last two columns of Table 3,
and then add the occupation variables in column (3). Only the coefficients on the sectoral
variables are reported. The coefficients in columns (1) and (2), while having somewhat
different magnitudes, are qualitatively similar to their counterparts in Table 3. Once
occupation controls are added in column (3), the implied federal differentials falls
slightly and remains statistically significant. The point estimate, 0.265, is virtually the
same as the corresponding figure in Table 3, 0.277. The state and local differentials

38

To assess the robustness of this result, we also estimated this specification using the CPS data set
described in the Appendix. The result was the same. There is no education group for which the coefficient
on Federal is negative. The State coefficient is negative and significant for individuals whose highest
educational attainment is a master’s degree, but returns to insignificant for those who have a doctorate or
professional degree. There is no education group for which the coefficient on Local is negative and
significant.
39
An appendix table available upon request provides a list of the occupation categories that are available in
the HRS, and the proportion of employees in each category.

27
remain statistically insignificant, also just as they were in Table 3. In short, our
substantive results are essentially unchanged when controls for occupation are included.40
Another variable that sometimes appears in empirical studies of compensation,
especially with respect to pensions, is firm size. We are inclined to agree with Gittleman
and Pierce [2012, p. 226] who argue that including firm size in compensation regressions
is not appropriate because it is not a skill-related factor that an individual can transfer
from job to job. However, as a check on the robustness of our findings, we estimated the
pension wealth regression using the 1,716 observations for which we have information on
firm size (indicators for whether the firm is small, medium, or large)41. Consistent with
previous studies, we find that pension wealth increases with firm size, and the
coefficients are statistically significant. With the size of firm variables included, the
sectoral differentials are $87,200, $61,900, and $65,600, respectively, for federal, state,
and local government, and all are statistically significant at the 0.01 or smaller level. The
story is essentially the same as in our basic model in Table 4—large and statistically
significant positive differentials for all sectors.
6. Conclusion
We have used a sample of older full-time workers from the 2006 Health and
Retirement Study to study wage and pension compensation differentials between
government and private sector employees. With respect to hourly wages (including
employee contributions to defined contribution plans), federal workers earn a premium of
40

In the same way, the coefficients on the sectoral variables in our pension wealth equation (column (4) of
Table 4) are not substantively changed when we augment it with the occupation variables. Moulton [1990],
using CPS data from 1988, finds that including occupation variables has a substantive effect on the publicprivate differential.
41
Firms with fewer than 100 employees are classified as small, between 100 and 500, medium, and more
than 500 employees, large.

28
about 28 log points. However, no statistically significant differences for state and local
workers emerge once employee characteristics are taken into account. Workers at all
levels of government accumulate more pension wealth than private sector workers, even
after holding employee characteristics constant. Specifically, as a proportion of the
hourly private-sector wage, the hourly equivalent public-private differentials are about
17.2 percent, 13.4 percent and 12.6 percent at the federal, state, and local levels,
respectively. Our results offer some support to both sides in the rather noisy public debate
over public sector compensation. The argument that taking worker characteristics into
account can make a big difference in public-private comparisons is correct. However,
those who assert that examining wages alone can be misleading are also right. Once
pension benefits are taken into account, employees at all levels of government receive
higher compensation than private sector workers, and these differentials cannot be
explained away by differences in worker characteristics.
As usual, one must be cautious in interpreting compensation differences. They
might be due to compensating differentials associated with unobserved job
characteristics, or they might arise from successful rent-seeking. Also, to the extent that
public sector employment contracts are more back-loaded than those in the private sector,
this could contribute to the presence of public-private differentials. An important subject
for future research is to determine the source of these unexplained differences. Further, it
would be interesting to apply the methods used in this paper to a sample that includes a
larger proportion of younger workers, if a data set with all the requisite variables were to
become available.

29
As mentioned at the outset, we have focused on wage and pension differentials
because comparable data on other dimensions of the compensation package are not
readily available. Ideally, future work in this area should incorporate other components of
compensation, particularly employer-provided health insurance benefits. The HRS does
include information on whether an individual has health insurance coverage. In results
available upon request, we find that government workers are in fact significantly more
likely to have employer-provided health insurance than their private sector counterparts
with the same characteristics. The differentials are 10.2, 10.0 and 8.1 percentage points
for federal, state, and local workers, respectively. However, there is no information on the
cost to employers of providing this benefit. Integrating information on the value of
employee-provided health insurance with wage and pension differentials within a micro
data framework is another important topic for future research.

30

References
Allegretto, Sylvia A. and Jeffrey Keefe. “The Truth about Public Employees in California: They are
Neither Overpaid nor Overcompensated.” Center on Wage and Employment Dynamics, October
2010.
Altonji, Joseph G. and Nicholas Williams. “Do Wages Rise with Job Seniority? A Reassessment.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, April 2005.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, Mostly Harmless Econometrics—An Empiricist’s
Companion, Princeton University Press, 2009.
Belman, Dale, and John S. Heywood. “State and Local Government Wage Differentials: An Intrastate
Analysis.” Journal of Labor Research. Vol. 16, No. 2. 1995, pp. 187-201.
Bender, Keith A. and John S. Heywood. “Out of Balance? Comparing Public and Private Sector
Compensation over 20 Years.” National Institute for Retirement Security and Center for State and
Local Government Excellence, April 2010.
Blackburn, McKinley L., “Are Union Wage Differentials in the United States Falling?” Industrial
Relations 47, No. 3, July 2008, pp. 390-418.
Blinder, Alan S. “Wage Discrimination: Reduced Form and Structural Estimates.” Journal of Human
Resources. Vol. 8, No. 4. 1973, pp. 436-455.
Blue Mass Group. “A Reality Check on Compensation for Public Employees.” 07 Mar. 2011: n. pag.
Web. 26 Jul. 2011. <http://bluemassgroup.com/2011/03/a-reality-check-on-compensation-forpublic-employees/>
Cannon, Andrew. “Apples to Apples: Private-Sector and Public-Sector Compensation in Iowa.” The Iowa
Policy Project, February 2011.
Christie, Chris. “We have no choice.” New York Post. 05 Mar. 2010: n. pag. Web. 28 Mar. 2011.
<www.nypost.com>
Clark, Robert L., Lee A. Craig and Neveen Ahmed. “The Evolution of Public Sector Pension Plans in the
United States.” In The Future of Public Employee Retirement Systems, eds. Olivia S. Mitchell and
Gary Anderson, pp. 239-270. New York: Oxford University Press Inc., 2009.
Congressional Budget Office, Measuring Differences between Federal and Private Pay, Washington, DC,
November 2002.
Congressional Budget Office, Comparing the Compensation of Federal and Private-Sector Employees,
Washington, DC, January 2012.
Cook, Glenn, “Bluster Surrounds Debate Over Salaries, Benefits,” Las Vegas Review—Journal, March 6,
2011, <http://www.reviewjournal.com/news/government/bluster-surrounds-debate-over-salariesbenefits>

31
Davis, Paula M. “Public employees are paid too much, Mike Bouchard says: Candidate for governor
wants law change to reduce compensation.” Mlive.com. 24 Jun. 2010: n. pag. Web. 28 Mar. 2011.
<www.mlive.com>
Delaney, Arthur. “Are These People Overpaid?” HuffPost Business. 25 Feb. 2011: n. pag. Web. 28 Mar.
2011. <www.huffingtonpost.com>
DiSalvo, Daniel. “The Trouble with Public Sector Unions.” National Affairs. No. 5. Fall 2010, pp. 3-19.
Garofalo, Pat. “Gov. Daniels Bashes Public Employees As ‘A New Privileged Class’.” The Wonk Room.
07 Jun. 2010: n. pag. Web. 28 Mar. 2011. <wonkroom.thinkprogress.com>
Gittleman, Maury and Brooks Pierce. “Compensation for State and Local Government Workers.” Journal
of Economic Perspectives 26, no. 1, Winter 2012, pp. 217-242.
Gyourko, Joseph and Joseph Tracy. “An Analysis of Public- and Private-Sector Wages Allowing for
Endogenous Choices of Both Government and Union Status.” Journal of Labor Economics. Vol.
6, No. 2. 1988, pp. 229-253.
Gustman, Alan L., Olivia S. Mitchell, and Thomas L. Steinmeier. “Retirement Measures in the Health and
Retirement Study.” The Journal of Human Resources. Vol 30. 1995, pp. S57-S83.
Gustman, Alan L., Thomas L. Steinmeier, and Nahid Tabatabai. 2010. Pensions in the Health and
Retirement Study. Cambridge, MA, and London, England: Harvard University Press.
Gustman, Alan, Thomas Steinmeier and Nahid Tabatabai, “Redistribution Under the Social Security
Benefit Formula at the Individual and Household Levels, 1992 and 2004,” Journal of Pension
Economics and Finance Vol. 12, Number 1, January 2013, pp. 1-27.
Keefe, Jeffrey. “Debunking the Myth of the Overcompensated Public Employee.” Economics Policy
Institute Briefing Paper No. 276, September 2010.
Krueger, Alan B. “Are Public Sector Workers Paid More Than Their Alternative Wage? Evidence from
Longitudinal Data and Job Queues.” In When Public Sector Workers Unionize, eds. Richard B.
Freeman and Casey Ichniowsk, pp. 217-242. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988.
Krugman, Paul. “Freezing Out Hope.” The New York Times. 2 Dec. 2010: n. pag. Web. 28 Mar. 2011.
<www.nytimes.com>
Lewis, Gregory B. and Chester S. Galloway. “A National Analysis of Public/Private Wage Differentials
at the State and Local Levels by Race and Gender.” Working Paper 11-10, Andrew Young
School of Policy Studies Research Paper, February 2011.
Miller, Michael A. “The Public-Private Pay Debate: What Do the Data Show?” Monthly Labor Review.
Vol. 119. 1996, pp. 18-29.
Moore, William J. and John Raisian. “Government Wage Differentials Revisited.” Journal of Labor
Research. Vol. 12, No. 1. 1991, pp. 13-33.
Moulton, Brent R., “A Reexamination of the Federal-Private Wage Differential in the United States,”
Journal of Labor Economics 8, no. 2, April 1990, pp. 270-93.

32

Mulvihill, Geoff. “Political Battles Playing Out In State Capitals.” Huffpost Politics. 08 Mar. 2011: n.
pag. Web. 28 Mar. 2011. <www.huffingtonpost.com>
Munnell, Alicia H. and Pamela Perun. “An Update on Private Pensions.” Center for Retirement Research
at Boston College Issue in Brief No. 50, August 2006.
Oaxaca, Ronald. “Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets.” International Economic
Review. Vol. 14, No. 3. 1973, pp. 693-709.
Quinn, Joseph F. “Wage Differentials among Older Workers in the Public and Private Sectors.” The
Journal of Human Resources. Vol. 14, No. 1. 1979, pp. 41-62.
_____________. “Pension Wealth of Government and Private Sector Workers.” The American Economic
Review. Vol. 72, No. 2. 1982, pp. 283-287.
Ramoni-Perazzi, Josefa and Don Bellante. “Do Truly Comparable Public and Private Sector Workers
Show Any Compensation Differential?” Journal of Labor Research. Vol. 28, No. 1. 2007, pp.
117-133.
Schmitt, John. “The Wage Penalty for State and Local Government Employees.” Working Paper, Center
for Economic and Policy Research, May 2010.
Smith, Sharon P. “Pay Differentials between Federal Government and Private Sector Workers.” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review. Vol. 29, No. 2. 1976, pp. 179-197.
_____________. “Government Wage Differentials by Sex.” The Journal of Human Resources. Vol. 11,
No. 2. 1976, pp. 185-199.
_____________. “Government Wage Differentials” Journal of Urban Economics. Vol. 4, No. 3. 1977,
pp. 248-271.
Thompson, Jeffrey and John Schmitt. “The Wage Penalty for State and Local Government Employees in
New England.” Working Paper, Political Economy Research Institute and Center for Economic
and Policy Research, September 2010.
Tuutti, Camille. “Federal Employees Not Overpaid, Says OMB Chief Peter R. Orszag.” ExecutiveGov. 10
Mar. 2010: n. pag. Web. 28 Mar. 2011. <www.executivegov.com>
Venti, Steven F. “Wages in the Federal and Private Sectors.” In Public Sector Payrolls, ed. David A.
Wise, pp. 147-182. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987.

33
Appendix 1
Comparing the HRS and CPS
As detailed in the text, we apply a set of screens to the HRS data in order to
obtain our analysis sample. The purpose of this appendix is to investigate whether our
HRS analysis sample is statistically similar to a sample generated by applying the same
screens to the CPS.
Table A1 exhibits the means of a set of variables that are common to both data
sets.42 Column (1) has the HRS means along with their standard deviations, and column
(2) has analogous calculations for the CPS. A glance at the table suggests that the means
are quite similar. Indeed, for none of the variables can one reject the hypothesis that the
respective HRS and CPS means are equal.
A related question arises in the context of our estimated wage differentials. As
shown in Table 3 in the text, once personal characteristics are taken into account, the
state and local differentials are small and statistically insignificant, a result not unlike that
found in a number of earlier papers. Our federal differential is 0.278 and statistically
significant. While a positive and statistically significant federal differential is a common
finding, the magnitude of our estimate is somewhat larger than in many papers. One
possible explanation for the difference is that the HRS sample is somehow nonrepresentative. Another is that previous papers have not applied the same screens to
generate their analysis samples—they generally look at the entire population, while we
focus on workers over 50. To investigate this issue, we applied the same screens to the

42

All means are computed using sample weights. The labeling of the education categories in the two data
sets is not exactly the same. We assume that what the CPS refers to as "bachelor degree" is the same as the
"4-year college degree" in the HRS, and that "professional degree" in the CPS includes doctoral degrees.

34
CPS as we did to the HRS, and used this sample to replicate as closely as possible our
basic wage regression from column (2) of Table 3. The key results are as follows: The
state differential in the CPS is -0.0112 (s.e. = 0.0360) and the local differential is 0.00626
(s.e. = 0.0291). Like their counterparts in Table 3, they are small and statistically
insignificant. The federal differential is a statistically significant 0.170 (s.e. = 0.0406).
While smaller than the estimate in Table 3, one cannot reject the hypothesis that they are
equal-- the chi-square statistic for a test of equality of these two estimates is 2.17, while
the critical value at the 0.05 level is 3.84. In short, there is no statistically discernible
difference between our HRS estimate of the federal-private differential and an estimate
generated by the CPS.

35
Table 1*
Dependent Variable Definitions and Summary Statistics
Variable

Description

Private
Sector

WAGE

Hourly pay in 2006
Dollars

23.22
(31.40)

31.56
(34.54)

44.09
(218.49)

22.70
(10.56)

DBPlan

1 if respondent has
primary defined
benefit pension
plan
1 if respondent has
primary defined
contribution
pension plan
1 if respondent has
primary hybrid
pension plan
Hourly employer
contribution to
respondent’s DC
plans in 2006
Sum of Wage and
EmpC

0.206
(0.405)

0.556
(0.499)

0.668
(0.472)

0.744
(0.437)

0.420
(0.494)

0.300
(0.460)

0.241
(0.429)

0.154
(0.361)

0.041
(0.197)

0.086
(0.281)

0.045
(0.208)

0.039
(0.194)

2.22
(5.12)

2.11
(4.44)

2.29
(2.66)

0.78
(0.45)

23.95
(32.2)

32.33
(34.67)

44.48
(218.5)

22.78
(10.36)

205,682
(218,432)

196,930
(264,745)

190,786
(260,060)

0.946
(0.226)

0.884
(0.321)

0.867
(0.341)

115

225

249

DCPlan

HPlan

EmpC**

WAGE+DC

PensionW**

PositivePW

Number of
Observations***

Sum of pro-rated
113,515
present value of
(179,497)
future benefits from
most important DB
plan and cash
balances in all DC
plans in 2004
1 if pension wealth
0.416
>0
(0.423)
1,907

Federal
State
Local
Government Government Government

* This table shows means and standard deviations for dependent variables by employment sector, weighted
by 2006 respondent weights. Variables that are measured in dollars (WAGE, EmpC, WAGE+DC, and
PensionW) are in 2006 dollars.
** Means and standard deviations for PensionW and EmpC are computed over positive observations.***
These are the maximal number of respondents with non-zero sample weights in each sector. However, not
every question is answered by all respondents; therefore, the number of observations varies slightly across
variables.

36
Table 2*
Variable Definitions and Summary Statistics
Private
Sector

Federal
Government

State
Government

Local
Government

Omitted Category:
1 if the respondent
did not complete
high school

0.090
(0.286)

0.016
(0.125)

0.031
(0.173)

0.043
(0.202)

GED

1 if the
respondent’s
highest degree is a
GED

0.044
(0.204)

0.010
(0.099)

0.032
(0.177)

0.030
(0.172)

HS

1 if the
respondent’s
highest degree is a
high school degree

0.517
(0.500)

0.438
(0.498)

0.359
(0.481)

0.397
(0.490)

TwoCollege

1 if the
respondent’s
highest degree is a
2-year college
degree

0.082
(0.274)

0.100
(0.301)

0.045
(0.209)

0.073
(0.260)

FourCollege

1 if the
respondent’s
highest degree is a
4-year college
degree

0.170
(0.376)

0.189
(0.393)

0.206
(0.406)

0.185
(0.389)

Masters

1 if the
respondent’s
highest degree is a
masters degree

0.078
(0.268)

0.198
(0.400)

0.167
(0.374)

0.239
(0.427)

Professional

1 if the
respondent’s
highest degree is a
professional
degree

0.021
(0.142)

0.050
(0.219)

0.159
(0.367)

0.035
(0.183)

Black

1 if the respondent
is black

0.080
(0.272)

0.146
(0.355)

0.138
(0.346)

0.096
(0.295)

Variable

Description

NoDegree

37
Female

1 if the respondent
is female

0.464
(0.499)

0.492
(0.502)

0.605
(0.490)

0.468
(0.500)

Married

1 if the respondent
is married

0.674
(0.469)

0.670
(0.472)

0.726
(0.447)

0.678
(0.468)

Age

Age of respondent
in years

58.17
(4.596)

58.82
(4.600)

58.21
(4.048)

58.10
(4.780)

Age2

Age squared

3404.4
(564.13)

3480.8
(567.15)

3404.6
(487.69)

3397.8
(587.67)

Urban

1 if the respondent
lives in metro area
of 1 million or
more population

0.452
(0.498)

0.416
(0.495)

0.340
(0.475)

0.436
(0.497)

Suburban

1 if the respondent
lives in metro area
of 250,000 to 1
million population

0.266
(0.442)

0.311
(0.465)

0.250
(0.432)

0.210
(0.408)

Ex-Urban

Omitted Category:
1 if the respondent
lives in area of less
than 250,000
population

0.282
(0.450)

0.273
(0.447)

0.413
(0.493)

0.354
(0.479)

*This table shows means and standard deviations for independent variables by employment sector,
weighted by 2006 respondent weights. The maximal number of respondents with non-zero sample weights
is 1,907 for the private sector, 115 for federal government, 225 for state government, and 249 for local
government. These figures are the same across all variables.

38

(1)

Table 3*
Hourly Compensation
(2)

(3)

(4)

Variable

Log(WAGE)

Log(WAGE)

Log(WAGE+DC)

Log(WAGE+DC)

Federal

0.371***
(0.052)
0.163***
(0.046)
0.086**
(0.037)

0.278***
(0.045)
0.0559
(0.0414)
-0.0134
(0.0333)
0.122***
(0.0394)
0.318***
(0.0279)
0.425***
(0.0455)
0.639***
(0.0434)
0.819***
(0.0525)
1.000***
(0.0525)
-0.183***
(0.0314)
-0.190***
(0.0197)
0.0758**
(0.0181)
0.0174
(0.066)
-0.000177
(0.000537)
0.239***
(0.0311)
0.0828***
(0.0304)
2.048
(2.017)
2,496

0.373***
(0.0523)
0.152***
(0.0466)
0.0673*
(0.0372)

0.277***
(0.0464)
0.0379
(0.0418)
-0.0339
(0.0338)
0.138**
(0.0431)
0.328***
(0.0283)
0.435***
(0.0461)
0.649***
(0.0443)
0.835***
(0.054)
1.05***
(0.067)
-0.180***
(0.034)
-0.190***
(0.0194)
0.0789**
(0.0182)
0.0219
(0.0659)
-0.000216
(0.000537)
0.241***
(0.0307)
0.0904***
(0.0306)
1.927
(2.015)
2,496

State
Local
GED
HS
TwoCollege
FourCollege
Masters
Professional
Black
Female
Married
Age
Age2
Urban
Suburban
Constant
Observations

2.93***
(0.018)
2,496

2.956***
(0.0183)
2,496

* Estimation is by ordinary least squares. The right-hand side variables are defined in Table 2. Standard
errors are in parentheses. A (***) indicates that the variable is statistically significant at the 1 percent level,
a (**) at the 5 percent level, and a (*) at the 10 percent level.

39
Table 4*
Pension Wealth Differentials
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Variable

Pr (Pension Wealth
>0)

Amount of Pension
Wealth

Pr (Pension Wealth
>0)

Pension
Wealth

Federal

0.216***
(0.0314)
0.148***
(0.0375)
0.129***
(0.028)

111,342***
(26,162)
89,757***
(21,729)
80,809***
(16,009)

0.727***
(0.0139)
2,100

82,490***
(5,639)
2,100

0.178***
(0.030)
0.0995***
(0.0374)
0.102***
(0.0295)
0.0991
(0.0771)
0.204***
(0.0377)
0.188***
(0.0499)
0.284***
(0.0433)
0.317***
(0.0482)
0.312***
(0.0642)
-0.0386
(0.0323)
-0.00337
(0.0214)
0.0721***
(0.0252)
0.179***
(0.0282)
-0.00157***
(0.000228)
0.0199
(0.0214)
0.0356
(0.024)
-4.604***
(0.864)
2,100

93,636***
(27,297)
62,913***
(18,122)
65,775***
(15,478)
13,292
(14,801)
43,629***
(9,036)
61,696**
(25,981)
71,561***
(15,009)
125,315***
(18,771)
206,395***
(44,560)
3,626
(15,674)
-46,354***
(6,355)
29,812***
(8,274)
26,957**
(11,427)
-247.0***
(92.9)
32,398***
(10,174)
17,717*
(9,764)
-720,121*
(349,683)
2,100

State
Local
GED
HS
TwoCollege
FourCollege
Masters
Professional
Black
Female
Married
Age
Age2
Urban
Suburban
Constant
Observations

* Columns (1) and (3) provide estimates of the marginal effects on the probability that the respondent has
positive pension wealth, based on linear probability models. Columns (2) and (4) are the corresponding
OLS estimates of the effects on the amount of pension wealth. The right-hand side variables are defined in
Table 2. Standard errors are in parentheses. A (***) indicates that the variable is statistically significant at
the 1 percent level, a (**) at the 5 percent level, and a (*) at the 10 percent level.

40

Table 5*
Hourly Wages plus DC Contributions, Controlling for Occupation*
(Dependent Variable is Log of (WAGE+DC))
(1)

(2)

(3)

(no occupation
controls; no other
covariates)

(no occupation controls;
same covariates as in
Table 3)

(occupation controls;
same covariates as in
Table 3)

Federal

0.485***
(0.0713)

0.302***
(0.0647)

0.265***
(0.0618)

State

0.197***
(0.0518)

0.0398
(0.0511)

0.0821
(0.0503)

Local

0.0739***
(0.0513)

-0.0389
(0.0498)

0.0316
(0.0480)

Observations

1,453

1,453

1,453

Variable

* This table augments the model of Table 3 with a set of dichotomous variables for occupation. A list of the
occupation categories is in Table A2. The number of observations differs from that of the basic sample
(2,946) because not every respondent provided information about occupation. The other right-hand side
variables are the same as in Table 3, but not reported here. Standard errors are in parentheses. A (***)
indicates that the variable is statistically significant at the 1 percent level, a (**) at the 5 percent level, and a
(*) at the 10 percent level.

41
Table A1*
Selected Summary Statistics from the HRS and CPS*
Variable

Description

(1)
HRS Sample

(2)
CPS Sample

WAGE

Hourly pay in 2006
dollars

25.37
(71.14)

21.93
(12.81)

NoDegree

Omitted Category: 1 if the respondent
did not complete high school

0.077
(0.266)

0.079
(0.269)

FourCollege

1 if the respondent’s highest degree is a
4-year college degree

0.175
(0.380)

0.193
(0.395)

Masters

1 if the respondent’s highest degree is a
masters degree

0.107
(0.309)

0.104
(0.305)

Professional

1 if the respondent’s highest degree is a
professional degree

0.035
(0.185)

0.047
(0.212)

Black

1 if the respondent is black

0.090
(0.286)

0.096
(0.295)

Female

1 if the respondent is female

0.478
(0.500)

0.464
(0.499)

Married

1 if the respondent is married

0.679
(0.467)

0.701
(0.458)

Age

Age of respondent in years

58.19
(4.57)

56.42
(5.32)

Age2

Age squared

3407.01
(560.29)

3212.1
(637.57)

*Column (1) reproduces the weighted means and standard deviations of selected variables in our HRS
analysis sample from Tables 1 and 2. Column (2) exhibits means and standard deviations computed from a
sample generated by applying the same screens to the 2006 CPS. The number of respondents with non-zero
respondent weights is 2,496 in the HRS sample and 3,000 in the CPS sample.

