NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HYBRID TAIL RISK AND EXPECTED STOCK RETURNS:
WHEN DOES THE TAIL WAG THE DOG?
Turan G. Bali
Nusret Cakici
Robert F. Whitelaw
Working Paper 19460
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19460

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013

We would like to thank seminar participants at Georgetown University, Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology, and the University of Utah for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Turan G. Bali, Nusret Cakici, and Robert F. Whitelaw. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Hybrid Tail Risk and Expected Stock Returns: When Does the Tail Wag the Dog?
Turan G. Bali, Nusret Cakici, and Robert F. Whitelaw
NBER Working Paper No. 19460
September 2013
JEL No. C13,G10,G11
ABSTRACT
We introduce a new, hybrid measure of stock return tail covariance risk, motivated by the under-diversified
portfolio holdings of individual investors, and investigate its cross-sectional predictive power. Our
key innovation is that this covariance is measured across the left tail states of the individual stock return
distribution, not across those of the market return as in standard systematic risk measures. We document
a positive and significant relation between hybrid tail covariance risk (H-TCR) and expected stock
returns, with an annualized premium of 9%, in contrast to the insignificant or negative results for purely
stock-specific or systematic tail risk measures.

Turan G. Bali
McDonough School of Business
Georgetown University
Between 37th and O Streets
Washington, D.C. 20057
tgb27@georgetown.edu
Nusret Cakici
Graduate School of Business
Fordham University
1790 Broadway
New York, NY 10019
cakici@fordham.edu

Robert F. Whitelaw
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
rwhitela@stern.nyu.edu

1. Introduction
In spite of the dominance of the CAPM paradigm, there has been a longstanding interest in the
literature on the question of whether downside or tail risk plays a special role in determining
expected returns. Such a role could come about, for example, due to preferences that treat losses
and gains asymmetrically,1 return distributions that are asymmetric, or some combination of the
two. While systematic downside or tail risk is a natural starting point, there is increasing
evidence that non-market risk may play an important role in determining the cross-section of
expected returns.2 Thus, we consider a setting where investors hold concentrated stock holdings
in addition to a fraction of their wealth in a well-diversified portfolio, e.g., a mutual fund within
a retirement account, consistent with existing empirical evidence on the holdings of individual
investors.3 In this setting the contribution of an individual stock to the tail risk of the portfolio
can be decomposed into three components—a systematic component, a stock-specific
component, and a third, hybrid component that depends on the co-tail risk of the stock and the
market portfolio. Based on this decomposition, we conduct a thorough re-examination of the role
of downside risk in determining the cross-section of expected returns. Specifically, controlling
for the usual determinants of expected returns, we investigate the predictive power of various
downside risk measures that vary across two dimensions: (i) the fraction of the lower half of the
return distribution that they measure and on which they are calculated, i.e., the extent to which
they are tail risk measures, and (ii) the extent to which they capture systematic versus
idiosyncratic or total risk.
Our risk measures build on the notion of semi-variance or the lower partial moment
(LPM) of Markowitz (1959). The LPM of an asset or portfolio is defined as
h

LPM   ( R  h) 2 f p ( R) dR ,

(1)



where h is the target level of returns and f p (R) represents the probability density function of
returns for portfolio p.4 That is, the semi-variance is the expected value of the squared negative
deviations from the mean, while the more general LPM uses a chosen point of reference (h). The

1

See, for example, Kahneman et al. (1990) for some of the extensive experimental evidence on loss aversion.
For recent examples, see Ang et al. (2006, 2009) and Bali, Cakici and Whitelaw (2011).
3
Polkovnichenko (2005), Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2010).
4
For expected utility maximizing investors, Bawa (1975) provides a theoretical rationale for using semi-variance or
the lower partial moment as the measure of portfolio risk.
2

1

main heuristic motivation for the use of the LPM in place of variance as a measure of risk is that
the LPM measures losses (relative to some reference point), whereas variance depends on gains
as well as losses. Of course, for symmetric distributions and a reference point equal to the mean
of the distribution, this distinction is meaningless.
In our simplified setting in which investors hold an under-diversified portfolio consisting
of positions in an individual stock and a diversified fund, three factors contribute to the tail risk
of the portfolio. First, systematic tail risk matters in that the tail risk of the market portfolio
contributes to the tail risk of the overall portfolio. We take our systematic risk measure from the
mean-lower partial moment capital asset pricing model (EL-CAPM) of Bawa and Lindenberg
(1977):

 LPM 

E ([ Ri  h ][ Rm  h] | Rm  h)
,
E ([ Rm  h]2 | Rm  h)

(2)

where E ( Ri ) is the expected return on asset i, E ( Rm ) is the expected return on the market
portfolio, r f is the risk-free interest rate, and  LPM is a measure of downside systematic risk for
a target level of returns h. That is, the relevant beta in the model is the co-lower partial moment
(CLPM) of the asset return with the market return divided by the LPM of the market return,
where the moments are conditional on the market return being below a specified threshold.
Earlier studies on the EL-CAPM use alternative measures of downside market risk based
on different return thresholds, such as the mean excess market return, the risk-free rate, or zero.5
More recently, Ang, Chen, and Xing (2006) re-examine these downside betas. Motivated by the
possibility that it is more extreme negative realizations about which investors care or that it is
asymmetries in the tail of return distributions that are important, we examine alternative
measures of downside beta based on the observations in the lower tail of the market return
distribution. There is recent evidence that systematic crash risk is priced in the cross-section of
returns (Kelly (2010) and Spitzer (2006)), but these studies consider infrequent events of extreme
magnitude, in the spirit of the rare disaster models of Rietz (1988) and Barro (2006), using
empirical techniques from extreme value theory. In contrast, we consider the more frequent but
less extreme tail events that occur on a regular basis, using more traditional risk measures.

5

See, for example, Jahankhani (1976), Price, Price, and Nantell (1982), and Harlow and Rao (1989).
2

Second, it is clear that the tail risk of the individual stock will also matter for the tail risk
of the under-diversified portfolio. For stock-specific tail risk we use the LPM of individual stock
returns.
Finally, we propose a new, hybrid measure of tail risk. Given that individual stocks
generally have substantially higher volatilities than the market portfolio and assuming a
sufficient weight in the stock in the portfolio, the tail events for such an under-diversified
portfolio will coincide more with the tail events of the individual stocks than with the tail events
of the diversified holdings. Thus, we construct a measure called hybrid tail covariance risk (HTCR) defined as:6

H - TCRi  E ([ Ri  hi ][ Rm  hm ] | Ri  hi ) ,

(3)

where h denotes the return threshold, e.g., the 10th percentile of the return distribution of the
stock or market. H-TCR is the CLPM between extreme daily returns on stock i and the
corresponding daily returns on the market portfolio, conditional on the stock return being below
the specified threshold. H-TCR is analogous to the numerator of the EL-CAPM beta defined
above except that the moment is conditional on the return on the individual stock rather than on
the return on the market.
In our empirical analysis, we compute the above measures of tail risk (systematic, hybrid,
and stock-specific) for individual stocks using six months and one year of daily data. We then
ask which, if any, of these measures have predictive power for returns over the subsequent
month using NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ stocks over the July 1963-December 2009 sample period.
In addition to the standard controls in cross-sectional tests, we are also careful to control for
volatility (Ang et al. (2006, 2009)) and extreme returns (Bali, Cakici and Whitelaw (2011)) since
these stock-specific distributional characteristics are likely to be correlated with both the LPM of
stock returns and our hybrid measure of tail risk.
The results are striking. First, systematic risk has little or no explanatory power for future
returns, whether measured relative to the center or the tail of the distribution. Second, stockspecific risk is, if anything, priced negatively, i.e., in the opposite direction of that implied by
theory. However, these latter results should be interpreted with caution due to the difficulty of
distinguishing any tail risk effect from the pricing of other distributional characteristics. Third,

6

We motivate H-TCR more formally in the context of a stylized model in the next section.
3

and most important, in marked contrast to these results, H-TCR has significant and robust
positive predictive power for future returns.
Univariate portfolio level analyses indicate that a trading strategy that goes long stocks in
the highest H-TCR decile and shorts stocks in the lowest H-TCR decile yields average raw and
risk-adjusted returns of up to 9% per annum. Firm-level, cross-sectional regressions that control
for well-known pricing effects, including size, book-to-market (Fama and French (1992, 1993)),
momentum (Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)), short-term reversals (Jegadeesh (1990)), liquidity
(Amihud (2002)), co-skewness (Harvey and Siddique (1999, 2000)), volatility (Ang et al. (2006,
2009)), and preference for lottery-like assets (Bali, Cakici, and Whitelaw (2011)) generate
similar results. Moreover, there is strong evidence that the pricing of H-TCR is a tail risk, rather
than a more general downside risk phenomenon, as the effect attenuates significantly as the
fraction of observations used to calculate the measure increases.
As robustness checks, we test whether the positive relation between tail covariance risk
and the cross-section of expected returns holds in bivariate dependent sorts, using size and bookto-market matched benchmark portfolios similar to Daniel and Titman (1997), and once we
screen for extreme stocks across numerous dimensions. Throughout our empirical analysis, the
evidence is consistent with significant pricing effects generated by individual investors who care
about how the tail risk of their concentrated positions interacts with their diversified holdings.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 motivates our tail covariance risk measure in
the context of a stylized model and also presents motivating empirical evidence. Section 3
contains the data and variable definitions. Section 4 presents evidence of cross-sectional
predictability in the context of univariate portfolio sorts and also looks more closely at the
characteristics of the stocks within these portfolios. Section 5 examines the significance of a
cross-sectional relation between tail covariance risk and expected stock returns using firm-level
regressions. Section 6 provides bivariate portfolio level analyses, controlling for size, book-tomarket, momentum, short-term reversals, liquidity, co-skewness, volatility, and extreme returns,
while also examining the predictive power of tail covariance risk using the characteristic
matched benchmark portfolios. Section 7 provides additional robustness checks, and Section 8
concludes.

4

2. Motivating Theory and Empirical Evidence
In order to motivate our three measures of tail risk, we develop a relatively stylized, 1-period,
discrete state space model in which systematic, stock-specific and hybrid tail risk arise as
appropriate measures of risk for an individual stock. The assumptions of this model are, in turn,
motivated by existing empirical evidence on the stock holdings of individual investors.
Although diversification is critical in eliminating idiosyncratic risk, a closer examination
of the portfolios of individual investors suggests that these investors are, in general, not welldiversified.7 For example, Polkovnichenko (2005) examines a survey of 14 million households
and shows that the median number of stocks in household portfolios is two in 1989, 1992, 1995,
and 1998. The median increases to three stocks in 2001. Based on 40,000 stock accounts at a
brokerage firm, Goetzmann and Kumar (2008) find that the median number of stocks in a
portfolio of individual investors is three in the 1991-1996 period. These results are similar to the
findings of earlier studies. For example, Blume and Friend (1975) and Blume, Crockett, and
Friend (1974) provide evidence that the average number of stocks in household portfolios is
about 3.41 in 1967. Odean (1999) and Barber and Odean (2001) also report the median number
of stocks in individual investors’ portfolios as two to three. In recent work, Dorn and Huberman
(2005, 2010) use trading records between 1995 and 2000 of over 20,000 customers of a German
discount brokerage and find that the typical portfolio consists of little more than three stocks.
However, these individual stock holdings often do not constitute the full financial asset
portfolios of these investors. Polkovnichenko (2005) reports the fraction of individual equities
relative to total financial assets as 33% in 1989, 39% in 1992, 49% in 1995, 53% in 1998, and
57% in 2001. That is, investors have a significant fraction of their wealth in concentrated
holdings, but they also hold wealth in other investments that may take the form, for example, of
diversified mutual funds in retirement accounts.
Based on this evidence, consider an investor that holds a portfolio consisting of positions
in two assets—equity in an individual firm and the market portfolio. Assume that over the next
period the returns on the firm (Ri) and on the market (Rm) can take on J and K discrete values,
respectively, indexed by j=1, …, J and k=1, …, K and in order of increasing returns. That is, the
7

It is important to note that this under-diversification relative to the implications of classical models of portfolio
choice could be completely consistent with rationality in more complex models. For example, Roche et al. (2013),
Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2010), and references therein propose a number of rational models that generate
concentrated holdings.
5

return in state j on firm i is greater that the return in state j-1 (Ri,j>Ri,j-1) and similarly for the
market (Rm,k>Rm,k-1). There are J x K possible states of the world, each occurring with probability
pjk, where the probability of a given state can be zero. Denote the investor’s non-negative
portfolio weights in the two assets as wi and wm, where wi  wm  1 . The portfolio return in each
state is
RP, jk  wi Ri , j  (1  wi ) Rm,k .

(4)

Now assume further that the relevant measure of risk is the LPM of the portfolio, as
defined in equation (1), for a specified threshold h. This calculation requires an ordering of the J
x K states in terms of the associated portfolio return in order to compute the probability-weighted
sum of the states with returns less than h, but the portfolio return and therefore the ordering
depends on both the magnitudes of the returns on the two assets in each state and the portfolio
weights. A simple numerical example is sufficient to illustrate this point. Consider two states,
one with a firm return of -20% and a market return of -10%, the second with firm and market
returns of -15%. For relatively larger (smaller) fractions invested in the firm, the former will
have a lower (higher) portfolio return than the latter as illustrated in the table below.
State

wi

wm

Ri

Rm

RP

1

0.6

0.4

-20%

-10%

-16%

2

0.6

0.4

-15%

-15%

-15%

1

0.4

0.6

-20%

-10%

-14%

2

0.4

0.6

-15%

-15%

-15%

In spite of this dependence on the model parameters, there are some things that can be
said about the relevant measures of tail risk in this setting. First, holding all else fixed, the more
extreme the negative returns on the firm, the larger is the LPM of the portfolio, i.e., the greater
the tail risk. Due to the under-diversified nature of the portfolio, stock-specific risk matters. In
the context of tail risk, a natural measure of this stock-specific risk is the LPM of the stock
return:

LPM ( Ri ) 

( R  h )

Ri  hi

i

i

2

.

(5)

6

Second, again holding all else fixed, the more extreme the negative returns on the market,
the larger is the LPM of the portfolio. Therefore, in addition to the stock-specific risk, a stock is
risky to the extent that it contributes to the tail risk of the market portfolio. The natural measure
of this component of risk is the beta in the EL-CAPM setting:

 i , LPM 

 (R

Rm  hm

i

 hm )( Rm  hm )

 (R

Rm  hm

m

.

 hm ) 2

(6)

Third, and perhaps most interesting, is the risk component associated with co-movement
of the firm and the market in the tail of the distribution of the portfolio return. If the tail events
for the firm and the market coincide, then these states will also be the tail states for the portfolio
return, and the LPM of the portfolio will be high. On the other hand, if they do not coincide, then
we need to develop an easily implementable empirical proxy for this co-movement. As noted
above, the identity of the tail states for the portfolio depends on the model parameters that
determine the ordering of the returns across states. State (j=1, k=1) is obviously the state with the
lowest portfolio return independent of portfolio weights. The next lowest return state is either
(j=1, k=2) or (j=2, k=1) with returns

RP ,12  wi Ri ,1  (1  wi ) Rm, 2
RP , 21  wi Ri , 2  (1  wi ) Rm,1

.

(7)

The former will have the lower return as long as
wi ( Ri , 2  Ri ,1 )  (1  wi )( Rm, 2  Rm,1 ) .

(8)

This simple inequality generates some insight. Specifically, conditioning on states with
low firm returns (as opposed to low market returns), i.e., selecting (j=1, k=2) versus (j=2, k=1), is
the intuitively correct thing to do as long as the firm is more volatile than the market. The
difference between returns across discrete states is the analogue to volatility, and, as long as the
weight in the firm is sufficiently high, the set of low portfolio return states will be those with low
firm returns and varying market returns rather than low market returns and varying firm returns.
This intuition motivates the construction of our hybrid measure of tail risk, which we call hybrid
tail covariance risk (H-TCR). Specifically, we define

H - TCR 

 (R

Ri hi

i

 hi )( Rm  hm ) .

(9)

7

The key distinction between this measure and the LPM beta in equation (6) is that H-TCR
conditions on the states of the world with low stock returns, not low market returns. Note that for
the purposes of cross-sectional analyses, the denominator in equation (6) is irrelevant since it is
equal across all stocks; it simply serves to normalize the systematic risk measure.
As a check on the possible economic impact of this distinction, we perform a simple
empirical exercise. For each month, six months or one year of past daily returns (approximately
125 or 250 daily observations, respectively) are used to determine the tail observations for the
market portfolio and also for individual stocks at the 10% level, i.e., we identify the 13 or 25
days on which the market fell the most, and we also identify separately the 13 or 25 days on
which each individual stock fell the most. We then count the number of days that these two sets
have in common for each individual stock. The table below shows percentiles for the number of
common days over the 1962-2009 sample period. For both sample lengths, the median number of
common days is small, 2.77 and 5.52 for six months and one year, respectively, an overlap of
only approximately 20% between the tails of the market return distribution and that of a typical
stock in both cases. Even the 99th percentiles for the number of common days are only 7.17 and
12.61 (an overlap of approximately 50%). Clearly the tail events for the market and individual
stocks do not coincide. In other words, tail events for individual stocks are primarily
idiosyncratic. Thus, there is a realistic possibility that H-TCR will differ significantly from
downside beta and, moreover, that this risk measure will better capture tail risk for investors with
meaningful fractions of their wealth in concentrated positions.
Percentiles for the Number of Common Days in the 10% Tail

6 months
12 months

1%

5%

10%

30%

50%

70%

90%

95%

99%

0.02
0.65

0.42
1.73

0.87
2.38

1.87
4.09

2.77
5.52

3.75
7.04

5.14
9.37

5.88
10.53

7.17
12.61

We also look directly at the empirical, cross-sectional determinants of the LPM of a
concentrated portfolio of the type described in equation (4). Again using daily returns over a six
month or one year period, the LPM of the portfolio is calculated as
LPM ( R p ) 

( R

R p h p

p

 hp )2 ,

(10)

8

where the sum is taken over the days for which the portfolio return is less than the specified
threshold. Intuitively, this portfolio LPM will depend on the three components of tail risk
discussed above—systematic, stock-specific, and hybrid.
We consider two sets of portfolios weights—50% in the stock and 50% in the market,
and 30% in the stock and 70% in the market—and thresholds at the 10th percentile of the relevant
return distributions. Each month, we look back over the preceding 6 or 12 months and calculate
the four quantities in equations (5), (6), (9), and (10). We then run firm-level Fama-MacBeth
cross-sectional regressions of LPM ( R p ) on LPM ( Ri ) ,  i,LPM , and H-TCRi for each month from
July 1963 to December 2009:

LPM ip,t  0,t  1,t LPM i ,t  2,t i ,LPM ,t  3,t H - TCRi ,t   i ,t .

(11)

For brevity we only discuss the results for the one year sample length, but the results
using six months are similar. For the 50/50 weights, the average slope coefficient on LPMi is
estimated to be 0.26 with a Newey-West t-statistic of 208.9, the average coefficient on H-TCRi is
0.33 with a t-statistic of 36.3, and the average coefficient on  i,LPM is 0.0003 with a t-statistic of
3.0. All the coefficients are statistically significant, but the magnitudes of the t-statistics indicate
their marginal explanatory power. The average R-squared of the monthly cross-sectional
regressions in equation (11) is 98.5%, i.e., the three tail risk measures capture almost all the
cross-sectional variation in portfolio LPM. For the 30/70 weights, the average estimated slope
coefficient on LPMi is lower, 0.09, with a t-statistic of 104.9, because the investor allocates a
smaller amount to the individual stock. The average coefficient on H-TCRi is also lower at 0.23
with a t-statistic of 40.2, while that on  i,LPM is higher at 0.0004, with a corresponding t-statistic
of 3.4. The average R-squared of the monthly cross-sectional regressions is 95.1%. In both cases,
the significance of the coefficient on H-TCR and the high explanatory power of the crosssectional regressions validate our choice of the hybrid tail risk measure. Moreover, while
variations of the H-TCR measure give similar results, these variations generally yield lower
cross-sectional R-squareds than those for H-TCR.
Overall, these empirical results indicate that H-TCR is an appropriate measure of risk in
our framework. Theoretically, the dependence of H-TCR on the CLPM of firm and market
returns follows from the assumption that the LPM of the portfolio return is the correct measure
of risk at the portfolio level. Finally, as is true with any model that assumes concentrated
9

holdings, the total risk of these individual assets will also contribute to portfolio risk and
therefore may require compensation in equilibrium.
3. Data and Variable Definitions
The first dataset includes all New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), American Stock Exchange
(AMEX), and NASDAQ financial and nonfinancial firms from the Center for Research in
Security Prices (CRSP) for the period from July 1962 through December 2009.8 We use daily
stock returns to estimate alternative measures of risk. The second data set is COMPUSTAT,
which is primarily used to obtain the book values for individual stocks.
For each month from July 1963 to December 2009, we compute the three tail risk
measures for each firm in the sample—(1) the LPM of the return on the stock, (2) the LPM beta
of the stock with respect to the market, and (3) hybrid tail covariance risk, as defined in
equations (5), (6), and (9), respectively. In all cases we use daily returns over the past six
months, except for certain extensions in Section 5, and the return thresholds for the stock and
market return are determined by the relevant empirical percentiles over the same sample. For
much of the analysis we employ the 10th percentile as our measure of the tail of the distribution,
but we also report results for thresholds ranging from the 5th percentile to the 50th percentile.
We also employ an extensive set of control variables. As Subrahmanyam (2010) points
out, over 50 variables have been shown to have predictive power for stock returns in the crosssection. It is infeasible to control for all of these variables, but we select both the most popular
variables in the literature and those that, intuitively, are most likely to be correlated with our tail
risk measures. The first four variables are those from the Fama-French-Carhart 4-factor model—
market beta, size, book-to-market, and momentum. We also control for microstructure-related
phenomena in the form of short-term reversals and liquidity. Finally we include three variables—
co-skewness, idiosyncratic volatility, and extreme positive returns—that are directly related to
the distribution of returns, and thus possibly tail risk as well, and that have been shown to have
significant predictive power. The detailed definitions of all these variables are provided in the
Appendix.
8

Following Harris (1994), Jegadeesh and Titman (2001), and Ang, Chen, and Xing (2006), we remove small,
illiquid, and low-priced stocks from the sample. Specifically, for each month, all NYSE stocks on CRSP are sorted
by firm size to determine the NYSE decile breakpoints for market capitalization. Then, we exclude all
NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ stocks with market capitalizations that would place them in the smallest NYSE size decile.
We also exclude stocks whose price is less than $5 per share.
10

4. Preliminary Evidence
Given the number of potential control variables, i.e., other stock characteristics that may
influence returns, the Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regression approach may be the natural way
to examine the predictive power of measures of tail risk. We turn to these regressions in Section
5; however, in order to get an initial feel for the data, we first look at univariate sorts on the basis
of our three tail risk measures and the associated characteristics of the portfolios.
4.1. Average Returns for Univariate Portfolio Sorts

Table 1 presents the average monthly returns for the equal-weighted, decile portfolios that are
formed by sorting the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks based on our three tail risk measures
— H-TCR, LPM(Ri), and βLPM. We also report the average across months of the median tail risk
measure within each portfolio. The returns are reported for the sample period July 1963 to
December 2009, while the measures of tail risk are computed over the preceding six months.
Portfolio 1 (Low) contains stocks with the lowest tail risk and Portfolio 10 (High) includes
stocks with the highest tail risk in the previous six months.
We turn first to our new hybrid measure of tail covariance risk. By construction, the
average H-TCR of individual stocks in the univariate sort increases monotonically across the
deciles, from -0.266 for Portfolio 1 to 0.124 for Portfolio 10. Since we are conditioning on states
in which the individual stock return is less than the specified threshold, the stock specific term in
equation (9) is always negative. Thus, a negative (positive) H-TCR indicates that the market term
is positive (negative), on average, in these same states. Positive and large H-TCRs correspond to
stocks whose low returns coincide with those of the market as a whole. In other words, they have
substantial tail risk because a portfolio with significant weights in both the stock and the market
will tend to have returns in the left tail due to the coincidence of tail events for both assets.
As shown in the first column, the average return of individual stocks is about 0.45% per
month for the low H-TCR decile (Portfolio 1) and 1.22% per month for the high H-TCR decile
(Portfolio 10). The raw average return difference between decile 10 and 1 is 0.77% per month
(9.2% per annum) with a Newey-West (1987) t-statistic of 5.29. In other words, there is evidence
that our hybrid measure of tail risk is priced in the cross-section consistent with the model in
Section 2. However, there is also some evidence of non-monotonicity in the average portfolio

11

returns, and we have not yet made an effort to control for other priced risks that may vary across
these portfolios.
The results for the other two tail risk measures are in sharp contrast to those for H-TCR.
When stocks are sorted on the LPM of their daily returns over six months, this measure of stockspecific tail risk is negatively associated with raw portfolio returns. That is, the average returns
on stocks with high LPMs are lower than those with less risk, with a return difference of -0.71%
that is economically large in magnitude and statistically significant (with a t-statistic of -2.84).
While this result is somewhat disappointing from the perspective of uncovering priced tail risk in
our framework of under-diversified holdings, it is perhaps not totally surprising. As we analyze
in more detail below, LPM is correlated with other measures of stock-specific risk, specifically
volatility (Ang et al. (2006, 2009)) and extreme returns (Bali et al. (2011)), that have been shown
to have a strong relation to returns in the cross-section. Thus, isolating the effect of stockspecific tail risk may be extremely difficult.
Finally, our measure of systematic tail risk, βLPM, is also negatively associated with
portfolio returns in the cross-section in the sense that the returns on Portfolio 1 are larger than
those on Portfolio 10. However, the difference is economically and statistically insignificant, and
the portfolio returns are clearly non-monotonic. In light of the voluminous literature attempting,
and in many cases failing, to find significant pricing of systematic risk measures in the crosssection, this result is not totally unexpected.
4.2. Descriptive Statistics for Tail Risk Portfolios

While the raw return differences between the high and low H-TCR deciles are economically and
statistically significant, the pattern across deciles in raw returns is not quite monotonic.
Moreover, stock-specific tail risk, as measured by LPM, appears to be negatively priced in raw
returns. These patterns in the data could be the result of additional priced risk factors, and these
factors might also influence the risk-adjusted return differences across portfolios. To highlight
the firm characteristics and risk attributes of stocks in the portfolios of Table 1, Table 2 presents
descriptive statistics for the stocks in the various deciles. Specifically, Panels A through C report
the average across the months in the sample of the median values within each month of various
characteristics for the stocks in each decile sorted by H-TCR, LPM(Ri), and βLPM, respectively.
In each case, we report values for the three tail risk measures, the price (in dollars), the market
12

beta, the log market capitalization (in millions of dollars), the book-to-market (BM) ratio, the
return over the 6 months prior to portfolio formation (MOM), the return in the portfolio
formation month (REV), a measure of illiquidity (scaled by 105), the co-skewness, the
idiosyncratic volatility, and the maximum daily return in the portfolio formation month (MAX).
Definitions of these variables are given in the Appendix.
Table 2, Panel A reports the characteristics for the portfolios sorted on H-TCR.9 Our
hybrid measure of tail risk is positively related to systematic tail risk, as measured by β LPM, but
non-monotonically related to stock-specific tail risk, as measured by LPM(Ri). This latter result
is a manifestation of the fact that many tail events for individual stocks are idiosyncratic. Stocks
with large idiosyncratic negative returns have high values of LPM but low values of H-TCR,
whereas stocks with large systematic negative returns have high values of both LPM and HTCR.
Interestingly, stocks with high H-TCR are larger, higher priced, and more liquid stocks,
on average. The intuition behind this result is that while smaller stocks tend to have more
extreme negative returns, these tail events are also more likely to be idiosyncratic. Thus, in the
context of our hypothesized portfolios of concentrated positions in individual stocks plus
additional wealth in a well-diversified fund, it is the larger stocks that generate more portfolio
tail risk after controlling for the stock-specific component. This size and liquidity discrepancy
suggests that the raw return difference will hold up to risk adjustment on these dimensions. Large
stocks and liquid stocks, on average, have low returns, whereas stocks with low systematic risk
in the left tail (low H-TCR) are small, illiquid stocks that should have high returns, all else equal.
Apparently, in the raw returns, the effect of hybrid tail risk dominates the effect of size or
liquidity on future returns.
Market beta also increases as H-TCR increases, implying that stocks with high hybrid
covariance risk in the lower tail of the stock return distribution are more exposed to market risk.
Of course, this systematic risk likely does not explain the raw return differences across portfolios
in Table 1 since market beta is weakly priced, at best, in the cross-section of returns.
In contrast, it will be important to control for momentum when risk-adjusting returns.
Stocks with high H-TCR (low H-TCR) are generally past winners (losers) over an horizon of 6
9

The average across months of the median H-TCR for each portfolio differs slightly from that reported in Table 1
because the sample is slightly smaller due to the data requirements necessary to calculate some of the other
variables.
13

months, and thus H-TCR-sorted portfolios should exhibit the well-documented intermediate-term
momentum phenomenon. On the other hand, both median book-to-market ratios (BM) and
average returns in the portfolio formation month (REV) are similar across the H-TCR portfolios,
indicating no association between H-TCR and the value premium or short-term reversals.
COSKEW (Harvey and Siddique (2000)) measures the direction and strength of the
relation between individual stock returns and squared market returns, implying that stocks with
high co-skewness have high (low) returns when market volatility is high (low). A preference for
positive skewness suggests a negative price for co-skewness risk. Panel A indicates that stocks
with high H-TCR also have high co-skewness, indicating that this phenomenon is unlikely to be
an explanation for our results.
The final 2 columns of Panel A examine two properties of the stock return distribution—
idiosyncratic volatility and the prevalence of extreme positive returns—both of which have been
linked to expected returns in the literature. Stocks with high H-TCR seem to have somewhat
lower idiosyncratic volatility and lower maximum daily returns in the portfolio formation month.
Interestingly, the patterns across portfolios in both IVOL and MAX do superficially resemble
those in the raw returns in Table 1.
Panel B reports the same characteristics as Panel A for portfolios sorted on LPM(Ri)
rather than H-TCR. These characteristics may suggest a potential explanation for the anomalous
negative relation between raw returns and stock-specific tail risk in Table 1. Clearly, such an
explanation cannot rely on market beta, size, or illiquidity, since these effects go in the opposite
direction to the raw returns across the deciles. More likely candidates are the stock-specific
return distribution measures, idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL) and extreme positive returns
(MAX). Both of these variables have a strong negative relation to returns in the cross-section
and increase monotonically across the LPM(Ri)-sorted portfolios. This association between
LPM, idiosyncratic volatility, and extreme returns is both expected and probably difficult to
resolve empirically.
In Panel C, we report the characteristics of portfolios sorted on our final tail risk measure,
systematic tail risk as measured by βLPM. There is little or nothing surprising in the results. Tail
beta is positively associated with market beta, co-skewness, idiosyncratic volatility, and extreme
positive returns.

14

To further understand the interaction of tail risk with firm characteristics and risk
attributes, we compute the firm-level cross-sectional correlations of all the variables for each
month from July 1963 to December 2009. Table 2, Panel D reports the time-series averages of
these cross-sectional correlations. Confirming our earlier findings at the portfolio level, hybrid
tail risk, H-TCR, is positively correlated with market beta, size, momentum, and co-skewness
and negatively correlated with illiquidity, idiosyncratic volatility, and MAX. The correlations of
H-TCR with book-to-market and reversals are very small, with magnitudes less than 0.03. Stockspecific tail risk, LPM(Ri), is strongly positively correlated with both idiosyncratic volatility and
MAX, as is systematic tail risk, βLPM.
5. Firm-Level Cross-Sectional Regressions
The univariate-sort portfolio results in Table 1 are certainly consistent with H-TCR being priced
in the cross-section, but Table 2 identifies a number of risk factors that may play a role in the
results. Therefore, we now examine the cross-sectional relation between H-TCR and expected
returns at the firm level using the Fama and MacBeth (1973) methodology. Specifically, we run
the following multivariate specification and nested versions thereof:

Ri ,t 1  0,t  1,t X i ,t  2,t BETAi ,t  3,t SIZEi ,t  4,t BM i ,t  5,t MOM i ,t  6,t Z i ,t   i ,t 1 , (12)
where Xi,t is one of the three tail risk measures— H-TCR, LPM(Ri), and βLPM; BETA, SIZE, BM,
and MOM are the four Fama-French-Carhart factors; and Zi,t represents the possible inclusion of
other control variables.
Table 3, Panel A reports the time series averages of the slope coefficients over the sample
period July 1963-December 2009 (558 monthly observations) from the univariate regressions of
one-month ahead stock returns on our three tail risk measures and multivariate regressions on
each tail risk measure with the four Fama-French-Carhart factors. The average slopes provide
standard Fama-MacBeth tests for determining which explanatory variables on average have nonzero premiums, and the Newey-West adjusted t-statistics are given in parentheses.
Not surprisingly, the univariate cross-sectional regression results are consistent with the
raw return differences across portfolios from the univariate portfolio sorts in Table 1. The
average slope on H-TCR is 2.88 with a t-statistic of 4.77. Given a difference in median H-TCR
of approximately 0.39 between the high and low H-TCR deciles, this coefficient estimate
translates into a monthly return difference of 1.12%, about 50% higher than the economic effect
15

seen in Table 1. For both LPM(Ri) and βLPM, the coefficients are economically small and
statistically insignificant.
In the multivariate regressions, the coefficients on the Fama-French-Carhart factors are
also as expected. The average slope on BETA is negative and statistically insignificant, which is
consistent with prior empirical evidence. The average slope on SIZE is negative, but only
sporadically significant at the 5% level. This lack of statistical significance is due to the
exclusion of small and low-priced stocks from our sample, the sector of the market in which the
traditional size effect is concentrated. There is a significantly positive value premium as the
average slope on BM is positive and significant with t-statistics between 2.2 and 3.0. Finally,
stocks exhibit strong intermediate-term momentum, proxied by the cumulative return over the 6
months prior to the return prediction month. Since momentum is often measured over a period
longer than 6 months, we also re-run the 4-factor multivariate cross-sectional regressions,
replacing the 6-month momentum variable (MOM) with momentum defined as the cumulative
return over the previous 12 months starting 2 months ago (MOM12). As shown in Table 3, the
average slopes on both momentum variables are positive and highly significant with t-statistics
ranging from 4.1 to 5.1.
Of greater interest are the average slope coefficients on the tail risk measures. The
predictive power of H-TCR remains after controlling for the Fama-French-Carhart factors,
including alternative definitions of momentum. In the multivariate regressions, the coefficient on
H-TCR is above 2 with t-statistics greater than 5. The implied economic magnitude of the effect
is slightly lower than in the univariate regression, but at a difference of approximately 85 to 89
basis points per month between median stocks in the high and low H-TCR deciles, it is still
large. The slight attenuation is due partly to the inclusion of the momentum factor, with which
H-TCR is positively correlated. The coefficient in a similar regression with only the three FamaFrench factors is larger.
Controlling for the additional risk factors has a large effect on the LPM(Ri) coefficient.
The magnitude more than doubles to -0.2, and it becomes statistically significant at all standard
levels, with a t-statistic exceeding 4 in magnitude. However, the sign on the coefficient is
inconsistent with LPM(Ri) being a measure of priced tail risk—stocks with high stock-specific
tail risk apparently have lower expected returns. This anomalous result strongly suggests that this
variable is proxying for an omitted factor.
16

For systematic tail risk, the inclusion of the additional factors has little effect. The
coefficient remains small in magnitude and of the wrong sign, albeit statistically insignificant.
Table 3, Panel B reports results for multivariate regressions that include each of the
additional control variables from Table 2 in turn. The coefficients on these variables are
generally in line with the existing literature. The average slope on REV is negative and highly
significant, implying that stocks exhibit strong short-term reversals. There is evidence of
statistically significant coefficients on illiquidity and co-skewness, but in both cases the sign is
the opposite of that implied by the theory. For illiquidity, this result is likely due to the exclusion
of small and low-priced stocks from the sample. Finally, consistent with the findings of Ang et
al. (2006) and Bali, Cakici, and Whitelaw (2011), the results indicate a negative and significant
relation between expected returns and the IVOL and MAX variables.
Again, it is the tail risk variables that are of primary interest. For H-TCR, the inclusion of
controls for return reversals, illiquidity, or co-skewness has little effect. However, both IVOL
and MAX reduce the coefficient on H-TCR by approximately 50%. The effects of these control
variables are extremely strong in the data with a sign opposite to that of H-TCR, and they are
negatively correlated with H-TCR. Nevertheless, H-TCR remains economically and statistically
significant in all the specifications.
Interestingly, the pattern of coefficients across regressions is similar for LPM(Ri).
Reversals, illiquidity and co-skewness have little effect, but the inclusion of either IVOL or
MAX reduces the coefficient by about 50%. In this case, the sign of the coefficient on LPM(Ri)
and the control variables (IVOL, MAX) is the same, but the variables are positively correlated.
Regardless of the specification, the anomalous sign on stock-specific tail risk is preserved.
For systematic tail risk, it is the control for co-skewness that has the largest effect on the
results. When this control variable is added to the regression, the magnitude of the coefficient on
βLPM increases and becomes marginally significant. However, given that the signs of the
coefficients on both systematic tail risk and co-skewness are the opposite of those implied by
theory, this particular result should be interpreted with caution.
The tail risk measures in Tables 1, 2, and 3 are constructed using the 10% tails of the
relevant return distributions over the preceding six months. The choice of 10% and six months is
somewhat arbitrary, although it intuitively provides a reasonable tradeoff between a sufficient
number of observations to limit estimation error and the desire to get a measure of tail risk rather
17

than more general downside risk. We now investigate the predictive power of alternative
measures of H-TCR, LPM(Ri), and βLPM estimated using different tails of the daily return
distribution over the preceding year (instead of six months).10 Moreover, there is the more
fundamental issue of the nature of investor preferences or the asymmetry properties of joint
return distributions that generate a role for tail risk. To partially address both these issues, we rerun the multivariate cross-sectional regressions above with the three annual tail risk measures
and the Fama-French-Carhart risk factors, varying the fraction of the lower half of the return
distribution over which we calculate tail risk. The results are reported in Table 4, which contains
the average slope coefficients and associated t-statistics for the tail risk measures but omits the
coefficients for the other risk factors in the interest of brevity.
For H-TCR, the pattern in coefficients as the definition of the tail of the distribution
changes is consistent with the theoretical intuition. The coefficient and statistical significance
peak when H-TCR is calculated using the 5% and 10% tails, respectively. When H-TCR is
measured over the full lower half of the distribution, i.e., when it becomes a downside risk rather
than tail risk measure, the magnitude of the coefficient is small, the sign is reversed, and it is
statistically insignificant.
The pattern for stock-specific risk, as measured by LPM(Ri), is markedly different. The
coefficient remains large in magnitude, and its statistical significance is preserved for all tail
values from 5% to 50%. This evidence confirms the conclusion above that the significance of
LPM(Ri) is not due to its ability to pick up tail risk at all. Instead, it is proxying for the more
general features of the return distribution associated with idiosyncratic volatility and extreme
returns (MAX). One should not conclude from these results that stock-specific tail risk is
unpriced, rather that disentangling the pricing of this risk from the pricing of related
distributional risks is an extremely challenging empirical exercise, which is beyond the scope of
this paper.
Finally, the negative but statistically insignificant coefficients for systematic tail risk are
evident across the various definitions of the tail. Like many existing papers, we are unable to
document that systematic risk, in our case tail risk, is priced in the cross-section. However, the
results for the 50% tail appear to contradict those of Ang, Chen, and Xing (2006), who report

10

The choice of a longer period over which to calculate tail risk allows us to go deeper into the tail, i.e., to the 5%
level, while still having a sufficient number of daily observations.
18

significant compensation in the form of higher expected returns for those stocks with higher
systematic downside risk. Our sample period and methodology differ somewhat, but the primary
reason for the discrepancy appears to be sample selection. Ang, Chen, and Xing (2006) restrict
their sample to NYSE stocks and eliminate the 20% of these stocks with the highest volatility,
whereas we use the broader NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ sample and eliminate small and low priced
stocks due to concerns about liquidity and the associated microstructure issues.
The clear conclusion from our empirical analysis is that cross-sectional regressions
provide strong evidence for an economically and statistically significant positive relation
between hybrid tail covariance risk and future returns, consistent with models that suggest that
risk in the left tail of portfolio returns is priced and that prices are influenced by investors with
concentrated holdings in individual securities and positions in more diversified portfolios. The
evidence for both stock-specific and systematic tail risk measures is more mixed. In the former
case, the results strongly suggest an inability to distinguish the desired effect from other effects
associated with the stock-specific distribution of returns. In the latter case, the effect may be too
small to detect with any degree of precision given measurement issues.
6. Further Evidence on Hybrid Tail Covariance Risk
Given the evidence above of statistically and economically significant pricing of hybrid tail
covariance risk in the cross-section of stocks, we now proceed to examine this phenomenon in
more detail, examining first the time series persistence of H-TCR and then turning to alternative
measures of tail covariance risk and tail beta.
6.1. Persistence

As is appropriate for a study of cross-sectional expected returns, we calculate tail risk over a
specific time window (six months in much of the previous analyses) and examine returns over
the subsequent month. However, in a rational setting, investors should only care about historical
hybrid tail covariance risk to the extent that it predicts future risk. Alternatively, if one views the
phenomenon we document as mispricing, then the portfolio turnover associated with a strategy
that exploits this mispricing is of interest.
To examine this issue we compute the transition matrix for decile portfolios formed by
sorting on H-TCR. Table 5, Panel A reports the average of the month-to-month transition
19

matrices for the stocks in these portfolios, i.e., the average probability (in percent) that a stock in
decile i (as given by the rows of the matrix) in one month will be in decile j (as given by the
columns of the matrix) in the subsequent month. Because we calculate H-TCR over six months,
there is a 5-month overlap between H-TCR calculated in two adjacent months, which generates
persistence in portfolio membership by construction. Thus, the diagonals of the transition matrix
reflect both the overlap and the persistence in tail risk. For the extreme deciles, portfolios 1 (Low
H-TCR) and 10 (High H-TCR), close to 70% of the stocks remain in the extreme decile in the
following month.
To eliminate the persistence caused by the overlap, Panel B reports the average of the 6month lag transition matrices for the stocks in these portfolios, i.e., the average probability (in
percent) that a stock in decile i (as given by the rows of the matrix) in one month will be in
decile j (as given by the columns of the matrix) 6 months later. Despite the high hurdle presented
by the six months lag, this transition matrix also shows substantial evidence of persistence.
Approximately 20% of stocks in the extreme portfolios are still in the same portfolios six months
later, and approximately 35%-40% of the stocks are in the top or bottom two deciles. In other
words, H-TCR predicts both returns and future tail risk in the cross-section.
6.2. Alternative Measures of Hybrid Tail Covariance Risk

As presented in equation (9), we have so far used six months of daily returns and the 10% lower
tail to estimate hybrid tail covariance risk (H-TCR) and predict returns in the subsequent month.
In order to get additional insight into the relation between tail risk and returns, we generate
alternative measures of tail covariance risk and test their predictive power for the cross-section of
expected returns.
Specifically, alternative measures of H-TCR are computed based on the daily returns
from the (i) 5% lower tail of the daily return distribution over the past 12 months; (ii) 10% lower
tail of the daily return distribution over the past 12 months; (iii) 10% lower tail of the daily return
distribution over the past 6 months; (iv) 20% lower tail of the daily return distribution over the
past 6 months; and (v) 20% lower tail of the daily return distribution over the past 3 months. As
the calculation window is reduced, we increase the tail size in order to keep the number of daily
observations used in computing H-TCR sufficiently large.

20

Table 6, Panel A shows that, for all measures of H-TCR, the average raw return increases
when moving from the low H-TCR to the high H-TCR portfolio. The average raw return
differences are in the range of 0.48% to 0.77% per month with Newey-West t-statistics ranging
from 2.76 to 5.29. The results, both in terms of the magnitude of the return difference and its
statistical significance, seem to improve as the window length is reduced, i.e., we use more
recent information, and as we focus on a smaller fraction of the more extreme tail observations.
In addition to the average raw returns, Panel A also presents the magnitude and statistical
significance of the difference in intercepts from the regression of the equal-weighted H-TCR
portfolio returns on a constant, the excess market return, a size factor (SMB), a book-to-market
factor (HML), following Fama and French (1993), and Carhart’s (1997) momentum (MOM)
factor.11 The four-factor alpha differences between the low H-TCR and high H-TCR portfolios
are in the range of 0.51% to 0.69% per month and are highly significant, with the t-statistics
ranging from 3.29 to 5.24.12
These results indicate an economically and statistically significant, positive relation
between hybrid tail covariance risk and the cross-section of expected returns. An investment
strategy that goes long stocks in the highest H-TCR decile and shorts stocks in the lowest H-TCR
decile produces average raw and risk-adjusted returns in the range of 5.8% to 9.2% on an
annualized basis.
6.3. Hybrid Tail Beta

We have so far measured hybrid risk in the lower tail of the return distribution using tail
covariance risk. In this section, we construct an alternative measure called hybrid tail beta
defined as the ratio of hybrid tail covariance risk to the lower partial moment of the market
portfolio:

H - TCR
Hybrid Tail Beta 

LPM ( Rm )

 (R

Ri  hi

i

 hi )( Rm  hm )

 (R

Ri  hi

m

 hm ) 2

(13)

11

SMB (small minus big), HML (high minus low), and MOM (winner minus loser) are described in and obtained
from Kenneth French’s data library: http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/.
12
The three-factor Fama-French alpha differences are even larger and more statistically significant than those that
control for momentum; however, we report only the latter for the sake of brevity.
21

This tail risk measure is the same as the measure of  i,LPM in equation (6), except that the
moments in the numerator and denominator are conditioned on states in which the return on the
individual stock is in the tail of its distribution rather than on states in which the market return is
in the tail. Relative to tail covariance risk, tail beta has the advantage of being normalized to a
more standard scale.
We generate alternative measures of tail beta computed based on daily returns from the
(i) 5% lower tail of the daily return distribution over the past 12 months; (ii) 10% lower tail of
the daily return distribution over the past 12 months; (iii) 10% lower tail of the daily return
distribution over the past 6 months; (iv) 20% lower tail of the daily return distribution over the
past 6 months; and (v) 20% lower tail of the daily return distribution over the past 3 months.
Table 6, Panel B shows that for all measures of hybrid tail beta the average raw return
increases when moving from the low tail beta to the high tail beta portfolio. The average raw
return differences are in the range of 0.52% to 0.78% per month with Newey-West t-statistics
ranging from 3.20 to 5.67, comparable but slightly stronger than those reported in Panel A for
hybrid tail covariance risk. The Fama-French-Carhart four-factor alpha differences between the
low tail beta and high tail beta portfolios are in the range of 0.44% to 0.64% per month and are
also highly significant, with t-statistics ranging from 2.70 to 4.44.13 These results indicate an
economically and statistically significant, positive relation between expected returns and
alternative measures of tail beta. The annual average raw and risk-adjusted returns of stocks in
the highest tail beta decile are 5.2% to 9.4% higher than the annual average returns of stocks in
the lowest tail beta decile.
As with H-TCR, hybrid tail betas measured over shorter periods and deeper in the tail
appear to have more economically and statistically significant predictive power. Of course, as the
window length decreases, it is necessary to increase the fraction of the distribution used to
measure tail risk in order to ensure a sufficient number of observations to avoid severe
measurement error issues.
7. Robustness Checks
While cross-sectional regressions are arguably the best way to deal with large sets of potential
risk factors, in this section we provide two alternative ways of dealing with the potential
13

As before, Fama-French three-factor alpha differences are uniformly larger and more statistically significant.
22

interaction of tail covariance risk with firm size, book-to-market, past returns, liquidity, coskewness, idiosyncratic volatility, and MAX. Specifically, we test whether the positive relation
between H-TCR and the cross-section of expected returns still holds once we control for these
additional factors using bivariate sorts of portfolios and characteristic-matched benchmark
portfolios. We also provide results from a screening mechanism to rule out the possibility that
extreme stocks of various types are driving our results.
7.1. Dependent Sorts

For the dependent bivariate sorts our general methodology is to first form deciles on the control
variable, then, within each of these deciles, to form deciles on the basis of H-TCR. We then
average the H-TCR deciles across the control variable deciles to form portfolios with similar
levels of the control variable but different levels of H-TCR. For example, we control for size by
first forming decile portfolios based on market capitalization. Then, within each size decile, we
sort stocks into decile portfolios based on tail covariance risk (H-TCR) so that decile 1 (decile
10) contains stocks with the lowest (highest) H-TCR. The first column in Table 7 averages
returns across the 10 size deciles to produce decile portfolios with dispersion in H-TCR, but
which contain firms of all sizes. This procedure creates a set of H-TCR portfolios with nearly
identical levels of firm size, and thus these H-TCR portfolios control for differences in size.
After controlling for size, the average return increases from 0.55% per month to 1.28% per
month when moving from the low H-TCR to the high H-TCR portfolios, yielding an average
return difference of 0.73% per month, with a Newey-West t-statistic of 5.62. The 10-1 difference
in four-factor alphas is 0.53% per month, and it is also highly statistically significant.14 Thus,
market capitalization does not explain the return difference between high and low H-TCR stocks.
We form similar bivariate decile portfolios based on the dependent sorts of H-TCR and
book-to-market, momentum, short-term reversals, liquidity, co-skewness, idiosyncratic volatility,
and MAX. Table 7 shows that after controlling for these variables, the average return differences
between the low H-TCR and high H-TCR portfolios are in the range of 0.35% to 0.73% per
month, and the differences in four-factor alphas vary over the same range. These average raw
and risk-adjusted return differences are both economically and statistically significant.

14

As before, for the sake of brevity we do not report the differences in three-factor alphas, but they are uniformly
greater in magnitude than the corresponding differences in four-factor alphas.
23

Of some additional interest, the bivariate sort on MAX eliminates much of the nonmonotonicity associated with the univariate sorts in Tables 1 and 6, illustrating the potential
interaction between different risk factors. Overall, the results in Table 7 indicate that the wellknown cross-sectional effects such as size, book-to-market, past return characteristics, liquidity,
co-skewness, idiosyncratic volatility, and MAX cannot explain the high (low) returns to high
(low) H-TCR stocks.
7.2. Characteristic-Matched Portfolios

In Table 8, we further examine whether the significantly positive relation between tail covariance
risk and expected returns is due to size, book-to-market, momentum, reversals, liquidity, coskewness, idiosyncratic volatility, or MAX effects. In the column labeled ‘‘Size/BM Adjusted,’’
we report the average returns in excess of the size and book-to-market matched benchmark
portfolios similar to the procedure in Daniel and Titman (1997). In the next six columns, we
include additional controls for momentum, short-term reversals, illiquidity, co-skewness,
idiosyncratic volatility, and MAX. For each additional control, we first perform a decile sort
based on the characteristic and then on hybrid tail covariance risk (H-TCR). Finally, we average
the H-TCR deciles across the characteristic deciles and report size and book-to-market matched
returns within each H-TCR decile. Portfolio 1 (10) is the portfolio of stocks with the lowest
(highest) tail covariance risk.
As presented in the first column of Table 8, after controlling for size and book-to-market
simultaneously, the average return difference between the low H-TCR and high H-TCR deciles
is about 0.59% per month with a Newey-West t-statistic of 5.35. The last six columns of Table 8
clearly show that the spreads in size and book-to-market adjusted returns between H-TCR
deciles 10 and 1 remain positive and significant after controlling for momentum, short-term
reversals, liquidity, co-skewness, idiosyncratic volatility, and MAX. The average return
difference between the low H-TCR and high H-TCR deciles is in the range of 0.35% to 0.60%
per month with t-statistics ranging from 3.53 to 5.83. Thus, the predictive power of hybrid tail
covariance risk is not due to the aforementioned cross-sectional effects.

24

7.3. Further Screening for Liquidity, Volatility, Momentum, and Reversals

So far, we have used bivariate sorts, characteristic-matched portfolios, and cross-sectional
regressions to deal with the potential interaction of the tail covariance risk with firm size, bookto-market, momentum, short-term reversals, liquidity, co-skewness, idiosyncratic volatility, and
MAX. An alternative way of demonstrating the robustness of our results is to exclude small,
low-priced, illiquid, highly volatile, and extreme short-term and intermediate-term winner and
loser stocks in the formation of H-TCR portfolios. As discussed earlier, we use a sample that
excludes NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ stocks that are in the smallest NYSE size decile and stocks
trading below $5 per share. Our further screening process for liquidity, volatility, intermediateterm return continuation, and short-term return reversals is as follows:
(1) Liquidity: To screen for liquidity, all NYSE stocks are sorted each month by the ratio of
absolute stock return to dollar volume to determine the NYSE decile breakpoints. Then, we
exclude all stocks that fall in the smallest NYSE liquidity decile (or the largest NYSE illiquidity
decile).
(2) Volatility: To screen for total volatility, all NYSE stocks are sorted each month by their
idiosyncratic volatility to determine the NYSE decile breakpoints for the volatility measure.
Then, we exclude all stocks that fall in the highest NYSE idiosyncratic volatility decile.
(3) Winners: To screen for past 6-month winners, all NYSE stocks are sorted each month by
their 6-month cumulative returns from month t-7 to t-2 to determine the NYSE decile
breakpoints. Then, we exclude the winner stocks that fall in the highest NYSE return decile. We
follow the same procedure for past 1-month winners.
(4) Losers: We screen for past 6-month and 1-month losers using a procedure analogous to that
for winners above.
(5) Momentum: To screen for momentum, we eliminate both the 6-month winners and 6-month
losers as described above.
(6) Short-term reversals: As indicated by Jegadeesh (1990) and Lehmann (1990), returns in
month t–1 are subject to short-term reversals in month t. Hence, to screen for short-term
reversals, we estimate the tail covariance risk using daily returns from month t–12 to month t–2,
skipping returns in month t–1.
After further screening for liquidity, volatility, momentum, and short-term reversals, the
equal-weighted decile portfolios are formed every month from January 1963 to December 2009
25

by sorting the NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ stocks based on the tail covariance risk calculated using
the 10% lower tail of the daily stock return distribution over the past 6 months. Portfolio 1 (10) is
the portfolio of stocks with the lowest (highest) tail covariance risk.
Table 9 reports the average returns in monthly percentage terms on H-TCR portfolios.
The average raw return difference between deciles 10 and 1 is in the range of 0.36% to 0.73%
per month with Newey-West t-statistics ranging from 2.59 to 5.03. The 10-1 differences in fourfactor alphas are also positive and economically and statistically significant. Based on the
average raw and risk-adjusted return differences, we find a positive and significant relation
between hybrid tail covariance risk and expected returns after screening for small, illiquid,
highly volatile, and extreme winner and loser stocks.
8. Conclusion
Motivated by under-diversification on the part of individual investors and further evidence that
these investors hold some of their wealth in well-diversified funds in addition to their
concentrated holdings of equities, we construct a measure of tail risk that depends on the
covariance between individual stock returns and the market return conditional on the returns on
the stock being in the lower tail of its distribution. This measure, which we denote hybrid tail
covariance risk (H-TCR), shows significant and robust ability to predict future returns.
Annualized risk-adjusted return differences between high and low H-TCR stocks are 6-9%,
depending on the precise specification and methodology.
These results contrast starkly with those from either purely stock-specific or purely
systematic measures of tail risk. In the former case, this risk appears to be negatively priced, an
anomalous result that we attribute to severe co-linearity between stock-specific tail risk measures
and other distributional characteristics of stock returns such as volatility and the prevalence of
extreme returns, both of which have been shown to be strongly correlated with future returns.
This issue clearly deserves further study. In the latter case, the estimated price of risk is negative,
small in magnitude, and statistically insignificant, adding to the wealth of existing failures to
detect the pricing of systematic risk in the cross-section of stocks.

26

Appendix: Variable Definitions
Market Beta: To estimate the market beta of an individual stock, we assume a single factor
return generating process:
Ri ,d   i   i Rm,d   i ,d ,

(14)

where Ri ,d is the return on stock i on day d and Rm,d is the market return on day d. We estimate
equation (14) for each stock using daily returns over the past one year. The estimated slope
coefficient ˆi  cov( Ri ,d , Rm,d ) var( Rm,d ) is the market beta of stock i.
Size: Following the existing literature, firm size is measured as the natural logarithm of the
market value of equity (a stock’s price times shares outstanding) for each stock.
Book-to-market: Following Fama and French (1992), we compute a firm’s book-to-market ratio
using its market equity at the end of December of year t–1 and the book value of common equity
plus balance-sheet deferred taxes for the firm’s latest fiscal year ending in calendar year t–1.15
Momentum: Following Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), the momentum variable for each stock in
month t is defined as the cumulative return on the stock over the previous 7 months but skipping
the most recent month, i.e., the 6-month cumulative return from month t–7 to month t–2. We also
use an alternative definition of momentum defined as the cumulative return on the stock over the
previous 12 months again skipping the most recent month, i.e., the 11-month cumulative return
from month t–12 to month t–2.
Short-term Reversals: Following Jegadeesh (1990) and Lehmann (1990), the reversal variable
for each stock in month t is defined as the return on the stock over the previous month, i.e., the
return in month t–1.
Liquidity: Following Amihud (2002), we measure stock illiquidity as the ratio of the absolute
return on a stock to its dollar trading volume: ILLIQi,t | Ri,t | / VOLDi ,t , where Ri,t is the return on
stock i in month t, and VOLDi,t is the respective monthly trading volume in dollars.
Co-skewness: Following Harvey and Siddique (2000), co-skewness is defined as:
Coskewi 



E Ri   i Rm   m 

2

varRi  varRm 

,

(15)

15

To avoid giving extreme observations heavy weight in our analysis, following Fama and French (1992), the
smallest and largest 0.5% of the observations on book-to-market ratio are set equal to the next largest and smallest
values of the ratio (the 0.005 and 0.995 fractiles).
27

where Ri is the daily return on stock i over the past one year, Rm is daily market return over the
past one year, and  i and  m are the average daily returns on Ri and Rm , respectively. var( Ri )
and var( Rm ) are the variance of daily returns on Ri and Rm , respectively.
Idiosyncratic Volatility: Following Ang et al. (2006), we estimate the monthly idiosyncratic
volatility of an individual stock using the three-factor Fama-French (1993) model:
Ri ,d  r f ,d   i   i ( Rm,d  r f ,d )   i SMBd   i HMLd   i ,d ,

(16)

where SMBd and HMLd are daily returns on the size and book-to-market factors of Fama and
French (1993), and  i,d is the idiosyncratic return on day d. Following Ang et al. (2006), the
idiosyncratic volatility of stock i in month t is defined as the standard deviation of daily residuals
in month t: IVOLi ,t  var( i ,d ) .
Maximum Daily Return: Following Bali, Cakici, and Whitelaw (2011), MAX is defined as the
maximum daily return within a month:
MAX i ,t  max( Ri ,d )

d  1,..., Dt ,

(17)

where Ri ,d is the return on stock i on day d and Dt is the number of trading days in month t.

28

References
Amihud, Y., 2002, “Illiquidity and Stock Returns: Cross-Section and Time-Series Effects,”
Journal of Financial Markets, 5, 31–56.
Ang, A., J. Chen, and Y. Xing, 2006, “Downside Risk,” Review of Financial Studies, 19, 1191–
1239.
Ang, A., R. J. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang, 2006, “The Cross-Section of Volatility and
Expected Returns,” Journal of Finance, 61, 259–299.
Ang, A., R. J. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang, 2009, “High Idiosyncratic Volatility and Low
Returns: International and Further U.S. Evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics, 91, 1–23.
Bali, T. G., N. Cakici, and R. F. Whitelaw, 2011, “Maxing Out: Stocks as Lotteries and the
Cross- Section of Expected Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 99, 427–446.
Barber, B., and T. Odean, 2001, “Boys Will Be Boys: Gender, Overconfidence, and Common
Stock Investment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 261–292.
Barro, R. J., 2006, “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 121, 823–866.
Bawa, V. S., 1975, “Optimal Rules for Ordering Uncertain Prospects,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 2, 95–121.
Bawa, V. S., and E. B., Lindenberg, 1977, “Capital Market Equilibrium in a Mean-Lower Partial
Moment Framework,” Journal of Financial Economics, 5, 189–200.
Blume, M. E., J. Crockett, and I. Friend, 1974, “Stockholders in the United States:
Characteristics and Trends,” Survey of Current Business, 54, 16–40.
Blume, M. E., and I. Friend, 1975, “The Asset Structure of Individual Portfolios and some
Implications for Utility Functions,” Journal of Finance, 30, 585–603.
Carhart, M. M., 1997, “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance,” Journal of Finance, 52,
57–82.
Daniel, K., and S. Titman, 1997, “Evidence on the Characteristics of Cross-Sectional Variation
in Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, 52, 1–33.
Dorn, D., and G. Huberman, 2005, “Talk and Action: What Individual Investors Say and What
They Do,” Review of Finance, 9, 437–481.
Dorn, D., and G. Huberman, 2010, “Preferred Risk Habitat of Individual Investors,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 97, 155–173.

29

Fama, E. F., and K. French, 1992, “Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns,” Journal of
Finance, 47, 427–465.
Fama, E. F., and K. French, 1993, “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and Bonds,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 33, 3–56.
Fama, E. F., and J. D. MacBeth, 1973, “Risk and Return: Some Empirical Tests,” Journal of
Political Economy, 81, 607–636.
Goetzmann, W. N., and A. Kumar, 2008, “Equity Portfolio Diversification,” Review of Finance,
12, 433–463.
Harlow, W., and R. Rao, 1989, “Asset Pricing in a Generalized Mean-Lower Partial Moment
Framework: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 24, 285–
311.
Harris, L. E., 1994, “Minimum Price Variation, Discrete Bid-Ask Spreads, and Quotation Sizes,”
Review of Financial Studies, 7, 149–178.
Harvey, C. R., and A. Siddique, 1999, “Autoregressive Conditional Skewness,” Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 34, 465–487.
Harvey, C. R., and A. Siddique, 2000, “Conditional Skewness in Asset Pricing Tests,” Journal of
Finance, 55, 1263–1295.
Jahankhani, A., 1976, “E-V and E-S Capital Asset Pricing Models: Some Empirical Tests,”
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 11, 513–528.
Jegadeesh, N., 1990, “Evidence of Predictable Behavior of Security Returns,” Journal of
Finance, 45, 881–898.
Jegadeesh, N., and S. Titman, 1993, “Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers:
Implications for Stock Market Efficiency,” Journal of Finance, 48, 65–91.
Jegadeesh, N., and S. Titman, 2001, “Profitability of Momentum Strategies: An Evaluation of
Alternative Explanations,” Journal of Finance, 56, 699–720.
Kahneman, D., J. L. Knetsch, and R. H. Thaler, 1990, “Experimental Tests of the Endowment
Effect and the Coase Theorem,” Journal of Political Economy, 99, 1325–1350.
Kelly, B., 2010, “Risk Premia and the Conditional Tails of Stock Returns,” working paper,
University of Chicago.
Lehmann, B., 1990, “Fads, Martingales, and Market Efficiency,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 105, 1–28.
Markowitz, H., 1959, Portfolio Selection: Efficient Diversification of Investments. New York:
Wiley.
30

Newey, W. K., and K. D. West, 1987, “A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity and
Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,” Econometrica, 55, 703–708.
Odean, T., 1999, “Do Investors Trade too Much?” American Economic Review, 89, 1279–1298.
Polkovnichenko, V., 2005, “Household Portfolio Diversification: A Case for Rank-Dependent
Preferences,” Review of Financial Studies, 18, 1467–1502.
Price, K., B. Price, and T. J. Nantell, 1982, “Variance and Lower Partial Moment Measures of
Systematic Risk: Some Analytical and Empirical Results,” Journal of Finance, 37, 843–855.
Rietz, T. A., 1988, “The Equity Risk Premium: A Solution,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
22, 117–131.
Roche, H., S. Tompaidis, and C. Yang, 2013, “Why Does Junior Put All His Eggs in One
Basket? A Potential Explanation for Holding Concentrated Portfolios,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 109, 775-796.
Spitzer, J., 2006, “Market Crashes, Market Booms, and the Cross-Section of Expected Returns,”
working paper, University of Virginia.
Subrahmanyam, A., 2010, “The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns: What Have We
Learnt from the Past Twenty-Five Years of Research?” European Financial Management, 16,
27–42.
Van Nieuwerburgh, S., and L. Veldkamp, 2010, “Information Acquisition and UnderDiversification,” Review of Economic Studies, 77, 779–805.

31

Table 1. Univariate Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by Tail Risk Measures
Decile portfolios are formed every month from July 1963 to December 2009 by sorting stocks based on
three measures of tail risk over the past six months: (i) hybrid tail covariance risk (H-TCR) (equation (9)),
(ii) the lower partial moment of returns (LPM(Ri), equation (5)), and (iii) LPM beta with respect to the
market (βLPM, equation (6)). Portfolio 1 (10) is the portfolio of stocks with the lowest (highest) tail risk.
We report the equal-weighted average monthly returns (in percentage terms) and the average tail risk
measure for each portfolio. The last two rows present the differences in average monthly returns between
portfolios 10 and 1 and the associated Newey-West (1987) adjusted t-statistics, in parentheses.
H-TCR

βLPM

LPM(Ri)

Return

H-TCR

Return

LPM(Ri)

Return

βLPM

Low

0.45

-0.266

1.07

0.070

0.91

-1.428

2

0.85

-0.153

1.17

0.140

1.07

-0.699

3

0.95

-0.104

1.19

0.200

1.10

-0.251

4

1.05

-0.071

1.24

0.270

1.15

0.142

5

1.17

-0.044

1.21

0.350

1.09

0.527

6

1.14

-0.020

1.22

0.460

1.19

0.932

7

1.15

0.004

1.13

0.610

1.15

1.391

8

1.28

0.031

1.08

0.830

1.15

1.956

9

1.26

0.064

0.86

1.230

0.97

2.746

High

1.22

0.124

0.36

2.530

0.74

4.225

Return Diff.

0.77

-0.71

-0.17

t-stat.

(5.29)

(-2.84)

(-0.57)

32

Table 2. Descriptive Statistics for Decile Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by Tail Risk Measures
Decile portfolios are formed every month from July 1963 to December 2009 by sorting stocks based on three measures of tail risk over the past six
months: (i) hybrid tail covariance risk (H-TCR) (equation (9)), (ii) the lower partial moment of returns (LPM(Ri), equation (5)), and (iii) LPM beta
with respect to the market (βLPM, equation (6)). Portfolio 1 (10) is the portfolio of stocks with the lowest (highest) tail risk. Panel A reports for each
H-TCR decile the average across the months in the sample of the median values within each month of various characteristics for the stocks—the
three tail risk measures, the price (in dollars), the market beta, the log market capitalization, the book-to-market (BM) ratio, the cumulative return
over the 6 months prior to portfolio formation (labeled MOM),the return in the portfolio formation month (labeled REV), a measure of illiquidity
(scaled by 105), the co-skewness (COSKEW), idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL), and the maximum daily return over the past one month (MAX).
Panel B and C present the same descriptive statistics for decile portfolios of LPM(Ri) and βLPM, respectively. Panel D presents the time-series
averages of the cross-sectional correlations of all the variables for the sample period July 1963-December 2009.
Panel A: H-TCR
H-TCR

LPM(Ri)

βLPM

Price

BETA

SIZE

BM

MOM

REV

ILLIQ

COSKEW

IVOL

MAX

Low H-TCR

-0.252

1.378

0.405

17.45

0.77

4.97

0.60

-0.13

0.14

0.22

-0.05

2.64

5.79

2

-0.143

0.602

0.286

20.54

0.74

5.23

0.66

7.17

0.73

0.18

-0.06

2.18

4.88

3

-0.096

0.413

0.289

22.55

0.73

5.43

0.67

9.28

0.83

0.14

-0.07

1.97

4.44

4

-0.064

0.330

0.319

23.91

0.74

5.59

0.69

10.40

0.95

0.12

-0.07

1.83

4.20

5

-0.038

0.280

0.400

25.37

0.76

5.75

0.70

11.19

1.06

0.10

-0.08

1.72

4.00

6

-0.015

0.252

0.497

26.93

0.78

5.94

0.70

12.07

1.05

0.08

-0.09

1.63

3.86

7

0.008

0.250

0.662

28.29

0.83

6.11

0.70

13.08

1.08

0.07

-0.10

1.57

3.81

8

0.033

0.271

0.928

29.67

0.91

6.29

0.69

13.77

1.14

0.05

-0.12

1.54

3.80

9

0.066

0.333

1.388

30.94

1.03

6.45

0.67

15.88

1.16

0.05

-0.13

1.56

3.95

High H-TCR

0.123

0.625

2.673

30.42

1.33

6.42

0.61

21.46

1.08

0.05

-0.17

1.80

4.68

33

Table 2 (continued)
Panel B: LPM(Ri)
H-TCR

LPM(Ri)

βLPM

Price

BETA

SIZE

BM

MOM

REV

ILLIQ

COSKEW

IVOL

MAX

Low LPM(Ri)

-0.020

0.072

-0.184

32.29

0.51

6.56

0.80

11.21

1.11

0.05

-0.07

1.11

2.63

2

-0.022

0.133

0.174

30.92

0.65

6.41

0.74

11.82

1.14

0.05

-0.08

1.32

3.16

3

-0.022

0.191

0.392

29.37

0.72

6.23

0.71

12.15

1.15

0.06

-0.08

1.46

3.50

4

-0.024

0.256

0.586

27.96

0.78

6.04

0.70

12.40

1.16

0.07

-0.09

1.60

3.81

5

-0.024

0.334

0.759

26.37

0.84

5.85

0.68

12.61

1.06

0.08

-0.09

1.74

4.14

6

-0.026

0.434

0.955

24.73

0.90

5.68

0.66

13.12

1.15

0.10

-0.10

1.91

4.51

7

-0.030

0.570

1.167

23.14

0.97

5.54

0.64

13.65

0.98

0.11

-0.10

2.09

4.92

8

-0.032

0.776

1.440

21.70

1.05

5.39

0.61

13.55

0.90

0.12

-0.11

2.30

5.40

9

-0.045

1.153

1.710

20.15

1.14

5.24

0.58

12.37

0.63

0.14

-0.11

2.55

5.94

High LPM(Ri)

-0.103

2.374

2.119

17.28

1.27

5.05

0.54

3.92

-0.48

0.16

-0.10

2.96

6.70

Panel C: βLPM
H-TCR

LPM(Ri)

βLPM

Price

BETA

SIZE

BM

MOM

REV

ILLIQ

COSKEW

IVOL

MAX

Low βLPM

-0.098

0.258

-1.349

24.43

0.38

5.37

0.77

13.03

1.76

0.19

-0.01

1.64

3.65

2

-0.067

0.214

-0.626

26.51

0.48

5.71

0.76

11.19

1.25

0.13

-0.05

1.44

3.27

3

-0.052

0.233

-0.188

27.05

0.59

5.87

0.74

10.71

1.14

0.10

-0.07

1.48

3.41

4

-0.040

0.259

0.187

27.08

0.68

5.94

0.71

10.36

1.01

0.08

-0.08

1.56

3.63

5

-0.028

0.294

0.556

27.06

0.79

6.00

0.68

10.69

0.97

0.07

-0.09

1.63

3.84

6

-0.015

0.337

0.941

26.56

0.89

6.00

0.66

10.60

0.89

0.07

-0.10

1.72

4.10

7

-0.002

0.400

1.375

26.06

1.00

5.96

0.64

11.17

0.79

0.07

-0.11

1.84

4.42

8

0.014

0.497

1.913

24.83

1.15

5.87

0.61

12.60

0.67

0.08

-0.13

2.00

4.86

9

0.035

0.660

2.666

23.43

1.35

5.73

0.58

14.63

0.52

0.08

-0.13

2.26

5.56

High βLPM

0.082

1.101

4.105

20.32

1.71

5.44

0.53

20.44

0.12

0.10

-0.15

2.72

6.82

34

Table 2 (continued)
Panel D: Average Firm-Level Correlations

H-TCR
LPM(Ri)
βLPM
BETA
SIZE
BM
MOM
REV
ILLIQ
COSKEW
IVOL
MAX

H-TCR

LPM(Ri)

βLPM

BETA

SIZE

BM

MOM

REV

ILLIQ

COSKEW

IVOL

MAX

1

-0.390

0.342

0.230

0.278

0.002

0.115

0.022

-0.112

-0.130

-0.277

-0.152

1

0.292

0.259

-0.195

-0.058

-0.075

-0.045

0.029

-0.038

0.421

0.286

1

0.719

-0.001

-0.102

-0.021

-0.056

-0.083

-0.250

0.307

0.267

1

0.076

-0.141

0.017

-0.007

-0.127

0.015

0.347

0.325

1

-0.142

-0.012

-0.009

-0.265

0.052

-0.355

-0.255

1

0.053

0.028

0.121

-0.002

-0.045

-0.028

1

0.007

-0.023

-0.063

0.033

0.016

1

0.029

-0.003

0.177

0.398

1

-0.009

0.082

0.058

1

-0.019

0.001

1

0.851
1

35

Table 3. Firm-Level Cross-Sectional Return Regressions
Each month from July 1963 to December 2009 we run a firm-level cross-sectional regression of the one-month
ahead return on lagged predictor variables including our tail risk measures— H-TCR, LPM(Ri), and βLPM,—the
Fama-French-Carhart factors (in Panel A), and five other control variables (in Panel B). The variables are
defined in the Appendix. Two alternative definitions of momentum are used; MOM is the 6-month cumulative
return from month t–7 to month t–2, and MOM12 is the 11-month cumulative return from month t–12 to
month t–2. In each row, Panels A and B report the time series averages of the cross-sectional regression slope
coefficients and their associated Newey-West (1987) adjusted t-statistics (in parentheses).
Panel A. Standard Specifications
Tail Risk Measure
H-TCR

LPM(Ri)

Fama-French-Carhart Factors
βLPM

BETA

SIZE

BM

MOM

MOM12

2.2870

-0.1557

-0.0905

0.1480

0.8489

(5.63)

(-0.90)

(-2.12)

(2.22)

(4.12)

-0.1999

-0.0346

-0.0810

0.1541

0.8899

(-4.43)

(-0.20)

(-1.82)

(2.29)

(4.24)

-0.0112

-0.0999

-0.0549

0.1700

0.9019

(-0.32)

(-0.65)

(-1.23)

(2.53)

(4.29)

2.1844

-0.1842

-0.0882

0.1711

0.7615

(5.53)

(-1.09)

(-2.04)

(2.66)

(4.94)

-0.2104

-0.0635

-0.0815

0.1757

0.7924

(-4.63)

(-0.39)

(-1.81)

(2.70)

(5.03)

-0.0163

-0.1211

-0.0548

0.1929

0.7902

(-0.46)

(-0.80)

(-1.21)

(2.96)

(5.05)

2.8797
(4.77)
-0.0775
(-0.76)
0.0009
(0.02)

36

Table 3 (continued)
Panel B: Specifications with Additional Control Variables
Tail Risk
Measure

Fama-French-Carhart Factors

Additional Control Variables

H-TCR

BETA

SIZE

BM

MOM

REV

ILLIQ

2.4575

-0.1509

-0.0906

0.1680

0.7730

-3.8010

(5.91)

(-0.85)

(-2.09)

(2.44)

(3.57)

(-8.44)

2.2233

-0.1699

-0.1057

0.1487

0.8375

-0.1768

(5.47)

(-0.98)

(-2.42)

(2.23)

(4.05)

(-2.09)

2.2436

-0.1643

-0.0933

0.1420

0.8566

-0.0725

(5.43)

(-0.92)

(-2.24)

(2.16)

(4.21)

(-0.30)

1.2336

0.0785

-0.1559

0.1219

0.8786

-0.2820

(3.48)

(0.48)

(-3.81)

(1.86)

(4.29)

(-9.09)

1.6471

0.0612

-0.1394

0.1332

0.8362

-8.7523

(4.42)

(0.37)

(-3.32)

(2.02)

(4.03)

(-9.92)

LPM(Ri)

BETA

SIZE

BM

MOM

REV

-0.2233

-0.0154

-0.0813

0.1733

0.8193

-3.8643

(-4.72)

(-0.09)

(-1.80)

(2.49)

(3.72)

(-8.63)

-0.1930

-0.0520

-0.0970

0.1548

0.8766

-0.1851

(-4.25)

(-0.31)

(-2.13)

(2.30)

(4.16)

(-2.15)

-0.2004

-0.0649

-0.0834

0.1463

0.8883

-0.3020

(-4.49)

(-0.38)

(-1.93)

(2.20)

(4.28)

(-1.26)

-0.0987

0.1285

-0.1522

0.1239

0.9092

-0.2890

(-2.26)

(0.81)

(-3.66)

(1.89)

(4.37)

(-8.95)

-0.1347

0.1433

-0.1338

0.1372

0.8652

-9.0479

(-2.94)

(0.88)

(-3.10)

(2.07)

(4.10)

(-10.05)

βLPM

BETA

SIZE

BM

MOM

REV

-0.0251

-0.0402

-0.0546

0.1909

0.8402

-3.7748

(-0.80)

(-0.26)

(-1.21)

(2.75)

(3.83)

(-8.59)

-0.0132

-0.1118

-0.0712

0.1706

0.8887

-0.1708

(-0.38)

(-0.73)

(-1.56)

(2.53)

(4.21)

(-2.11)

-0.0670

-0.0433

-0.0701

0.1594

0.9102

-0.3702

(-1.73)

(-0.25)

(-1.62)

(2.39)

(4.40)

(-1.48)

0.0080

0.0667

-0.1426

0.1278

0.9032

-0.3108

(0.23)

(0.46)

(-3.46)

(1.96)

(4.35)

(-9.64)

-0.0024

0.0835

-0.1162

0.1468

0.8665

-9.4371

(-0.07)

(0.57)

(-2.69)

(2.22)

(4.11)

(-10.32)

ILLIQ

ILLIQ

COSKEW

COSKEW

COSKEW

IVOL

IVOL

IVOL

MAX

MAX

MAX

37

Table 4. Tail Risk Measures for Differing Tail Sizes
We report the average slope coefficients, over the sample period July 1963 to December 2009, and associated
Newey-West t-statistics (in parentheses) on our three tail risk measures— H-TCR, LPM(Ri), and βLPM—from
Fama-MacBeth regressions of one-month ahead returns on tail risk after controlling for market beta, size,
book-to-market, and momentum, i.e., the four Fama-French-Carhart factors. For the sake of brevity, results for
the factors are not reported. Tail risk measures for the 5%, 10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, and 50% tails are calculated
using daily returns over the past one year.

H-TCR
LPM(Ri)
βLPM

5%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

1.2221

1.1493

0.9400

0.7474

0.5526

-0.1519

(3.73)

(4.09)

(3.61)

(3.18)

(2.90)

(-0.88)

-0.1125

-0.1216

-0.1031

-0.0872

-0.0592

-0.0624

(-3.72)

(-4.66)

(-5.13)

(-5.50)

(-5.07)

(-5.45)

-0.0303

-0.0424

-0.0686

-0.0800

-0.0514

-0.0506

(-1.08)

(-0.89)

(-0.72)

(-0.53)

(-0.23)

(-0.17)

38

Table 5. Time-Series Average of the H-TCR Transition Matrix
Decile portfolios are formed every month from July 1963 to December 2009 by sorting stocks based on the hybrid tail covariance risk (H-TCR) over the
past six months. Panel A reports the average of the month-to-month transition matrices for the stocks in these portfolios, i.e., the average probability (in
percent) that a stock in decile i (as given by the rows of the matrix) in one month will be in decile j (as given by the columns of the matrix) in the
subsequent month. We roll the sample month by month (hence there is an overlap in the calculation of H-TCR) and the transition matrices are computed
for each month in our sample, generating a total of 558 matrices. Panel B reports the average of the 6-month lag transition matrices for the stocks in these
portfolios, i.e., the average probability (in percent) that a stock in decile i (as given by the rows of the matrix) in one month will be in decile j (as given
by the columns of the matrix) 6 months later.
Panel A. One Month Lag
Low H-TCR

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

High H-TCR

Low H-TCR

71.94%

16.44%

4.45%

2.18%

1.35%

0.97%

0.66%

0.52%

0.40%

0.36%

2

16.29%

47.34%

19.56%

7.42%

3.64%

2.14%

1.41%

0.96%

0.71%

0.51%

3

4.68%

19.19%

37.33%

19.90%

8.43%

4.46%

2.54%

1.61%

1.10%

0.76%

4

2.33%

7.36%

19.58%

32.64%

19.32%

8.92%

4.73%

2.65%

1.54%

1.01%

5

1.44%

3.70%

8.50%

18.87%

31.01%

18.98%

9.11%

4.64%

2.55%

1.32%

6

1.06%

2.25%

4.43%

8.89%

18.59%

31.09%

18.79%

8.67%

4.33%

2.07%

7

0.78%

1.42%

2.65%

4.71%

9.01%

18.44%

32.80%

19.15%

7.99%

3.20%

8

0.57%

0.99%

1.66%

2.72%

4.72%

8.67%

18.72%

36.70%

19.41%

5.99%

9

0.50%

0.75%

1.07%

1.68%

2.60%

4.29%

8.04%

18.87%

44.45%

17.89%

High H-TCR

0.41%

0.56%

0.77%

0.99%

1.32%

2.05%

3.21%

6.23%

17.52%

66.88%

39

Table 5 (continued)
Panel B. Six Month Lag
Low H-TCR

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

High H-TCR

Low H-TCR

23.04%

15.81%

12.33%

10.07%

8.47%

7.33%

6.24%

5.50%

5.30%

5.91%

2

15.31%

14.10%

12.82%

11.39%

10.07%

8.91%

7.72%

6.97%

6.36%

6.34%

3

12.11%

12.38%

12.05%

11.57%

10.90%

9.95%

9.07%

8.23%

7.11%

6.63%

4

10.02%

11.18%

11.54%

11.49%

11.10%

10.65%

9.93%

9.02%

7.94%

7.12%

5

8.19%

9.95%

10.71%

10.92%

11.22%

11.14%

10.77%

9.97%

9.07%

8.06%

6

7.28%

8.99%

9.74%

10.61%

10.95%

11.15%

11.17%

10.95%

10.24%

8.92%

7

6.45%

7.85%

8.96%

9.92%

10.57%

11.37%

11.41%

11.71%

11.54%

10.21%

8

5.78%

6.96%

8.01%

8.86%

9.94%

10.80%

11.87%

12.43%

12.98%

12.35%

9

5.50%

6.41%

7.18%

8.02%

8.88%

9.86%

11.51%

12.92%

14.57%

15.16%

High H-TCR

6.31%

6.36%

6.67%

7.15%

7.89%

8.84%

10.30%

12.31%

14.88%

19.28%

40

Table 6. Alternative Measures of Hybrid Tail Covariance Risk
In Panel A, decile portfolios are formed every month from July 1963 to December 2009 by sorting stocks based on alternative measures of hybrid tail
covariance risk (H-TCR). H-TCR is computed based on returns from the (i) 5% lower tail of the daily return distribution over the past 12 months; (ii)
10% lower tail of the daily return distribution over the past 12 months; (iii) 10% lower tail of the daily return distribution over the past 6 months; (iv)
20% lower tail of the daily return distribution over the past 6 months; and (v) 20% lower tail of the daily return distribution over the past 3 months.
Portfolio 1 (10) is the portfolio of stocks with the lowest (highest) H-TCR. The table reports the average monthly returns (in percentage terms) and
average H-TCR values in each decile. The last four rows present the differences in monthly returns and the differences in alphas with respect to the 4factor Fama-French-Carhart model (FFC4 Alpha) between portfolios 10 and 1, with associated Newey-West (1987) adjusted t-statistics in parentheses. In
Panel B, we repeat the same exercise except that stocks are sorted on the basis of hybrid tail beta, as given in equation (13), rather than TCR.
Panel A: Alternative Measures of Tail Covariance Risk
5% H-TCR in 12 months

10% H-TCR in 12 months

10% H-TCR in 6 months

20% H-TCR in 6 months

20% H-TCR in 3 months

Return

H-TCR

Return

H-TCR

Return

H-TCR

Return

H-TCR

Return

H-TCR

Low H-TCR

0.64

-0.408

0.65

-0.456

0.45

-0.266

0.54

-0.251

0.49

-0.155

2

0.91

-0.241

0.95

-0.273

0.85

-0.153

0.91

-0.131

0.84

-0.081

3

1.03

-0.167

1.03

-0.188

0.95

-0.104

0.99

-0.074

0.99

-0.048

4

1.10

-0.118

1.01

-0.127

1.05

-0.071

1.07

-0.032

1.04

-0.025

5

1.13

-0.079

1.13

-0.077

1.17

-0.044

1.13

0.003

1.10

-0.006

6

1.17

-0.044

1.21

-0.032

1.14

-0.020

1.15

0.037

1.12

0.012

7

1.21

-0.011

1.20

0.013

1.15

0.004

1.18

0.072

1.19

0.031

8

1.18

0.025

1.22

0.064

1.28

0.031

1.21

0.113

1.26

0.052

9

1.21

0.071

1.17

0.128

1.26

0.064

1.20

0.167

1.27

0.081

High H-TCR

1.14

0.148

1.14

0.238

1.22

0.124

1.12

0.265

1.23

0.134

Return Diff.

0.51

0.48

0.77

0.59

0.74

t-stat.

(3.19)

(2.76)

(5.29)

(3.37)

(5.20)

FFC4 Alpha Diff.

0.51

0.54

0.69

0.51

0.63

t-stat.

(3.83)

(3.66)

(5.24)

(3.29)

(4.42)

41

Table 6 (continued)
Panel B: Hybrid Tail Beta

5% Tail Beta

10% Tail Beta

10% Tail Beta

20% Tail Beta

20% Tail Beta

in 12 months

in 12 months

in 6 months

In 6 months

in 3 months

Return

Tail Beta

Return

Tail Beta

Return

Tail Beta

Return

Tail Beta

Return

Tail Beta

Low Tail Beta

0.67

-1.82

0.57

-1.46

0.48

-1.77

0.55

-1.21

0.45

-1.57

2

0.85

-1.16

0.96

-0.97

0.82

-1.10

0.88

-0.72

0.87

-0.91

3

1.08

-0.88

1.05

-0.74

0.97

-0.82

1.00

-0.50

0.98

-0.62

4

1.10

-0.69

1.04

-0.58

1.08

-0.63

1.10

-0.34

0.98

-0.43

5

1.07

-0.55

1.12

-0.45

1.12

-0.48

1.12

-0.21

1.13

-0.27

6

1.13

-0.44

1.18

-0.34

1.11

-0.36

1.16

-0.09

1.14

-0.13

7

1.18

-0.32

1.21

-0.23

1.15

-0.23

1.16

0.05

1.19

0.02

8

1.19

-0.20

1.21

-0.10

1.25

-0.09

1.25

0.20

1.28

0.21

9

1.24

-0.05

1.21

0.07

1.30

0.10

1.18

0.42

1.28

0.47

High Tail Beta

1.19

0.27

1.16

0.41

1.24

0.51

1.11

0.87

1.23

1.03

Return Diff.

0.52

0.59

0.77

0.56

0.78

t-stat.

(3.20)

(3.46)

(5.06)

(3.27)

(5.67)

FFC4 Alpha Diff.

0.50

0.59

0.64

0.44

0.62

t-stat.

(3.56)

(3.80)

(4.43)

(2.70)

(4.44)

42

Table 7. Returns on Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by H-TCR after Controlling for
SIZE, BM, MOM, REV, ILLIQ, COSKEW, IVOL, and MAX
Double-sorted, equal-weighted decile portfolios are formed every month from July 1963 to December
2009 by sorting stocks based on the hybrid tail covariance risk after controlling for size, book-to-market,
intermediate-term momentum, short-term reversal, illiquidity, co-skewness, idiosyncratic volatility, and
MAX. In each case, we first sort the stocks into deciles using the control variable, then within, each
decile, we sort stocks into decile portfolios based on the hybrid tail covariance risk over the previous year
so that decile 1 (10) contains stocks with the lowest (highest) H-TCR. The table presents average returns
(in percentage terms) across the 10 control deciles to produce decile portfolios with dispersion in H-TCR
but with similar levels of the control variable. The last four rows present the differences in monthly
returns and the differences in alphas with respect to the 4-factor Fama-French-Carhart model (FFC4
Alpha) between portfolios 10 and 1, with associated Newey-West t-statistics in parentheses.

SIZE

BM

MOM

REV

ILLIQ

COSKEW

IVOL

MAX

0.55

0.69

0.77

0.62

0.58

0.64

0.77

0.82

(2.11)

(2.49)

(2.93)

(2.25)

(2.09)

(2.30)

(3.11)

(3.16)

0.86

0.88

0.93

0.86

0.91

0.93

0.96

0.90

(3.42)

(3.41)

(3.61)

(3.34)

(3.55)

(3.59)

(4.08)

(3.57)

0.94

1.00

1.03

1.01

0.99

1.06

1.04

0.95

(3.95)

(4.00)

(4.28)

(4.08)

(4.00)

(4.27)

(4.38)

(3.90)

1.04

1.05

1.05

1.04

1.03

1.07

1.03

1.06

(4.42)

(4.34)

(4.37)

(4.42)

(4.26)

(4.37)

(4.42)

(4.47)

1.13

1.09

1.07

1.12

1.14

1.06

1.04

1.06

(4.82)

(4.64)

(4.59)

(4.70)

(4.85)

(4.51)

(4.42)

(4.45)

1.08

1.11

1.11

1.17

1.14

1.10

1.10

1.06

(4.61)

(4.72)

(4.66)

(5.10)

(5.00)

(4.71)

(4.55)

(4.44)

1.20

1.17

1.15

1.12

1.17

1.16

1.17

1.17

(5.10)

(5.13)

(4.95)

(4.88)

(5.05)

(5.08)

(4.82)

(4.94)

1.30

1.21

1.22

1.29

1.23

1.21

1.18

1.22

(5.43)

(5.10)

(5.08)

(5.37)

(5.27)

(5.20)

(4.67)

(4.99)

1.27

1.22

1.21

1.18

1.24

1.22

1.17

1.19

(5.11)

(5.12)

(4.92)

(4.91)

(5.07)

(5.19)

(4.55)

(4.83)

1.28

1.25

1.11

1.24

1.23

1.19

1.19

1.22

(4.39)

(4.58)

(3.98)

(4.44)

(4.36)

(4.36)

(4.27)

(4.52)

Return Diff.

0.73

0.56

0.35

0.63

0.65

0.55

0.42

0.40

t-stat.

(5.62)

(4.08)

(2.55)

(4.50)

(4.73)

(4.05)

(3.27)

(3.22)

FFC4 Alpha Diff.

0.53

0.49

0.40

0.56

0.50

0.51

0.34

0.35

t-stat.

(4.18)

(3.81)

(3.18)

(4.40)

(3.74)

(4.32)

(2.96)

(3.14)

Low H-TCR
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
High H-TCR

43

Table 8. Characteristic Matched Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by H-TCR:
Additional Controls for SIZE/BM and MOM, REV, ILLIQ, COSKEW, IVOL, and MAX
In the column labeled “Size/BM adjusted,” we report the average returns of H-TCR portfolios in excess of the size and book-to-market matched
benchmark portfolios similar to Daniel and Titman (1997) for the sample period July 1963 to December 2009. In the next six columns, we include
additional controls for momentum, short-term reversal, illiquidity, co-skewness, idiosyncratic volatility, and MAX. For each additional control, we
first perform a decile sort based on the characteristic and then on hybrid tail covariance risk (H-TCR). Then, we average the H-TCR deciles across
the characteristic deciles and report size and book-to-market matched returns within each H-TCR decile. Portfolio 1 (10) is the portfolio of stocks
with the lowest (highest) tail covariance risk. We report the average returns in monthly percentage terms. The last two rows report the difference in
returns between portfolios 10 and 1 with associated Newey-West t-statistics in parentheses.

Additional Controls
SIZE/BM Adjusted

MOM

REV

ILLIQ

COSKEW

IVOL

MAX

Low H-TCR

-0.41

-0.24

-0.40

-0.39

-0.37

-0.29

-0.22

2

-0.17

-0.13

-0.21

-0.14

-0.15

-0.09

-0.17

3

-0.08

-0.03

-0.06

-0.05

-0.01

-0.05

-0.10

4

0.00

-0.02

0.00

-0.02

0.02

-0.02

0.00

5

0.08

-0.01

0.04

0.06

0.01

-0.04

-0.02

6

0.02

0.03

0.07

0.06

0.01

0.02

0.00

7

0.06

0.06

0.05

0.08

0.07

0.09

0.07

8

0.16

0.14

0.17

0.12

0.13

0.11

0.13

9

0.15

0.11

0.16

0.12

0.13

0.10

0.12

High H-TCR

0.18

0.11

0.19

0.16

0.17

0.18

0.19

Return Diff.

0.59

0.35

0.60

0.55

0.54

0.46

0.42

t-stat.

(5.35)

(3.53)

(5.83)

(5.33)

(5.70)

(4.44)

(4.37)

44

Table 9. Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by Hybrid Tail Covariance Risk after Screening for
Liquidity, Idiosyncratic Volatility, Winners, Losers, Momentum, and Reversal
We form equal-weighted decile portfolios every month from July 1963 to December 2009 by sorting stocks based on hybrid tail covariance risk (H-TCR)
calculated using the lower 10% tail of the daily return distribution over the past six months, after screening for liquidity, idiosyncratic volatility,
momentum, and reversals. To screen for liquidity, all NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ stocks are sorted for each month by the ratio of absolute stock return to its
dollar volume to determine the NYSE decile breakpoints for the illiquidity measure. Then, we exclude all stocks that belong to the largest NYSE
illiquidity decile. To screen for idiosyncratic volatility, all NYSE stocks are sorted for each month by their idiosyncratic volatility to determine the NYSE
decile breakpoints for the volatility measure. Then, we exclude all stocks that belong to the highest NYSE volatility decile. To screen for past 6-month
winners and losers, all NYSE stocks are sorted for each month by their 6-month cumulative returns from month t-7 to t-2 to determine the NYSE decile
breakpoints for momentum (or winners and losers). Then, we exclude the winner (loser) stocks that belong to the highest (lowest) momentum decile. We
also screen both momentum winners and losers simultaneously. To screen for past 1-month winners and losers, all NYSE stocks are sorted for each
month by their past 1-month return to determine the NYSE decile breakpoints for short-term reversals. Then, we exclude the past 1-month winner (loser)
stocks that belong to the highest (lowest) reversal decile. To screen for short-term reversals, we estimate tail covariance risk using daily returns from
month t-12 to month t-2, skipping month t-1. Portfolio 1 (10) is the portfolio of stocks with the lowest (highest) H-TCR. The last four rows present the
differences in monthly returns and the differences in alphas with respect to the 4-factor Fama-French-Carhart model (FFC4 Alpha) between portfolios 10
and 1, with associated Newey-West t-statistics in parentheses. Average raw and risk-adjusted returns are given in percentage terms.

Low H-TCR
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
High H-TCR

Illiquidity
0.62
0.90
0.99
1.04
1.17
1.10
1.18
1.27
1.24
1.24

Volatility
0.94
1.05
1.07
1.16
1.18
1.15
1.22
1.31
1.25
1.33

Past 6-month
Winners
0.49
0.79
0.94
0.98
1.10
1.06
1.09
1.24
1.14
1.06

Past 6-month
Losers
0.84
1.04
1.04
1.12
1.19
1.15
1.23
1.29
1.30
1.30

Momentum
0.77
0.95
1.02
1.10
1.12
1.12
1.14
1.26
1.18
1.13

Past 1-month
Winners
0.74
0.94
1.04
1.07
1.17
1.13
1.24
1.34
1.29
1.29

Past 1-month
Losers
0.49
0.85
0.93
1.02
1.13
1.08
1.14
1.27
1.22
1.22

Reversal
0.67
0.91
0.99
1.07
1.14
1.13
1.18
1.32
1.27
1.29

Return Diff.

0.62

0.39

0.57

0.46

0.36

0.54

0.73

0.62

t-stat.

(4.00)

(2.86)

(3.97)

(3.12)

(2.59)

(3.65)

(5.03)

(4.42)

FFC4 Alpha Diff.

0.52

0.31

0.52

0.43

0.36

0.45

0.65

0.54

t-stat.

(3.64)

(2.37)

(4.00)

(3.07)

(2.80)

(3.24)

(4.85)

(4.12)

45

