                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH AND STOCK RETURNS:
                      FIRM- AND AGGREGATE-LEVEL ANALYSES

                                          Hyunbae Chun
                                         Jung-Wook Kim
                                          Randall Morck

                                       Working Paper 19462
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19462


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2013




Chun and Kim gratefully acknowledge support from the National Research Foundation of Korea Grant
funded by the Korean Government (NRF-2013S1A3A2053312), the Sogang University Research
Fund, the Institute of Finance and Banking and the Institute of Management Research at Seoul
National University, respectively. Morck gratefully acknowledges support from the SSHRC and
the Bank of Canada. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Hyunbae Chun, Jung-Wook Kim, and Randall Morck. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Productivity Growth and Stock Returns: Firm- and Aggregate-Level Analyses
Hyunbae Chun, Jung-Wook Kim, and Randall Morck
NBER Working Paper No. 19462
September 2013
JEL No. G14,G31,O33

                                                ABSTRACT

Technological innovation is not a blessing for all firms, or for investors holding the market. In the
late 20th century US, individual firms’ stock returns correlate positively with their own productivity
growth, yet the market return correlates negatively with aggregate productivity growth, yet. This seeming
fallacy of composition reflects Schumpeterian creative destruction: a few technology winners’ stocks
rise with their rising productivity while many technology losers’ stocks fall with their declining productivity.
Thus, most individual firms’ stock returns correlate negatively with aggregate productivity growth.
Analogous reasoning explains prior findings that the market return correlates negatively with aggregate
earnings.


Hyunbae Chun                                           Randall Morck
Department of Economics                                Faculty of Business
Sogang University                                      University of Alberta
Seoul 121-742 Korea                                    Edmonton, AB T6G 2R6
hchun@sogang.ac.kr                                     CANADA
                                                       and NBER
Jung-Wook Kim                                          randall.morck@ualberta.ca
Associate Professor of Finance
College of Business Administration
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
151-742
jwkim87@snu.ac.kr
The first rule of any technology used in a business is that automation applied to an efficient operation will
magnify the efficiency. The second is that automation applied to an inefficient operation will magnify the
inefficiency.
                                                                                                   Bill Gates


1.        Introduction

Although productivity growth (a measure related to economic profits and often associated with

technological progress) is of central importance in economics, its importance in finance remains

largely uncharted.1 Estimated annual firm-level productivity growth rates for U.S. Compustat

firms from 1970 through 2006 let us explore the contemporaneous relationships between firm-

level and aggregate stock returns and productivity growth rates. This exercise reveals why the

sign of the relationship between stock return and growth in earnings (an accounting measure of

profits) at the firm-level reverses at the aggregate-level (Kothari, Lewellen, and Warner, 2006;

Hirshleifer, Hou, and Teoh, 2009; Sadka and Sadka, 2009; Ritter, 2012) by supplementing recent

theoretical and empirical work revealing economically significant negative spillovers from

technological innovation on established firms (Hobjin and Jovanovic, 2001; Gârleanu, Kogan,

and Panageas, 2012; Gârleanu, Panageas, and Yu, 2012; Kogan and Papanikolaou, 2012a,

2012b).

          Work in productivity growth emphasizes positive spillovers from technological

innovation. Popular endogenous growth models (Aghion and Howitt, 1992; Romer, 1986) posit

innovation creating wealth in two ways. First, an innovating firm invests in a new technology,

creating wealth for its shareholders. Second, other firms throughout the economy adopt, imitate,

or improve the innovation, generating positive spillovers that create far more wealth for their
1
  Economic profit is total revenue less total costs. Productivity growth is growth in revenues less growth in total
costs. Accounting profit or earnings, differs from economic profit in subtracting accounting (rather than economic)
depreciation, and in not subtracting the cost of equity capital. Economic profit associated with technological
progress is alternatively characterized as an entrepreneurial rent – that is, a return to creativity.

                                                        1
shareholders (Jaffe, 1986; Bernstein and Nadiri, 1989; Griliches, 1992). For example, AT&T’s

1970s semiconductor innovations first spilled over into electronics parts firms, and then to other

sectors, including autos, home appliances, retailing, and watchmaking (Ruttan, 2001).

         However, more recent theoretical and empirical work associates the diffusion of a new

technology across the economy with a widened performance gap, as increasingly productive

technology winners leave increasingly troubled loser firms behind.2 Tirole (1988) dubs these

negative spillovers the business stealing effect of innovation. Yet other work characterizes

technological progress as winner-take-all competition, where a lone winner amasses immense

wealth and there is no prize for second place.3 Consistent with negative spillovers in the

semiconductor sector, Megna and Klock (1993) document firms’ share prices dropping markedly

on news of a rival’s innovation success. Lerner (1997) finds evidence of winner-take-all

competition among hard-disk makers.

         This work recalls Schumpeter’s (1912) view of innovation as a process of creative

destruction. Like Romer (1986), Schumpeter begins with an innovating firm investing in new

technology that boosts its economic profits, creating wealth for its own shareholders. But

Schumpeter envisions shareholder wealth destruction at the innovators’ competitor firms because

they fail to utilize the new technology as productively. Moreover, another entrant, or even a

seeming loser today, might ultimately adapt, imitate, or improve on the innovation to emerge as

tomorrow’s creative winner, wreaking value destruction upon the initially successful innovator.


2
  See David (1990), Davis and Haltiwanger (1992), King and Levine (1993), Jovanovic and MacDonald (1994),
Helpman and Trajtenberg (1998a, 1998b), Greenwood and Jovanovic (1999), Hobijn and Jovanovic (2001), Chun,
Kim, Morck, and Yeung (2008), Fogel, Morck, and Yeung (2008), and Bena and Garlappi (2012).
3
  Merton (1968) first characterized winner-take-all competition as the Matthew Effect, referring to Matthew 13:12
“For whoever hath, to him more shall be given, and he will have an abundance; but whoever hath not, even what he
hath shall be taken from him.” See also Dasgupta and Maskin (1987), Arthur (1990), Cook and Frank (1996),
Stephan (1996), Bena and Garlappi (2012), and Kogan, Papanikolaou, Seru, and Stoffman (2012).

                                                       2
         This destructive aspect of technological progress could become especially important

amid the diffusion of a general purpose technology (GPT), a new technology that lets innovative

firms in most (or many) sectors, rather than just one (or a few), raise their productivity,

ultimately enhancing economic growth across the board. Jovanovic and Rousseau (2005) argue

that the information technology (IT) boom of the 1990s is a recent example of a GPT.4 Hobijn

and Jovanovic (2001) show the introduction of a GPT favoring new firms over incumbents with

old technologies embedded in existing capital or attuned to obsolescing value chains. Thus,

Gârleanu, Kogan, and Panageas (2012) model broad-based technological progress inducing

displacement risk, an erosion in the values of established firms’ physical (and human) capital.

Gârleanu, Panageas, and Yu (2012) and Kogan and Papanikolaou (2012a, 2012b) show firms’

decisions about investing in a new GPT widening the performance gaps between winner and

loser firms, increasing cross-sectional dispersion in firm-valuation.5 A common theme of these

papers is that, while technological innovation has the bright side of ultimately increasing overall,

or average, firm productivity, it also has a dark side of destroying, at least partially, the values of

the many established firms that are left behind.

         To explore these issues, we measure the spillover effect of technological innovation by

contrasting stock returns at the firm- and economy-levels. Our sample is Center for Research in

Security Prices (CRSP) and Compustat firms from 1970 to 2006.6 We follow the growth theory

literature in using firm-level total factor productivity (henceforth, TFP) growth as a proxy for


4
  Earlier examples include the steam engine, electricity, the internal combustion engine and electronics (Bresnahan
and Trajtenberg, 1995; Jovanovic and Rousseau, 2005).
5
  Note that the gap between winners’ and losers’ stock returns can be wider than that between their measured
productivity growth rates because of the forward-looking nature of stock returns.
6
  Our sample period ends in 2006, because the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) and the Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS) ceased reporting SIC-based industry-level deflators thereafter. The newly introduced NAICS-based
industry classification is unavailable before 1987.

                                                        3
economically profitable technological innovation; and the finance literature in using stock

returns to measure changes in firms’ market values, as in Kothari, Lewellen, and Warner (2006).7

TFP is defined as the ratio of total real revenue to the total real costs of all factors of production,

including both labor and capital. TFP differs from accounting earnings in subtracting the

estimated required return to shareholders as an annualized dollar cost and in subtracting

estimated economic depreciation, rather than accounting depreciation and amortization.8 Our

findings are summarized as follows.

            First, the typical firm’s stock price rises significantly as its own TFP rises, but falls

significantly as aggregate TFP rises, indicating negative spillovers. This heterogeneous, albeit

mostly negative, reaction to aggregate TFP is evident in most industries, suggesting that negative

spillovers are not limited to certain high-tech sectors. These findings extend Kogan,

Papanikolaou, Seru, and Stoffman (2012), who find that firms’ stock returns are negatively

affected by other firms’ innovation activities measured by patents.

            Second, this heterogeneous, but mainly negative, firm-level reaction to aggregate TFP

growth explains a recent fallacy of composition finding: US firms’ stock returns and earnings are

correlated positively, but the US stock market return and aggregate corporate earnings are

negatively correlated (Kothari, Lewellen, and Warner, 2006; Hirshleifer, Hou, and Teoh, 2009;

Sadka and Sadka, 2009). This seeming contradiction is readily explicable because the economy-

level correlation of TFP growth with the stock market’s return is a weighted average of the

heterogeneous, but mostly negative, correlations of individual firm’s stock returns with

aggregate TFP growth. The firm-level correlation, in contrast, reflects a consistently positive


7
    Section 2.2 discusses other innovation measures used in the literature.
8
    See section 2.1 for further discussion on the construction and interpretation of TFP.

                                                            4
linkage between a firm’s own TFP growth and its own stock’s return. Accounting earnings

approximate economic profits closely enough to echo this pattern. Our explanation of this fallacy

of the composition is based on firm-level evidence; and thus supplements prior explanations

based on aggregate-level data.9

         Third, observed negative spillovers exhibit substantial time-series variation. The gap

between firms whose stock prices rise with aggregate productivity growth and those whose stock

price fall expands until 2000 and then gradually narrows. This accords with the IT boom of the

1990s inducing a wave of creative destruction across the U.S. economy that largely ran its course

by the turn of the century (Pástor and Veronesi, 2009). The relationship between the stock

market return and aggregate earnings growth found by Kothari, Lewellen, and Warner (2006)

tracks this timing: it grows increasingly negative through the 1990s, and then subsides and even

flips signs.

         Our findings imply that technological change widens inequality between firms, and the

negative aggregate correlations we detect also suggest potentially widening inequality among

shareholders. Much of the gain from successful innovation accrues to entrepreneur founders,

venture capitalists, or private equity investors who back innovative firms prior to their initial

public offerings (Gompers, Kovner, Lerner, and Scharfstein, 2008). Public investors who buy

into IPOs tend to earn modest returns (Ritter and Welch, 2002; Gompers and Lerner, 2003). Our

result is consistent with these findings, in that public shareholders’ wealth, represented by the


9
  Kothari, Lewellen, and Warner (2006) suggest that the positive relationship between discount rate and earnings
growth at the aggregate level may be an underlying reason for the discrepancy, but find little empirical support for
the hypothesis. Hirshleifer, Hou, and Teoh (2009) show that Kothari, Lewellen, and Warner (2006)’s result is driven
by the accruals component of aggregate earnings. Sadka and Sadka (2009) focus on the fact that stock prices predict
earnings better at the aggregate-level than at the firm-level. None of these approaches let individual firms react
heterogeneously to a common aggregate productivity shock, which underlies explanation. See section 4.2 for more
discussion on these papers.

                                                         5
market return, can decline as economy-wide innovations unfold.

        Our findings also suggest that understanding aggregate-level correlations requires

understanding firm-level dynamics. Theoretical and empirical work transcending representative

firms with heterogeneous firm-level dynamics might be highly illuminating.

        This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Sections 3 reports

empirical findings. Section 4 discusses implications of our findings and section 5 concludes.



2.      Data

2.1     Total Factor Productivity Growth Measure

A successful innovation alters the innovating firm’s production function, letting it either produce

more valuable output from given inputs (product innovation) or a given output from less costly

inputs (process innovation). In either case, the firm’s total factor productivity (TFP) grows: the

value of its output rises relative to the costs of its inputs. This echo’s Schumpeter’s (1912)

argument, that innovation, by altering the parameters of production, places the economy in

disequilibrium. Until output and factor prices adjust to a new equilibrium, the innovating firm

earns economic profits, or quasirents, equal to the value of its outputs minus the cost of its inputs.

In either perspective, the productivity gains or quasirents can alternatively be thought of as a

return to creativity due the entrepreneur, or perhaps shared with initial capital providers as a

reward for their ability to identify promising early-stage innovations.

        This alteration to the parameters of a production function is the essence of technological

change, indeed of innovation in general (Schumpeter, 1912). Thus, TFP growth can arise from

successfully accessing new markets, providing improved services, or any number of non-

technological innovations to previously state-of-the-art business practice, as well as from
                                                  6
engineering advances. The deep connection to economic profits and innovation makes TFP

growth a key variable in economic growth theory (Romer, 1986, 1990; Grossman and Helpman,

1991; Aghion and Howitt, 1992, 1997; Aghion, Harris, Howitt, and Vickers, 2001).

          Firm-level TFP growth is measured annually because the necessary Compustat data are

annual, and defined as



                            1                                  1
[1]       d i ,t  dYi ,t  [ S L,i ,t  S L,i ,t 1 ]dLi ,t  [ S K ,i ,t  S K ,i ,t 1 ]dK i ,t
                            2                                  2



where dYi ,t , dLi ,t , and dLi ,t are firm i’s growth rates in value-added, labor, and capital,

respectively and where S L ,i ,t and S K ,i ,t are the share of the firm’s costs payable to its

providers of labor and capital, respectively.10 The firm’s costs of raw materials, electricity, and

other inputs to production are subtracted from its revenues each year to calculate its value-added,

Yi ,t .

          Real value-added is nominal value-added (operating income before depreciation

(Compustat mnemonic: OIBDP) plus labor and related expenses (XLR or, if missing, an

estimate described below)), all deflated by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) Gross

Product Originating (GPO) value-added deflator for firm i’s 2-digit primary industry, denoted

j(i). Before 1977, these deflators are unavailable, so we use gross output and intermediate input

prices from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Multifactor Productivity Database to construct

substitutes. Our output growth rate is then dYi ,t  ln(Yi ,t )  ln(Yi ,t 1 ).

10
   In constructing TFP growth measure, we use the definition used by BLS. However, as robustness checks, we use
other methods of calculating TFP growth as suggested by Hall (1988) and Basu and Fernald (1997) as discussed in
section 3.4.

                                                                     7
         The firm’s labor cost share, S L,i ,t , is its labor and related expenses over this plus capital

services costs. If labor and related expenses are unreported, we estimate them as industry

average wage for i(j), from GPO data, times the firm’s workforce (EMP). If employees’ benefits

are excluded from labor and related expenses (XLR_FN), we estimate them using industry-level

ratio of benefits to total compensation, from GPO data. Capital services cost is defined as real

capital stock, Ki,t, times industry j(i)’s rental price of capital. To estimate the last, we use the

BEA Fixed Reproducible Tangible Wealth (FRTW) data on the asset composition of each

industry each year to aggregate BLS asset-specific rental prices of capital, tax-adjusted as in BLS

(1997), using the Törnqvist method. Because DeAngelo and Roll (2011) report firm-level capital

structures to be highly unstable, and driven by multi-year financing cycles, we do not attempt to

adjust cost of capital for firm-level leverage. Firm i’s capital cost share, S K ,i , t , is one minus its

labor cost share. We follow the BLS’ method in smoothing S L,i ,t and S K ,i , t by averaging each

across the current and previous years.



2.2      Discussion on Other Measures of Technology Innovation

Despite the supreme importance of TFP growth in the growth theory literature, its use in finance

is nascent. Schoar (2002) and Maksimovic and Phillips (2002) compare TFP in diversified firms

versus conglomerates. İmrohoroğlu and Tűzel (2013) relate firm-level TFP to stock return.

Vassalou and Apedjinou (2004) and Lieberman and Kang (2008) show TFP variable to contain

information above and beyond that discern able from earnings. Chun, Kim, Morck, and Yeung

(2008) and Chun, Kim, and Morck (2011) link TFP variation to stock return volatility.

         Rather than using TFP as a measure of the economic profits associated with successful

innovation, finance research tends to employ measures of innovative activity such as patents
                                             8
(Blundell, Griffith, and van Reenen, 1999; Hsu, 2009; Bena and Garlappi, 2012; Kogan,

Papanikolaou, Seru, and Stoffman, 2012; Hirshleifer, Hsu, and Li, 2013) or R&D (Chan,

Lakonishok, and Sougiannis, 2001; Hsu, 2009; Lin, 2012; Hirshleifer, Hsu, and Li, 2013).

Unfortunately, in the present context, well-known ambiguities limit the validity of inferences

drawn from patent data (Nagaoka, Motohashi, and Goto, 2010). First, a patent signifies that the

firm believes it has intellectual property to protect, not that it has an economically successful

innovation.11 Second, recent work shows that some 50% of patents are strategic – designed as

tolls along rivals’ possible research paths, preemptive moves to avoid litigation or cross-

licensing, or defensive gambits to thwart rivals’ research efforts (Hall and Ziedonis, 2001;

Gambardella, Giuri, and Luzzi, 2007; Motohashi, 2008). Third, many economically important

innovations are not patented because the innovator prefers alternative intellectual property

defenses – secrecy, complex design, or speedy product development (Levin, Klevorick, Nelson,

and Winter, 1987; Cohen, Nelson, and Walsh, 2000). R&D is a direct measure of the cost of

inputs used in technological innovation, but also has limitations that render it problematic in this

context. First, we are interested in the consequences of a firm’s success as an innovator, not the

costs of successful and unsuccessful firms’ innovative activity. Second, R&D spending

disclosure is not mandatory unless the amounts are large, and is therefore a strategic decision – at

least for small spenders. Third, disclosed R&D spending is highly concentrated in a few

manufacturing sectors, such as computers and pharmaceuticals (Bloom, Schankerman, and van

Reenen, 2013). Fourth, R&D does not capture spending on non-scientific innovations in, for

example, the service sector. While these limitations are bridgeable in other contexts, we require a


11
  To overcome this issue, Kogan, Papanikolaou, Seru, and Stoffman (2012) calculate a quality adjusted patent
measure by incorporating stock market reaction of a firm when a patent is granted to the firm.

                                                     9
measure of the ex-post gains due to successful innovation of any kind.



2.3     Stock Returns

When public shareholders learn that a firm risks losing business to more innovative or productive

competitors (Tirole, 1988) – the phenomenon Gârleanu, Kogan, and Panageas (2012) dub

displacement risk – they bid down its share price. If successful adoption of new technology is

substantially a winner-take-all competition, the vast majority of stocks should exhibit elevated

displacement risk as technological progress accelerates, turning the relationship between

aggregate-level TFP growth and stock returns predominantly negative if the associated

productivity changes are at least partially unexpected by public shareholders at the beginning of

the period, but understood by them at the end of the period after the firm’s financial statements

are made public. Further, due to the forward looking nature of the stock market, stock price

change could be more dramatic than underlying fundamentals (Hobijn and Jovanovic, 2001;

Mazzucato, 2006).

        To construct stock returns, we begin with all stocks covered by the CRSP from 1970

through 2006 that have matching TFP growth rates. Following Kothari, Lewellen, and Warner

(2006) and Hirshleifer, Hou, and Teoh (2009), we calculate annual total returns using monthly

total returns from May of year t to April of year t + 1. This four-month lag mitigates problems

associated with delays in Compustat annual data. We wish our annual returns to include all

information released in the firm’s financial statements for year t. As in Kothari, Lewellen, and

Warner (2006) and Hirshleifer, Hou, and Teoh (2009), we drop all firms with fiscal year-ends

other than December to permit a clean correspondence of calendar year stock return data with

fiscal year accounting data.

                                               10
                                                        [Table 1 about here]



           Summary statistics are shown in Table 1. The aggregate variables are value-weighted

and equally-weighted averages of the firm-level variables. Value weighting is by prior year-end

market capitalizations. Table 1 only includes firms with non-missing data for TFP growth and

stock returns. The final sample consists of 42,032 firm-year observations from 1970 to 2006

encompassing all firms with December fiscal year-ends except those in the finance sector (SIC

6000–6999), whose financial data are not comparable. The value-weighted and equally-weighted

average firm-level stock returns are 12.5% and 17.4%, respectively. These closely approximate

the average returns of the value-weighted (12.6%) and equally-weighted (16.8%) CRSP market

indexes.



3.         Empirical Results

3.1        Firm-level Regressions

To explore the effect of technological innovation on realized stock returns, we estimate firm-

level regressions of the form



[2]        rˆi ,t  ri ,t  E[ri ,t ]  a i d i ,t  bi d m,t   i ,t



where rˆi ,t firm i’s realized abnormal stock return in year t, equals the firm’s observed total stock

return, ri ,t , minus its expected value, E[ri ,t ] estimated by CAPM or other factor models. TFP

                                                                     11
growth for individual firm i in year t and aggregate-level TFP growth are denoted d i ,t and

d m,t respectively, with the latter defined as the value-weighted average of the d i ,t . Our

objective is to measure the correlation between firm i’s abnormal stock return and changes in its

economic profits, which we decompose into two components: the change in its economic profits

associated with its own innovations, d i , t , and the change in its economic profits due to either

positive or negative (business stealing effect) spillovers associated with the pace of economy-

level innovation, as captured by bi d m,t .

         Because of the inclusion of d m,t in [2], the coefficient ai on d i ,t captures the effect

of firm i’s firm-specific productivity growth on its own value.12 The literature suggests that a i

should be positive. Chan, Martin, and Kensinger (1990) report significant positive stock price

reactions when firms announce increased R&D budgets. Pakes (1985), Hall (1993), and Blundell,

Griffith, and van Reenen (1999) find higher shareholder value in firms with higher R&D or

patents. İmrohoroğlu and Tűzel’s (2013) report a positive relationship between firms’ stock

returns and their contemporaneous TFP growth, which they interpret as exposure to a technology

risk factor in an asset pricing framework.

         The regression coefficient, bi, measures the relationship of firm i’s stock return to

aggregate TFP growth, above and beyond that to firm i’s own TFP growth. Thus we assume that

the effect of positive or negative spillovers on each firm’s value is proportional to the change in

aggregate economic profits, d m,t , but allow the ratio of proportionality to differ across firms.

12
   Including the lagged value of d m,t in [2] allows an AR(1) structure in the d m,t . This lets aggregate TFP
growth obey an AR(1) process as well. Given this, bi captures the explanatory power of “unexpected” aggregate
TFP growth on firm i’s stock market return. We omit the lagged value as a robustness check, and find the
distributional characteristics of bi to remain qualitatively similar to that described in the figures and tables.

                                                       12
The existing literature has ambiguous predictions about bi, the partial correlation of firm i’s stock

return with aggregate productivity growth. If positive spillovers predominate, firms’ bi should be

largely positive, implying that most firms’ stock market valuation rise as aggregate-level

productivity rises; but if negative spillovers predominate, the business stealing effect (Bena and

Garlappi 2012; Gârleanu, Kogan, and Panageas, 2012) suggests that most firms’ bi should be

negative.

         To operationalize [2], we estimate the following regression separately for each firm

using annual data windows of various lengths,



[3]       ri ,t  rf ,t  i  ai d i ,t  bi d m,t   i rm,t  rf ,t    i ,t .



In [3], firm i’s expected return component is rf ,t  i rm,t  rf ,t  , estimated using the CAPM with

rf , t the annualized one-month Treasury Bill return, rm,t the CRSP value-weighted annual

market return, and  i stock i’s estimated CAPM beta. 13 The intercept  i captures any

remaining unexplained component in the firm’s stock return.



                                                       [Table 2 about here]



         Table 2 summarizes the distributional characteristics of the estimated ai and bi thus

obtained. The first two columns describe coefficients from regressions using all available data

13
   Our results are robust to alternative specifications. For example, to avoid any look-ahead bias, we instead use
CAPM βis estimated from the prior year’s data to calculate the abnormal return in [2], and then run regressions of
that form. All the results remain qualitatively the same. Replicating this procedure using other asset pricing models
to calculate the abnormal return in [2] yields qualitatively similar results. See section 3.4 for details.

                                                                   13
for each of the 367 firms for which at least 20 observations exist over the sample period of 1970–

2006. Numbers in parentheses are the number of firms with statistically significant (10%)

coefficients. Using long-lived firms only allows more precise estimation of the coefficients in [3],

but eliminates firms founded after 1986 and thus obviously misses major innovative entrants

during the 1990s IT boom. We therefore rerun [3] for each firm using sequentially increasingly

inclusive sampling criteria and shorter estimation windows. The third and fourth columns use 30-

year rolling windows and firms having 20 or more observations; the third pair of columns uses

20-year rolling windows and firms having 10 or more observations; and the fourth pair of

columns uses 10-year rolling windows and firms with 5 observations or more.

         First, consider the leftmost two columns, which summarize the coefficients for firm-

level regression [3] for firms having at least 20 annual observations. Column 2A.1 of Panel A

reveals approximately 74% of the firm-level regression coefficients ai to be positive. About 27%

of the ai coefficients are statistically significant at 10%, and 87% of these are positive. Column

2B.1 of Panel B summarizes the analogous distributional characteristics for the firm-level

regression coefficients, bi, which gauge the correlation of each firm’s stock return with aggregate

TFP growth. Some 81% of firms attract negative bi coefficients. About 28% of the bi are

significant; and approximately 95% of these are negative. These results show that a firm’s own

stock return tends to correlate positively with its own innovation success, but negatively with the

aggregate innovative success of the economy.14

         The second three rows in each panel provide medians as well as equally-weighted and

value-weighted means of the estimated ai and bi regression coefficients. Again focusing on the

14
    Estimating regression for each firm and counting significant coefficients fails to account for cross-firm
correlations. An alternative approach, firm-level panel regressions assuming homogeneous ai and bi coefficients
across firms and clustering by time, while imposing a different and more restrictive set of assumptions, reproduces
the central findings reported in this section. See section 3.3 for details.

                                                        14
first pair of columns, the equally-weighted mean of the ai, is 0.575, and exceeds its value-

weighted analog, 0.201. The equally-weighted mean of the bi is -0.955, and likewise exceeds its

value-weighted analog of -0.437 in absolute value. These patterns in equally-weighted versus

value-weighted means suggest that smaller firms profit more from their own innovative

successes, but also suffer worse ill effects amid aggregate innovative success.

        Column 2C.1 of Panel C of Table 2 shows the bi and  i coefficients to be very

different too. About 85% of firm-level regressions attract positive  i coefficients, indicating

that firms’ stock returns typically correlate positively with market returns. This also confirms

that the market risk premium and aggregate TFP growth rate have different effects on stock

returns. About 27% of the  i are significant, and of these some 99% are positive. The equally-

weighted and value-weighted means of the  i are similar: 0.448 and 0.424, respectively. The

low means of the  i reflect Compustat’s more limited coverage of smaller firms and our

requirement that firms to have a certain number of years of data, depending on the estimation

window, removing younger firms from the sample. Panels C1 and C2, respectively, of Figure 1

show the distributions of all the  i coefficients and of those significant at 10% or better.

        The coefficients summarized in the first pair of columns arise from regressions using a

single long window from 1970 to 2006 for each firm and using only firms having least 20

observations. This presumes constant regression coefficients over time for each individual firm.

To let each firm’s ai and bi vary over time, we rerun [3] using alternative windows and inclusion

criteria. The other columns in Table 2 summarize regression coefficients estimated using 30-year

rolling windows with at least 20 observations, 20-year rolling windows with at least 10




                                                 15
observations, and 10-year rolling windows with at least 5 observations.15 Decreasing the size of

the estimation window, while increasing the number of firms we can use, decreases the number

of observations in each window used in estimating [3] for each firm, reducing the fraction of

coefficients attaining significance. Nonetheless, the basic pattern of predominantly positive ai

and predominantly negative bi persists throughout the table. For example, column 2B.2 of Panel

B, summarizing the bi coefficients for 30-year rolling windows with at least 20 observations,

shows approximately 80% of the bi coefficients negative. About 25% of these are flagged for

statistical significance and about 96% of these are negative. Column 2B.3 of Panel B, describing

coefficients estimated in 20-year rolling windows with at least 10 observations, shows

approximately 70% of the bi coefficients negative. About 15% of these are flagged for statistical

significance, and among these, some 88% are negative. Lastly, Column 2B.4 of Panel B

describes results from 10-year rolling windows with at least 5 observations. It shows

approximately 63% of the bi coefficients to be negative. About 11% of them are flagged as

statistically significant and about 74% of these are negative. Thus, the 10-year windows entirely

obviate statistical significance: 11% (3,076 of 28,664 coefficients) – essentially the expected 10%

incidence of Type II errors – are flagged for significance at 10%. However, Type II errors should

be 50%, not 74%, negative, leaving even these runs suggestive of negative spillovers.



                                            [Figure 1 about here]




15
   Rolling windows induce serial-correlation in firm’s estimated coefficients in addition to the cross-firm
correlations within windows (previous footnote). An alternative approach, panel regressions (section 3.3), is more
restrictive in assuming homogeneous ai and bi coefficients across firms and windows, but allows two dimensional
clustering (Thompson, 2011) to reflect both cross-firm and time-series non-independence. This exercise confirms
the findings in this section.

                                                       16
            Panels A and B of Figure 1 graph the distribution of the firm-level regression ai and bi

coefficients, respectively, estimated using 10-year rolling windows.16 Panels A1 and B1 include

all estimated coefficients, while Panels A2 and B2 include only coefficients that are significant at

10% or better. The distributions of the ai and bi differ starkly, and a significantly larger negative

mass in the bi distribution is apparent.

            If bi captures negative spillovers from aggregate productivity growth, the distribution

characteristics of the bi should vary over time as aggregate productivity growth accelerates and

slows. Schumpeter (1939) posits that, as a major innovation first spreads across the economy,

successful innovators far outpace each affected industry’s increasingly troubled incumbents; but

that once the innovation has propagated fully, and its best uses in each industry become apparent,

an increasingly homogeneous set of surviving firms should compete increasingly on price, rather

than new product or process development, causing profit rates should decline towards relatively

low and homogenous levels. This thesis suggests a period of widening performance gaps as a

new technology spreads followed by a period of narrowing performance gaps as it grows mature.

Chun, Kim, and Morck (2011) show firm-performance heterogeneity among U.S. firms

increasing until the end of the 20th century, but decreasing thereafter, and link this more precisely

to the observed patterns of IT propagation in different industries. Pástor and Veronesi (2009)

likewise interpret changing stock return volatility to conclude that the diffusion of IT was

essentially complete in the U.S. by about 2002. Kogan, Papanikolaou, Seru, and Stoffman (2012)

show that firms affected negatively by other firms’ patents in the short-run, generally eventually

benefit from them in the long-run – if they survive the initial negative shock. These

considerations suggest specific patterns of time-series variation in the distribution characteristics

16
     We obtain similar figures for other estimation windows as well.

                                                          17
of the bi, for which we can test.



                                         [Figure 2 about here]



         Panels A and B of Figure 2 summarize how distribution characteristics of the ai and bi

change over time by plotting their decile cutoffs over successive 10-year rolling windows, each

ending in the indicated year. The rightmost graphs in each panel plot differences between the

distributions’ 9th and 1st decile cutoffs.

         Panel A of Figure 2 shows that, consistent with Table 2, the positive masses of the ai

greatly outweigh their negative masses throughout. Moreover while their distributions narrow

somewhat in the 1990s, their medians remain positive throughout. In contrast, the distributional

characteristics of the bi change markedly with time. Panel B of Figure 2 shows that the median bi

remains negative, except in windows ending near the turn of the century, when the distribution of

significant coefficients (Panel B2) both shifts its median into the positive range and distends its

positive tail before reverting to its earlier form in later windows.

         Panels A3 and B3 of Figure 2 show the difference between 9th and 1st decile cutoffs of

the ai to be relatively stable throughout the sample period. Again, this contrasts starkly with the

distributions of the bi . Panel B3 of Figure 2 shows that the difference between 9th and 1st decile

cutoffs of the bi increasing until the end of the 20th century, and then decreasing. The

increasingly positive median of firm’s bi might reflect positive spillovers slowly overtaking

negative spillovers as the new IT ran its course; but might also reflect generally upward biased

stock returns as the 1990s dot.com bubble expanded. Regardless, most of the 1990s show

predominantly negative bi and the entire decade, even during the bubble period, exhibits a

                                                  18
widening performance gap between sharply divided winners and losers as IT-related innovation

peaked (Jovanovic and Rousseau, 2003, 2005).



                                                  [Figure 3 about here]



            Figure 3 reports the empirical probability functions of firms’ bi, averaged across 1980

through 2006, by industry. The complete distributions of the bi exhibit negative medians in 42 of

44 industries, and the distributions of the significant bi (not shown) are likewise negative in 38 of

43 industries.17 Figure 3 shows that the negative bi in Figure 2 are not concentrated within a few

industries, but are characteristic of firms spread across the economy as a whole. Repeating this

exercise, but separating manufacturing from non-manufacturing firms, yields similar time

patterns (not shown) revealing the pattern to be common across both broad sectors.

            The findings in this section are consistent with stock returns reflecting Schumpeter’s

(1912) creative destruction. The thick positive tail of the ai distribution reflects profits from firms’

own innovations boosting their own share prices. The thin positive tail of the bi distribution is

consistent with a few “winners” benefiting hugely from aggregate productivity growth, while the

thicker negative tail is consistent with most firms being left behind by technological progress.



3.2         Aggregate-level Regressions

To explore the relationship between the stock market return reacts and aggregate productivity

growth, we regress the stock market return on aggregate TFP growth,



17
     One sector lacks significant coefficients.

                                                           19
[4]       rm,t  a  bd m,t   m,t .



This specification follows from summing the regressions [2] across all firms, weighting each by

wi. 18 The coefficient b, which captures the linkage between the stock market return and

aggregate TFP growth, is simply the weighted average of the bi in [2]. Thus, if positive spillovers

outweigh negative spillovers across firms, the weighted average                                ∑               ; but if

negative spillovers – the business stealing effect predominates,                              . 19 Moreover, if the

distributional characteristic of the firm-level bi differs for different estimation windows, b can

vary through time, and even flip signs.

          Panel A in Table 3 summarizes these regressions of (aggregate) stock market returns,

rm,t , on aggregate TFP growth, d m,t , taking aggregates as means of firm-level stock returns and

TFP growth rates, respectively. The table displays regressions using value-weighted as well as

equally-weighted means. Firm-level stock returns are always measured from May of year t to

April of year t+1.



                                                [Table 3 about here]




18
     Summing both sides of [2], weighting by wi = firm i’s prior year-end market capitalization, yields ∑ ̂
            [    ] ∑                       ∑       . This leads to [4] only if       [   ] ∑                is a constant
within each sample period. This would follow if both [                 ] and ∑             were constant. Empirically,
   [     ] need not be constant (Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay, 1997) and ∑                  need not be zero – although
   [       ] is fairly close to zero (between 0.7% and 0.9% in Table 1). Nonetheless, if there is little time-variation in
∑           within estimation windows, [4] serves as a parsimonious specification. A comparison of point estimates,
shown below, reveals that               ∑       in corresponding estimation window, validating the assumption of a
constant in each window.
19
     If a few very large firms had bi > 0, a positive b might ensue despite most firms having bi < 0. However, equally-
weighted and value-weighted means of the bi exhibit similar behavior (see especially Figure 4 below).

                                                           20
         Regressions 3A.1 and 3A.2 show d m,t defined here as the value-weighted mean TFP

growth rate, attracting a significantly negative coefficient. Regression 3A.2 shows that including

lagged TFP growth as a control leaves this result qualitatively unchanged.20,            21
                                                                                              Regressions 3A.3

and 3A.4 repeat these exercises, but define d m,t as an equally-weighted mean TFP growth rate.

The point estimates for b remain negative and significant, and roughly double in magnitude.

Table 3 thus suggests that negative spillovers outweigh positive spillovers in the aggregate for

the firms in our sample.



                                            [Figure 4 about here]



         To explore the stability of b over time, Figure 4 plots estimates of the b coefficient from

[4] over successive ten-year rolling windows against the windows’ end-years. The figure also

plots the value-weighted and equally-weighted means of the firm-level coefficients bi from

regressions [3] estimated using the same rolling windows. These two series of means closely

follow the aggregate-level regression coefficients b, though the equally-weighted mean of the

firm-level bi coefficients is generally more negative than its value-weighted analog, especially

for windows ending after 2000. These patterns suggest that the time variation in b might be

associated with a varying preponderance of negative firm-level coefficients bi estimated using

different windows.



20
   Here and throughout, we define qualitatively unchanged to mean an identical patterns of signs and significance
and point estimates of roughly comparable magnitude.
21
   This specification lets aggregate TFP growth obey an AR(1) process, thereby letting b gauge the importance of
plausibly “unexpected” TFP growth in regressions explaining the stock market return.


                                                       21
3.3        Firm-Level Panel Regressions

The previous sections show that firm-level stock returns are generally positively associated with

firms’ own productivity growth, but generally negatively associated with aggregate TFP growth.

That is, in [3] the ai are generally positive and the bi are generally negative. Moreover, the

aggregate productivity growth coefficient b in [4] closely tracks the means of the firm-level

coefficients on aggregate productivity growth, bi, in [2], operationalized as [3]. These patterns

suggest the alternative specification of panel regressions of the form,



[5]        ri ,t  i i  ad i ,t  bd m,t   i ,t



with ri,t and dπi,t the stock return and TFP growth rate, respectively, of firm i in year t; and with

 i representing firm-fixed effects. Including aggregate TFP growth, dπm,t in the regression

precludes time-fixed effects.

           The advantage of the firm-by-firm regressions in the previous section is that each firm

has a distinct set of coefficients, ai and bi, for each firm and window,22 allowing an analysis of

their distributional characteristics. However, spillovers complicate assessment of the overall

significance of the coefficient ai and bi across many firms by inducing cross-firm correlations

within a given window and, as noted above, coefficients estimated using overlapping windows

may not be independent. The panel specification [5], though more restrictive in requiring the

firm-level coefficients in [3] to be identical across firms and across time (ai = a and bi = b for

22
     More precisely, we estimate        and      for each firm i and for each estimation window . For brevity,   is
     suppressed in our notation.

                                                           22
each i in the whole sample),23 permits clustering by year (to allow for cross-firm statistical

dependence) or by firm (to address persistence in data for each firm). These considerations both

weigh against finding statistical significance in [5]. Standard errors with firm clustering are

smaller, thus generating higher t-statistics, than those with year clustering, a typical characteristic

of asset pricing data (Petersen, 2009). Clustering by firm or by firm and year simultaneously

(Thompson, 2011) generates significance levels for a and b virtually identical to those obtained

from clustering by year only. Thus, we evaluate the statistical significance of our estimated

coefficients using year clustering.

         Panel B of Table 3 presents these results. Regression 3B.1 shows a firm’s stock return

significantly positively correlated with its own firm-level TFP growth, but significantly

negatively correlated with value-weighted aggregate TFP growth. Regression 3B.2 shows these

results unaffected by including lagged value-weighted aggregate TFP growth as a control.

Regressions 3B.3 and 3B.4 repeat these specifications, but use equally-weighted aggregate TFP

growth and, in 3B.4, its lagged value, along with firm-level TFP growth. Firm-level TFP growth

again attracts a significant positive coefficient, and equally-weighted aggregate TFP growth

again attracts a negative coefficient.



3.4      Robustness Checks

The results in the tables and figures survive a battery of robustness tests. In all cases,

qualitatively similar results means identical patterns of signs and significance to those in the

tables and point estimates of roughly comparable magnitudes. Details are provided wherever this

23
   Kogan, Papanikolaou, Seru, and Stoffman (2012) run similar firm-level panel regressions to examine the business
stealing effect. Their aggregate innovation measure, an economic importance-weighted average of other firms’
patents, attracts a significant negative coefficient, also consistent with the business stealing effect.

                                                       23
is not true.

         The regressions in the tables utilize simple CAPM estimates of each stock’s return each

period. We repeat all these regressions using each of the following alternative specifications,



[6A]     ri ,t   i   i rm,t  r f ,t   ai d i,t  bi d m,t   i ,t

[6B]     ri ,t  ri  ai d i ,t  bi d m,t   i ,t

                                                              3

[6C]     ri ,t  r f ,t   i  ai d i ,t  bi d m,t   i , f f f   i ,t
                                                             f 1



[6D]     ri ,t  r f ,t   i   i rm,t  r f ,t   ai d i ,t  bi d m,t  ci d j (i ),t   i ,t .



Specification [6A] uses Black’s (1972) zero-beta model in lieu of the CAPM; [6B] employs a

naïve specification in which each firm’s expected stock return is assumed constant; and [6C]

uses the Fama-French (1993) three-factor model. [6D] includes the industry-level TFP variable,

d j (i ),t , the value-weighted average of the TFP growth rates of all firms in j(i), the industry firm i

belongs. An intermediate level of aggregation, industry-level data, might be of interest for

several reasons. This remove any potential impact industry-level TFP growth might have on the

coefficients of own firm-level TFP growth, ai, and aggregate TFP growth, bi .



                                                      [Table 4 about here]



         Table 4 shows the distributional characteristics of the estimated response coefficients

based on alternative specifications described above. Qualitatively similar results to those in

                                                                    24
Table 2 ensue in all cases. For [6D], the ci , like the bi , have distributional characteristics

consistent with winner-take-all competition. Roughly 56% of firms attract a negative c i

coefficient, whereas about 60% attract negative bi coefficients in this specification. However,

the greater incidence of positive c i than bi coefficients is also suggestive of relatively more

positive spillovers within than between industries – perhaps because firms in an industry use

more closely related technologies (Jaffe, 1986; Bloom, Schankerman, and van Reenen, 2013).

        We generally aggregate firm-level response variables weighting by market capitalization.

Using equal weighting generates qualitatively similar results. Weighting by assets or sales, rather

than market capitalization also generates results qualitatively similar to those shown.

        We drop observations for all firms with fiscal years ending in months other than

December throughout so that the stock returns and accounting data, from which we construct

TFP growth rates, match precisely. If we include all firms irrespective their fiscal years ending,

for example, the number of firms (firm-year observations) increased from 4,672 (42,032) to

9,389 (87,106) in the sample period. Rerunning our tests using all available data, yields

qualitatively similar results.

        Finally, we consider alternative methods of calculating TFP. Basu and Kimball (1997)

and Syverson (2004) modify the standard TFP calculation to account for firms not fully

deploying their capital assets during business cycle downturns. This approach assumes materials

and capital-in-production to be imperfect substitutes. Hall (1988) proposes a second alternative

TFP calculation using revenue (rather than cost) shares. This approach imposes constant returns

to scale. Both alternative TFP measures generate results qualitatively similar to those in the

figures and tables.


                                                25
4.        Alternative Explanations

The results above expose a fallacy of composition. A firm’s stock return is positively correlated

with its firm-level TFP growth rate; but the stock market return is negatively correlated with

aggregate-level TFP growth. The next subsection considers creative destruction as a potential

explanation. The subsequent subsections reconsider alternative proposed explanations of the

negative aggregate-level relationship between stock returns and measures of aggregate corporate

sector profitability. These explanations differ in that they focus directly on the relationship

between aggregate-level variables, rather than firm-level reactions to aggregate productivity

growth.



4.1       The Aggregation of Creative Destruction

This seeming inconsistency arises because a firm’s stock return is affected not just by its own

innovation, but also by the innovative activity of other firms. Rival firms’ success with

productivity-enhancing innovations is bad news, not good news, for any individual firm.

          The puzzle is that a firm’s TFP growth elevates its stock price because higher

productivity means changed production function parameters that let the firm produce more

valuable outputs from the same inputs (product innovation) or the same outputs from less costly

inputs (process innovation), or some mixture of the two. Regardless of the details, an increase in

aggregate TFP growth likewise lets the economy produce more with less, and this, virtually by

definition, is a Pareto improvement that should create value overall. Negative bi might

predominate in firm-level regressions [3], but the contribution of the winners to the overall

economy should eclipse the losses suffered by the losers.

          Reconciling this reasoning with our findings requires returning to the discussion of
                                               26
“winner-take-all” competition. This form of competition bestows huge rewards on a handful of

creative winner firms, but wreaks devastation upon vastly more loser firms. This devastation can

take several forms.24 First, shareholders foresee loser firms’ future cash flows falling as the

business stealing effect of innovation takes hold (Tirole, 1988). Second, shareholders foresee

decreases in the values of loser firms’ existing physical capital, production routines, and

managerial talent – all of which were designed for older technology (Hobijn and Jovanovic, 2001;

Gârleanu, Kogan, and Panageas, 2012; Gârleanu, Panageas, and Yu, 2012; Kogan and

Papanikolaou; 2012a, 2012b). Third, both of the above effects can increases loser firms’

financial and/or operating leverage, which would further erode share values if shareholders

foresee substantial bankruptcy costs. Fourth, a successfully innovative firm’s profits need not all

accrue to its public shareholders if its creative insiders pay themselves an entrepreneurial rent

(e.g. patent royalties). All four considerations, given the forward looking nature of share prices,

permit immediate price drops in technology loser firms’ stocks to appear disproportionately large

relative to their immediate productivity drops. Regardless of the mechanism, some part of the

Pareto gains from aggregate TFP growth can readily accrue to people other than the winner firms’

public shareholders at the time its TFP growth is observed.



4.2      Time-varying Discount Rates

Kothari, Lewellen, and Warner (2006) note that stock prices are the expected present discounted

values of future corporate disbursements, and argue that it investors’ discount rates rise

sufficiently whenever aggregate corporate earnings rise, the net effect might be lower stock

24
   See Hobijn and Jovanovic (2001), Jovanovic and Rousseau (2003), Laitner and Stolyarov (2003), Rajan and
Zingales (2003, 2004), Gârleanu, Kogan, and Panageas (2012), Gârleanu, Panageas, and Yu (2012), and Kogan and
Papanikolaou (2012a, 2012b).

                                                     27
market valuations. This thesis requires that investors have not just time-varying risk premiums

(Fama, 1991; Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay, 1997), but that they discount future risky cash

flows more steeply in good times than in bad times. To test their thesis, Kothari, Lewellen, and

Warner (2006) construct several discount rate proxies: the 30-day T-bill rate, the difference

between ten-year and one-year constant maturity treasury rates, and the difference between

Moody’s Baa and Aaa yields. Because the stock market return correlates negatively with

aggregate earnings throughout their sample window, their thesis predicts positive correlations

between their discount rate proxies and aggregate earnings. Their results are inconclusive:

aggregate earnings growth correlates significantly positively with the T-bill rate, insignificantly

with the term structure variable, and significantly negatively with the bond risk premium variable.

Hirshleifer, Hou, and Teoh (2009) conduct a similar analysis and arrive at similarly inconclusive

results. Also, although the relationship between the stock market return and aggregate earnings

growth is negative during their sample period, the relationship turns positive in part of our longer

sample window.

        Kothari, Lewellen, and Warner (2006) and Hirshleifer, Hou, and Teoh (2009) suggest a

no mechanism whereby investors might increase their discount rates when aggregate earnings

rise. If creative destruction underlies the negative relationship between the stock market return

and aggregate earnings, such a mechanism appears. Suppose average firm earnings grow while

the performance gap between winner and loser firms’ earnings widens. As noted above, loser

firms stock prices might fall because of a business stealing effect (their earnings fall as they lose

business to more innovative firms) or a displacement risk effect (shareholders discount the value

of their capital more heavily), or both. If displacement risk is a systematic risk factor

disproportionately affecting loser firms’ stocks, intensified creative destruction could

                                                 28
disproportionately elevate the discount rates investors use to value loser firms. Thus, our creative

destruction explanation may be an elaboration of the discount rate thesis of Kothari, Lewellen,

and Warner (2006) and Hirshleifer, Hou, and Teoh (2009), not a rival explanation. If most listed

firms are losers in races to adopt new technology, innovation might raise discount rates in

general, as those papers posit. If the pace of innovation picks up and falls off again, the

displacement risk factor might wax and wane as well, explaining the sign flip we observe.



4.3     Other Explanations

Hirschleifer, Hou, and Teoh (2009) decompose earnings into cash flow and accrual’s

components, and show that the contemporaneous negative relationship between earnings growth

and stock returns is driven by accrual rather than cash flow component. We replicate their

findings using their sample period, but not outside it. One possibility is that regulatory reforms

around the turn of the 21st century altered the practice of accruals management in ways that

somehow reversed the negative relationship between stock market returns and aggregate

earnings, at least for a time. The details of such an explanation are not immediately obvious, but

their hypothesis cannot be rejected out of hand.

        Sadka and Sadka (2009) posit that investors foresee aggregate earnings growth more

clearly than firm-level earnings growth. If so, firm-level earnings would convey new information

and contemporaneously affect stock returns; but aggregate earnings, largely known in advance,

would not. Invoking Campbell’s (1991) return decomposition, they derive a negative aggregate-

level relationship between expected earnings growth and the expected stock market return .This

requires that investors demand a lower risk premium whenever they expect positive earnings

growth (Chen, 1991) and Sadka and Sadka (2009) present empirical results supporting this. This

                                                   29
hypothesis too may also correct; but is not obviously a complete explanation. Here too, time

variation in the contemporaneous relationship between aggregate profits and stock market

returns, evident in Figure 4, would appear to require a more complicated model.

        We suggest that Okham’s razor favors a time-varying negative spillover effect as the

simplest explanation of not just the fallacy of composition, but also its changing characteristics

over time. Nonetheless, we welcome further research into the importance of earnings

management and the differential predictability of aggregate versus firm-level fundamentals.



5.      Conclusions

High aggregate productivity growth appears to be bad news for many firms. While some firms’

shares do rise with aggregate TFP growth; those of most firms drop. This predominance of

negative relationships leads to several major conclusions.

        First, the result supports Schumpeter’s (1912) concept of creative destruction driving

aggregate productivity growth and validates formal models of that process (Tirole, 1988;

Gârleanu, Kogan, and Panageas, 2012). These findings also reinforce work by Bena and

Garlappi (2012) and Kogan, Papanikolaou, Seru, and Stoffman (2012), showing a very few firms

to be responsible for most innovation, as measured by patents in the U.S.

        Second, this lopsided and predominantly negative distribution of firm-level associations

with aggregate productivity growth explains a fallacy of composition: firms’ stock returns

correlate positively with their own TFP growth rates, but the stock market as a whole correlates

negatively with aggregate TFP growth. This seeming contradiction reflects a preponderance of

listed firms’ stock returns correlating negatively with aggregate productivity growth, and

summing up to generate a negative aggregate correlation. This fallacy of composition may

                                               30
explain, partially at least, the seemingly discordant findings of Kothari, Lewellen, and Warner

(2006), Hirshleifer, Hou, and Teoh (2009), and Sadka and Sadka (2009) that stock returns and

earnings growth correlate positively at the firm level, but negatively at the aggregate level. This

parallelism is unsurprising because TFP and earnings are both proxies for profits.

           Third, this reconciliation highlights firm-level inequality as regards the benefits of

technological change. Taken at face value, the empirical findings suggest a predominantly

negative effect of aggregate productivity growth on the portfolio wealth of highly diversified

public shareholders. This may reflect public shareholders being precluded from diversifying into

early-stage start-ups and even experience significant wealth loss as economy-wide innovations

unfold if asset prices are set by marginal investors who do have access to the full spectrum of

diversification possibilities. Our estimation techniques require that we exclude very young firms

from the analysis that leads to this conclusion, so if these firms provided very high returns,

public shareholders might share more fully in the fruits of technological progress. However,

Ritter (1998) finds strongly negative post-initial public offering performance for younger firms,

suggesting that holding the excluded stock would leave public shareholders with even lower

returns.




                                                31
References

Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt, “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction,”
   Econometrica, 60(2), 1992, 323–351.
Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt, Endogenous Growth Theory, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
   1997.
Aghion, Philippe, Christopher Harris, Peter Howitt, and John Vickers, “Competition, Imitation
   and Growth with Step-by-step Innovation,” Review of Economic Studies, 68(3), 2001, 467–
   492.
Arthur, W. Brian, “Positive Feedback in the Economy,” Scientific American, 262(2), 1990, 92–
   99.
Basu, Susanto, and Miles S. Kimball, “Cyclical Productivity with Unobserved Input Variation,”
   NBER Working Paper No. 5915, 1997.
Basu, Susanto, and John G. Fernald, “Returns to Scale in U.S. Production: Estimates and
   Implications,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(2), 1997, 249–283.
Bena, Jan, and Lorenzo Garlappi, “Corporate Innovation and Returns,” University of British
   Columbia Working Paper, 2012.
Bernstein, Jeffrey I., and M. Ishaq Nadiri, “Research and Development and Intra-industry
   Spillovers: An Empirical Application of Dynamic Duality,” Review of Economic Studies,
   56(2), 1989, 249–267.
Black, Fischer, “Capital Market Equilibrium with Restricted Borrowing,” Journal of Business,
   45(3), 1972, 444–455.
Bloom, Nicholas, Mark Schankerman, and John van Reenen, “Identifying Technology Spillovers
   and Product Market Rivalry,” Econometrica, 81(4), 2013, 1347–1393.
Blundell, Richard, Rachel Griffith, and John van Reenen, “Market Share, Market Value and
   Innovation in a Panel of British Manufacturing Firms,” Review of Economic Studies, 66(3),
   1999, 529–554.
Bresnahan, Timothy F, and Manuel Trajtenberg, “General Purpose Technologies ‘Engines of
   Growth’?” Journal of Econometrics, 65(1), 1995, 83–108.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, BLS Handbook of Methods, Washington, DC: Bureau of Labor
   Statistics, 1997.
Campbell, John Y., “A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns,” Economic Journal,
   101(405), 1991, 157–179.
Campbell, John Y., Andrew W. Lo, and Craig MacKinlay, The Econometrics of Financial
   Markets, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997.
Chan, Louis K. C., Josef Lakonishok, and Theodore Sougiannis, “The Stock Market Valuation of
   Research and Development Expenditures,” Journal of Finance, 56(6), 2001, 2431–2456.
Chan, Su Han, John D. Martin, and John W. Kensinger, “Corporate Research and Development
   Expenditures and Share Value,” Journal of Financial Economics, 26(2), 1990, 255–276.
                                             32
Chen, Nai-Fu, “Financial Investment Opportunities and the Macroeconomy,” Journal of Finance,
   46(2), 1991, 529–554.
Chun, Hyunbae, Jung-Wook Kim, and Randall Morck, “Varying Heterogeneity among U.S.
   Firms: Facts and Implications,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(3), 2011, 1034–1052.
Chun, Hyunbae, Jung-Wook Kim, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung, “Creative Destruction
   and Firm-specific Performance Heterogeneity,” Journal of Financial Economics, 89(1), 2008,
   109–135.
Cohen, Wesley M., Richard R. Nelson, and John P. Walsh, “Protecting Their Intellectual Assets:
   Appropriability Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or Not),” NBER
   Working Paper No. 7552, 2000.
Cook, Philip, and Robert Frank, The Winner-Take-All Society: Why the Few at the Top Get So
   Much More Than the Rest of Us, New York: Penguin, 1996.
Dasgupta, Partha, and Eric Maskin, “The Simple Economics of Research Portfolios,” Economic
   Journal, 97(387), 1987, 581–595.
David, Paul A., “The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the Modern
   Productivity Paradox,” American Economic Review, 80(2), 1990, 355–361.
Davis, Steve J., and John Haltiwanger, “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and
   Employment Reallocation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(3), 1992, 819–863.
DeAngelo, Harry, and Richard Roll, “How Stable are Corporate Capital Structures?” Available
  at SSRN 1784204, 2011,
Fama, Eugene, “Efficient Capital Markets: II,” Journal of Finance, 46(5), 1991, 1575–1617.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and
   Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics, 33(1), 1993, 3–56.
Fogel, Kathy, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung, “Big Business Stability and Economic
   Growth: Is What’s Good for General Motors Good for America?” Journal of Financial
   Economics, 89(1), 2008, 83–108.
Gambardella, Alfonso, Paola Giuri, and Alessandra Luzzi, “The Market for Patents in Europe,”
  Research Policy, 36(8), 2007, 1163–1183.
Gârleanu, Nicolae, Leonid Kogan, and Stavros Panageas, “Displacement Risk and Asset Returns,”
   Journal of Financial Economics, 105(3), 2012, 491–510.
Gârleanu, Nicolae, Stavros Panageas, and Jianfeng Yu, “Technological Growth and Asset
   Pricing,” Journal of Finance, 67(4), 2012, 1265–1292.
Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner, “The Really Long-run Performance of Initial Public Offerings:
  The Pre-NASDAQ Evidence,” Journal of Finance, 58(4), 2003, 1355–1392.
Gompers, Paul, Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein, “Venture Capital Investment
  Cycles: The Impact of Public Markets,” Journal of Financial Economics, 87(1), 2008, 1–23.
Greenwood, Jeremy, and Boyan Jovanovic, “The IT Revolution and the Stock Market,”
   American Economic Review, 89(2), 1999, 116–122.

                                              33
Griliches, Zvi, “The Search for R&D Spillovers,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 94(S),
    1992, S29–S47.
Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy,
   Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.
Hall, Bronwyn H., “The Stock Market’s Valuation of R&D Investment During the 1980’s,”
   American Economic Review, 83(2), 1993, 259–264.
Hall, Bronwyn H., and Rosemarie H. Ziedonis, “The Determinants of Patenting in the U.S.
   Semiconductor Industry, 1980–1994,” Rand Journal of Economics, 32(1), 2001, 101–128.
Hall, Robert E., “The Relationship between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry,” Journal
   of Political Economy, 96(5), 1988, 921–947.
Helpman, Elhanan, and Manuel Trajtenberg, “A Time to Sow and a Time to Reap: Growth
   Based on General Purpose Technologies,” in Elhanan Helpman (Ed.), General Purpose
   Technologies and Economic Growth, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998a, 55–83.
Helpman, Elhanan, and Manuel Trajtenberg, “The Diffusion of General Purpose Technologies,”
   in Elhanan Helpman (Ed.), General Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth,
   Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998b, 85–119.
Hirshleifer, David, Kewei Hou, and Siew Hong Teoh, “Accruals, Cash Flows, and Aggregate
   Stock Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 91(3), 2009, 389–406.
Hirshleifer, David, Po-Hsuan Hsu, and Dongmei Li, “Innovative Efficiency and Stock Returns,”
   Journal of Financial Economics, 107(3), 2013, 632–654.
Hobijn, Bart, and Boyan Jovanovic, “The Information-Technology Revolution and the Stock
   Market: Evidence,” American Economic Review, 91(5), 2001, 1203–1220.
Hsu, Po-Hsuan, “Technological Innovation and Aggregate Risk Premiums,” Journal of
   Financial Economics, 94(2), 2009, 264–279.
İmrohoroğlu¸ Ayşe, and Şelale Tűzel, “Firm Level Productivity, Risk, and Return,” Forthcoming
   in Management Science, 2013.
Jaffe, Adam, “Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms, Patents,
    Profits and Market Value,” American Economic Review, 76(5), 1986, 984–1001.
Jovanovic, Boyan, and Glenn M. MacDonald, “The Life Cycle of a Competitive Industry,”
   Journal of Political Economy, 102(2), 1994, 322–347.
Jovanovic, Boyan, and Peter L. Rousseau, “Two Technological Revolutions” Journal of the
   European Economic Association, 1(2–3), 2003, 419–428.
Jovanovic, Boyan, and Peter L. Rousseau, “General Purpose Technologies,” in Philippe Aghion
   and Steven Durlauf (Eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth, Amsterdam, The Netherlands:
   Elsevier, 2005, 1181–1224.
King, Robert G., and Ross Levine, “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(3), 1993, 717–737.
Kogan, Leonid, and Dimitris Papanikolaou, “Growth Opportunities, Technology Shocks, and
   Asset Prices,” Forthcoming in Journal of Finance, 2012a.
                                              34
Kogan, Leonid, and Dimitris Papanikolaou, “Firm Characteristics and Stock Returns: The Role
   of Investment-specific Shocks,” Forthcoming in Review of Financial Studies, 2012b.
Kogan, Leonid, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Amit Seru, and Noah Stoffman, “Technological
   Innovation, Resource Allocation, and Growth,” NBER Working Paper No. 17769, 2012
Kothari, S.P., Jonathan Lewellen, and Jerold B. Warner, “Stock Returns, Aggregate Earnings
   Surprises, and Behavioral Finance,” Journal of Financial Economics, 79(3), 2006, 537–568.
Laitner, John, and Dimitriy Stolyarov, “Technological Change and the Stock Market,” American
    Economic Review, 93(4), 2003, 1240–1267.
Lerner, Josh, “An Empirical Exploration of a Technology Race,” Rand Journal of Economics,
   28(2), 1997, 228–247.
Levin, Richard C., Alvin K. Klevorick, Richard R. Nelson, and Sidney G. Winter,
   “Appropriating the Returns from Industrial Research and Development,” Brookings Papers
   on Economic Activity: Special Issue on Microeconomics, 3, 1987, 783–831.
Lieberman, Marvin B., and Jina Kang, “How to Measure Company Productivity using Value-
   added: A Focus on Pohang Steel (POSCO),” Asia Pacific Journal of Management, 25(2),
   2008, 209–224.
Lin, Xiaoji, “Endogenous Technological Progress and the Cross-section of Stock Returns,”
   Journal of Financial Economics, 103(2), 2012, 411–427.
Maksimovic, V., and Phillips, G, “Do Conglomerate Firms Allocate Resources Inefficiently?
  Evidence from Plant-level Data,” Journal of Finance, 57(2), 2002, 721–767.
Mazzucato, Mariana, “Innovation and Stock Prices,” Revue de L'Observatoire Français de
  Conjonctures Economiques, Special Issue on Industrial Dynamics, Productivity and Growth,
  2006.
Megna, Pamela, and Mark Klock, “The Impact of Intangible Capital on Tobin’s q in the
  Semiconductor Industry,” American Economic Review, 83(2), 1993, 265–269.
Merton, Robert K., “The Matthew Effect in Science,” Science, 159(3810), 1968, 56–63.
Motohashi, Kazuyuki, “Licensing or Not Licensing? An Empirical Analysis of the Strategic Use
  of Patents by Japanese Firms,” Research Policy, 37(9), 2008, 1548–1555.
Nagaoka, Sadao, Kazuyuki Motohashi, Akira Goto, “Patent Statistics as an Innovation Indicator,”
   in Bronwyn H. Hall and Nathan Rosenberg (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation,
   Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 2010, 1083–1127.
Pakes, Ariel, “On Patents, R&D, and the Stock Market Rate of Return,” Journal of Political
   Economy, 93(2), 1985, 390–409.
Pástor, Luboš, and Pietro Veronesi, “Technological Revolutions and Stock Prices,” American
   Economic Review, 99(4), 2009, 1451–1483.
Petersen, Mitchell A., “Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets: Comparing
   Approaches,” Review of Financial Studies, 22(1), 2009, 435–480.


                                             35
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales, “The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial
   Development in the Twentieth Century,” Journal of Financial Economics, 69(1), 2003, 5–50.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales, Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists: Unleashing the
   Power of Financial Markets to Create Wealth and Spread Opportunity, Princeton, NJ:
   Princeton University Press, 2004.
Ritter, Jay, and Ivo Welch, “A Review of IPO Activity, Pricing, and Allocations,” Journal of
    Finance, 57(4), 2002, 1795–1828.
Ritter, Jay, “Initial Public Offerings,” Contemporaneous Finance Digest, 2(1), 1998, 5–30.
Ritter, Jay, “Is Economic Growth Good for Investors?” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance,
    24(3), 2012, 8–18.
Romer, Paul M., “Increasing Returns and Long-run Growth,” Journal of Political Economy,
  94(5), 1986, 1002–1037.
Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy, 98(5),
  1990, S71–S102.
Ruttan, Vernon W., Technology, Growth, and Development, New York: Oxford University Press,
   2001.
Sadka, Gil, and Ronnie Sadka, “Predictability and the Earnings-returns Relation,” Journal of
   Financial Economics, 94(1), 2009, 87–106.
Schoar, Antoinette, “Effects of Corporate Diversification on Productivity,” Journal of Finance,
   57(6), 2002, 2379–2403.
Schumpeter, Joseph, Theorie der wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung, Leipzig: Dunker und Humbolt,
   1912 (Translation by Redvers Opie, The Theory of Economic Development, Cambridge, MA:
   Harvard University Press, 1934).
Schumpeter, Joseph, Business Cycles: A Theoretical, Historical and Statistical Analysis of the
   Capitalist Process, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1939.
Stephan, Paula, “The Economics of Science,” Journal of Economic Literature, 34(3), 1996,
   1199–1235.
Syverson, Chad, “Product Substitutability and Productivity Dispersion,” Review of Economics
   and Statistics, 86(2), 2004, 534–550.
Thompson, Samuel B., “Simple Formulas for Standard Errors that Cluster by both Firm and
   Time,” Journal of Financial Economics, 99(1), 2011, 1–10.
Tirole, Jean, The Theory of Industrial Organization, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988.
Vassalou, Maria, and Kodjo Apedjinou, “Corporate Innovation, Price Momentum, and Equity
   Returns,” Columbia University Working Paper, 2004.




                                              36
          Figure 1. Distributions of Firms' Stock Return Responses to Own and Aggregate TFP
          Growth

          Panel A1. Firm-level TFP: All Firms                                  Panel A2. Firm-level TFP: Significant at 10%
            .4




                                                                               .4
            .3




                                                                               .3
Density




                                                                     Density
            .2




                                                                               .2
            .1




                                                                               .1
             0




                                                                                0
                 -10    -5             0          5            10   15              -10   -5             0          5            10   15
                                            a                                                                 a



          Panel B1. Aggregate TFP: All Firms                                   Panel B2. Aggregate TFP: Significant at 10%
            .2




                                                                               .2
Density




                                                                     Density
            .1




                                                                               .1
             0




                                                                                0




                 -20         -10            0             10        20              -20        -10            0             10        20
                                            b                                                                 b



          Panel C1. CAPM Beta: All Firms                                       Panel C2. CAPM Beta: Significant at 10%
            .5




                                                                               .5
            .4




                                                                               .4
            .3




                                                                               .3
Density




                                                                     Density
            .2




                                                                               .2
            .1




                                                                               .1
             0




                                                                                0




                 -5                0                  5             10              -5               0                  5             10
                                           beta                                                              beta




          Notes: Figures omit top and bottom 1% of estimated coefficients.




                                                                               37
Figure 2. Dispersion in Firm-level Stock Return Responses to Own and Aggregate TFP Growth
              Panel A1. Firm-level TFP:                         Panel A2. Firm-level TFP:                        Panel A3. Firm-level TFP:
              All Firms                                         Significant at 10%                               90 percentile minus 10 percentile
7.5                                                15                                                 7                                                                12



                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                                                                       10
5.0                                                10

                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                                                       8
2.5                                                 5
                                                                                                      4

                                                                                                                                                                       6

                                                                                                      3
0.0                                                 0

                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                   All firms (left axis)
-2.5                                                -5
                                                                                                                                   Significant at 10% (right axis)     2
                                                                                                      1



-5.0                                               -10                                                0                                                                0
       1980    1985   1990   1995   2000   2005          1980     1985   1990   1995   2000   2005        1980       1985   1990      1995           2000       2005

              Panel B1. Aggregate TFP:                          Panel B2. Aggregate TFP:                         Panel B3. Aggregate TFP:
              All Firms                                         Significant at 10%                               90 percentile minus 10 percentile
15                                                 30                                                 16                                                               30


                                                                                                      14
                                                                                                                                                                       25
10                                                 20
                                                                                                      12

                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                      10
  5                                                10


                                                                                                          8                                                            15

  0                                                 0
                                                                                                          6
                                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                    All firms (left axis)
                                                                                                          4
 -5                                                -10                                                                              Significant at 10% (right axis)
                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                          2


-10                                                -20                                                    0                                                            0
       1980   1985    1990   1995   2000   2005          1980     1985   1990   1995   2000   2005            1980   1985   1990      1995           2000       2005

Notes: Figures show decile cutoffs of firm-level stock return response to aggregate TFP growth. In Panels A1, A2, B1, and B2, the three black lines, from the
                    th  th                   th
bottom up,,track 10 , 50 (median) and 90 percentiles, respectively, by the end-year of each 10-year estimation window. Gray lines represent intermediate
deciles. Panels A1 and B1 include all firms and Panels A2 and B2 include only firms with coefficients significant at 10%.
                                                                                 38
Figure 3. Fraction of Firms with Negative Stock Return Response to Value-Weighted
Aggregate TFP Growth, Means over 1980–2006 by Industry

                           Textile
                         Railroad
                           Paper
     Transportation equipment
            Stone, clay, & glass
                 Motion pictures
                           Retails
              Rubber & plastics
              Personal services
          Transportation by air
            Furniture & fixtures
                      Chemicals
           Printing & publishing
                  Primary metal
                        Trucking
  Miscellaneous manufacturing
                Lumber & wood
                   Metal mining
          Nonmetallic minerals
                          Apparel
          Educational services
                          Leather
                    Coal mining
                    Construction
                     Instruments
              Business services
                            Food
                      Electronics
              Tobacco products
               Fabricated metal
                      Telephone
           Industrial machinery
          Engineering services
                 Health services
                     Wholesales
       Transportation services
                  Radio and TV
      Electric and gas services
          Amusement services
                   Oil extraction
           Water transportation
                           Hotels
                           Farms
                       Petroleum
                                     0        0.25                0.5               0.75                1
Notes: Each bar indicates the proportion of firms with negative beta averaged over the sample period of 1980–2006.
The sample includes all industries with 3 or more firms in 1980–2006.




                                                        39
Figure 4. Aggregate-level versus Mean Firm-level Stock Return Responses to Aggregate
TFP Growth in Rolling Ten-year Windows Ending in the Year Indicated

        3



                   Aggregate response
        2
                   Value-weighted average of firm-level responses

                   Equally-weighted average of firm-level responses
        1




        0




       -1




       -2




       -3
            1980           1985              1990               1995         2000             2005


Notes: A black line is aggregate response coefficients obtained from [4] over 10-year rolling windows. Gray and
dotted lines are value-weighted and equally-weighted averages of firm-level responses, respectively, obtained from
firm-level regressions in [3] that are estimated over 10-year windows for each firm.




                                                          40
Table 1. Summary Statistics, 1970–2006
Panel A. Aggregate Level
                          Mean            Stdev           Min       Q1         Median            Q3           Max

Value weights

 Stock return             0.125           0.148         -0.153     0.043        0.117           0.222         0.426

 TFP growth               0.008           0.067         -0.138    -0.042        0.014           0.046         0.110

Equal weights

 Stock return             0.174           0.222         -0.212     0.018        0.147           0.276         0.766

 TFP growth               0.009           0.046         -0.105    -0.003        0.011           0.039         0.091




Panel B. Firm Level
                        Value weights             Equal weights

                      Mean        Stdev       Mean        Stdev    Min        Q1        Median          Q3     Max

 Stock return         0.119       0.313       0.179       0.573   -0.978    -0.139      0.091         0.367    6.844

 TFP growth           0.007       0.191       0.009       0.289   -6.216    -0.062      0.020         0.097    2.959

Notes: The sample sizes in Panels A and B are 37 and 42,032, respectively. Previous-year-end market capitalization
is used as weights for both stock returns and TFP growth. The sample excludes firms with fiscal year-ends other than
December and finance sector (SIC 6000–6999) firms.




                                                           41
Table 2. Characteristics of Coefficients on Firm-level TFP Growth, Aggregate-level TFP
Growth, and the Market Return in Firm-level Regressions Explaining Firm-level Stock
Return
Panel A. Coefficients on Firm’s Own TFP Growth (ai)
                              2A.1                   2A.2                     2A.3                  2A.4
Number of firms
 Negative                    94         (13)        678          (85)      3,337      (333)      9,899       (858)
 Positive                   273         (87)       1,991         (573)     8,978     (2,253)     18,765     (3,186)
 Total                      367        (100)       2,669         (658)     12,315    (2,586)     28,664     (4,044)
Median                     0.454      (1.066)      0.440        (1.257)    0.477     (1.546)     0.474      (1.871)
Mean (EW)                  0.575      (1.223)      0.599        (1.329)    0.757     (1.852)     0.882      (2.207)
Mean (VW)                  0.201      (0.362)      0.234        (0.221)    0.313     (0.298)     0.383      (1.017)


Panel B. Coefficients on Aggregate TFP Growth (bi)
                              2B.1                   2B.2                     2B.3                  2B.4
Number of firms
 Negative                   297         (96)       2,139         (630)     8,598     (1,660)     18,000     (2,278)
 Positive                    70         (5)         530          (24)      3,717      (219)      10,664      (798)
 Total                      367        (101)       2,669         (654)     12,315    (1,879)     28,664     (3,076)
Median                     -0.974     (-1.998)    -0.902        (-2.167)   -0.815    (-2.738)    -0.797     (-3.237)
Mean (EW)                  -0.955     (-2.105)    -0.979        (-2.402)   -0.831    (-2.553)    -0.730     (-2.132)
Mean (VW)                  -0.437     (-1.211)    -0.411        (-1.616)   -0.400    (-1.600)    -0.295     (-1.335)


Panel C. CAPM Beta (βi)
                              2C.1                   2C.2                    2C.3                   2C.4
Number of firms
 Negative                    54         (1)         506          (27)      3,248      (114)      9,052       (498)
 Positive                   313         (98)       2,163         (587)     9,067     (1,590)     19,612     (2,445)
 Total                      367         (99)       2,669         (614)     12,315    (1,704)     28,664     (2,943)
Median                     0.381      (0.762)      0.360        (0.767)    0.360     (1.040)     0.416      (1.345)
Mean (EW)                  0.448      (0.842)      0.408        (0.820)    0.437     (1.096)     0.468      (1.165)
Mean (VW)                  0.424      (0.656)      0.436        (0.701)    0.405     (0.858)     0.418      (1.091)

Notes: Regression coefficients are estimated separately for each firm. The first pair of columns summarizes
coefficients from regressions using all available data for each of the 367 firms with at least 20 observations in the
sample window 1970–2006. Numbers in parentheses are counts of firms with statistically significant (10%)
coefficients. The second pair of columns uses 30-year rolling windows and includes firms with 20 or more in the
window. The third pair of columns uses 20-year rolling windows and firms with 10 or more observations. The fourth
pair of columns uses 10-year rolling windows and firms with 5 observations or more. Medians, equally-weighted (EW)
means, and value-weighted (VW) means of coefficients are reported in the last three rows of each panel. The sample
excludes firms with fiscal year-ends other than December and finance sector (SIC 6000–6999) firms.

                                                           42
Table 3. Regressions of Stock Returns on TFP Growth: Aggregate-level versus Firm-level
Panel Regressions, 1970–2006
Panel A. Aggregate Level
                                             3A.1                 3A.2                  3A.3                  3A.4
VW aggregate TFP                           -0.622*               -0.649*
                                           (0.359)               (0.357)
Lagged VW aggregate TFP                                           0.462
                                                                 (0.358)
EW aggregate TFP                                                                       -1.385*              -1.557*
                                                                                       (0.772)              (0.802)
Lagged EW aggregate TFP                                                                                      0.677
                                                                                                            (0.802)
Constant                                   0.129***             0.126***              0.186***              0.181***
                                           (0.024)               (0.024)               (0.036)              (0.037)
Sample size                                   37                   37                    37                    37
Adj. R-squared                              0.079                 0.122                0.084                 0.103


Panel B. Firm Level
                                             3B.1                 3B.2                  3B.3                 3B.4
Firm TFP                                   0.289***             0.289***              0.291***              0.296***
                                           (0.026)               (0.025)               (0.026)              (0.027)
Lagged firm TFP                                                   0.019                                      0.024
                                                                 (0.017)                                    (0.014)
VW aggregate TFP                          -1.175***             -1.129***
                                           (0.343)               (0.325)
Lagged VW aggregate TFP                                          0.788**
                                                                 (0.324)
EW aggregate TFP                                                                      -1.657**             -1.872***
                                                                                       (0.697)              (0.620)
Lagged EW aggregate TFP                                                                                     1.113***
                                                                                                            (0.358)
CAPM factor                                0.592***             0.606***              0.679***             0.701***
                                           (0.150)               (0.126)               (0.174)              (0.158)
Sample size                                 42,032               42,032                42,032               42,032
Adj. R-squared                              0.092                 0.100                0.090                 0.098

Notes: Dependent variables in Panel A are value-weighted (VW) aggregate stock returns (columns 3A.1 and 3A.2) or
equally-weighted (EW) aggregate stock returns (columns 3A.3 and 3A.4). The dependent variable in Panel B is firm-
level stock returns. Panel regressions in Panel B include firm-fixed effects. The sample excludes firms with fiscal
year-ends other than December and finance sector (SIC 6000–6999) firms. Numbers in parentheses are standard
errors. Standard errors in Panel B are year-clustered. * Significant at the 10% level; ** Significant at the 5% level; ***
Significant at the 1% level.


                                                           43
Table 4. Firms' Stock Returns Explained by Own and Aggregate TFP Growth: Alternative
Specification
Panel A. Unadjusted for Risk-free Rate
                              5A.1                                5A.2                             5A.3
                           Responses to                       Responses to                       CAPM beta
                           own TFP (a)                      aggregate TFP (b)
Number of firms
 Negative                  10,033 (863)                      18,327 (2,397)                  9,314 (488)
 Positive                 18,631 (3,111)                     10,337 (751)                   19,350 (2,363)
 Total                    28,664 (3,974)                     28,664 (3,148)                 28,664 (2,851)
Median                     0.453 (1.845)                    -0.864 (-3.287)                 0.393 (1.320)
Mean (EW)                  0.871 (2.213)                    -0.800 (-2.306)                 0.447 (1.142)
Mean (VW)                  0.358 (1.026)                    -0.391 (-1.454)                 0.395 (0.961)


Panel B. Without Including CAPM Factor
                                        5B.1                                              5B.2
                                     Responses to                                     Responses to
                                     own TFP (a)                                    aggregate TFP (b)
Number of firms
 Negative                             9,250 (789)                                     19,162 (2,970)
 Positive                            19,414 (3,498)                                    9,502 (702)
 Total                               28,664 (4,287)                                   28,664 (3,672)
Median                                0.498 (1.905)                                   -1.021 (-3.499)
Mean (EW)                             0.834 (2.166)                                   -0.894 (-2.470)
Mean (VW)                             0.380 (0.780)                                   -0.404 (-1.763)

Panel C. Including Fama-French 3 Factors
                     5C.1                5C.2                   5C.3                5C.4                5C.5
                  Responses to       Responses to             CAPM beta         FF size factor       FF Book-to-
                  own TFP (a)      aggregate TFP (b)                                                 market factor
Number of firms
 Negative          8,740 (818)       14,838 (1,696)           7,708 (425)        10,330 (991)        10,401 (1,291)
 Positive         15,135 (2,305)      9,037 (701)            16,167 (2,279)     13,545 (1,792)       13,474 (1,745)
 Total            23,875 (3,123)     23,875 (2,397)          23,875 (2,704)     23,875 (2,783)       23,875 (3,036)
Median            0.452 (1.844)      -0.705 (-3.033)         0.417 (1.362)      0.231 (1.332)        0.183 (0.790)
Mean (EW)         0.790 (1.917)      -0.748 (-2.016)         0.462 (1.269)      0.348 (1.089)        0.014 (-0.340)
Mean (VW)         0.412 (1.182)      -0.427 (-1.363)         0.467 (1.042)      -0.226 (-0.617)      0.072 (0.084)




                                                       44
[Table 4 Continued]

Panel D. Including Industry TFP
                                5D.1                      5D.2                     5D.3                     5D.4
                             Responses to             Responses to             Responses to               CAPM beta
                             own TFP (a)            aggregate TFP (b)         industry TFP (c)
Number of firms
 Negative                     8,188 (673)             14,395 (1,809)           13,387 (1,706)             7,315 (430)
 Positive                    15,687 (2,686)             9,480 (771)             10,488 (916)            16,560 (2,077)
 Total                       23,875 (3,359)           23,875 (2,580)           23,875 (2,622)           23,875 (2,507)
Median                       0.541 (2.350)            -0.698 (-3.442)          -0.422 (-3.380)           0.432 (1.350)
Mean (EW)                    0.897 (2.600)            -0.541 (-1.712)          -0.709 (-2.734)           0.510 (1.236)
Mean (VW)                    1.018 (2.174)            -0.093 (0.236)           -0.875 (-1.818)           0.451 (1.216)

Notes: Response coefficients are estimated for each firm. Coefficients in Panels A and B are estimated using 10-year
rolling windows and firms with 5 observations or more and those in Panels C and D using for 10-year rolling windows
and firms with 7 observations or more. Numbers in parentheses are the number of firms with statistically significant at
the 10% level in the first three rows for each panel and the average coefficient of the firms with statistically significant
at the 10% in the bottom three rows for each panel, respectively. The two rows from the bottom of each panel report
both equally-weighted (EW) and value-weighted (VW) means. The sample excludes firms with fiscal year-ends other
than December and finance sector (SIC 6000–6999) firms.




                                                            45
