NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCENTIVIZING CALCULATED RISK-TAKING:
EVIDENCE FROM AN EXPERIMENT WITH COMMERCIAL BANK LOAN OFFICERS
Shawn Cole
Martin Kanz
Leora Klapper
Working Paper 19472
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19472
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013

We thank the cooperating financial institution for providing us with the data on loan applications used
in this paper. For helpful comments and suggestions, we thank Philippe Aghion, Andreas Fuster, Victoria
Ivashina, Raj Iyer, Michael Kremer, Rohini Pande, Jose Liberti, Daniel Paravisini, Enrichetta Ravina,
Andrei Shleifer, Antoinette Schoar, Erik Stafford, Jeremy Stein, and numerous seminar and conference
participants. Samantha Bastian, Doug Randall, and Wentao Xiong provided excellent research assistance.
Data from loan files, used in this experiment, were obtained under a Non-Disclosure Agreement from
a financial institution. Financial assistance from the Kauffman Foundation, the International Growth
Center, and the Harvard Business School Division of Faculty Support and Research, is gratefully
acknowledged. None of the authors has a potentially relevant outside financial relationship. The
opinions expressed do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors,
the countries they represent, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Shawn Cole, Martin Kanz, and Leora Klapper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Incentivizing Calculated Risk-Taking: Evidence from an Experiment with Commercial Bank
Loan Officers
Shawn Cole, Martin Kanz, and Leora Klapper
NBER Working Paper No. 19472
September 2013
JEL No. D03,G21,J33
ABSTRACT
We use an experiment with commercial bank loan officers to test how performance based compensation
affects risk-assessment and lending. High-powered incentives lead to greater screening effort and more
profitable lending decisions. This effect, however, is muted by deferred compensation and limited
liability, two standard features of loan officer incentive contracts. We find that career concerns and
personality traits affect screening behavior, but show that the response to monetary incentives does
not vary with traits such as risk-aversion, optimism or overconfidence. Finally, we present evidence
that incentive contracts distort the assessment of credit risk, even among trained professionals with
many years of experience. Loans evaluated under permissive incentives are rated significantly less
risky than the same loans evaluated under pay-for-performance.
Shawn Cole
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 271
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
scole@hbs.edu
Martin Kanz
The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20433
mkanz@worldbank.org

Leora Klapper
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
lklapper@worldbank.org

1

Introduction

The effect of performance-based compensation on risk-taking is of fundamental importance
in finance.1 However, the precise mechanism through which financial incentives affect riskassessment and decision making remains poorly understood. Existing research has established that bank lending is responsive to the external economic environment (see, for example,
Dell’Ariccia and Marquez [2006] or Keys et al. [2010])2 and, more recently, that agency problems within a bank may affect credit allocation (Liberti and Mian [2009], and Hertzberg et al.
[2010]). By contrast, there is little evidence on individual responses to performance-based
compensation, a key instrument banks may use to influence the decisions of loan officers
tasked with making actual lending decisions.3
Linking compensation practices to lending decisions is difficult, for at least two important reasons. First, incentive structures are endogenously determined by financial institutions, yielding standard identification problems. Second, even setting identification challenges aside, the data typically available in observational studies, such as lending, interest
income, and write-offs, are often insufficient to distinguish between competing hypotheses.
To surmount these challenges, this paper uses a high-stakes field experiment with commercial bank loan officers in India, that enables us to present direct evidence on the effect
of performance-based compensation on risk-assessment and lending decisions. In the experiment, loan officers were paid to review and assess actual loan applications, making 14,675
1

The impact of incentives on risk-taking has been cited as an key factor in several financial crises preceded
by a lending boom. See Bebchuk et al. [2010], Fahlenbrach and Stulz [2012], Acharya et al. [2013] for a
discussion of incentives and risk-taking in the run-up to the recent global financial crisis. Devlin [1989] and
Gourinchas et al. [2001] highlight the role of employee incentives and supply side factors in the Latin American
debt crisis. For a general discussion of incentives and risk-taking at banks, see also “Crazy compensation
and the crisis”. Alan Blinder, The Wall Street Journal. May 28, 2009.
2
For evidence on credit booms and screening incentives see also Dell’Ariccia et al. [2012]. Theoretical
approaches have modeled variation in screening standards as a result of herding, business cycle factors
[Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997], or limited screening capacity of banks [Berger and Udell, 2004].
3
See Freixas and Rochet [2008] for a discussion of incentive problems specific to lending. For reviews of
the literature on incentive compensation in firms see Baker et al. [1988] and Prendergast [1999].

1

lending decisions under exogenously assigned incentives. We pinpoint the relationship between compensation and lending decisions by exogenously varying the incentive contracts
faced by loan officers and evaluate three classes of incentive schemes [i.] volume incentives
that reward origination, [ii.] low-powered incentives that reward origination conditional on
performance and [iii.] high-powered incentives that reward performance and penalize default.
While much of the literature on performance-based compensation in banking and finance
has focused on incentives for risk-taking provided to top management,4 this paper explores
the hypothesis, often advanced in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, that nonequity incentives for loan originators, such as commissions, can play an important role in
determining the fate of a bank’s lending operation.5 Indeed, providing appropriate incentives
to employees at the lower tiers of a commercial bank’s corporate hierarchy is a difficult
problem: their very responsibility is to collect information that the bank cannot otherwise
observe, making monitoring difficult. They enjoy limited liability, and may have different
risk and time preferences than the bank’s shareholders.
The design of our experiment closely matches the loan approval process of low- documentation loans in an emerging credit market, and has several features that are particularly
well-suited for studying the question at hand. First, while still novel in finance, the use
of randomized experiments has grown rapidly in other areas of economics, in large part
because they allow clear tests of causal relationships. Our unique experimental approach,
which brings professional loan officers with many years of experience in credit assessment
into a controlled laboratory environment, allows us to track aspects of loan officer behavior
that would normally be unobservable to a bank or econometrician and allows for the causal
identification of the impact of monetary incentives on loan officer behavior.
4

See Jensen and Murphy [1990] and Murphy [1999] for an overview of this literature.
Acharya et al. [2013] note that the literature on executive compensation disagrees about the effect of
performance pay on risk-taking and argues that these conflicting results could be due to an omitted factor,
such as the impact of non-executive compensation on risk-taking.
5

2

Second, by design, our experiment focuses on the lending decision and allows us to
isolate the impact of performance pay on the quality of initial screening from other channels
that may affect lending, such as the collection of soft information or the degree of expost monitoring.6 Finally, participants completed a set of standard psychological tests,
similar to those used in the literature on managerial characteristics and decision-making
(Malmendier and Tate [2005], Graham et al. [2013]). We use this information to shed light
on the mechanism through which incentives affect loan officer decisions, and to benchmark
the size of the effects. In particular, we examine whether monetary incentives affect lending
decisions directly or through their interaction with personality traits, such as overconfidence,
conscientiousness or risk-aversion.
We present three main results. Our first set of results documents the efficacy and limitations of performance incentives in lending. We provide evidence that the structure of performance incentives strongly affects screening effort, risk-assessment, and the profitability of
originated loans. Loan officers who are incentivized based on lending volume rather than
the quality of their loan portfolio originate more loans of lower average quality. By contrast,
high-powered incentives that reward loan performance and penalize bad lending decisions
cause loan officers to exert greater screening effort, reduce exposure to loans with higher
perceived ex-ante credit risk, and induce significantly more profitable lending decisions while
leading only to a small reduction in lending volume. Relative to a baseline treatment with
low-powered incentives, high-powered incentives increase the probability that a bad loan is
detected and increase profits per originated loan by up to 3.5% of the median loan size; in
contrast, origination incentives lead to a substantial decline in the quality of originated loans
and reduce profits per loan by up to 5% of the median loan size.
Building on these results, we explore a number of constraints, inherent to any incentive
6

The distinction between screening, information production and ex-post monitoring is also a feature of
the real lending environment that is being replicated by our experiment, where these tasks are carried out
by separate employees, each facing their own wage schedule.

3

contract in lending, that may limit the efficacy of pay for performance. Consistent with the
predictions of a simple model of loan officer decision-making, we find that deferred compensation attenuates the effectiveness of high-powered incentives. When incentive payments are
awarded with a three month delay, our measures of costly screening effort decline by between
5% and 14%, and we document a corresponding but less pronounced decline in the quality of
originated loans. Notably, we find that deferred compensation also moderates the negative
effect of incentive schemes that emphasize loan origination over the quality of originated
loans. Relaxing loan officers’ limited liability constraint (similar in spirit to giving a loan
officer equity in the loan) induces greater screening effort and leads to more conservative
lending decisions, but has only a moderate effect on the profitability of originated loans.
Second, we demonstrate that performance incentives have important effects on loan officers’ subjective perception of credit risk. We find that loan officers evaluating applications
under performance contracts that provide strong incentives for approval systematically inflate internal ratings they assign to the loans they process. While internal ratings are strongly
predictive of default under all incentive schemes, loan officers facing volume incentives inflate
risk ratings by as much as .3 standard deviations, irrespective of the underlying asset quality.
Since incentives affect both risk ratings and approvals, the loan book approved under a permissive incentive scheme may therefore be of poorer quality but, based on internal ratings
alone, may in fact look less risky than a set of comparable loans approved under a more
conservative incentive contract.
Third, we provide evidence on the interaction between loan officer characteristics and
the response to performance incentives, using data from psychometric tests administered to
a subset of the participants in our experiment. We show that loan officer characteristics
have a strong effect on loan officers’ baseline level of screening effort. In particular, we find
evidence that career concerns are a key non-monetary determinant of loan officer behavior.
However, personality traits show only a weak interaction with monetary incentives. This
4

indicates that personality traits can be useful in identifying conscientious screeners, but are
unlikely to affect individual performance differentially under alternative incentive schemes.
This paper contributes to several literatures. A growing body of research highlights the
importance of incentives for the transmission and use of information in lending (Hertzberg,
Liberti and Paravisini [2010], Qian, Strahan and Yang [2011], Berg, Puri and Rocholl [2012]).
Most closely related to our study, Agarwal and Ben-David [2012] exploit a change in the
compensation structure of a U.S. bank and show that volume incentives lead to greater
risk-taking and a deterioration in loan performance.
Second, we contribute to the literature on incentive compensation and risk-taking. Existing research in this area has focused almost exclusively on risk-taking among CEOs and
senior management (see Bebchuk and Spamann [2010], Bolton, Mehran and Shapiro [2010],
Edmans and Liu [2011] and Fahlenbrach and Stulz [2012]). Mechanisms similar in their effect
to equity compensation for senior executives have been proposed to align the incentives of
employees at lower levels of a bank’s corporate hierarchy with those of the bank.
Finally, our findings add to the literature on lending in informationally opaque credit
markets. We examine the role of loan officer effort and risk-assessment in an environment of
high idiosyncratic risk (see Petersen and Rajan [1994], Berger, Klapper and Udell [2001]).
This is related to, but distinct from, the special role played by loan officers in collecting soft
information, and monitoring borrowers following the disbursal of a loan.
While we feel that our setting offers important advantages –for example we are able
to study lending decisions amounting to the allocation of approximately US$ 88 million
in credit– there are also two limitations worth mentioning. First, this paper studies one
specific lending model, often used in practice, where the loan officer’s primary function is
to screen loans, rather than to prospect for new clients, cross-sell other products, or gather
soft information.7 This allows us to devise a clean test for the impact of incentives that can
7

The organizational form of the lending process is a distinct topic that is being explored in concurrent

5

rule out multitasking concerns, but naturally confines the scope of our analysis to the loan
officer’s traditional screening role (Freixas and Rochet [2008]). Second, while the information
environment and lending process in our experiment match what’s done in practice, one might
be concerned that studying lending decisions in a lab may lead us to underestimate the role
of career concerns and other longer term motivations that may influence behavior in a real
lending environment. As we shall see, we do find evidence of career concerns and other
reputational motivations. These should, however, be interpreted as lower bound estimates.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we discuss the basic incentive
problem in lending. Section 3 describes the experimental design. Section 4 reviews the
empirical strategy and presents our results. Section 5 examines the interaction between
performance compensation and loan officer characteristics and Section 6 concludes.

2

Performance Incentives in Lending

The potential for excessive8 and socially inefficient risk-taking in response to poorly designed
incentive schemes has long been recognized. However, in many real world settings, first-best
contracts may be difficult to implement, as they require easily quantifiable criteria against
which to measure and reward performance. The basic incentive problem in lending arises
from the fact that loan officers are tasked with allocating the bank’s capital based on private
information and risk-assessments that are not independently verifiable by the bank [Stein,
2002]. This generates significant scope for agency conflict within the lending institution
and creates a strong rationale for the use of performance pay to align the risk and time
preferences of the bank’s employees with those of the institution.
work. See for example Paravisini and Schoar [2012].
8
The literature does not provide a universally accepted definition of what constitutes “excessive” risktaking. In the context of our experiment, we define excessive risk-taking with reference to the hypothetical
first-best contract in which a loan officer would be made a fully liable residual claimant of the loans she
originates. Excessive risk-taking denotes the case in which a loan officer with rational beliefs takes higher
risk at a weakly lower rate of return than she would under the hypothetical first-best contract.

6

There are, however, several important constraints that generally preclude a bank from
offering a first-best contract that would make a loan officer a fully liable residual claimant
of the loans she originates. First, loan officer effort is typically unobservable. Second, loan
officers are necessarily protected by limited liability, as they take decisions on large amounts
of money, which typically far exceed the amount of any penalty a bank could enforce to deter
bad lending decisions. Third, the risk and time preferences of loan officers are likely to differ
significantly from those of the bank’s shareholders. This may make it difficult to generate
effort with deferred pay conditioned on loan outcomes, rather than with an immediate bonus.
Finally, in a lending environment characterized by high aggregate and idiosyncratic risk, it
is difficult to reliably identify idiosyncratic defaults, which further complicates the use of
realized outcomes for the measurement of loan officer screening effort and performance.
Where banks provide performance incentives, loan officer compensation typically consists
of a fixed base salary plus a performance component. This performance component may place
weight on lending volume, loan performance, or a combination of the two.9
The debate on bank compensation has revolved around two main features of such incentive contracts: first, the incentive power of the contract, which is a function of the reward
for good and the penalty for bad decisions, and determines the perceived cost of originating
a loan that might become delinquent. Second, the often short time-horizon of compensation,
which may lead loan officers to prioritize short-term gains over long-term loan performance.
Theoretical work on performance incentives in lending has been relatively scarce. Heider
and Inderst [2012] develop a model of relationship lending and analyze the optimal contract
when loan officers, in addition to their traditional screening role [Freixas and Rochet, 2008],
9

The U.S. Department of Labor, for example, describes the structure of loan officer compensation contracts as follows: “The form of compensation for loan officers varies. [...] Some institutions pay only salaries,
while others pay loan officers a salary plus a commission or bonus based on the number of loans originated.”
(See http://www/bls.gov/oco/ocos018.htm, as also cited in Heider and Inderst [2012]). Examples of specific compensation schemes that reward loan officers based on lending volume or loan performance are also
discussed in Berg et al. [2012] and Paravisini and Schoar [2012].

7

also act as “salespeople”, tasked with prospecting for new loans and producing soft information through the cultivation of lending relationships. They show that in this setting, the
optimal contract is a function of the bank’s competitive position, as well as the degree of
private information the loan officer can conceal from her employer.
In contrast to this line of research, our experiment is set in a lending environment where
loan solicitation and approvals are strictly distinct, such that loan officers approve loans with
little or no contact with the borrower. This enables us to rule out multitasking concerns in
the response to incentives. An additional advantage of this approach is that we can rank
incentive contracts offered in the experiment with reference to the hypothetical first-best in
which a loan officer would be made a fully liable residual claimant of the loans she originates.
The separation of information collection and loan approvals is common for a wide range
of financial products, and especially prevalent in emerging markets where the small loan
sizes, relative to the high fixed cost of screening, often rule out the use of an expensive
relationship lending model that relies on repeated personal interaction with the client. This
places greater importance on incentives at the time of the initial screening decision, which
is the focus of our analysis.
In this paper, we study the impact of performance pay in lending in the context of an
experiment with commercial bank loan officers in India. The design of our experiment builds
on a simple model of loan officer decision making, outlined in the Supplemental Appendix,10
in which loan officer behavior depends on both financial incentives and non-monetary repu10
We follow, in particular, Levitt and List [2007], who propose a model in which an experimental subject
optimizes a utility function that is additively separable in the monetary and non-monetary arguments: “The
choice of action affects the agent through two channels. The first effect is on the individual’s wealth [. . . ], the
second effect is the non-pecuniary moral cost or benefit associated with [the] action. [. . . ] More generally,
we have in mind that decisions which an individual views as immoral, anti-social or at odds with her own
identity (Akerlof and Kranton [2000]; 2005) may impose important costs on the decision maker)” This
model is sufficiently general to encompass a range of non-monetary motivations including career concerns,
the desire for social status and more general reputational motivations. See also Prendergast [1999] and
Bloom and Van Reenen [2011] for evidence from the literature on personnel economics, and Bandiera et al.
[2011] on non-monetary incentives in field experiments with firms using real employees as subjects.

8

tational concerns. Specifically, we assume that in addition to monetary rewards, loan officers
care about the possibility that their actions may affect others’ inference about their type.
This is the standard approach suggested by a growing literature on how to model behavior
in experiments with real subjects (see Harrison and List [2004] and Levitt and List [2007]).
Our theoretical framework makes four basic predictions about the effect of performance
pay on loan officer behavior: first, origination incentives, as often employed by commercial
banks, lead to indiscriminate lending, low effort and high defaults. By contrast, high-powered
incentives that reward profitable lending and penalize default result in greater screening
effort, but more conservative lending. Second, deferred compensation reduces the power of
performance-based incentives. Third, relaxing a loan officer’s limited liability constraint, for
example through a contract with a “claw-back” provision, unambiguously increases effort.
Finally, effort under any contract is higher, and may be independent of monetary rewards,
if loan officers have reputational concerns.

3

Experimental Context and Design

We designed a framed field experiment11 that closely matches the underwriting process for
unsecured small enterprise loans in India. In the experiment, loan officers recruited from
the active staff of several commercial banks evaluate credit applications in the context of a
controlled lab experiment under exogenously assigned incentives.
The files assessed in the experiment consist of real, previously processed loan applications.
Each file contains all information available to the bank at the time that the loan was first
evaluated. The distribution of loan files evaluated by loan officers in the experiment is
matched to the distribution of good and bad loans participants would expect to see in a real
lending environment. This distribution was elicited using a pilot survey of 30 loan officers
11

We follow the classification of experimental designs proposed by Harrison and List [2004].

9

prior to the main experiment.
An especially attractive feature of this experimental design is that it allows us to draw on
a population of highly experienced loan officers and observe their behavior and decisions to a
level of detail that would be difficult to achieve outside a controlled laboratory environment.
In the analysis, we use this feature of the experiment to estimate the causal impact of alternative incentive schemes, as well as the interaction of monetary incentives with measurable
loan officer attitudes and personality traits. This allows us to provide causal evidence on the
channel through which incentives affect loan officer behavior.
While lending decisions in the experiment were hypothetical, in the sense that all loans
had been previously processed by a bank and their realized outcome had been observed,
loan officers received only information that was available to the bank at the original time of
application. Since we observe the performance of all evaluated loans, we were able to pay
participants performance incentives, based on their lending decision and the realized outcome
of the loan applications they approve. The experimental treatments vary the magnitude and
the time horizon of these conditional payments to change the terms of the incentive contract
faced by loan officers participating in the experiment.
One potential concern with our experimental design is that it might not appropriately
account for the role of soft information in loan giving. We however note that the aim of
our experiment is to isolate the impact of incentives on screening behavior and lending
decisions. In order to do this, we were careful to choose a loan product whose risk profile is
determined by the quality of the initial screening decision (rather than ex-post monitoring
or soft information obtained through relationship lending).
We focus on lending decisions for ‘mass market’ loans to small businesses, as an example
of a loan product for which sales and origination channels are strictly distinct. Loans of this
type are sourced by sales agents in the field, who collect all necessary client information,
which is then forwarded to the bank’s loan officers for approval. Loan officers do not interact
10

with the client directly, cannot conduct interviews, and have no other way of collecting
soft information. By focusing on first-time borrowers, we remove the potential influence of
soft information generated over time. This allows for a clean test that isolates changes in
screening behavior from other channels through which incentives might affect lending. By
the same token, our results should be interpreted with care when applied to an environment
where loan officers and are incentivized on tasks beyond loan screening.
In order to ensure that monetary incentives in the experiment were perceived as salient,
we calibrated expected payouts to the approximate hourly wage of the median participant,
a public sector loan officer with ten years of experience in banking. The remainder of this
section describes the database of loans used in the experiment, the population of loan officers
and the experimental protocol.

3.1

Loan Officers

Loan officers were recruited from the staff of several leading private and public sector commercial banks in India. We report summary statistics for the population of participating
loan officers in Table II, Columns [1] to [4]. The median loan officer in our sample is a public
sector bank employee who is 35 years old, and has 10 years of work experience. In Table
II, Columns [5] to [8] we report comparable characteristics from a sample of all loan officers
from a major commercial bank in the region where our experiment takes place. The descriptive statistics indicate that our sample is quite representative of this reference population
in terms of age, rank and experience. In addition to their participation in the experiment,
loan officers completed a series of tests of attitudes and personality traits commonly used
in the literature on psychology and behavioral economics. Summary statistics of these tests
are reported in Panel B of Table II. Additional details about the measurement of loan officer
attitudes and personality traits are provided in Supplemental Appendix A.

11

3.2

Database of Loans

As a basis for the experiment, we requested a random sample of loan applications from a
large commercial lender in India and received 676 loan files. These loan files contain all
information available at the time the application was first processed, and are matched with
at least nine months of repayment history for each loan.12 The information contained in each
loan application can be grouped into the following categories, corresponding to the sections
of the Lender’s standard application format: (1) basic client information including a detailed
description of the client’s business, (2) list of documents and verification (3) balance sheet
and (4) income statement. In addition, participants in the experiment had access to three
types of background checks for each applicant: a site visit report on the applicant’s (5)
business, and (6) residence and (7) a credit bureau report.13
Our sample consists of uncollateralized small business loans to self-employed individuals,
with a ticket size between Rs 150,000 (US$ 3,000) and Rs 500,000 (US$ 10,000).14 We
consider only term loans to new borrowers, many of whom are first-time applicants for a
formal loan.15 The median loan in our database has a tenure of 36 months, a ticket size of
Rs 283,214 (US$ 6,383) and a monthly installment of Rs 9,228. (US$ 208).
Based on the Lender’s proprietary data on loan repayment, we classify credit files into
performing and non-performing loans. Following the standard definition, we classify a loan
as delinquent if it has missed two or more monthly payments and remains 60+ days overdue.
To calculate the profitability of a loan, we subtract the disbursal amount from the discounted
12

More than 90% of all defaults occur during the first five months of a loan’s tenure, so that our default
measure allows for a relatively precise measurement of loan quality.
13
We focus on loan applications from new customers. A credit bureau report was therefore only available
for 66% of the loans in our sample.
14
To rule out vintage effects and ensure consistency in the initial screening standards applied to loans used
in the experiment, we restrict our sample to loans originated in 2009 Q1 and 2009 Q2.
15
Since none of the loans in our sample are collateralized, they are priced at an annual interest rate of
between 15 and 30 per cent. We control for the variation in interest rates by including loan fixed effects.

12

stream of repayments.16 To achieve as representative a sample as possible, we also include a
subset of files from clients who applied, but were turned down by the Lender. Throughout
the analysis, we report results disaggregated by non-performing and declined loans and show
that our results are unaffected by the classification of loans declined ex-ante by the Lender.
Summary statistics for the sample of loan files are reported in Table OA.II. Importantly,
the last columns of the table indicate that loan files indeed contain information that makes
it possible to infer loan quality, suggesting that there are returns to effort in this setting.

3.3

Experimental Protocol

The experimental procedure and presentation of information were designed to closely resemble the actual work environment of the representative loan officer.17

18

Incentive treatments,

as described in Section 3.4, were randomly and individually assigned at the loan officer and
session level. Loan officers were invited to an introductory session and then participated in
up to 15 sessions of the experiment, in which they evaluated a set of six randomly assigned
loans under a given incentive scheme. Within each session of the experiment, the sequence
of loan files was randomly assigned,19 but the ratio of performing, non-performing and declined loans was held constant at four performing loans, one non-performing loan and one
loan declined by the Lender. We chose this ratio to match the distribution that loan officers
reported experiencing in their workplaces.
16

We estimate the Lender’s net profit per loan as the net present value of the disbursal plus repayments
including interest, discounted by 8%, the approximate rate on Indian commercial paper between January 1
and December 31, 2009, and assuming a 10% recovery on defaulted loans.
17
Harrison, List and Towe [2007] point out that laboratory behavior may not match field behavior when
eliciting risk attitudes (“background risk”). In contrast to that study, we use within-subject variation,
and the inclusion of loan officer fixed-effects may reduce the importance of heterogeneous perceptions of
background risk from different subjects.
18
The literature on experiments in economics has pointed out that Hawthorne effects might obscure behavior in experiments that occur under observation (see Levitt and List [2007] and Levitt and List [2011] for
a discussion). Note that the only feature that changed in from session to session in our experiments was the
compensation scheme, so that any constant “experimenter demand” effects would not affect our estimates.
19
This was done to ensure that estimates of loan performance would not be biased by factors such as
variation in the quality and extent of information contained in the application file.

13

At the start of each session, loan officers were assigned to an incentive treatment, received a one-on-one introduction to the incentive scheme in place and completed a short
questionnaire to verify comprehension. Loan officers then began the loan rating exercise in
which they were asked to assess a series of loan files, using a customized software interface.
For every loan file under review, the loan evaluation software reproduced each section of the
application on a separate tab on the loan officer’s screen: this included a description of the
applicant’s business, balance sheet, trade reference, site visit report, document verification
and credit bureau report when available. Each session of the experiment was scheduled to
last one hour, although participants could finish early or late if they so chose.
While reviewing loan applications, participants were asked to assess the applicant’s credit
risk along 15 credit-scoring criteria adapted from the standard format of a leading Indian
bank. Internal ratings range from 0 to 100 (with a higher score indicating higher credit
quality) and were not binding for the loan officer’s lending decision. The risk ratings serve
three purposes. First, they add realism to the lab session, as completing a (non-binding)
risk rating is a routine part of evaluating applications. Second, they allow us to elicit a
measure of perceived credit risk that is not tied to loan officer compensation. Finally, internal
ratings serve to assist the loan officer in aggregating information about the application in a
systematic way. To ensure that internal ratings are an unbiased reflection of a loan officer’s
true risk-assessment, participants were reminded that internal risk ratings were not tied to
monetary incentives and never reviewed by the administrating staff.
Loan officers were asked to evaluate loans based on their best judgment, but were given
no information about the ratio of good and bad loans or the outcome of any particular loan
under evaluation.

14

3.4

Incentive Treatments

To test the impact of performance pay on loan officer behavior, we exogenously vary three
features of the incentive scheme faced by the loan officer: the incentive power of the contract,
the time horizon over which performance incentives are paid, and the degree of limited
liability enjoyed by a loan officer. We vary the power of the incentive contract by assigning
loan officers to contracts that specify three conditional payments: a payment wP made when
a loan is approved and performs, a payment wD , made when a loan is approved and defaults
and a payment w that is made when a loan is declined.
Because the outcome of a loan is only observed with some delay, performance incentives, in practice, must be paid with a lag. In our setting, under the non-deferred payment
scheme, incentives were paid immediately following an experimental session. In the deferred
compensation scheme, incentive payments were delayed by three months.
Finally, we experimentally relax loan officers’ limited liability constraint, by providing
an initial endowment that the participant can lose if she approves non-performing loans.
This mimics proposed ‘clawback’ schemes. Throughout the paper, we express experimental
incentive contracts as as the vector w = [wP , wD , w]. In addition to these three performancebased conditional payments, loan officers received an unconditional show-up fee of Rs 100
(US$ 2.25), each time they participated in a session of the experiment.
In order to ensure that participants perceived these conditional payoffs as salient, we
calibrated the mean payout of experimental incentive schemes to approximately 1.5 times
the hourly wage of the median participant in our experiment, a public sector credit officer
with ten years of professional experience, an annual income of Rs 240,000 (US$ 4,800) and
an approximate hourly wage of Rs 125 (US$ 2.5).
Because understanding the impact of performance pay on costly screening effort is a main
objective of the experiment, half of our sessions included a ‘costly information’ feature. In

15

this treatment condition, loan officers were given an initial information endowment of Rs
108. Under the ’costly information’ condition, loan officers were able to review only basic
client and loan information items for free20 and were charged Rs 3 per section for as many of
the remaining loan file sections as they chose to view. In these sessions, loan officers received
their remaining information endowment at the conclusion of the session, in addition to any
incentive payments. Table I summarizes the experimental incentive schemes.
We use the random assignment of incentive contacts to test the following predictions.
First, origination incentives will lead to greater risk-taking. Indeed, under this type of
incentive, purely rational and profit-maximizing loan officers should indiscriminately approve
all applications, and exert no effort to screen out bad applications.21 Second, high-powered
incentives will increase effort by increasing the rewards for a profitable lending decision and
increasing the penalty for originating a loan that ultimately becomes delinquent.22 Third,
high-powered incentives will induce more conservative lending behavior by increasing the
utility cost of making a bad lending decision. Fourth, if a loan officer’s discount rate is
greater than zero, the amount of effort induced by deferred compensation will be less than
the amount of effort induced by an immediate bonus.
Finally, if loan officers are intrinsically motivated, or responsive to reputational considerations or career concerns, they may invest in screening even when such effort will not yield
additional remuneration.23
20

Two out of nine sections of the loan application could be viewed for free. This included the basic
customer profile and the list of verified documentation provided.
21
It is of course possible that financial incentives interact with loan officers intrinsic motivation. If this
is the case, our experiments measure the combined effect of a ‘classical’ increase in effort, along with any
changes in effort due to intrinsic motivation. This is the policy relevant parameter.
22
Note that this implies that the effort exerted under these treatments can be ranked B > A > C.
23
Theoretical work has also suggested that monetary incentives may crowd out intrinsic motivation. However, a recurring theme in this literature is that some very restrictive conditions need to be fulfilled for
“incentive crowding” to occur. Benabou and Tirole [2003] for example note that incentive crowding requires
the employer (bank) to have an information advantage over the employee (loan officer). We believe that this
is unlikely to be the case in the setting we study.

16

4

Empirical Strategy and Results

Since treatment status was randomly assigned, our empirical strategy is straightforward and
we estimate regressions of the form:

yil =

K−1
X

βk Tilk + θi + θl + ζ 0 Ril + ξ 0 Xil + εil

(1)

k=1

where yil is the outcome of interest for loan officer i and loan l, Til is a vector of treatment
dummies for the incentive schemes being compared to the baseline. In all regressions, we use
the low-powered baseline incentive wB = [20, 0, 10] as the omitted category. We additionally
control for loan officer fixed effects, θi , loan file fixed effects θl , and individual controls
Xil , including loan officer age, seniority, rank, education, and include dummies for whether
the loan officer has management and business experience. Finally, the experiments took
approximately one year to complete, and not all incentive schemes were eligible to be assigned
in any given session. Hence, our regressions include a set of fixed effects Ril to control for
these randomization strata. Standard errors are clustered at the loan officer-session level,
the same level at which the treatment is assigned.
Our dataset includes 14,369 lending decisions, representing 206 unique subjects, with
three key treatment conditions: (1) Low-powered incentives, which we use as the baseline
throughout the empirical analysis; (2) High-powered incentives, which reward loan officers
for approving loans that perform and penalizes the origination of loans that default; and (3)
Origination bonus, which rewards the loan officer for every originated loan.24
In addition to these incentive vectors, we vary conditions under which incentives are paid.
In 369 randomly selected sessions (2,214 loan evaluations), we defer incentive payments by 3
months, rather than paying immediately. In further 163 sessions (978 evaluations), we relax
24

Regressions using all data we collected, which includes the performance bonus schemes which pay only if
a loan performs, along with the appropriate treatment dummies, are reported in the Supplemental Appendix.

17

the participant’s limited liability constraint by providing an initial information endowment
of Rs 200 (US$ 4.5), which can be lost if a loan officer makes a series of unprofitable lending
decisions. Finally, in 137 sessions (3,638 loans), we provide loan officers with an initial
information endowment of Rs 108 (US$ 2.25), which they may spend to sections of the
loan file. Table I summarizes the sample sizes by treatment condition. Table OA.I in the
Supplemental Appendix reports a test of random assignment.
To test our hypotheses, we consider three primary groups of outcome variables: (i) measures of screening effort, (ii) measures of subjective risk-assessment, and (iii) lending decisions
(actual risk-taking) and the resulting profitability of originated loans. We construct two measures of screening effort: the number of credit file sections reviewed by a credit officer; and
the amount of money spent on reviewing additional information under the costly-information
treatment. To measure risk-assessment and risk-taking, we record internal risk ratings assigned to each loan. Finally, to evaluate loan officer decisions and performance, we match the
loan officer’s lending decision to the actual profitability of the loan to the financial institution.

4.1

Descriptive Statistics

Before turning to the main analysis, we report descriptive statistics of loan evaluations during
the exercise. We first verify that the experimental task is meaningful, in the sense that it is
indeed possible for loan officers to infer credit risk based on hard information contained in an
applicant’s loan file. To do this, Table OA.II in the Supplemental Appendix presents mean
comparisons of loan application information for performing and non-performing loans. There
are a number of differences in hard information characteristics that help distinguish ex-post
performing from non-performing loans. In particular, borrowers who defaulted on their loans
had substantially lower revenue, younger businesses, higher ratios of monthly debt service
to income, compared to borrowers who remained current on their obligations. Overdues

18

on credit reports also predicted default. Higher-quality borrowers reported higher levels of
debt, consistent with the common observation of low-quality borrowers being excluded from
formal credit markets.
Table OA.III reports summary statistics of loan evaluations by loan type and incentive.
We note the following. First, even for a group of highly experienced loan officers, making
profitable lending decisions in this lending environment was not a trivial task. On average,
loan officers approved 75% of all loans evaluated in the experiment and made correct lending
decisions in 65% of all cases. Lending volume responds dramatically to incentives. Lending
decisions were, however, profitable under all incentive schemes in the experiment and would
have earned the bank an average net present value of US$ 240 (5.9% of the median loan size)
per originated loan. Identifying performing loans was substantially easier than identifying
non-performing loans or loans that were rejected by the Lender ex-ante. Changes in the
incentive power of the contract were especially effective in improving loan officer’s success in
detecting non-performing loans, and these patterns are directly reflected in the profitability
of loans approved under alternative incentives (Column [6]).
Table OA.III Column [2] describes the number of sections a loan officer reviewed prior
to making a decision, while Column [3] gives this number for only the subsample which was
charged to see additional sections from the loan file. Virtually all loan officers study the
basic information and borrower profile sections. However, some chose to reject or accept a
loan without viewing the entire application, particularly when the incentive scheme did not
reward higher-quality screening.25
In addition to observed lending decisions, we analyze loan officer risk assessment, as
measured by the rating each loan officer gave to each loan. Since ratings themselves were
not incentivized, one might wonder whether these ratings contain useful information. To
25

When information was costly, loan officers were most likely to review sections of the loan file that
contained basic financial information, such as income statements and balance sheet information, and much
less likely to pay for additional sections of the file such as site visit reports (results not reported in table).

19

address this concern, Table OA.V reports tests in which we use internal ratings to predict
loan approvals and performance. The results show that loan officer assessments of credit risk
are a meaningful and strongly significant predictor of actual lending decisions, the probability
of default and the profit of loans evaluated in the experiment. This is true for the overall
rating as well as its sub-components measuring perceived personal and financial risk.26
Since loan officers complete multiple sessions, one might wonder whether loan officers
learn over the course of the study. An affirmative answer might be cause for concern, given
that our average loan officer has more than ten years of experience in lending. To verify that
learning over the course of the exercise poses no threat to the validity of our results, Figure
2 plots the average fraction of correct decisions and average profit per originated loan as a
function of the number of completed sessions. These demonstrate no learning effect, a result
confirmed by regression results in Table OA.IV.

4.2

Incentivizing Screening Effort

We first analyze the effect of incentives on screening effort. Intuitively, performance incentives can affect the quality of lending decisions if they induce a loan officer to choose higher
screening effort, translating into a more thorough evaluation of available information. The
design of our experiment provides us with a straightforward measure of screening effort.
Specifically, we record how many of the ten sections of the credit file the loan officer chooses
to review before making a decision. In a separate set of sub-treatments meant to make the
effort trade-off even more stark, we charge loan officers Rs 3 for each section of the loan
dossier beyond what would be available on the application form.27 As human subject considerations precluded an experimental design in which loan officers would pay to participate,
26

Figure 3 shows the distribution of ratings for performing and non-performing loans, respectively. A
Kolgomorov-Smirnov test rejects the equality of these distributions at the 1% level.
27
Available for free were basic applicant details and list of provided documentation. Loan officers paid to
view income statement, balance sheet, site visit reports, and trade and credit reference checks.

20

we provide each loan officer with an initial information endowment of Rs 108 (approximately
US$ 2.25 per experimental session). Participants could choose not to pay to view additional
tabs, in which case Rs 108 would be paid to them at the end of the session, in addition to
whatever show-up and incentive payments they earn. This information cost was not trivial: purchasing access to all six tabs would cost close to the maximum payout of 20 under
the low-powered and origination incentive schemes. We use the amount spent to view loan
sections as a second measure of screening effort, capturing the notion of costly information.
Because screening effort is not observable to the bank, we do not tie bonus payments to
measures of observed effort.
Table III reports the effect of performance pay on screening effort, measured by the number of loan file sections reviewed when the only cost of effort was the loan officer’s time
(Columns [1] and [2]), as well as when the loan officer was required to pay to view additional
tabs (Columns [3] and [4]). High-powered incentives significantly increase screening effort.
On average, loan officers facing high-powered incentives viewed .4 additional tabs of information when there was no charge to view tabs (the mean number of tabs viewed was 5.06
when information was free, and 3.99 when information was costly). When information was
costly, high-powered incentives had an even stronger effect, increasing the average number
of tabs viewed by .8-1.2. These effects are statistically significant across all specifications.
Interestingly, we do not observe effort to be significantly lower when loan officers face origination bonuses, although the standard errors are not small enough to rule out meaningful
effects. These results confirm that loan officers respond strongly to monetary incentives, and
suggest that performance pay can incentivize effort in the review of borrower information.

21

4.3

Risk-Assessment and Risk-Taking

How do performance incentives affect the perception of credit risk and actual risk-taking?
We measure loan officers’ subjective risk assessment of credit risk using the non-binding
internal risk-ratings that participants were asked to complete while evaluating loans.28
In Table IV we use these internal ratings to explore the effect of incentives on the perception of credit risk. We find strong evidence that the structure of performance incentives
distorts the subjective assessment of credit risk. Loan officers facing incentives that reward
loan origination inflate internal ratings by as much as .16 standard deviations. In the specification with loan officer and loan fixed effects (Table IV, Column [2]), we see that the size
of the coefficient increases in proportion to the incentive that is placed on origination.
There are two interpretations that are consistent with this finding. Consider a model in
which loan officers screen to detect negative signals about a potential borrower. A reduction
in effort would result in fewer negative signals, and higher loan ratings. An alternative
possibility, which we cannot rule out is that loan officers may fear harm to their reputation
if they approve a loan they have rated poorly, and therefore inflate ratings of loans they
are going to approve. Finally, our findings are also consistent with a behavioral view of
risk-assessment, which is outside the scope of our model: loan officers may change their
perception of credit risk if they are not comfortable thinking that the loans they wish to
approve under prevailing incentives are indeed of poor quality. This “wishful thinking”
effect has been discussed extensively in connection with subprime lending in the United
States (see e.g. Barberis [2012]) and documented in lab experiments (Mayraz [2012]). While
our experiment does not allow us to disentangle the degree to which each of these forces
is at work, an important implication of our results is that irrespective of the underlying
mechanism, the same set of clients is judged as collectively less risky when the bank offers
28

To obtain an unbiased measure of perceived credit risk, loan officers were reminded that risk-ratings
were not tied to compensation, and would not be reviewed by the lab staff or the loan officer’s employer.

22

an incentive scheme that places greater emphasis on lending volume.
We next turn to the effect of performance pay on risk-taking. Because the realized
outcome of a loan may be a poor proxy of the ex-ante riskiness at the time a loan is originated,
we construct a measure of ex-ante risk, by averaging the internal ratings of all loan officers
who observed a given file under the baseline incentive. We call this the “loan’s average
rating.” We also calculate the coefficient of variation for the baseline internal score, which
is a measure of the degree of disagreement of loan officers about the riskiness of the loan.
If high-powered incentives encourage more discerning lending decisions, they will lead loan
officers to approve loans with higher average rating and a lower variance. (Indeed, in our
data set, the coefficient of variation is strongly correlated with default.)
Table V tests this hypothesis. Rather than using the loan outcome, which is a noisy
measure and depends on idiosyncratic risk, we take advantage of the fact that we had over
100 loan officers rate each loan. We therefore define two measures of the riskiness of a loan,
based on the ratings given by the loan officers who evaluated loans under the baseline, lowpowered incentive scheme. The first measure is simply the mean risk rating. The second is the
coefficient of variation of the risk rating, which measures the degree of ex-ante disagreement
about the quality of a loan.
In the regressions in Table V, we restrict the sample to loans which a loan officer approved;
thus the coefficients give the average risk rating of loans approved under a particular incentive
scheme. We find that high-powered incentives lead to more conservative lending, though this
result is significant only for the measure of business and financial risk (Columns [5] and [6]).
We also find that high-powered incentives cause loan officers to shy away from loans that
are risky in the sense that there is greater ex-ante disagreement about the interpretation of
information contained in the loan file, as reflected in greater variance of a loan’s baseline risk
rating. Loans approved under high-powered incentives are characterized by a significantly
lower coefficient of variation of their baseline rating.
23

4.4

Lending Decisions and Loan-Level Profit

In Table VI, we turn to the impact of performance pay on lending decisions and loan level
profit. We find that loan officers facing compensation schemes that do not penalize default
are dramatically more likely to originate loans (Columns [1] and [2]). Compared to the
baseline condition, high-powered incentives lead to only slightly more conservative lending
decisions, with the share of loans approved dropping by between 3.6 and .04%. This is a
small effect relative to the mean acceptance rate of 71% under the baseline. Incentive schemes
that reward origination, on the other hand, result in a dramatic increase in the probability of
approval. Under the origination bonus treatment, loan approvals increase by approximately
8 percentage points, statistically significant at the 1% level. The probability of approval
increases monotonically for the two repayment bonus incentives, with the probability of
approval increasing by 9–13.5 and 12.2–15.4 percentage points, respectively.
Of course, incentivizing more or less lending is relatively easy; the more interesting question is whether incentives can make loan officers more discerning. Table VI, Columns [3] and
[4] show that laxer incentives increase the fraction of good loan clients who are approved,
roughly in proportion to the overall effect on lending. We find a dramatically different pattern for non-performing loans: loan officers facing the high-powered incentive scheme are 11
percentage points less likely to approve these bad loans, a result that is significant at the
five percent level in column [5], despite the smaller sample size. In contrast, we find large
increases in the fraction of non-performing loans approved under an incentive scheme that
does not penalize poor screening decisions. The pattern is similar for the sample of loans that
were initially rejected by the bank, though the statistical significance of the high-powered
incentive effect is lost.
In Table VI, Columns [9] to [12], we study the effect of performance pay on the profitability of bank lending. Our first measure is the net present value to the lender of repayments,

24

less the amount disbursed, restricting the sample to loans approved by our experimental
subjects.29 This measure is relevant for a lending institution that seeks to maximize average
profitability per loan made, such as a capital-constrained lender. Columns [9] and [10] show
that high-powered incentives dramatically improve the profitability of lending, raising profit
per loan by US$ 149 to US$ 176 per loan, approximately 5% of the median loan size. The
final two columns of Table VI consider profit per screened loan, setting the NPV of a loan
that is rejected by an experimental subject to zero. This measure makes most sense for a
lender whose lending opportunities may be limited and may face difficulties sourcing additional clients. Again, we find that high-powered incentives improve profitability by roughly
similar magnitudes, though the result is only statistically significant in the specification with
loan officer fixed-effects.
In our setting, the net interest margin is quite high (around 30%), so one might be concerned that high-powered incentives lead loan officers to behave too conservatively, declining
profitable loans. In fact, we observe that high-powered incentives improve the quality of origination, and are therefore likely a profitable proposition from the bank’s perspective, even
when screening costs, reduced volume, and the cost of the incentive payments themselves
are taken into consideration.

4.5

Deferred Compensation

Efforts to regulate the compensation of loan originators have often focused on the alleged
“short-termism” present in many performance contracts in banking and have therefore aimed
at extending the time-horizon of incentive payments. If loan officers have higher discount
rates than shareholders, however, deferred compensation will blunt the effect of incentives.30
29

Because we do not observe the outcome of loans that were originally rejected by the lender, we do not
include these loans in our profit calculations.
30
One need not assume loan officers are impatient: credit-constraints or concern about separation from
employers could also cause loan officers to discount future payments at high rates.

25

In this subsection, we test how the effects of incentive payments vary when the time
horizon of payouts is changed. It is worth noting that any compensation that varies with
loan repayment must be paid with some delay, as it takes time to observe whether loans
perform or not. The intent of our experimental treatments is to vary the extent of this
delay in performance-based compensation. We are primarily interested in understanding
whether deferred compensation weakens incentives for costly screening effort. We therefore
restrict attention to the subset of “costly information” treatments, in which loan officers
pay to access additional sections of the loan application. We operationalize the concept
of deferred compensation by comparing loan officer behavior under immediate performance
pay (for low-powered, high-powered and origination incentives) to behavior under a series of
treatments, in which incentive payments were awarded after a period of 90 days.31
Table VII presents the results of the deferred compensation intervention. In Panel A, we
report the effect of deferred compensation on screening effort. Panel B reports on the effect
of deferred compensation on risk-taking, and treatment effects of deferred compensation
on loan-level profits are reported in Panel C. Note that in contrast to the previous tables,
the omitted category and relevant basis for comparison here is the low-powered treatment
with costly information. At the foot of the table, we report t-tests comparing the effect of
immediate versus deferred compensation. Consistent with the predictions of our model, the
results show that deferred compensation significantly weakens the impact of high-powered
incentives. This is most apparent in the effect of deferred incentives on screening effort, as
measured by loan sections purchased (Table VII, Columns [3] and [4]). In Column [3], the
difference between immediate high-powered incentive payments and the exact same payments
deferred 90 days is large, [1.225 - (-.454)], and significant at the 1 percent level. While
31

Note that our estimates do not differentiate between the pure effect of deferring incentive payments and
the lower real value of the payment at a future date. The setup of our treatments assumes that the relevant
comparison in a real world compensation contracts is between the nominal value of payment today versus
the same payment at a future date.

26

high-powered incentives drive loan officers to lend more conservatively (Columns [5] and
[6]), deferring those same payments attenuates this effect. High-powered incentives lead
loan officers to shy away from loans that appear riskier ex-ante, irrespective of whether the
high-powered incentives are deferred (Columns [7] and [8]). Finally, the point estimates of
profitability are lower for deferred weak (baseline) incentives, as well as the high-powered
incentives, though the difference is significant at the 10% level only for weak incentives.

4.6

Relaxing Limited Liability

In the same way that banks benefiting from deposit insurance and other implicit guarantees may be tempted to take high-risk low-NPV gambles, loan officers seeking to maximize
their variable compensation may be tempted to take excessive risks due to the fact that
they are protected by limited liability. To test how the presence of limited liability, an inherent characteristic of incentive contracts for loan originators, affects loan officer behavior,
we randomly assigned loan officers to a treatment that relaxed the officer’s limited liabity
constraint. In this treatment, participants received an endowment of Rs 200 (US$ 4.5) at
the beginning of each session, which was theirs to take home unless their incentive payments
for the session were negative. The worst outcome for a loan officer would be to approve two
bad loans and decline four good loans under high-powered incentives, in which case incentive payments would be Rs -200. The endowment therefore completely relaxed the limited
liability constraint for the session.
Table VIII presents the results. We find evidence to suggest that relaxing limited liability
indeed increases loan officers’ screening effort (Columns [3] and [4]), though the differences
are not statistically significant. Surprisingly, loan officers approve loans that appear to be
on average lower quality (Column [5]) when limited liability is relaxed. When taking lending
decisions, loan officers are more conservative without limited liability, though the size of this

27

difference is modest (the difference in coefficients in Column [7] is 2.9 percentage points)
and not statistically significant. Taken at face value, these results suggest that ensuring loan
officers have more skin in the game has only modest effects on effort and the profitability of
lending decisions. Note, however that in a loan officer’s real work environment ‘unlimited’
liability may include career considerations and the possibility of losing one’s job. In our
experiment, we only partly capture these non-pecuniary factors, so that our results should
be interpreted as lower bound estimates.

5

Do Loan Officer Characteristics Matter?

The analysis so far documents that the structure of performance pay has important effects
on loan officer behavior. However, individual ability and personality traits may play an
important role in determining how loan officers respond to incentives.
In this subsection, we use loan officer characteristics to explore the mechanisms by which
incentives affect behavior, and to compare their relative importance. We proceed in three
steps. First, we benchmark the effect of performance pay against the heterogeneity in performance we observe absent such variation in monetary incentives. Second, we test whether
reputational motivations and career concerns can explain heterogeneity in effort, and document the size of the effect. Finally, we examine whether financial incentives interact with
loan officer personality traits to determine screening behavior: are greater financial rewards,
for example, less effective in eliciting effort from risk-averse individuals?
We are able to answer these questions because our data collection efforts included a detailed elicitation of loan officer characteristics and personality traits, including two widely
used personality tests: the ‘big five’ personality test (John et al. [1991]) and the ‘LOT-R’
life orientation test (Scheier et al. [1994]). While these tests are widely used, and a small lit-

28

erature has established that individual heterogeneity affects management decisions,32 there
is little work that systematically links employee personality traits to financial decisions. We
are aware of only one study in the finance literature, Graham et al. [2013], which uses psychometric tests to link the personality traits of senior executives to firms’ financial decisions.
We complement this work in several ways. We show that personality traits are an important determinant of employee behavior, and explain variation in effort, even in a setting
without explicit financial incentives. Second, an important finding in Graham et al. [2013]
is that growth firms employ less risk-averse executives, suggesting endogenous matching between firm and employee. This, however, leaves open the question whether empoyees with
different personality traits vary in their response to incentives. We are able to address this
question using exogenous variation in incentive contracts induced by our experiment.
The most direct test for individual heterogeneity is a joint test of significance of the loan
officer fixed effects from regression 1. We reject the hypotheses that loan officer heterogeneity
does not affect screening effort at the 1 percent level (F-Statistic 71.98, with N =204 degrees
of freedom). The magnitude of loan officer effects is economically significant, with officers
at the 75th percentile of the effort distribution viewing approximately 45 percent more tabs
than officers at the 25th percentile of the distribution. This effect size is large, in fact much
larger than the increase in effort observed when loan officers transition from baseline to
high-powered incentives. This variation helps explain why we observe screening effort even
when loan officers face no financial incentives. It also suggests that even in settings where
monetary incentives ‘work’, their efficacy may be bounded by fixed personality traits.
The decision to exert screening effort is likely to depend on more than compensation
policy alone: even in settings without explicit monetary incentives, reputational concerns
and the prospect of promotion may motivate employees. Our next test examines whether
reputational concerns drive screening behavior, by examining whether individuals whose
32

See Bertrand and Schoar [2003], Malmendier and Tate [2005] and Landier and Thesmar [2009].

29

characteristics indicate stronger reputational concerns behave differently. To do this, we
estimate regressions of the form:

yil =

K−1
X
k=1

βk T +

L
X
l=1

γl g +

K−1
L
XX

δkl (T ∗ g) + θi + θl + ζ 0 Ril + ξ 0 Xil + εil

(2)

k=1 l=1

where g is a personality trait, Xil is a control vector, which includes loan officer age, rank,
gender, education, business experience, dummy variables for branch manager experience and
employment at a private sector bank, Ril is a matrix of treatment conditions and all other
variables are as previously defined. We consider both the main effect of each personality
trait, as well as their interaction with the exogenously assigned monetary incentives. The
dependent variable is always effort, which is measured by the number of sections of the loan
file that the loan officer reviews. Columns [1]–[4] include all observations, while columns
[5]–[8] are restricted to the sample of observations in which loan offers faced an explicit
monetary cost for viewing additional sections of the loan file.
We first consider the possibility that loan officer behavior is driven by career concerns
–a special type of reputational motivation, which would imply that effort is a decreasing
function of age. Consistent with the career concerns hypothesis, Panel A of Table IX shows
that, ceteris paribus, older loan officers exert less effort. Taking the point estimate from
column [5], a loan officer close to retirement (aged 60) will review .36 fewer loan file sections
than a 30-year old officer. This represents a ten percent reduction in effort. The presence
of career concerns can also explain why loan officers are motivated to exert effort and make
appropriate lending decisions even in the absence of explicit financial incentives. The second
entry of Table IX, Panel A examines whether loan officers from private sector banks behave
differently than those employed by public sector banks. Private banks are likely to be more
meritocratic and offer faster promotion paths so that the returns to demonstrating one’s type
may be higher. Similarly, private banks may attract employees who are more responsive to
30

implicit career incentives. Both mechanisms would suggest stronger career concerns, and
imply that private bankers exert greater baseline effort when compared to their public sector
counterparts. We find that this is indeed the case: private sector loan officers exert greater
baseline screening effort under any monetary incentive scheme.
Second, using data from surveys and psychometric tests, IX, Panel B examines how
loan officer behavior varies with fixed personality traits. We find that personality matters:
individuals who are risk-averse, altruistic, or state that they wish to live up to personal and
professional expectations exert significantly higher effort under any monetary incentive. By
contrast, loan officers who are overconfident33 screen significantly less. Personality also affects
risk-ratings and the ability to correctly identify good loans. Optimistic loan officers rate
loans significantly higher. Risk-averse loan officers are significantly more likely to approve
non-performing loans while the opposite is true for impatient loan officers: a loan officer
in the top decile of the discount rate distribution is 16 percent more likely to originate a
non-performing loan than the average loan officer.
Finally, to shed light on the mechanism through which performance-based compensation
affects loan officer behavior, we test whether monetary rewards affect effort and performance
directly, or through their interaction with fixed personality traits. Standard agency theory
would, for example, predict that it is more expensive to induce effort when agents are riskaverse. The opposite may be true for traits such as optimism or overconfidence, which
might accentuate the response to high-powered incentives. The answer to this question
has important implications for financial firms: if the effects of incentives vary by employee
type, then firms must not only seek out employees with desirable personality traits, but also
consider which type of incentive contract is the best match for their employee population.
By and large, we find only weak evidence that the effects of incentives vary by personal
33

We identify a loan officer as overconfident if she incorrectly ranks herself in the top decile of the performance distribution.

31

characteristics. In column [3] of Panel B.4, we find that more conscientious individuals alter
their behavior less in response to changes in incentives, though this pattern is not consistent
across measures of effort (column [7] of Panel B.4). In total, five of the twenty-four possible
interactions in Table IX, Panel B are statistically significant at the five percent level. This is
more than would be expected by chance, but does not provide overwhelming evidence that
incentives are mediated by personality type.
More confident, optimistic, or conscientious loan officers do not respond more strongly
to performance-based compensation than their peers. Two interesting exceptions, consistent
with the reputational motivations documented above, are worth noting. First, we do find that
private sector bankers respond to incentives differently. In particular, we find an asymmetric
response when officers are moved from the baseline, low-incentive treatment. When given
higher-powered incentives, private sector officers do not increase effort, but when offered the
origination bonus scheme, they dramatically reduce effort. Second, loan officers who report
a strong “desire to live up to the expectations of others” exert significantly higher effort
under origination incentives. That is, they provide effort under conditions where it is most
likely to set them apart and signal their type.
In summary, our analysis suggests that career concerns are an important mechanism
which generates effort above and beyond what would be expected from immediate financial
incentives alone. A second lesson from this section is that personal characteristics are an
important determinant of loan officer behavior that may constrain the ability of performance
pay to affect screening effort. However, we do not find systematic evidence that incentives
work differentially for officers with different personal characteristics.

32

6

Conclusion

Understanding how performance compensation affects risk-taking is a question of first order
importance in finance. However, identifying the individual response to incentives is difficult,
as we rarely observe decisions under different and truly exogenous incentive environments.
In this paper, we use an experiment with experienced loan officers to identify the effect of
performance-based compensation on risk-assessment and risk-taking. We find a strong and
economically significant effect of performance pay on risk-assessment and lending behavior.
At the same time, we document several factors that constrain the ability of conventional
incentive contracts to alter loan officer behavior. First, deferred compensation and limited
liability, two standard features of loan officer compensation contracts, severely attenuate the
response to performance pay. Second, using psychometric tests, we show that personality
traits and demographic characteristics have a strong effect on screening effort that is unrelated to monetary incentives. Irrespective of monetary incentives, effort declines with age,
which is consistent with the presence of career concerns. Our results suggest that performance pay affects behavior directly, rather than by accentuating traits such as risk-aversion,
conscientiousness or overconfidence. Finally, we provide evidence that monetary incentives
distort the perception of credit risk: permissive incentives lead officers to rate loans as significantly less risky than the same loans evaluated under pay-for-performance.
These findings have important implications for the design of performance-based compensation in lending. Lenders have increasingly relied on credit scoring models rather than
human judgment. But it is unclear whether credit scoring can outperform human judgment,
particularly in informationally opaque credit markets, such as the one we study. Nor is it
obvious what individual characteristics are associated with screening ability and to what
extent they help or hinder the use of performance incentives as a tool to manage credit-risk.
The results in this paper are a first step towards answering these important questions.

33

References
Acharya, Viral, Lubomir V. Litov, and Simone M. Sepe, “Non-Executive Incentives
and Bank Risk-Taking,” Working Paper, 2013.
Agarwal, Sumit and Itzhak Ben-David, “Do Loan Officer Incentives Lead to Lax Lending Standards?,” Ohio State University, Fisher College of Business. Working Paper WP2012-7., 2012.
Akerlof, George A. and Rachel A. Kranton, “Economics and Identity,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 2000, 115 (3), 715–753.
Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin, “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence from a Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines,” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, May 2006, 121 (2), 635–672.
Baker, George, Michael Jensen, and Kevin Murphy, “Compensation and Incentives:
Practice vs. Theory,” Journal of Finance, July 1988, 43 (3), 593–616.
Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul, “Field Experiments with Firms,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (3), 63–82.
Barberis, Nicholas, “Psychology and the Financial Crisis of 2007-2008,” in M. Haliassos,
ed., Financial Innovation and Crisis, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012.
Bebchuk, Lucian, Alma Cohen, and Holger Spamann, “The Wages of Failure,” Yale
Journal on Regulation, 2010, 27, 257–282.
and Holger Spamann, “Regulating Bankers’ Pay,” Georgetown Law Journal, 2010, 98
(2), 247–287.
Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole, “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation,” The Review of
Economic Studies, 2003, pp. 489–520.
Berg, Tobias, Manju Puri, and Jorg Rocholl, “Loan Officer Incentives and the Limits
of Hard Information,” Mimeo. Duke University Fuqua School of Business, 2012.
Berger, Allen N. and Gregory F. Udell, “The institutional memory hypothesis and the
procyclicality of bank lending behavior,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, October
2004, 13 (4), 458–495.
, Leora F. Klapper, and Gregory F. Udell, “The ability of banks to lend to informationally opaque small businesses,” Journal of Banking & Finance, December 2001, 25
(12), 2127–2167.
Bernheim, Douglas, “A Theory of Conformity,” Journal of Political Economy, 1994, 102
(51), 841–877.
34

Bertrand, Marianne and Antoinette Schoar, “Managing with style: the effect of managers on firm policies,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (4), 1169–1208.
Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen, “Human Resource Management and Productivity,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4B
of Handbook of Labor Economics 2011, chapter 19, pp. 1697–1769.
Bolton, Patrick, Hamid Mehran, and Joel Shapiro, “Executive Compensation and
Risk-Taking,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve bank of New York., 2010.
Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni and Robert Marquez, “Lending Booms and Lending Standards,” Journal of Finance, October 2006, 61 (5), 2511–2546.
, Deniz Igan, and Luc Laeven, “Credit Booms and Lending Standards: Evidence from
the Subprime Mortgage Market,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 03 2012, 44,
367–384.
Devlin, Robert, Debt and Crisis in Latin America: the Supply Side of the Story, Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1989.
Edmans, Alex and Qi Liu, “Inside Debt,” Review of Finance, April 2011, 15 (1), 75–102.
Fahlenbrach, Rudiger and Rene Stulz, “Bank CEO Incentives and the Credit Crisis,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 2012, 99, 11–26.
Freixas, X. and J.-C. Rochet, Microeconomics of Banking, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2008.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Rodrigo Valdes, and Oscar Landerretche, “Lending
Booms: Latin America and the World,” Journal of LACEA Economia, 2001.
Graham, John, Campbell Harvey, and Manju Puri, “Managerial Attitudes and Corporate Actions,” Journal of Financial Economics., 2013, 109 (1), 103–121.
Harrison, Glenn W. and John List, “Field Experiments,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2004, 42 (4), 1013–1059.
Harrison, Glenn W, John A List, and Charles Towe, “Naturally Occurring Preferences
and Exogenous Laboratory Experiments: A Case Study of Risk Aversion,” Econometrica,
2007, 75 (2), 1468–1482.
Heider, Florian and Roman Inderst, “Loan Prospecting,” Review of Financial Studies.,
2012, 25, 2381–2415.
Hertzberg, Andrew, Jose Liberti, and Daniel Paravisini, “Information and Incentives
Inside the Firm: Evidence from Loan Officer Rotation,” The Journal of Finance, 2010.

35

Jensen, Michael and Kevin Murphy, “Performance Pay and Top-Management Incentives,” Journal of Political Economy, April 1990, 98 (2), 225–64.
John, O. P., E. M. Donahue, and R.L. Kentle, “The Big Five Inventory–Versions 4a
and 54,” Berkeley, Institute of Personality and Social Research, Berkeley, CA: University
of California., 1991.
Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy K. Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, “Did
Securitization Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 2010, 125 (1).
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore, “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy,
April 1997, 105 (2), 211–48.
Landier, Augustin and David Thesmar, “Financial Contracting with Optimistic Entrepreneurs: Theory and Evidence,” Review of Financial Studies, 2009, 22 (1), 117–150.
Levitt, Steven and John List, “Was there really a Hawthorne Effect at the Hawthorne
Plant? An Analysis of the Original Illumination Experiments,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2011, 3 (1), 224–238.
Levitt, Steven D. and John A List, “What do laboratory experiments measuring social preferences reveal about the real world?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2007,
pp. 153–174.
Liberti, Jose and Atif Mian, “The Effect of Hierarchies on Information Use,” Review of
Financial Studies, 2009, 22 (4), 4057–4090.
Malmendier, Ulrike and G. Tate, “CEO Overconfidence and Corporate Investment,”
Journal of Finance, 2005, 60 (6), 2661–2700.
Mayraz, Guy, “Wishful Thinking,” Working Paper, Oxford University, Department of
Economics, 2012.
Meier, Stephan and Charles Sprenger, “Present-Biased Preferences and Credit Card
Borrowing,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2010, 2 (1), 193–210.
Murphy, Kevin, Executive Compensation, Elsevier Science North Holland, 1999.
Paravisini, Daniel and Antoinette Schoar, “The Information and Agency Effects of
Scores: Randomized Evidence from Credit Committees,” Working Paper, 2012.
Petersen, Mitchell A. and Raghuram G. Rajan, “The Benefits of Lending Relationships: Evidence from Small Business Data,” The Journal of Finance, 1994, 49 (1), 3–37.
Prendergast, Canice, “The Provision of Incentives in Firms,” Journal of Economic Literature, 1999, 37 (1), pp. 7–63.
36

Qian, Jun, Philip E. Strahan, and Zhishu Yang, “The Impact of Incentives and
Communication costs on Information Production: Evidence from Bank Lending,” Mimeo,
2011, (1).
Scheier, M., C. Carver, and M. Bridges, “Distinguishing optimism from neuroticism
(and trait-anxiety, self-mastery, and self-esteem): A re-evaluation of the Life Orientation
Test,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1994, 67, 1063–1078.
Shapiro, Jesse, “Is there a daily discount rate? Evidence from the food stamp nutrition
cycle,” Journal of Public Economics, 2005, 89 (2), 303–325.
Stein, Jeremy C., “Information Production and Capital Allocation: Decentralized versus
Hierarchical Firms,” The Journal of Finance, 2002, 57 (5), 1891–1921.

37

Figures and Tables

0

1

2

Density

3

4

5

Figure 1: Loan Officer Performance

.3

.4

.5

.6

.7

.8

% of Lending Decisions Correct [Baseline]

Notes: This figure shows the distribution of loan officer performance, measured by the average percentage of correct decisions per session under the Baseline treatment. The line plots the Kernel density of
the performance distribution. We define a correct lending decision as approving an ex-post performing
loan or declining an ex-post non-performing loan.

38

.7
.6
.5
.4

% Lending Decisions Correct

.8

Figure 2: Learning During the Experiment

0

5

10

15

20

Number of Experimental Sessions Completed

.4
.2
0
−.2

Profit per Approved Loan [US$ ’000]

.6

(a) Accuracy of Lending Decisions

0

5

10

15

20

Number of Experimental Sessions Completed

(b) Profitability of Lending Decisions
Notes: This figure examines the presence of learning effects over the course of the experiment by
plotting (a) the percentage of correct decisions by the total number of experimental sessions completed
and (b) the profit per approved loan by the number of experimental sessions completed. A correct
lending decision is defined as a loan officer correctly approving a performing loan or correctly declining a
loan that became delinquent. The dashed lines and shaded areas are Kernel-weighted local polynomial
regressions with corresponding 95% confidence intervals.

39

Figure 3: Distribution of Internal Ratings

0

.01

.02

.03

.04

(a) Non-performing Loans

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

0

.01

.02

.03

.04

(b) Performing Loans

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Notes: This figure plots the distribution of internal ratings assigned to loans evaluated under the
baseline treatment. Panel (a) shows the distribution of risk-ratings for the sample of non-performing
loans and loans that were declined by the Lender ex-ante; panel (b) plots the distribution for performing
loans. Vertical lines show the median of the distribution. A Kolgomorov-Smirnov test rejects equality
of distributions at 1% (p-value¡0.001).

40

41

Low-Powered [Baseline]

High-Powered

Origination Bonus

A

B

C

Payments [amount in Rs]

Treatment

[20, 20, 0]

[50, -100, 0]

[20, 0, 10]

[Perform | Default | Decline]

Incentive

Incentive

2,548

2,946

7,420

Observations

762

654

3,782

No

1,786

2,292

3,638

Yes

Information

Costly

1,632

2,496

6,568

No

916

450

852

Yes

Compensation

Deferred

N/A

978

N/A

No

2,548

1,968

7,420

Yes

Liability

Limited

The table summarizes the experimental incentive schemes. Each incentive scheme consists of a conditional payment wP for approving a loan that performs, a
conditional payment wD for approving a loan that subsequently defaults and an outside payment w for declining a loan, in which case the outcome of the loan
is not observed. All incentives refer to conditional payoffs for an individual lending decision.

Table I: Summary of Incentive Treatments

Table II: Loan Officer Summary Statistics
Panel A reports demographic summary statistics of the participants (Columns [1] to [4]), comparing experiment participants to the staff of all loan officers of a large public sector bank in the state in which the experiment was carried
out (Columns [5] to [8]). Rank is the loan officer’s seniority level in the bank ranging from 1 (lowest) to 5 (highest).
Experience is the total number of years the participant has been employed with the bank. Branch Manager is a dummy
variable indicating whether the participant has ever served as a branch manager or in a comparable management role.
Business Experience is a dummy variable taking on a value of 1 if a loan officer reports having any previous business
experience outside banking. Panel B shows summary statistics for the various tests of attitudes and personality characteristics completed by participants of the experiment. Details on the personality tests and construction of variables are
provided in Supplemental Appendix A.

Panel A: Demographics
Experiment participants [N=209]

Bank sample [N=3,111]

N

Mean

Median

StdDev

N

Mean

Median

StdDev

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Male

206

0.90

1.00

0.30

3,111

0.9

1.00

0.30

Age

206

37.60

35.00

10.94

3,111

37.9

35.00

12.0

Experience in banking [Years]

206

12.76

10.00

11.30

3,111

13.90

11.00

13.00

Rank [1 (Lowest) - 5 (Highest)]

206

1.94

2.00

1.00

3,111

1.60

2.00

0.75

Education [Master’s degree]

200

0.33

0.00

0.47

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Private sector banker [Yes=1]

206

0.20

0.00

0.40

3,111

1.00

1.00

0.00

Panel B: Personality traits
Experiment participants
N

Mean

Median

StdDev

p10

p25

p75

p90

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Impatient

74

0.12

0.00

0.33

0.00

0.00

0.00

1.00

Risk averse

172

0.75

1.00

0.43

0.00

0.50

1.00

1.00

Optimism [LOT-R]

64

2.37

2.33

0.46

1.83

2.17

2.67

3.00

Conscientiousness [BFI]

72

3.81

3.89

0.47

3.11

3.50

4.17

4.44

Confidence

71

0.73

0.78

0.20

0.50

0.60

0.85

0.99

Overconfidence

69

0.19

0.00

0.39

0.00

0.00

0.00

1.00

Altruism

172

0.70

1.00

0.46

0.00

0.00

1.00

1.00

42

Table III: The Effect of Incentives on Effort
This table reports treatment effects of performance pay on screening effort. Each column reports
results from a separate regression. The omitted treatment category is the low-powered baseline
incentive. The dependent variable in Column [1] and [2] is number of sections of the loan file viewed;
the dependent variable in Columns [3] and [4] is the number of loan file sections reviewed when loan
officers were required to pay for additional information. The regressions in Columns [1] and [2] include
the entire sample, while Columns [3] and [4] limit the data to evaluations to the “costly information
setting.” All regressions include a lab fixed effect, randomization stratum and week fixed effects, as
well as dummies to control for treatment conditions not reported in this table. Loan officer controls
include age, seniority, rank, education, and indicators for branch manager and business experience.
Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the loan officer × session level. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05
*** p<0.01.
Free information

Costly information

Loan file

Loan file

sections reviewed

sections reviewed

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.434*

0.400***

1.225***

0.794***

(0.23)

(0.14)

(0.42)

(0.25)

0.083

0.005

-0.147

-0.156

(0.22)

(0.14)

(0.40)

(0.21)

No

Yes

No

Yes

Loan officer fixed effects

No

Yes

No

Yes

Loan officer controls

Yes

No

Yes

No

Number of observations

14,405

14,675

8,520

8,688

R-squared, adjusted

0.232

0.689

0.271

0.725

Baseline, omitted

High-powered

Origination bonus

Loan fixed effects

43

Table IV: The Effect of Incentives on Risk-Assessment
This table reports the effect of performance pay on loan officers’ subjective assessment of credit
risk. Each column shows results from a separate regression. The omitted treatment category is
the low-powered baseline incentive. The dependent variable in regressions [1] and [2] is the overall
risk rating, standardized to have mean zero. The dependent variable in Columns [3] and [4] is the
normalized sub-rating for all categories that pertain to the personal risk of a potential applicant.
In Columns [5] and [6] the dependent variable is the normalized sub-rating for all rating categories
that pertain to the business, management and financial risk of a loan applicant. All regressions
include a lab fixed effect, randomization stratum and week fixed effects, as well as dummies to
control for treatment conditions not reported in this table. Loan officer controls include age,
seniority, rank, education, and indicators for branch manager and business experience. Standard
errors are clustered at the loan officer × session level. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01.
Internal rating
Overall rating

Personal and

Business and

management risk

financial risk

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.029

0.006

0.011

-0.001

0.054

0.02

(0.09)

(0.04)

(0.09)

(0.04)

(0.09)

(0.04)

0.144*

0.006

0.130*

-0.015

0.156**

0.021

(0.08)

(0.04)

(0.08)

(0.04)

(0.08)

(0.04)

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Loan officer fixed effects

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Loan officer controls

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Number of observations

14,405

14,675

14,405

14,675

14,405

14,675

R-squared, adjusted

0.151

0.640

0.142

0.644

0.161

0.626

Baseline, omitted

High-powered

Origination bonus

Loan fixed effects

44

45

Table V: The Effect of Incentives on Risk-Taking

10,180
0.08

Observations

R-squared, adjusted

0.096

10,402

No

0.07

10,180

Yes

No

No

(0.03)

0.031

(0.03)

-0.024

0.087

10,402

No

Yes

No

(0.03)

0.032

(0.03)

-0.03

0.082

10,180

Yes

No

No

(0.03)

0.025

(0.03)

-0.058*

(5)

0.098

10,402

No

Yes

No

(0.03)

0.022

(0.03)

-0.065*

(6)

financial risk

(4)

management risk
(3)

Business and

Personal and

0.06

9,349

Yes

No

No

(0.00)

-0.008*

(0.01)

-0.015***

(7)

(8)

0.081

9,555

No

Yes

No

(0.00)

-0.007

(0.01)

-0.015***

Overall rating

[Coefficient of variation]b

[b] Coefficient of variation of ratings assiged to loan application l by all loan officers reviewing the loan under the baseline treatment.

0.062

9,349

Yes

No

No

(0.00)

-0.007

(0.01)

-0.018***

(9)

0.084

9,555

No

Yes

No

(0.00)

-0.006

(0.01)

-0.018***

(10)

management risk

Personal and

Perceived loan quality of approved loans

[a] Mean rating assigned to loan application l by all loan officers evaluating the loan under the baseline treatment.

Yes

Loan officer controls

Yes

No

No
No

(0.03)

Loan fixed effects

0.025

(0.03)

(0.03)

(0.03)
0.027

-0.046

(2)

-0.039

Loan officer effects

Origination bonus

High-powered

Baseline, omitted

(1)

Overall rating

[Mean

rating]a

Perceived quality of approved loans

0.062

9,349

Yes

No

No

(0.00)

-0.010**

(0.01)

-0.013**

(11)

(12)

0.082

9,555

No

Yes

No

(0.00)

-0.009*

(0.01)

-0.013**

financial risk

Business and

This table reports treatment effects of performance pay on risk-taking. Each column reports results from a separate regression. The omitted treatment category is the low-powered
baseline incentive. The dependent variable in Columns [1] through [6] is a measure of the perceived quality of the loan: the average internal rating of each loan reported by all
loan officers under the baseline treatment. To capture the degree of ex-ante uncertainty about the quality of a loan, Columns [7] to [12] repeat the exercise using the coefficient
of variation of internal rating assigned to a given loan under the baseline treatment as the dependent variable. The internal rating is normalized to have mean zero and standard
deviation of 1, hence effect sizes are standard deviations. All regressions include a lab fixed effect, randomization stratum and week fixed effects, as well as dummies to control for
treatment conditions not reported in this table. Loan officer controls include age, seniority, rank, education, and indicators for branch manager and business experience. Standard
errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the loan officer × session level. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01.

46

Table VI: Incentives, Lending Decisions and Profit

R-squared, adjusted

0.025

14,405

Loan officer controls

Number of observations

No
Yes

Loan officer fixed effects

0.212

14,675

No

Yes

Yes

(0.02)

(0.02)
No

0.079***

(0.02)

0.083***

-0.004

(0.02)

(2)

-0.036*

Loan fixed effects

Origination bonus

High-powered

Baseline, omitted

(1)

0.025

9,398

Yes

No

No

(0.02)

0.087***

(0.03)

-0.010

(3)

0.203

9,575

No

Yes

Yes

(0.02)

0.068***

(0.03)

0.015

(4)

0.054

2,730

Yes

No

No

(0.05)

0.048

(0.06)

-0.110**

(5)

0.244

2,778

No

Yes

Yes

(0.05)

0.082*

(0.06)

-0.063

(6)

0.080

2,277

Yes

No

No

(0.06)

0.098*

(0.06)

-0.042

(7)

0.300

2,322

No

Yes

Yes

(0.05)

0.102*

(0.06)

-0.014

(8)

0.009

9,242

Yes

No

No

(78.04)

29.489

(85.01)

148.986*

(9)

0.020

9,435

No

Yes

No

(79.02)

-4.182

(86.81)

175.907**

(10)

per approved loan

Declined by bank

Panel B: Profit
Non-performing

Total

Performing

Panel A: Approved

0.007

11,853

Yes

No

No

(60.96)

80.193

(62.51)

84.900

(11)

0.016

12,074

No

Yes

No

(61.21)

56.500

(63.76)

114.930*

(12)

per screened loan

This table reports the effect of performance pay on loan approvals and the profitability of lending. Each column reports results from a separate regression. The omitted treatment
category is the low-powered baseline incentive. The dependent variable in Columns [1] to [8] is a dummy equal to one for loans approved by an experimental participant and zero
otherwise. The estimates in Columns [1] and [2] are based on the full sample. Estimates in Columns [3] and [4] are based on the sample of performing loans, estimates in Columns
[5] and [6] are based on the sample of non-performing loans, and estimates in Columns [7] and [8] are based on the sample of loans that were initially declined by the Lender.
Columns [9] to [12] report treatment estimates of incentives on profit per approved loan and profit per screened loan, in units of US$ ’000. All regressions include a lab fixed effect,
randomization stratum and week fixed effects, as well as dummies to control for treatment conditions not reported in this table. Loan officer controls include age, seniority, rank,
education, and indicators for branch manager and business experience. Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the loan officer × session level. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 ***
p<0.01.

47

Loan officer controls

[0.06]
[0.01]
[0.56]
8,520
0.282

Baseline

High-powered

Origination bonus

Observations

R-squared, adjusted

Test: immediate=deferred

No
Yes

Loan officer effects

0.724

8,688

[0.81]

[0.09]

[0.00]

No

Yes

Yes

(0.12)

(0.24)
No

-0.517***

(0.12)

-0.319

-0.497***

(0.25)

(0.15)

-0.409*

-0.364**

(0.28)

(0.13)

(0.25)
-0.512*

-0.125

(0.11)

-0.519***

0.102

(0.24)

-0.448*

Loan effects

Origination bonus, deferred

Origination bonus

High-powered, deferred

High-powered

Baseline, deferred

Baseline, omitted

0.271

8,520

[0.88]

[0.00]

[0.12]

Yes

No

No

(0.37)

-0.207

(0.40)

-0.147

(0.50)

-0.454

(0.42)

1.225***

(0.35)

-0.538

(3)

0.725

8,688

[0.28]

[0.02]

[0.21]

No

Yes

Yes

(0.23)

-0.387*

(0.21)

-0.156

(0.29)

0.034

(0.25)

0.794***

(0.20)

-0.248

(4)

0.075

8,090

[0.97]

[0.38]

[0.01]

No

Yes

No

(0.04)

0.185***

(0.04)

0.184***

(0.04)

0.048

(0.03)

0.081**

(0.04)

0.100***

(5)

Mean

0.104

7,263

[0.07]

[0.90]

[0.01]

No

Yes

No

(0.00)

-0.008*

(0.00)

-0.016***

(0.01)

-0.012*

(0.01)

-0.011**

(0.00)

-0.013***

(6)

cv

on information

sections reviewed
(2)

Average Internal Rating

Amount spent

Loan file

(1)

Panel B: Risk-taking

Panel A: Screening effort

0.054

8,520

[0.08]

[0.33]

[1.00]

Yes

No

No

(0.02)

0.079***

(0.02)

0.110***

(0.03)

-0.021

(0.02)

-0.048**

(0.02)

0.000

(7)

Approved

0.191

8,520

[0.88]

[0.10]

[0.19]

No

Yes

Yes

(0.02)

0.090***

(0.02)

0.093***

(0.03)

-0.017

(0.02)

-0.060***

(0.02)

0.025

(8)

0.654

5,619

[0.10]

[0.35]

[0.05]

No

Yes

No

(65.11)

-55.138

(74.73)

-165.972**

(105.13)

-60.365

(71.50)

39.656

(73.79)

-144.137*

(9)

approved

0.43

7,741

[0.44]

[0.19]

[0.06]

No

Yes

No

(62.48)

-15.003

(69.84)

-65.190

(100.10)

-52.466

(65.68)

78.682

(70.03)

-133.337*

(10)

screened

Profit per loan

Panel C: Lending and profit

This table reports treatment effects of deferring performance pay by three months. Each column reports results from a separate regression. The omitted treatment category is
the low-powered baseline condition. The dependent variable in Columns [1] and [2] is the number of loan file sections reviewed for each evaluated loan. The dependent variable in
Columns [3] and [4] is the amount spent on reviewing additional information under the “costly information” condition. In Columns [5] and [6] we consider the effect of deferred
compensation on risk-taking. The dependent variable is the mean and coefficient of variation of internal ratings assigned to each loan under the baseline for loans approved by
participants in the experiment as the outcome of interest, with the sample restricted to loans the loan officer approves. The dependent variable in Columns [7] and [8] is a dummy
equal to 1 if a loan evaluated in the experiment was approved and 0 otherwise. The dependent variables in Columns [9] and [10] report treatment estimates of monetary incentives
on profit per approved loan and profit per screened loan, in units of US$ ’000. All regressions include a lab fixed effect, randomization stratum and week fixed effects, as well as
dummies to control for treatment conditions not reported in this table. Loan officer controls include age, seniority, rank, education, and indicators for branch manager and business
experience. Test statistics at the foot of the table refer to t-tests for the equality of coefficients between the deferred and non-deferred treatment dummies. Standard errors, in
parentheses, are clustered at the loan officer × session level. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01.

Table VII: Deferred Compensation

48
No
Yes

Loan officer controls

[0.34]
8,520
0.282

High-powered with endowment:

Observations

R-squared, adjusted

Test: High-Powered no endowment=

No

Loan officer effects

(0.16)

Loan effects

[credit+endowment]

0.555***

(0.16)

[credit]

High-powered

0.345**

High-powered

[credit]

Baseline, omitted

0.724

8,688

[0.34]

No

Yes

Yes

(0.08)

0.372***

(0.10)

0.248**

0.271

8,520

[0.25]

Yes

No

No

(0.44)

1.900***

(0.42)

1.225***

(3)

0.725

8,688

[0.17]

No

Yes

Yes

(0.22)

1.260***

(0.25)

0.794***

(4)

0.073

6,100

[0.00]

No

Yes

No

(0.03)

-0.057*

(0.03)

0.081**

(5)

Mean

0.076

5,463

[0.00]

No

Yes

No

(0.01)

0.006

(0.01)

-0.011**

(6)

cv

credits spent

sections reviewed
(2)

Information

Loan file

(1)

Panel B: Risk-taking
Internal rating [baseline]

Panel A: Screening effort

0.054

8,520

[0.33]

Yes

No

No

(0.02)

-0.077***

(0.02)

-0.048**

(7)

Approved

0.240

8,688

[0.63]

No

Yes

Yes

(0.02)

-0.074***

(0.02)

-0.060***

(8)

0.661

5,694

[0.92]

No

Yes

No

(80.04)

49.900

(71.50)

39.656

(9)

approved

0.511

7,222

[0.53]

No

Yes

No

(69.50)

22.940

(65.68)

78.682

(10)

screened

Profit per loan

Panel C: Lending and profit

This table reports the effect of relaxing loan officers’ limited liability constraint. Each column reports results from a separate regression, the omitted category in each regression is
the low-powered baseline treatment. Panel A (Columns [1] to [4]) report treatment effects on screening effort, Panel B (Columns [5] and [6]) report treatment effects on risk-taking
and Panel C (Columns [6] to [8]) report treatment effects on loan approvals and profit per approved loan. The dependent variable in Columns [7]-[8] is a dummy equal to 1 if a
loan evaluated in the experiment was approved and 0 otherwise. The dependent variable in Columns [9] and [10] are the bank’s profit per approved loan, and the bank’s profit per
screened loan, respectively, denominated in units of US$ ’000. All regressions include a lab fixed effect, randomization stratum and week fixed effects, as well as dummies to control
for treatment conditions not reported in this table. Loan officer controls include age, seniority, rank, education, and indicators for branch manager and business experience. Test
statistics at the foot of the table refer to t-tests for the equality of coefficients between the high-powered treatment dummies when limited liability is present vs. relaxed. Standard
errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the loan officer × session level. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01.

Table VIII: Relaxing Limited Liability

Table IX: Heterogeneity in the Response to Incentives
This table examines the interaction between incentive schemes and loan officer personality traits. In each panel, the
first two columns report the main effect of the personality characteristic indicated in the panel heading. Additional
controls include loan officer age, rank, gender, education, experience in other business areas, dummy variables for branch
manager experience and employment by a private sector bank, loan officer confidence and all categories of the “big five”
personality test. All personality traits are as defined in Appendix A. Standard errors, in brackets, are clustered at the
loan officer×session level. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01.
Screening Effort
Sections reviewed
Main Effect
Panel A Career Concerns
A.1 Age

Information credits spent
Interaction

(1)

(2)

-0.02***

(0.01)

(3)

Main Effect
(4)

(5)

Interaction
(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.12***

High-powered

-0.71

(0.68)

0.03*

(0.02)

7.43*

(4.39)

0.02

(0.03)

Origination

-0.92

(0.67)

0.03

(0.02)

9.14**

(4.49)

-0.07

(0.05)

R-squared / N

0.455

14,405

0.42

3,828

A.2 Private Banker

0.39**

(0.17)

1.50***

(0.45)

High-powered

0.78**

(0.33)

-0.69

(0.43)

1.59*

(0.85)

-0.71

(0.79)

Origination

0.31

(0.31)

-0.46

(0.42)

0.72

(0.94)

-1.76**

(0.75)

R-squared / N

0.456

14,405

0.284

8,520

-0.55

(0.55)

-0.41

(1.06)

High-powered

0.28

(0.28)

3.00***

(0.76)

1.20*

(0.62)

3.01

(2.43)

Origination

0.14

(0.29)

1.38

(0.91)

-0.28

(0.69)

2.65

(1.99)

Panel B: Personality traits
B.1 Impatience

R-squared / N
B.2 Risk-aversion
High-powered
Origination

0.50

6,102

0.44

3,828

1.55***

(0.32)

1.46**

(0.57)

-0.86

(0.88)

1.32

(0.91)

3.86**

(1.79)

-2.00

(1.51)

-1.21

(0.92)

0.52

(1.08)

1.27

(0.87)

0.23

(1.39)

R-squared / N

0.504

6,102

0.425

3,828

B.3 Optimism

0.47

(0.33)

0.27

(0.64)

High-powered

0.55*

(0.29)

-0.80

(0.56)

0.32

(0.65)

-2.24**

(1.07)

Origination

0.33

(0.30)

-1.01

(0.91)

1.39**

(0.65)

-3.91***

(1.26)

0.500

6,102

0.42

3,828

-1.24**

(0.57)

-0.97

(5.27)

1.63*

(0.94)

0.42

(0.88)

R-squared / N
B.4 Conscientiousness

-0.43

(0.30)

High-powered

-5.97***

(1.71)

1.78***

(0.46)

Origination

-6.94***

(2.17)

1.96***

(0.59)

1.90

(5.18)

0.507

6,102

0.426

3,828

-1.01**

(0.46)

-1.07

(0.67)

R-squared / N
B.5 Overconfidence
High-powered

0.53*

(0.28)

-0.19

(0.86)

1.13*

(0.68)

1.51

(1.37)

Origination

0.04

(0.29)

1.18

(0.84)

-0.32

(0.80)

1.47

(1.07)

R-squared / N

0.501

6,102

0.434

3,828

49

Supplemental Appendix
Incentivizing Calculated Risk-Taking:
Evidence from an Experiment with
Commercial Bank Loan Officers

Shawn Cole

Martin Kanz

Leora Klapper

A

Measurement of Personality Traits

A.1 Personality tests
This section describes the tests used to measure loan officer personality traits. We use a
number of standard psychometric tests that are used in the behavioral economics literature,
specifically the literature on managerial attitudes and personality traits (see e.g. Landier
and Thesmar [2009], Graham, Harvey and Puri [2013]).
Optimism: We measure optimism using the revised LOT-R Life Orientation Test [Scheier
et al., 1994]. This psychometric test is widely used in the psychology literature. It measures
an individual’s level of optimism based on the following six salient questions which are
administered as part of a questionnaire including additional filler questions. Respondents
are asked to answer these questions on a scale ranging from “I agree a lot” to “I disagree a
lot”. The LOT-R score is calculated from the questions: [1] “In uncertain times, I usually
expect the best”, [2] “If something can go wrong for me, it will” [3] “I’m always optimistic
about my future” [4] “I hardly ever expect things to go my way” [5] “I rarely count on
good things happening to me” [6] “Overall, I expect more good things to happen than bad”.
Responses are coded from 0 to 4, so that higher values indicate greater optimism.
Figure A.1: The LOT-R personality test

1

Altruism: We measure altruism based on responses to the following question: “Suppose you
win Rs 1,00,000 in the lottery tomorrow and have a choice of keeping the money for yourself
or sharing it with friends and family. How will you divide the money?”. There were seven
choices, arranged in increasing order of generosity from “Keep the money for myself”, “Keep
90,000 and give 10,000 to family or friends” [...] “Keep 10,000 and give 90,000 to family
or friends”, “Give all of the money to family or friends”. We obtain the distribution of
responses for all participants and code a loan officer as ’altruistic’ if she would give more to
family and friends than the median respondent.
Conscientiousness: We measure conscientiousness using standard questions from the “Big
Five” personality test [John, Donahue and Kentle, 1991]. The test asks respondents to express their agreement or disagreement with 44 brief questions relating to personality traits.
The full questionnaire and details about the construction of the personality trait variables
are available at http://www.ocf.berkeley.edu/˜johnlab/bfi.htm. Based on responses to the test
we calculate measures of “extroversion”, “agreeableness”, “conscientiousness”, “neuroticism”
and “openness”. In our analysis, we focus on the correlation between “conscientiousness” on
loan officer behavior. We control for the remaining dimensions of the “Big Five” personality
test. Results are available upon request.
Figure A.2: The BFI personality test

2

Confidence and overconfidence: To measure confidence and overconfidence, loan officers were
asked the question “how would you compare your performance in the loan rating exercise”.
The question was asked after an initial familiarization session and participants were given
the choice of “top 5%”, “top 10%”, “top 25%” “above average” and “below average”. Respondents were classified as “confident” if they answered either “top 5%” or “top 10%”.
Respondents were classified as “overconfident” if they wrongly self-assessed their performance to be in the top 10th percentile of all participants.
A.2 Time preference and risk-aversion
Time preference: We elicit monthly discount rates using a standard Becker-DeGroot-Marschak
procedure, in which subjects were given a series of binary choices between Rs 200 to be paid
out in one month and and Rs 200-x to be paid out today. The resulting discount factor
between today and one month from today is our discount rate variable “delta”. Participants
were told that there was a 20% chance that their choices would actually be paid out.34
Risk-aversion: We used answers to the survey question “Do you regularly play the lottery?” as a simple proxy of risk aversion. Respondents were classified as risk-averse if they
stated that they never played the lottery.
Figure A.3: Eliciting monthly discount rates

34

There is a growing literature indicating that discount rates elicited in the lab using this standard procedure predict a range of real world behaviors, including saving and credit card borrowing (see e.g. Ashraf et
al. [2006], Shapiro [2005], Meier and Sprenger [2010])

3

B

Theoretical Framework

In this section, we develop a simple theoretical framework that highlights how changes in
loan officer incentives affect screening behavior and lending decisions.
Agents. The model encompasses firms, loan officers, and the bank. The bank is riskneutral, while loan officers are risk-averse with uw0 > 0, u 00 w < 0 and limw→∞ u0 (w, ·) = 0.
Firms seek to borrow 1 unit of capital from the bank. They invest in a project which either
succeeds, generating income, or fails, leaving zero residual value. There are two types of
firms: good firms of type θG with probability of investment success p, and bad firms of type
θB , with probability of investment success 0. The ex-ante fraction of good firms is π. We
assume that the bank has a net cost of capital normalized to 0, and charges interest rate
r > 0. If the bank makes a loan that is repaid, it earns net interest margin r. If the loan
defaults, the bank loses 1 unit of capital. If the bank were to lend 1 unit of capital to all
applicants, a loan would be repaid with probability πp and earn expected return πp(1+r)−1.
We assume this amount to be negative, so that it is not profitable to lend to all applicants.
Information and Screening. While firm type is not observed, a loan officer may screen
a loan application in an attempt to determine the firm’s type. This requires effort, which
comes at private cost e > 0 to the loan officer. We assume e to be specific to the loan officer
and independent of monetary incentives. If a loan officer screens, she observes either a fully
informative “bad news” signal, σB , indicating that the firm is type θB , and will default with
certainty, or the “no bad news” signal σG . Bad firms generate a bad signal with probability
γ, and a good signal with probability 1-γ. Good firms generate a good signal with certainty.
Hence, the probability of observing a bad signal conditional on firm type is
(
P (σB ) =

γ if borrower is type θB
0 if borrower is type θG

It follows that the posterior probability of a firm being bad after receiving a bad signal is
P(θB |σB ) = 1, and the probability of the firm being good after observing a good signal is
π
. We assume that it is profitable to lend to a firm with a good
P (θG |σG ) = π+(1−γ)(1−π)
signal, even when screening costs are taken into consideration, so that
π [pr + (1 − p)(−1)] + (1 − π) [γ · 0 + (1 − γ)(−1)] ≥ e

(A.3)

Contracts. The bank may offer the loan officer a contract w = [w, wD , w] to induce screening
effort. The contract specifies a payment w for declining a loan application, and contingent
payments for approving a loan that subsequently performs wP and for approving a loan that
subsequently defaults, wD , where wP , w ∈ [0, r] and wD ∈ [−1, 0]. The bank’s problem is to
choose w = [wP , wD , w] to maximize profitability. The bank does not observe the outcome
of a loan that is screened out by the loan officer.
Expected Utility. Loan officers choose the return to three possible actions: declining a loan
without screening, approving the loan without screening, or screening the loan application
and approving the loan only if no bad signal is observed. We consider the outcome of each
4

action in turn. If a loan officer rejects a loan without screening, her expected utility is simply
uR = u(w). If the loan officer approves a loan without screening, her expected utility is
uNS = πpu(wP ) + (1 − πp)u(wD )

(A.4)

If an officer screens and approves only when no negative signal is observed, her utility is35
uS (w) = πpu(wP ) + [1 − πp − γ(1 − π)] u(wD ) + [(1 − π) γ] u(w) − e

(A.5)

Incentive Compatibility. We begin by remarking that, in the case of a risk-neutral loan
officer with unlimited wealth, the efficient outcome can be obtained by setting w = [r, −1, 0],
effectively selling the loan to the loan officer and making her the residual claimant. However,
this contract is not feasible in practice, as the loan officer would be liable for the total amount
of the loan in case of default. Hence, if the bank is to motivate the loan officer to exert
screening effort, it needs to offer a contract that satisfies two incentive constraints: uS ≥ uNS
and uS ≥ uR . The first constraint requires that the returns to effort be greater than the cost
of effort. This condition simplifies to:
γ [u(w) − u(wD )(1 − π)] ≥ e∗

(A.6)

The second constraint requires that the loan officer prefer screening to declining all loans:
πpu(wP ) + [1 − πp + γ(π − 1)] u(wD ) − [1 + γ(π − 1)] u(w) ≥ e∗

(A.7)

In practice, since both constraints are upper bounds for the cost of effort, only one will bind.
No matter which constraint binds, it is always weakly easier to induce effort when the cost
of effort is lower, the penalty for making a non-performing loan increases, and the outside
option of declining a loan decreases. The effect of increasing wP depends on which incentive
compatibility constraint binds. Loan officers can always be induced to lend, although not
necessarily in a manner that is profitable for the bank.
We focus on the following testable predictions that characterize incentive schemes commonly employed in commercial lending. Taken literally, the model predicts that loan officers
will either screen all loans, or not screen any loans. However, a simple extension in which e
varies by loan, in a way that is observable only to the loan officer, would generate non-corner
solution in screening effort, with the following comparative statics.
∗

∗

∗

∂e
∂e
∂e
Proposition 1 (Incentive power) ∂w
and ∂w
< 0 and ∂w
> 0. An origination piece rate,
D
D
P
as often employed in commercial lending, leads to low effort, indiscriminate lending and high
defaults. By contrast, high-powered incentives that reward performing loans and penalize the
approval of bad loans lead to greater effort, more conservative lending and lower defaults.
Proposition 2 (Deferred compensation) Let δ ∈ (0, 1) denote the time discount rate of
35

From these conditions, we can also derive the profit of the bank in each case. If a loan officer rejects a loan
without screening, the bank’s profit is ΠR = −w. If the loan officer approves a loan without screening, the
bank’s profit is ΠN S = πp(r−wP )−(1−πp)(1+wD ), and if the loan officer screens and approves a loan only if
no bad signal is observed, expected profit is ΠS = πp(r−wP )−[π(1−p)+(1−π)(1−γ)](1+wD )−[(1−π)γ]w.

5

loan officer i. Then δu < u ∀ δ. Deferred compensation weakens the incentive power of the
contract, as monetary incentives are discounted while the cost of effort is not.
∗

∗

∂e
∂e
and ∂w
< 0, increasing a loan officer’s
Proposition 3 (Limited liability) Because ∂w
D
D
liability for non-performing loans from wD ≥ 0 to wD ∈ (−r, 0) leads to greater screening
effort. More generally, relaxing the limited liability constraint increases the incentive power
of any performance based contract.

Reputational concerns: To complete the model, we allow for the possibility that loan officers
are responsive to reputational concerns.
Suppose that a loan officer’s type is not directly observable, so that others must infer it
from her actions. Specifically, let h(b) denote the esteem accorded to a loan officer considered
to be of type b, and let φ(b, e) the inference function which, for each effort choice e, assigns
a probability to each possible inference about the loan officer’s type.36 In the population,
types are distributed over interval B with cumulative density function F (·). Hence, a loan
officer who is responsive to reputational concerns derives non-pecuniary utility
ˆ
v(b, e) =

h(b)φ(b, e)db

(A.8)

B

´
from screening, where the inference function satisfies v(b, e) = B φ(b, e)db = 1 for all e ∈ E.37
Finally, we assume loan officers to be heterogeneous in their responsiveness to reputational
concerns, with λi ∈ [0, 1] denoting an agent’s responsiveness to non-monetary incentives. We
allow λi to vary with a vector of measurable personality traits z and a loan officer’s age, or
distance to retirement, t − t This modifies the private utility from screening as follows
ˆ
i

uS (w, e) = uS (w) + λ (z, t − t)

h(b)φ(b, e)db − e

(A.9)

B

and generates the following additional predictions.
Proposition 4 (Reputational concerns). For any λi > 0, there exists a unique level of
optimal effort ee in which the agent exerts non-zero screening effort independent of monetary
∂e
e
incentives with ∂λ
> 0, ee > 0 and ee ≤ e∗ .
Proposition 5 (Career concerns). If a loan officer is motivated by career concerns, she will
exert non-zero screening effort in the absence of monetary incentives and screening effort is
∂e
e
decreasing in age, or distance to retirement so that λi > 0 and ∂(t−t)
> 0.
36

This requires the assumption that all agents will, in equilibrium, form the same expectations.
We choose this general specification to encompass a range of reputational concerns, including selfsignaling, social norms [Bernheim, 1994], and identity [Akerlof and Kranton, 2000].
37

6

C

Appendix Tables
Table OA.I: Test of Random Assignment
This table presents a test of random assignment across the four main treatments. We regress treatment
dummies on demographic variables, controlling for randomization strata, lab and week fixed effects. Age
is the loan officer’s age in years, Male is a dummy variable taking a value of 1 if the participant is male.
Rank is the loan officer’s level of seniority in the bank. Experience is the number of years the loan officer
has been employed by the bank. Branch Manager is a dummy variable indicating whether the participant
has ever served as a branch manager. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01.
Incentive Treatment
High-powered

Origination bonus

(1)

(2)

Male

0.006

-0.017

(0.03)

(0.03)

Age

-0.002

-0.001

(0.002)

(0.002)

-0.031

0.014

(0.019)

(0.020)

Education [Master’s degree]

Experience [Years]

0.002

0.001

(0.001)

(0.001)

Rank [1 Lowest - 5 Highest]

-0.005

-0.009

(0.008)

(0.008)

-0.007

-0.012

Branch manager experience

(0.023)

(0.024)

Number of observations

9,268

9,806

R-squared, adjusted

0.314

0.322

7

8
32.64

Loan tenure

9,818
1,844

Monthly business expenses

Monthly EBIT

227

Monthly debt service

11.27
283
0.2

Age of business

Monthly personal expenses

Credit report, accts overdue

Personal

6,776

Total debt

Debt

11,680

Monthly revenue

Business income

420

6,009

Monthly installment

Loan amount

Loan characteristics

0

223

9

0

0

1,007

5,191

6,383

36

208

6,383

(2)

(1)

0.4

304

7.99

733

31,572

6,523

17,438

18,621

9.04

855

2,627

0.18

285

11.64

226

6,820

1,904

10,529

12,126

31.8

413

5,987

(4)

Mean

(3)

[N=592]

Mean

StDev

Median

[N=676]

0

223

9

0

0

991

5,559

6,383

36

208

6,383

(5)

Median

0.38

317

8.35

777

33,425

7,002

18,354

19,257

7.57

878

2,613

(6)

StDev

Panel B: Performing loans

Panel A: Entire sample

0.32

270

9.5

234

6,504

1,467

5,368

7,850

37.9

476

6,147

(7)

Mean

[N=84]

0

231

8

112

955

1,074

3,514

5,309

36

205

6,383

(8)

Median

0.47

209

5.8

358

15,887

1,388

8,771

11,224

14.35

620

2,722

(9)

StDev

Panel C: Non-perf & declined

-0.14**

15

2.14**

-8.00

316

437

5,161***

4,276*

-6.10***

-63

-160

(10)

Difference

(B)-(C)

(0.04)

(0.66)

(0.02)

(0.92)

(0.93)

(0.55)

(0.01)

(0.07)

(0.00)

(0.58)

(0.58)

(11)

p > |t|

Difference in means

This table reports summary statistics for the sample of loans used in the experiment. Columns [4] to [6] report summary statistics for the sub-sample of performing
loans and Columns [7] to [9] show summary statistics for the sub-sample of non-performing loans and loans that were declined by the Lender. In Columns [10] and [11]
we show differences in means between the two groups and p-values from a test of equality. Monthly revenue includes business revenue and other sources of household
income. Personal Expenses measure a client’s monthly personal expenses and Business Expenses measure a client’s total monthly required cash expenses, including all
inputs to production. Monthly Debt Service is the sum of all monthly installments on the applicant’s outstanding loans, not including the proposed loan. All variables are
denominated in US$. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01.

Table OA.II: Loan File Summary Statistics

9

14,675

8,398

1,968

2,548

Entire sample

Baseline

High-powered

Origination

(1)

N

3.59
(3.84)

(2.18)

(4.66)

(2.33)
4.60

4.78

(4.57)

(2.35)
5.01

4.80

5.25

4.17
(4.41)

5.06
(2.44)

(3)

on information

reviewed
(2)

Amount spent

Sections

Effort

(1.02)

0.13

(1.01)

0.23

(1.00)

0.00

(1.01)

0.07

(4)

Risk rating

(0.37)

0.84

(0.46)

0.69

(0.45)

0.72

(0.44)

0.75

(5)

%

Approved

(1986.07)

554.83

(1732.70)

576.10

(1859.50)

527.84

(1882.85)

553.89

(6)

US$ ’000

Profit

(0.48)

0.66

(0.48)

0.65

(0.48)

0.65

(0.48)

0.65

(7)

Sample

(0.33)

0.87

(0.43)

0.75

(0.42)

0.78

(0.40)

0.80

(8)

Performing

Evaluations Correct

(0.41)

0.21

(0.49)

0.42

(0.47)

0.32

(0.46)

0.30

(9)

performing

Non-

(0.45)

0.29

(0.50)

0.48

(0.50)

0.52

(0.50)

0.45

(10)

by bank

Declined

This table reports summary statistics on lending decisions in the experiment by incentive treatment. The table displays unconditional means and standard deviations.
Columns [2] and [3] report summary statistics for screening effort measured as the number of loan file sections reviewed and the number of information credits spent
by loan officers for treatments that included the “costly information” condition, under which participants were charged to access additional information. Column [4]
reports the internal rating (normalized to have mean zero and standard deviation 1) assigned to loans evaluated under each treatment condition, and Column [6] reports
profit per approved loan by incentive treatment in units of US$ ’000. Columns [7] to [10] report the percentage of correct lending decisions by incentive treatment. A
“correct” decision is defined as approving a loan that ex-post performs, or rejecting a loan that ex-post does not perform, or which the bank rejected.

Table OA.III: Loan Evaluation Summary Statistics

Table OA.IV: Test for Learning During the Experiment
This table presents a formal test for the presence of learning effects during the
experiment. The dependent variable in column [1] is a dummy variable taking on
a value of one for a correct lending decision, defined as approving a performing
loan or declining a non-performing loan. The dependent variable in column [2] is
the profit per loan for the sample of approved loans, denominated in US$ ’000,
The dependent variable in column [3] is the profit per loans for the total sample
of screened loans in units of US$ ’000. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01.
Lending decisions

Profit per loan

correct

approved

(1)

screened

(2)

(3)

Number of experimental

-0.002*

0.003

-0.003

sessions completed

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

Loan fixed effects

Yes

No

No

Loan officer fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Number of observations

14,675

9,357

13,084

R-squared

0.322

0.652

0.415

10

Table OA.V: Predictive Content of Internal Ratings
This table presents evidence on the predictive content of internal ratings. The dependent variable in
column [1] is a dummy equal to 1 if a loan was approved by the reviewing loan officer and 0 otherwise.
The dependent variable in column [2] is a dummy equal to 1 if a loan performed and 0 otherwise.
In column [3] the dependent variable is the profit per loan of approved loans, denominated in units
of US$ ’000. The dependent variable in column [4] is the profit per screened loan, denominated in
units of US$ ’000. Each regression includes controls for the incentive treatment conditions and the
number of experimental sessions completed by the reviewing loan officer. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 ***
p<0.01.
Lending

Performance

Profit per loan

Approved=1

Performing=1

approved

screened

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

1.348***

0.322***

0.659***

0.305***

Panel A: Final Rating
Log internal rating

Number of observations
R-squared

(0.04)

(0.03)

(0.19)

(0.05)

13,979

13,979

8,834

12,411

0.443

0.064

0.03

0.024

Panel B: Personal and Management Risk
Log internal rating

1.159***

0.279***

0.476***

0.251***

Personal and management risk

(0.04)

(0.03)

(0.17)

(0.06)

Number of observations

13979

13979

8834

12,411

R-squared

0.368

0.061

0.03

0.023

1.265***

0.318***

0.572***

0.282***

Business and financial risk

(0.04)

(0.02)

(0.18)

(0.05)

Number of observations

13,979

13,979

8,834

12,411

0.439

0.066

0.03

0.024

Panel C: Business and Financial Risk
Log internal rating

R-squared

Loan fixed effects

No

No

No

No

Loan officer fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

11

12

Origination

0.18**
(0.09)
[6,102]

-0.86
(0.59)

0.504

0.01
(0.09)

0.46

(0.05)

up to expectations

[6,102]

(0.55)

-0.03

High-powered

0.50

(1.27)

(0.90)

[B] Desire to live

0.24

(1.22)

0.09

(0.84)

0.386

(0.19)

-0.22

(0.17)

-0.18

(0.02)

0.02

0.38

(0.32)

0.54*

(0.30)

0.62**

(0.30)
-0.41

(0.74)
0.81

1.89***

0.03

R-squared [N]

Origination

High-powered

[A] Confidence

Main Eff

Main Eff

[6,102]

(0.03)

0.03

(0.03)

0.03

[6,102]

(0.43)

-0.84*

(0.42)

-0.84**

Interaction

Internal rating

Sections reviewed

Interaction

Risk-assessment

Screening Effort

0.127

(0.05)

0.06

(0.06)

-0.05

(0.00)

0.00

0.127

(0.09)

-0.07

(0.08)

-0.03

(0.07)

0.02

[6,102]

(0.01)

-0.01

(0.01)

-0.00

[6,102]

(0.11)

0.12

(0.11)

-0.06

0.099

(0.07)

0.01

(0.07)

-0.09

(0.01)

0.00

0.102

(0.09)

-0.01

(0.11)

-0.03

(0.08)

0.06

Main Eff

Interaction

Non-performing

[3,970]

(0.01)

0.00

(0.01)

0.00

[3,970]

(0.12)

0.03

(0.14)

-0.06

0.143

(0.10)

0.16

(0.11)

-0.00

(0.01)

0.01

0.145

(0.16)

-0.21

(0.17)

-0.05

(0.14)

-0.09

Main Eff

[2,132]

(0.02)

-0.02*

(0.02)

-0.01

[2,132]

(0.21)

0.30

(0.23)

-0.01

Interaction

0.759

(146.38)

-157.14

(166.81)

-204.38

(12.71)

-9.45

0.760

(211.28)

394.71*

(289.08)

94.42

(201.17)

268.88

Main Eff

[5,067]

(20.94)

35.12*

(23.12)

25.44

[5,067]

(274.82)

-467.05*

(355.18)

-194.67

Interaction

Per screened loan

Performing

Total
Main Eff

Profit

Approved

Interaction

Lending and Profit

This table presents evidence on the interaction between incentive schemes and loan officer personality traits. In each panel, a pair of columns report the main and hetergenous effects of
each incentive treatment, by the personality characteristic indicated in the panel heading. Even columns indicate the interactions, odd columns report the main effects of the personality
characteristic and treatment conditions. Additional controls included in all regressions include loan officer age, rank, gender, education, experience in other business areas, a dummy equal
to one if a loan officer has ever served as a branch manager and a dummy equal to one if a loan officer is employed by a private bank, loan officer confidence and all categories of the “big
five” personality test. Standard errors are clustered at the loan officer×session level. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01.

Table OA.VI: Heterogeneity in the Response to Incentives, Additional Results

