NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WAGE ADJUSTMENT IN THE GREAT RECESSION
Michael W. Elsby
Donggyun Shin
Gary Solon
Working Paper 19478
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19478
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013

The authors are grateful for helpful comments from David Card, Henry Farber, Alexandre Mas, Jennifer
Smith, and participants at the May 2013 NBER conference on labor markets and the Great Recession.
The paper is based partly on data from the New Earnings Survey (Crown copyright 2012) originally
created, funded, and deposited by the Office for National Statistics, and distributed under secure access
by the UK Data Archive. Neither the Office for National Statistics nor the UK Data Archive bears
responsibility for the accuracy, comprehensiveness, analysis, or interpretation of these data. Crown
copyright material is reproduced with the permission of the Controller of HMSO and the Queen’s
Printer for Scotland. Elsby gratefully acknowledges funding from the Philip Leverhulme Prize granted
by the Leverhulme Trust. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, or the Leverhulme Trust.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Michael W. Elsby, Donggyun Shin, and Gary Solon. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Wage Adjustment in the Great Recession
Michael W. Elsby, Donggyun Shin, and Gary Solon
NBER Working Paper No. 19478
September 2013
JEL No. E24,E32,J3,J64
ABSTRACT
Using 1979-2011 Current Population Survey data for the United States and 1975-2011 New Earnings
Survey data for Great Britain, we study wage behavior in both countries, with particular attention to
the Great Recession. Real wages are procyclical in both countries, but the procyclicality of real wages
varies across recessions, and does so differently between the two countries. U.S. distributions of year-to-year
nominal wage change show many workers reporting zero change (suggesting wage stickiness) and
many reporting nominal reductions (suggesting wage flexibility), but both findings could be distorted
by reporting error. The British data, which are based on employers’ payroll records, show much lower
prevalence of zero wage change, but still show surprisingly frequent nominal wage cuts. The complex
constellation of empirical regularities defies explanation by simple theories.
Michael W. Elsby
University of Edinburgh
School of Economics
31 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh
EH8 9JT
United Kingdom
Mike.Elsby@ed.ac.uk
Donggyun Shin
Department of Economics
Kyung Hee University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
dgshin@khu.ac.kr

Gary Solon
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824-1038
and NBER
solon@msu.edu

Wage Adjustment in the Great Recession

As of a quarter-century ago, the conventional wisdom among macroeconomists was that
real wage rates are more or less non-cyclical, and many macroeconomic models described wage
inflexibility as a key contributor to cyclical unemployment. Since then, however, numerous
empirical studies based on microdata for workers have found that real wages are substantially
procyclical.1 This procyclicality had been obscured in aggregate wage statistics, which tend to
give more weight to low-skill workers during expansions than during recessions.

As

summarized by Martins, Solon, and Thomas (2012), the microdata-based literature has found
that the cyclical elasticity of real wages is similar to that of employment.
Most of the U.S. microdata-based literature, however, is based on data extending no later
than the early 1990s. An obvious question is what the cyclical wage patterns have been more
recently. Most importantly, how have wages behaved during the Great Recession? Is there
reason to think that wages responded especially sluggishly during this downturn and that
stickiness of wages contributed to the Great Recession’s high unemployment?2
This article addresses these questions with data for both the United States and Great
Britain. Section I uses March Current Population Survey data to trace U.S. real wage behavior
over the 1979-2011 period. Section II uses additional Current Population Survey data to explore
the role of inflation and nominal wage stickiness. Section III presents parallel analyses for Great
Britain based on data from the New Earnings Survey. Section IV summarizes and discusses our
findings.
I. Real Wages in the United States, 1979-2011
Our U.S. analyses of real wages are based on the annual March Current Population
Surveys (CPS). Every March CPS asks sample members about their annual earnings and
1

Examples from the U.S. literature are Stockman (1983), Bils (1985), Solon, Barsky, and Parker (1994), Devereux
(2001), Bowlus, Liu, and Robinson (2002), and Shin and Solon (2007). Similar studies for other countries include
Devereux and Hart (2006) for Great Britain; Carneiro, Guimarães, and Portugal (2012) and Martins, Solon, and
Thomas (2012) for Portugal; and Shin (2012) for Korea.
2
For example, in a brief Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco note entitled “Why Has Wage Growth Stayed
Strong?” Daly, Hobijn, and Lucking (2012) concluded from aggregate wage data that “Real wage growth ... has held
up surprisingly well in the recent recession and recovery,” and also found that, “During the recent recession and
recovery, the run-up in the fraction of workers subject to downward nominal wage rigidity has been especially
large…. This may partly explain why real wage growth has not significantly declined since the onset of the
recession in December 2007 and why hiring has been slow since the start of the recovery in mid-2009.”

1

employment in the preceding calendar year, so we can measure each worker’s hourly wage in the
preceding year as the ratio of annual earnings to annual hours of work. Relative to alternative
U.S. data sets, the March CPS has three advantages.

First, because the Bureau of Labor

Statistics (BLS) generates the public use files quickly, we have access to recent data, up through
the March 2012 CPS data for 2011 (and dating back in a comparable way to 1979). We
therefore have good data for the Great Recession and its immediate aftermath, as well as for
earlier recessions, including the similarly severe recession of the early 1980s. Second, the CPS
provides large nationally representative samples. Our main analyses of real wages are based on
well over 20,000 workers of each gender every year.
Third, access to the microdata goes a considerable way towards reducing the
composition-bias issues associated with aggregate data such as the average hourly earnings series
from the BLS employer survey. As discussed by Solon, Barsky, and Parker (1994) and others,
such aggregate series are constructed as hours-weighted averages of workers’ wages, so workers
with more employment get greater weight in the statistics. It is well documented that low-skill
workers’ employment is especially sensitive to cyclical fluctuations, so low-skill workers get less
weight in aggregate wage statistics during recessions than they do during expansions. This
imparts a countercyclical bias in aggregate wage statistics, making workers’ real wage
opportunities appear less procyclical than they really are.

Thanks to access to the CPS

microdata, we can obtain a reliable hourly wage variable for every worker with substantial
employment sometime during the calendar year, and we can weight those workers equally
instead of weighting them by their annual hours. Unfortunately, though, we cannot avoid
composition bias entirely. We cannot measure the wage opportunities of individuals with no
work during the calendar year (and, as we will discuss in a moment, for data reliability reasons
we also will exclude individuals with very few work hours over the calendar year). We will
achieve a partial correction of the resulting composition bias by regression-adjusting our annual
wage measures for some observable characteristics (education, potential work experience, and
race) of the worker samples. Finally, for workers employed for only part of the year, we
measure their wages when they were employed, but we do not observe their wage opportunities
during the time they were not employed. Of course, this is an insoluble problem in every data
set.

2

To focus on worker groups with substantial attachment to the labor force, we restrict our
real wage analyses to workers between the ages of 25 and 59. Because of extreme outliers (such
as the man recorded as having over $400,000 of earnings but only one hour of work in 2008!),
we require at least 100 annual hours of work, and we also exclude the cases with the top 1
percent and bottom 1 percent of average hourly earnings. The CPS oversamples in less populous
states, so for the sake of national representativeness, all our analyses use the provided sampling
weights. Our real wage analyses include the imputed wage measures provided for the substantial
number of cases with non-response for earnings.3
Table 1 displays men’s mean and median log real wages by year. Results are shown for
two deflators, the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) deflator from the national income
accounts and the CPI-U-RS version of the consumer price index. Both are scaled to express real
wages in 2009 dollars. Figure 1 adds a visual display of the real wage series based on the PCE
deflator. The table and figure also show the annual unemployment rate, to emphasize which
years are recession years and which are expansion years.
The first thing to note in Table 1 and Figure 1 is the stagnation of men’s real wages over
the 1979-2011 period. Real wages at the end of the period are much the same as at the
beginning.

Although this is bad news for us as male workers, it is convenient for us as

researchers. With almost no secular trend, it becomes easy to discern cyclical patterns. (The
subsequent analysis for women will be a little more nuanced.)
Like previous microdata-based studies, Table 1 and Figure 1 indicate that men’s real
wages are substantially procyclical. For example, from 1979 to 1983, when the unemployment
rate went from 5.8 to 9.6, the mean log real wage based on the PCE deflator fell from 2.933 to
2.889, a reduction of 0.044 (as also shown in Table 2, which provides a 0.005 standard error for
the estimated change between 1979 and 1983).4 With the CPI-U-RS used as an alternative
deflator, the estimated wage reduction of 0.057 is even larger. The recession of the early 1990s
was much less severe, but still was associated with a large reduction in the mean log real wage.
The recession of the early 2000s showed relatively little impact on the labor market, as reflected
in either the unemployment rate or the mean log wage.
3

Unweighted estimates turn out to be similar. Excluding observations with imputed wages results in higher mean
and median wages, but has almost no effect on measured cyclical variation.
4
If we mimic the composition bias in aggregate wage statistics by hours-weighting the CPS data, real wages then
appear considerably less procyclical. For example, the 1979-83 drop in the log of the hours-weighted mean real
wage based on the PCE deflator is only 0.010.

3

What interests us most, though, is the experience of the Great Recession.

The

unemployment rate, which was 4.6 in 2006 and 2007, reached 9.6 in 2010 and was still at 8.9 in
2011. Even though this run-up in the unemployment rate was even greater than that of the early
1980s, the reduction in men’s real wages was comparatively modest. The mean log real wage
based on the PCE deflator was 3.007 in 2006 and 2007, had dropped to 2.993 by 2010, and
declined slightly further to 2.989 in 2011. Compared to the 0.044 reduction from 1979 to 1983,
the 0.018 reduction from 2006-2007 to 2011 was significantly smaller (in both the statistical and
substantive senses). Similarly, with wages deflated instead by the CPI-U-RS, the 2006-2011
reduction in the mean log real wage was 0.026, as compared to the 0.057 reduction of 19791983.
So far we have discussed means, but there is considerable merit in looking at medians as
well. For one thing, medians are more robust to outliers. In fact, the medians stay the same
regardless of whether we do or do not trim the top and bottom 1% of wage observations.
Relatedly, medians sidestep the problem of earnings top-codes in the CPS. Before 1996, topcoded earnings observations were simply assigned the top-code threshold. Since 1996, a topcoded individual has been assigned the sample mean value among all cases above the threshold
that share the individual’s gender, race, and status vis-à-vis full-time/full-year work. As a result,
our means of log real wages before and after 1996 are not altogether comparable. The medians,
however, are comparable over time because they are unaffected by the treatment of top-codes.
As can be seen in Tables 1 and 2, our medians tell much the same story as the means.
From 1979 to 1983, the median log real wage based on the PCE deflator decreased by 0.056, and
the one based on the CPI-U-RS decreased by 0.069. In contrast, from 2006 to 2011, the one
based on the PCE deflator decreased by only 0.026, and the one based on the CPI-U-RS fell by
only 0.032. The medians, like the means, indicate that real wages are considerably procyclical,
but the procyclicality of men’s real wages has been significantly milder in the Great Recession
than in the recession of the early 1980s.
The cyclical patterns in these mean and median wage series are subject to a
countercyclical composition bias because our sample selection criterion requiring at least 100
annual hours of work disproportionately screens out low-wage workers during recessions. We
can partially correct for that bias by controlling for year-to-year changes in the demographic
composition of our samples. For example, as shown in Table 2, in addition to showing mean log
4

wages for each year in the 1979-1983 period, we also estimate “regression-adjusted” year effects
by applying least squares (again weighting by the provided CPS sampling weights) to a
regression of individual workers’ log real wages on year dummies for 1980, 1981, 1982, and
1983 (with 1979 as the omitted reference category) and controls for years of education, a quartic
in potential work experience (age minus years of education minus 6), and race dummies.5 As
expected, the regression-adjusted year effects show even more wage procyclicality. Whereas the
unadjusted means indicate that log real wages were 0.044 lower in 1983 than in 1979, the
adjusted 1983 year effect is 0.059 less than the 1979 effect.
We perform the same exercise for the 2006-2011 period. We estimate each period’s
regression separately because it is implausible that the coefficients of the control variables would
come close to holding still over the entire 1979-2011 period. For example, our estimated
coefficient of education is 0.072 (with estimated standard error 0.0005) for the 1979-1983
period, but it is 0.111 (0.0004) for 2006-2011. Whereas the unadjusted means indicate that log
real wages were 0.018 lower in 2011 than in 2006, the adjusted 2011 year effect is 0.032 less
than the 2006 effect. Again, however, this wage drop in the Great Recession is significantly
smaller than the wage decrease during the early 1980s recession.
For the same reasons it was worthwhile to calculate medians along with means, it makes
sense to estimate median regressions as well as mean regressions. In the last column of Table 2,
we report the estimated year effects from applying weighted least absolute deviations to the
regression of log real wages on year dummies and control variables. The results indicate again
that men’s real wages decreased during the Great Recession, but not as much as in the recession
of the early 1980s.
In most instances, the regression adjustments indicate that accounting for observed
heterogeneity reveals greater procyclicality in real wages.

Presumably, accounting for

unobserved heterogeneity would move further in the same direction. The traditional approach to
accounting for unobserved heterogeneity in the microdata-based literature on real wage
cyclicality is to control for worker fixed effects by tracking the same workers over time in a
panel survey. Although the rotating panel design of the CPS makes it possible to follow a
portion of one March’s sample to the next March, the CPS is far from ideal for longitudinal
5

We use the method of Jaeger (1997, last column of Table 2) to construct a consistent education variable over time.
The race categorization we are able to construct for the full time period consists of three categories: white, black,
and other.

5

analysis. The sample sizes for March-to-March matches are almost always less than one-third of
the sample sizes for the cross-sections. Worse yet, one of the sources of the sample loss is that
the CPS does not follow residential movers, and exclusion of movers is an endogenous sample
selection in a study of wage changes.
Nevertheless, as a further check on our results from repeated cross-sections, we perform
year-to-year matches from our samples of workers between adjacent March Current Population
Surveys. We follow the guidance of Madrian and Lefgren (2000) in verifying that longitudinal
matches on identification numbers are true matches by requiring that gender and race also match,
that year-to-year change in reported age is between -1 and 3, and that the respondent reports
living in the same residence as in the previous March. We are able to match between most
adjacent March surveys during our sample period, but not for 1985-1986 or 1995-1996 because
of changes in household identifiers, and not for 1984-1985 because the residence question was
not asked in 1985. We therefore cannot obtain longitudinal wage changes for 1983-1984, 19841985, or 1994-1995. For all other pairs of years in our sample period, the left side of Table 3
shows weighted sample means of men’s year-to-year change in log real wages.6 We weight
individuals by the simple average of their sampling weights across the two years.
The first thing to notice is that, because of normal life-cycle wage growth, the mean
changes are almost always positive, and tend to be substantially positive in expansion years (for
example, averaging about 0.03 from 1985 to 1989 and about 0.04 from 1995 to 2000). In stark
contrast, the longitudinally matched men experienced virtually zero average real wage growth
during the recessions of the early 1980s and early 1990s. Again, as we observed in our previous
analyses, the mild recession of the early 2000s had little impact on the labor market. Finally,
over the years 2006-2011, real wage growth averaged about 0.01, less than in typical expansion
years, but more than in the recessions of the early 1980s and early 1990s. Thus, as in our
analysis of repeated cross-sections, men’s real wages continued to follow a procyclical pattern in
the Great Recession, but to a lesser extent than one might have expected from earlier recessions.
Table 4 shows mean and median log real wages by year for women, as Table 1 did for
men. And Figure 2 provides a visual display for women, as Figure 1 did for men. Where Table
1 and Figure 1 documented stagnant real wages for men, Table 4 and Figure 2 corroborate the
6

We also have tried estimating regressions with controls for polynomials in age or potential experience, but the
variation over time in the estimated year effects is virtually identical to that for the unadjusted means shown in Table
3.

6

well-known rise in women’s wages during the 1979-2011 period. All our measures suggest that,
over the period as a whole, women’s real wages rose at a rate of close to 0.10 per decade.
This upward secular trend in women’s wages makes it trickier to distill the cyclical
patterns. Nevertheless, inspection of Table 4 and Figure 2 reveals a clear tendency for women’s
real wages to rise more slowly during recessions. And in the Great Recession in particular,
women’s real wage growth appears to have stalled out completely. The relatively large effect
that the Great Recession appears to have had on women’s wages stands in contrast to its effect
for men, which was smaller than in the recessions of the early 1980s and early 1990s. But a
conclusive judgment on this will require additional years of data because a possible reading of
Figure 2 is that women’s real wage growth was starting to peter out before the Great Recession.
If the upward trend in women’s wages resumes in the years to come, the cyclical impact of the
Great Recession will appear large. If it does not resume, the stalling-out will be interpreted
instead as a change in secular trend.
Table 5 highlights the effects of the two most severe recessions on women’s wages, as
Table 2 did for men’s wages. In addition to showing the relative movements in mean and
median log wages, the table also presents regression-adjusted series that account for variation in
the samples’ education, potential experience, and race. As in Table 2 for men, these adjustments
suggest even greater procyclicality in real wages. After adjustment, there appears to be virtually
no real wage growth for women during the recession of the early 1980s, and negative growth
during the Great Recession.
The right side of Table 3 shows the mean year-to-year changes in log real wages for
women longitudinally matched between adjacent March Current Population Surveys.

The

combination of life-cycle wage growth and the upward secular trend in women’s wages causes
the mean log change to be positive in every single year. In 20 of the 29 pairs of years that can be
matched, the growth rate in real wages is higher for women than for men.

Again, the

procyclicality of women’s real wages is manifested as a tendency for slower growth in recession
years than in expansion years. All four of the smallest increases in women’s real wages are in
recession years, three of them in the Great Recession.
To summarize, our evidence for 1979-2011 from March Current Population Surveys
corroborates and updates the findings from earlier microdata-based studies that real wages in the
United States are substantially procyclical. For men, however, we find that real wages took a
7

smaller hit in the Great Recession than might have been expected from the experience of earlier
recessions. Our results for women are less clear-cut because of the confounding of cyclical and
trend variation, but a tentative impression is that women’s real wages may have taken a relatively
large hit in the Great Recession.

II. Nominal Wages and Inflation in the United States
The previous section discussed the mean log real wage series plotted for men in Figure 1
and for women in Figure 2. Of course, the mean log real wage is the difference between the
mean log nominal wage and the log of the price level (measured in these figures with the PCE
deflator). Both of these component series are plotted in Figures 3 and 4 along with their
difference, the same log real wage series already plotted in Figures 1 and 2. The scale for the
two log wage series is on the left axis, and the scale for the log deflator is on the right axis.
In both Figure 3 for men and Figure 4 for women, nominal wages grow substantially over
time. In the case of men, long-run nominal wage growth is similar to the growth in the price
level, so real wages show little secular trend. For women, nominal wage growth exceeds price
inflation, so real wages trend substantially upwards.
As discussed in the previous section, men’s real wages declined considerably during the
recessions of the early 1980s and early 1990s. Figure 3 shows that nominal wages grew during
those recessions, but more slowly than the price level. In the Great Recession, men’s real wages
seemed to decline less and more belatedly than in the recessions of the early 1980s and early
1990s.

Nominal wages grew very little, but so did the price level.

In 2009, when the

unemployment rate was 9.3 percent, inflation as measured by the annual PCE deflator was
virtually zero (and was slightly negative according to the CPI-U-RS). With no decline in
nominal wages that year, real wages did not decline either. After 2009, inflation ran at about 2
percent a year, and the even smaller growth in nominal wages meant that real wages declined a
little.
As also discussed in the previous section, the upward secular trend in women’s real
wages makes the discernment of cyclical patterns somewhat more challenging. In the recessions
of the early 1980s and early 1990s, women’s real wages grew, but more slowly than in the
expansions of the late 1980s and late 1990s. During the Great Recession, women’s real wage
growth stalled out altogether, seemingly implying a larger cyclical impact on real wages. A clear
8

separation of the cyclical and trend movements, however, will have to await more years of data
in the aftermath of the Great Recession.
At least for men, that the Great Recession appeared to reduce real wages less and more
belatedly than in previous recessions suggests a possible role for the inflationary environment.
At the outset of the recession of the early 1980s, inflation was unusually high, and employers
could reduce real wages substantially even while granting nominal wage increases. This was
still somewhat true in the recession of the early 1990s, when annual inflation was about 4
percent. But during the Great Recession, especially in 2009, the inflation rate was lower, and
substantial real wage cuts would have required nominal wage cuts. Economists going back at
least to Keynes (1936) have suggested that resistance to nominal wage cuts can constrain the
response of real wages to slack labor demand, and that this wage stickiness might exacerbate
rising unemployment during recessions.
This possibility that downward stickiness in nominal wages can impede wage
adjustments to negative labor demand shocks has led numerous researchers (for example,
McLaughlin, 1994; Card and Hyslop, 1996; Kahn, 1997; Altonji and Devereux, 1999; Elsby,
2009; and Daly, Hobijn, and Lucking, 2012) to examine longitudinal microdata to assess the
prevalence of nominal wage stickiness in the United States. Because it is obvious that job
changers typically experience wage changes, most of these researchers have focused on the more
interesting question of whether workers staying with the same employer appear to experience
nominal wage stickiness. What would be more interesting still would be to ascertain how many
workers lose their jobs and become unemployed because of downward stickiness in nominal
wages, but no one knows how to do that. Instead, the implicit assumption in this literature is
that, if downward rigidity in nominal wages is sufficiently common to cause a lot of job losses, it
also should be common among workers that stay employed with the same employer. In this
section, we use longitudinally matched data from Current Population Surveys to extend this
literature and update it to include the Great Recession.
Our analysis begins with the Current Population Surveys of January 1981, January 1983,
January 1987, January 1991, February 1998, February 2000, January 2002, January 2004,
January 2006, January 2008, January 2010, and January 2012. Each of these waves of the CPS
included a job tenure supplement, which enables us to determine whether a worker had been

9

employed for at least a year with the worker’s current main employer. 7 We focus on such
workers in their eighth (and last) month in the CPS because workers in that “rotation group” also
were asked to report their current nominal wage rate. Using nearly the same method for
longitudinal matching described in Section I, we matched these workers to their data in the CPS
one year earlier, when these workers were in their fourth month in sample.8 The fourth rotation
group is the other “outgoing” rotation group asked to report a current nominal wage rate, so we
are able to obtain an empirical distribution of year-to-year nominal wage growth of stayers for
January 1980-January 1981, January 1982-January 1983, …, January 2011-January 2012.
Fortunately, these matches include at least one year-to-year change from every recession from
the 1980s on, as well as several expansion years.9
Like many previous studies, we present histograms of the empirical distribution of yearto-year nominal wage changes. Our sample for each year-to-year match pools women and men
between the ages of 16 and 64 in both years. We exclude observations for which wages were
imputed on account of non-response. As in our analyses of real wages, we use the provided
sampling weights to adjust for the Current Population Survey’s oversampling of less populous
states (though, in practice, this turns out not to affect the results much).
For each year-to-year match, we display two histograms – one in Figure 3 for workers
paid by the hour in both years, and one in Figure 4 for workers not paid by the hour in either
year. For the former, we use the reported hourly wage rate. For the latter, we follow Card and
Hyslop (1996) in using the reported usual weekly earnings. In Card and Hyslop’s words, “In
principle, we can construct an hourly wage for non-hourly-rated workers by dividing usual
weekly earnings by usual weekly hours. However, any measurement error in reported hours will
lead to excessive volatility in imputed hourly wages.” The typical sample size for each of our
histograms is about 1,000 workers. Accordingly, the typical standard error for the estimated

7

The appendix in Farber (2008) provides a valuable summary of the availability and content of CPS job tenure
supplements over time.
8
The one difference is that, in the current section’s match, we do not use the question about living in the same
residence as a year ago. That question is asked only in the March CPS.
9
Card and Hyslop (1996) and Daly, Hobijn, and Lucking (2012) also use longitudinally matched CPS data to
measure nominal wage change distributions, Card and Hyslop for 1979-1993 and Daly et al. for 1980-2011. Unlike
us, they use all CPS months, not just those with job tenure supplements. As a result, they have many more
observations, but their identification of stayers assumes that workers staying in the same industry and occupation
also stayed with the same employer.

10

percentage of workers with exactly zero nominal wage change from one January or February to
the next is about one percentage point.
Each of our histograms features a thin spike at zero, which shows the percentage of the
workers that reported the exact same wage in both years. For the hourly workers, in some years
we display a pink segment of the zero spike, which represents workers whose wage was at the
national minimum wage in both years. The relative value of the minimum wage became so low
during our sample period, however, that there are no such cases in many years. The next bin to
the right of the zero spike contains workers whose change in log nominal wage was positive but
no greater than 0.02; the next bin contains those whose change in log nominal wage was greater
than 0.02 and less than or equal to 0.04; etc. The bins to the left of zero are constructed
symmetrically. To limit the histograms to a readable scale, we pile up workers with change in
log nominal wage greater than 0.64 in the rightmost bin and those with change less than -0.34 in
the leftmost bin. Some of the salient statistics from the histograms are summarized in Table 6.
In general, our histograms display several features noted by previous authors. First, there
always is a spike at zero. As shown in Table 6, for each type of worker in each pair of years, a
non-trivial minority of workers – ranging between 6 and 20 percent – reports the exact same
nominal wage in both years. It is unclear in which direction these estimates are biased by
reporting error. On one hand, a worker with the same true nominal wage in both years may be
recorded as changing wages if the worker misreports the wage in either year. On the other hand,
a worker with a modest wage change may round to the same number in both years and thus
appear to have zero wage change. For example, a worker whose true nominal hourly wages were
$19.80 last year and $20.30 this year may report an hourly wage of $20 in both years. As will be
discussed in the next section, studies of nominal wage stickiness in Great Britain have exploited
richer data to suggest that the latter bias may dominate.
Second, the distribution of nominal wage changes is always centered on positive nominal
wage growth. This is to be expected both because of keeping pay raises up with price inflation
and because of exceeding price inflation in order to achieve normal life-cycle growth in real
wages.
Third, there is always a non-trivial fraction of workers reporting nominal wage
reductions. As shown in Table 6, this fraction always exceeds 10 percent for hourly workers and
always exceeds 20 percent for non-hourly workers. Again it is unclear what proportion of these
11

cases is an artifact of reporting error, but again the next section’s discussion of British evidence
will be instructive.
An advantage of having these distributions for many years is the opportunity to relate the
patterns to variations in the economic environment. In particular, there is good reason to expect
the distributions to be affected by both business cycle conditions and the inflation rate. We can
illustrate with a very simple model. Suppose that workers always stay employed with the same
employer and that, in the absence of any tendency towards nominal wage stickiness, the process
determining worker i ’s real wage growth between years t  1 and t would be

(1)

 log(Wit / Pt )   0  1Ct   it

where Wit is the worker’s nominal wage rate, Pt is the price level, C t is a measure of business
cycle conditions, 1  0 if both C t and real wage growth are procyclical, and, conditional on C t
and Pt ,  it is normally distributed with mean zero and variance  2 . Then the probability that
the worker’s nominal wage growth would be negative would be the probit function

(2)

Prob ( log Wit  0)  Prob ( it   0   log Pt  1Ct )

 [( 0 /  )  (1 /  ) log Pt  (1 /  )Ct ]
where  ( ) is the standard normal cumulative distribution function. Now add the further
extreme assumption that, because of downward rigidity of nominal wages, everyone that
otherwise would have negative wage growth instead has zero nominal wage growth. Then the
proportion of workers with zero nominal wage growth would be the probit function above, which
clearly is negatively related to both the inflation rate and the business cycle indicator. Although
the model is extreme, it does give a clear illustration of why many would expect the spike at zero
in the histograms to be highest when inflation is low and the economy is in recession.
Indeed, Table 6 and the histograms show that there is something to that expectation. The
highest spikes do appear during the Great Recession, when unusually weak demand coincided
with a low inflation rate.

The lowest spike appears in 1980-1981, when the inflation rate was

about 10 percent and unemployment was rising but had not reached the high level of 1982-1983.
12

In addition, there appears to be somewhat of an upward secular trend in the frequency of zero
nominal wage change, which conceivably might be a gradually evolving response to a prolonged
stretch without high inflation.10
Taken at face value, the finding of a spike at zero nominal wage change seems to suggest
some degree of nominal wage rigidity, while the finding of a substantial fraction of nominal
wage reductions seems to suggest a degree of nominal wage flexibility. We will defer further
discussion of the extent to which both patterns may reflect measurement error to the next section,
in light of that section’s richer evidence from Great Britain. Assuming for now that the evidence
in our histograms is accurate, what is the economic significance?

First, how would the

distribution of wage growth differ in the absence of nominal wage stickiness? Second, whatever
that difference is, what are the effects on quantity variables like employment and
unemployment? In particular, has downward nominal wage rigidity been a major cause of the
Great Recession’s unusually high unemployment?
On the first question, we note that the spikes at zero nominal wage change that we
measure during the Great Recession are only moderately greater than the ones we measure for
earlier in the 2000s. Beyond that, it is remarkably difficult to identify how nominal wage growth
distributions are affected by nominal wage stickiness. As noted earlier in this section, many
excellent researchers have tackled this question before, but we are struck by how unsuccessful
they have been in reaching definitive conclusions. A particularly sophisticated effort is the wellknown study by Kahn (1997), which used substantial changes in inflation over the 1970-1988
period to try to identify how nominal wage stickiness affected the distribution of wage growth
across 12 one-percentage-point bins on either side of each year’s median wage growth.
Although the approach seems conceptually promising, it delivers only two robust findings – that
there is a noticeable spike in the bin for zero nominal wage growth, and that there appears to be a
dip in the bins for one or two percent above zero (which, as we will discuss in the next section,
also could be a reporting effect, not a real phenomenon). All the other patterns of interest turn
out to be sensitive to functional form specification or sample selection. For example, Kahn’s
10

These patterns are broadly consistent with those reported in the CPS analyses by Card and Hyslop (1996) and
Daly, Hobijn, and Lucking (2012), but two differences stand out. First, unlike Card and Hyslop and ourselves, Daly
et al. divide reported weekly earnings by reported weekly hours to get their nominal wage measure for non-hourly
workers. As expected, this leads to considerably smaller spikes at zero nominal wage change. Second, for hourly
workers, Daly et al. estimate a substantial dip in the frequency of zero nominal wage change in the years preceding
the Great Recession. In contrast, our estimates in Table 6 do not show a drop-off after 2003-2004.

13

results (nicely summarized in her Table 2) indicate a tendency away from nominal wage
reductions for hourly workers, but show the opposite tendency in some specifications for nonhourly workers. Her estimates also indicate a dip in the bin for one percent below zero for nonhourly workers, but show no such dip for hourly workers. In the end, as is so often the case,
inferring convincingly clear-cut counterfactual distributions from observational data turns out to
be beyond the reach of even the most skillful researchers.11
If nothing else, though, there is the spike at zero. Assuming that is not merely an artifact
of rounding error, we are led to the second, even harder question: What are the effects of the
implied nominal wage inertia on employment and unemployment? Here it is helpful to make a
distinction between workers in the “primary” and “secondary” sectors of the labor market. Our
histograms pertain to workers that stayed with the same employer for at least a year. These tend
to be the primary-sector workers, for whom various types of specific human capital foster longterm employment relationships. The histograms tend to exclude workers in the secondary sector,
where specific human capital is mostly absent and labor turnover is high.

There is little

theoretical reason to expect wage rigidity in the secondary sector, and Bewley’s (1999) anecdotal
evidence from extensive interviews with employers during the recession of the early 1990s
corroborates the expectation of wage flexibility in the secondary sector.
On the other hand, Bewley’s interviews also dovetail with the zero spike’s quantitative
suggestion that primary-sector employers are reluctant to cut incumbent workers’ nominal
wages. But a long history of economic analysis, dating back at least to Becker (1962), questions
whether current wages in long-term employment relationships are “allocative.” Rather, current
wages can be seen as installment payments within a longer-term compensation package.

In

particular, an employer’s decision about whether to continue to employ the marginal incumbent
worker should depend on the employer’s beliefs about the present discounted value

T

(3)

V  {(mt  wt ) /[(1  r ) t 1 ]}
t 1

11

We salute Kahn for reporting her sensitivity analyses in sufficient detail to make clear which results are and are
not robust.

14

where m denotes the real value of the worker’s marginal product, w is the worker’s real wage, t
indexes time period with the current period denoted as t  1 , and T is the worker’s remaining
tenure with the employer if not laid off this period. Of course, the latter is not only uncertain, but
also endogenously determined by the employer’s wage policy and future retention decisions. For
simplicity, the real interest rate r is assumed to be constant over time, and the worker’s
employment with the firm is assumed to be binary with no hours variation at the intensive
margin. Now suppose that downward rigidity in the nominal wage causes the employee’s
current real wage w1 to exceed her current real value of marginal product m1 . Even so, it is in
the employer’s interest to retain the employee as long as continuing her employment is profitable
in present-value terms. Consequently, even in the face of evidence that there exists some
stickiness in current nominal wages, it does not follow that such wage stickiness necessarily
must generate inefficient job separations.
This theoretical point is buttressed by at least two pieces of empirical evidence. First is
the anecdotal evidence from Bewley’s interviews. On the question of why employers did not
save laid-off workers’ jobs by cutting their wages instead, here is Bewley’s summary (pp. 1801): “I was surprised to learn that most managers did not believe that pay cuts would prevent
many layoffs…. A common reaction to the question was puzzlement. Pay cuts would create
little or no extra work and so would barely reduce the number of excess workers.” The direct
quotations from owners and managers include these (p. 185): “If I cut pay instead of laying
people off, I would have lots of people with nothing to do.” “What do pay cuts have to do with
layoffs? A layoff is used when you don’t have sufficient work for certain skills. What would
you do with the extra help?” “Wage cuts are not an alternative to layoffs. You can’t have a lot
of people standing around doing nothing.” Whatever else one makes of these statements, they
are consistent with the proposition that downward stickiness in current nominal wages need not
be a major source of economically inefficient layoffs.
Second, returning to the Great Recession in particular, if current wages are indeed
allocative and downward nominal wage rigidity was especially binding in the Great Recession’s
low-inflation environment, one would expect the Great Recession to be characterized by an
extraordinary burst of layoffs. The behavior of the quantity side of the U.S. labor market during
the Great Recession has been documented in detail by Elsby, Hobijn, and Sahin (2010). They
show that, while layoffs rose sharply during the recent downturn, the magnitude of the rise was
15

comparable to that seen in prior severe recessions, notably the high-inflation environment of the
early 1980s (see, for example, their Figure 9).
Instead, the most distinctive feature of the Great Recession with respect to labor
quantities has been the extraordinarily long duration of unemployment spells.

Therefore,

understanding the high unemployment of the Great Recession requires understanding not only
why some employers laid off so many workers into unemployment, but also why other
employers have been so slow to hire the unemployed. Again, we find it instructive to consider
the present-value expression in equation (3), except that now we regard it as the present value of
a prospective new hire.12 Presumably, one major reason for employers’ reluctance to hire the
unemployed during a recession is that depressed product-market demand reduces prospective
hires’ current and near-term values of m. Even so, if current and future values of w fell
sufficiently, hiring the unemployed could become attractive to employers.
Accordingly, several recent papers – such as Shimer (2004), Hall (2005), Hall and
Milgrom (2008), Gertler and Trigari (2009), and Kennan (2010) – have appended various sorts
of hiring-wage stickiness to the Mortensen-Pissarides (1994) matching model in an effort to
generate realistically large cyclical fluctuations in unemployment.

Of course, it is always

possible theoretically to generate more unemployment by assuming inflexible wages, but is the
assumed inflexibility in hiring wages realistic? It is surprisingly difficult to answer that question
because most countries have no publicly available data that track hiring wages within particular
jobs within particular firms.

Martins, Solon, and Thomas (2012) use such data from the

Portuguese census of employers and find that real hiring wages in Portugal have been quite
procyclical. Their conclusion, however, acknowledges that the initial hiring wage by itself is not
a sufficient statistic for the relevant labor price. Referring again to equation (3), suppose that the
initial hiring wage w1 drops considerably in a recession, but this bargain price for labor
vaporizes quickly because, as the recession passes, the cheaply hired workers either quit (small
T) or are retained at the cost of substantial wage increases (high wt for t  1 ). In that case, even
a substantial drop in initial hiring wages might not raise V enough to induce primary-sector
employers to hire from the unemployed. On the other hand, as emphasized by Kudlyak (2009),

12

Following Becker (1962), the version of equation (3) for new hires should subtract off the part of hiring and
training costs borne by the employer (and not borne by the worker through wage reductions), but that modification
does not alter our main points.

16

if instead workers hired at a low wage during a recession are somehow locked into a long-term
employment relationship at a persistently low wage, the labor cost relevant to employers’
recruiting decisions could be as cyclical as, or even more cyclical than, the initial hiring wage.
Therefore, assessing the practical relevance of the new theories based on inflexible hiring wages
will require more empirical work that, in the tradition of Beaudry and DiNardo (1991),
recognizes the durability of primary-sector employment relationships and studies how wage
paths in those relationships depend on current, past, and anticipated business cycle conditions.
By the same token, future theoretical research needs to analyze the nature of implicit contracts in
long-term employment relationships and consider how contracts for new workers interact with
ongoing contracts for incumbent workers. In our view, the model of Snell and Thomas (2010) is
a promising step in that direction.
In any case, we are skeptical that a theory of downward rigidity in nominal wages in
particular is the key to understanding depressed hiring during the Great Recession. We already
have noted that whatever such rigidity there is did not cause a greater upsurge in layoffs than
occurred in the high-inflation environment of the early 1980s recession. While models such as
the Snell-Thomas one recognize the possibility of spillovers from wage stickiness for incumbent
workers to stickiness in hiring wages, it is hard to imagine that nominal rigidity is more
constraining for new hires than for incumbents. Therefore, given that nominal rigidity did not
appear to cause an unusually large upsurge in layoffs of incumbents, it seems implausible that it
could account for the Great Recession’s unusually long duration of unemployment spells.
To summarize, at an early stage of our research project, we were intrigued by the
possibility that the combination of downward nominal wage rigidity with low inflation might be
an important part of explaining the Great Recession’s high unemployment.

With some

disappointment, we have come to feel that much of the evidence lines up poorly with that story.
Although men’s real wages seem to have taken a smaller hit in the Great Recession than in
earlier recessions, women’s wages seem to show the opposite pattern; although the histograms
show a spike at zero nominal wage change, they also show many nominal wage cuts; the zero
spike increased in the Great Recession, but not dramatically; and layoffs were not dramatically
more prevalent in the Great Recession than in earlier severe recessions.
None of this is to deny the obvious – that the Great Recession has been a terrible
economic downturn with painful consequences for many workers. Rather, we are saying that the
17

existence of some nominal wage stickiness is not in itself prima facie evidence that such wage
stickiness has caused an epidemic of economically inefficient choices by employers and
employees. It is conceivable that the high unemployment of the Great Recession would have
been nearly as high even in a parallel universe with absolutely flexible wages.

III. Wages in Great Britain, 1975-2011
Our analyses of real and nominal wages in Great Britain are based on the New Earnings
Survey (NES, Office for National Statistics). These are the same data used by Devereux and
Hart (2006) to study real wage cyclicality and by Nickell and Quintini (2003) to study nominal
wage rigidity. Devereux and Hart’s sample period ends at 2001, however, and Nickell and
Quintini’s ends at 1999. We are able to update both analyses to 2011.
Besides the obvious substantive merit of studying wage adjustment in Great Britain in
addition to the United States, there is a methodological bonus – the NES data are superior to
available U.S. data in several ways. First, the NES sample sizes are large. The survey is based
on a one-percent sample of British income taxpayers, defined by individuals whose National
Insurance numbers end in a given pair of digits. The resulting sample covers about 160,000
workers each year. Second, since the sample frame consistently has been based on the same pair
of National Insurance number digits, the survey naturally has a panel structure. Third, the
survey’s wage information is unusually accurate. The survey is administered to employers,
which are required by law to respond to the survey. The information on earnings and work hours
elicited from the employers pertains to payroll information for a reference week in April.
Because the earnings and hours data come from payroll records, they are thought to be much
more accurate than similar data gathered from household surveys. A noteworthy limitation of
the survey, however, is that it samples from taxpayers registered in the income tax system and
therefore is thought to under-represent low-paid workers.
To provide context for our analysis, the two panels of Figure 7 respectively display the
1975-2012 U.K. series for the unemployment rate (as measured by the Labour Force Survey) and
the inflation rate (as measured by the change in the logarithm of the RPIX, which is based on the
Retail Price Index, but excludes mortgage interest payments). To conform to the April timing of
the NES, we use April measures for the unemployment rate and the RPIX.

As the

unemployment rate shows, our sample period encompasses three recessions. Like the United
18

States, the United Kingdom experienced a very severe recession in the early 1980s.

The

somewhat less severe episode in the early 1990s again brought the unemployment rate to double
digits. By some stroke of good fortune, the United Kingdom escaped the global contraction in
the early 2000s, but was not spared in the Great Recession. Interestingly, although the output
fall associated with the Great Recession was relatively large, the unemployment rate did not go
as high as it had in the recessions of the early 1980s and early 1990s.
As the second panel of Figure 7 shows, the United Kingdom entered the 1980s with even
higher inflation than the United States, reaching in excess of 20 percent on an annual basis.
Subsequently, inflation fell rapidly in the 1980s and, except for an aberration in the late 1980s
(associated with the boom at that time), remained below 5 percent per annum from 1985 through
to the early stages of the current recession. Importantly, though, the rate of price inflation did
rise during the Great Recession, exceeding 5 percent in 2010.
We will analyze real wages in part A of this section and nominal wages in part B.
Throughout, our nominal wage measure is the worker’s gross hourly earnings (defined as
earnings divided by hours in the reference week in April) excluding overtime. For the analysis
of real wages, we convert the nominal wage into 2012 pounds based on the April RPIX. In our
initial sample selection, we exclude individuals who reported wages for more than one job in the
reference week, who lost pay due to absence in that week, or who were younger than 16 or older
than 64, and then we trim the remaining sample for each year by excluding the cases with the top
and bottom 1% of wages.

A. Real wages
Following our U.S. analysis of real wages, we further restrict the sample to workers
between the ages of 25 and 59.13 The resulting sample of men is typically about 60,000 per year.
The women’s sample starts at more than 30,000 in 1975 and exceeds 60,000 in the later years of
the sample period.
Our main analysis of U.S. real wages used repeated cross-sections from the March CPS
that measured wages with average hourly earnings over the entire preceding calendar year. We
also reported longitudinal results based on March-to-March matches, but with some reservation

13

We have verified, however, that the cyclical patterns remain much the same if we use a 16-64 age range and also
if we do not trim the outliers.

19

on account of imperfections in the CPS as a source of longitudinal data, especially its failure to
follow residential movers. Somewhat in parallel, we will begin by analyzing repeated crosssections from the NES, but with a caveat. Because the NES measures wages only for those
working in the reference week in April, it seems potentially subject to more severe composition
bias than the March CPS. Fortunately, however, the NES is an excellent source of longitudinal
data, so we will proceed to longitudinal analyses that hold composition constant by following the
same workers from one April to the next.
Starting with the repeated cross-sections, Table 7 shows mean log real wages by year
separately for men and women, and Figure 8 displays both series visually. In Great Britain, as in
the United States, the upward trend in women’s wages is dramatic. But whereas men’s wages
stagnated in the United States, they have risen considerably in Great Britain, though not nearly as
much as women’s.
The cyclical patterns for men and women look similar, so we will discuss them together.
The most striking cyclical setback to real wages occurred during the Great Recession. From
2008 to 2011, as the unemployment rate went from 5.2 to 7.8, men’s real wages declined by
about 10 log points, and women’s declined by about 6. Viewed against the backdrop of the
upward secular trends in real wages, these reductions look all the more striking. The only other
prominent reduction in real wages during our sample period occurred in the non-recession year
of 1977. The story behind this episode appears to be related to incomes policies negotiated
between the British government and the trade unions at that time. The agreement placed an
upper bound on increases in nominal wages for that year, presumably in an attempt to curb
inflation by stemming wage inflation. Despite this, price inflation remained very high, and so
workers experienced real wage cuts.
Turning to the other recessions, during the early 1980s, when the unemployment rate rose
to almost 12 percent and inflation was even higher than in the United States, real wage growth
hardly slowed at all. The recession of the early 1990s was accompanied by a more noticeable
slowing of real wage growth, but nothing like the reduction during the Great Recession. Thus,
the British variation in wage cyclicality across recessions is more or less the opposite of what we
measured for U.S. men in Section II. This poses still another challenge to simple stories about
the interaction of downward nominal wage rigidity and the inflationary environment. In Great

20

Britain, real wages took a much bigger hit in the Great Recession than in the early 1980s even
though the early 1980s were a period of much higher inflation.
All of this, however, is based on wage measures from repeated cross-sections for a
reference week in April. The U.S. evidence indicates that such measures could be subject to a
substantial countercyclical composition bias, so we follow Devereux and Hart (2006) in using
the longitudinal nature of the NES to hold worker composition constant by following the same
workers from one April to the next.

This longitudinal matching loses some workers not

employed in one reference week or the other, but the sample sizes are still large. The men’s
sample size per year is usually over 50,000. The women’s sample size starts at over 20,000 in
1975-1976 and reaches over 60,000 in 2010-2011.
Table 8 shows mean year-to-year change in log real wages by gender for each pair of
years from 1975-1976 to 2010-2011.14 Figure 9 plots this longitudinally based series for each
gender along with the first difference of the cross-sectional mean log wage series previously
shown in Table 7 and Figure 8. Figure 9 vividly depicts two patterns. First, as one would
expect, the longitudinal series runs somewhat higher because it encompasses life-cycle wage
growth. But second, the cyclical patterns for the longitudinal series and the series from repeated
cross-sections are remarkably similar. Although composition bias repeatedly has been found to
be an important issue for measuring wage cyclicality in the United States, it appears to matter
much less for Great Britain. Thus, we continue to find that real wage growth in Great Britain
hardly slowed at all in the early 1980s, slowed more in the early 1990s, and went negative in the
Great Recession.
We already have noted that this pattern cannot be explained by changes in the
inflationary environment, which go the “wrong” way. So what does account for the increasing
procyclicality of British real wages? One possibility – broached, for example, by Blundell,
Crawford, and Jin (2013) – is that declining unionization has led to more flexible wages. Setting
aside the puzzle of why the same trend has not led to greater wage flexibility in the United States
as well, we can pursue the British evidence on this idea by redoing Figure 9 disaggregated by
union status. Figure 10 shows mean year-to-year change in log real wages by gender separately
for those who were in jobs covered by union agreements in both years and those who were in
14

As in our longitudinal analysis for the United States, we also have tried estimating regressions with controls for a
polynomial in age, but the variation over time in the estimated year effects is virtually identical to that for the
unadjusted means shown in Table 8.

21

non-union jobs in both years. The plots for union and non-union workers are strikingly similar
to each other, and to the blue aggregate plots in Figure 9. Thus, although declining unionization
could be part of the story, it cannot be nearly all of it. Even after controlling for union status, the
procyclicality of real wages remains much stronger in the Great Recession than in earlier
recessions.

B. Nominal wages
The relative accuracy of the payroll-based NES wage data is especially valuable in the
analysis of year-to-year changes in nominal wages. It will be instructive here to begin by
reviewing two previous British studies of nominal wage rigidity. Smith (2000) used the 19911996 waves of the British Household Panel Study (BHPS) to retrace the steps of the U.S.
literature described in our Section II. Whereas most U.S. researchers have attempted to restrict
their samples to workers staying with the same employer, Smith further restricted to workers
who reported staying in the same job with the same employer. If anything, one would expect
that difference to lead to a higher frequency of zero nominal wage change. Her initial results
turned out to be fairly similar to those from U.S. household surveys for the same period – she
found that 9 percent of stayers experienced zero nominal wage change from one year to the next,
and that 23 percent experienced nominal wage reductions.
But then she exploited a remarkable feature of the BHPS data – respondents were told
they could consult their pay slips when answering the wage questions, and the survey recorded
who did so. When Smith restricted her sample to those who did check their pay slips in both
years, the proportion with zero nominal wage change fell to 5.6 percent. As we mentioned in
Section II, it is ex ante unclear in which direction reporting error would bias the estimation of the
spike at zero nominal wage change.

Purely classical measurement error would bias the

estimation downward, but rounding error could go the other way. For example, a worker whose
hourly wage was $19.80 last year and is $20.30 this year might round to $20 in both years and
get coded as experiencing zero change. Smith’s results suggest that, on net, nominal wage
change distributions from household surveys overestimate the proportion of stayers with zero
nominal wage change. Unsurprisingly, she also found that, among the respondents who did
check their pay slips, the proportion reporting nominal wage reductions was somewhat smaller.
But it was still quite substantial, at almost 18 percent. In combination, Smith took these results
22

as showing that nominal wages are considerably more flexible than economists had believed. To
quote her striking summary, “Some of the results in this paper may seem difficult to believe – the
quite common occurrence of nominal pay cuts, for example. It may well be that the difficulty in
believing them stems not from the weight of contradictory evidence, but rather from
conventional wisdom that has survived because of the previous lack of evidence either way.”
Smith’s study was following by Nickell and Quintini’s (2003) study based on the NES
data for 1975-1999. Like Smith, Nickell and Quintini focused on workers staying in the same
job with the same employer. Nickell and Quintini began by comparing their 1991-1996 nominal
wage change measures, based on employers’ payroll-based reporting, to Smith’s household
survey measures for the respondents who consulted their pay slips. The results from the two
sources line up quite closely with each other. More generally, over their full 1975-1999 sample
period, Nickell and Quintini found that there was regularly a noticeable spike at zero nominal
wage change, but that it was much smaller than usually found in household surveys. In most
years, the proportion of stayers with zero nominal wage change was less than 3 percent, with the
highest proportion being 7.1 percent in 1992-1993. And despite the presumed accuracy of the
employers’ wage reports, the proportion of stayers with nominal wage reductions from year to
year was substantial, ranging from a low of 5 percent in 1979-1980 (when the inflation rate was
about 20 percent) to a high of 22 percent in 1996-1997. Nickell and Quintini concluded,
“Despite the substantial numbers of individuals whose nominal wages fall from one year to the
next, we find that there is evidence of some rigidity at zero nominal wage change. While the
effect is statistically significant, the macroeconomic impact of the distortion is very modest.”
Our analysis of the NES data updates Nickell and Quintini’s analysis to 2011. As in our
U.S. analysis of nominal wages in Section II, we pool women and men between the ages of 16
and 64. Unlike in our U.S. analysis, we pool hourly and non-hourly workers, who are not
distinguished in the NES data. Because our analysis of year-to-year nominal wage changes is
restricted to workers staying in the same job with the same employer, our sample sizes become
somewhat smaller than in our longitudinal analysis of real wages in the NES. With women and
men combined, our sample size starts at almost 60,000 for 1975-1976 and rises to over 100,000
by 2010-2011.
Figure 11 presents histograms of job stayers’ year-to-year nominal wage growth for each
pair of years from 1975-1976 to 2010-2011. The histograms are laid out similarly to the U.S.
23

ones in Figures 5 and 6, except that Figure 11 combines hourly and non-hourly workers.
Because the spikes at zero are less prominent in the British data, we highlight them in red. We
also insert a thin green spike at the inflation rate (the April-to-April change in the log of the
RPIX) to mark the nominal wage growth corresponding to zero real wage growth. Table 9 lists
some important summary statistics from the histograms.
Five patterns stand out in the histograms and table. First, like Nickell and Quintini, we
find relatively small spikes at zero nominal wage change, ranging from a low of 0.4 percent in
1979-1980 to a high of 7.4 percent in 2009-2010. In most years, the spike is less than 3 percent.
That the zero spikes are so much smaller in the British payroll-based data than in the U.S.
household survey data raises the question of whether the larger U.S. spikes might be in
considerable part an artifact of rounding error.

We doubt that question can be answered

convincingly until and unless payroll-based longitudinal hourly wage data become available for
the United States.
Second, we replicate and update the finding of substantial proportions of British job
stayers experiencing negative nominal wage changes. Our estimates range from a low of 5
percent in 1979-1980 to a high of 24 percent in 2009-2010. From 1993-1994 on (when the
inflation rate typically has been about 3 percent), the proportion experiencing nominal wage cuts
regularly has run in the neighborhood of 20 percent. Like the Smith and Nickell-Quintini studies
before us, we are struck by the wage flexibility indicated in the frequency of nominal wage cuts
as well as the infrequency of nominal wage freezes. Some U.S. writers, such as Altonji and
Devereux (1999), have conjectured that the substantial fraction of U.S. job stayers reporting
nominal wage reductions is an artifact of response error in household surveys. The payroll-based
British data, however, also show many nominal wage cuts. This again underscores the need for
payroll-based U.S. data.15

15

In the meantime, anecdotal U.S. evidence is of some interest. Bewley’s (1999) account of his interviews of
employers during the recession of the early 1990s famously emphasizes employers’ aversion to cutting nominal
wages, but Sections 11.1 and 12.1 of the book document some instances of nominal wage reductions. Blinder and
Choi’s (1990) account of their smaller survey of employers includes this finding: “One surprising fact that was
turned up is that money wage cuts are more common than we had imagined. Even though our interviews came at a
time and place of extremely tight labor markets (unemployment rates were below 4 percent in many localities), a
sizeable minority of firms had actually reduced wages to at least some employees in the recent past. Specifically,
five of the 19 firms (26 percent) had recently cut money wages; while four others (21 percent) had reduced fringe
benefits, mostly in minor ways…. Unless our small sample is unrepresentative in some important respect, money
wage cuts are more prevalent than many economists (including ourselves) have supposed.”

24

Third, as in previous research for both Great Britain and the United States, the fractions
of job stayers with zero and negative nominal wage changes vary over time with respect to
inflation and business cycle conditions in the ways that one would expect. In the first few years
of our British sample period, when inflation was particularly high, the fractions with zero and
negative nominal wage changes were particularly low. In the last two years of the sample
period, when the Great Recession was at its worst and inflation was moderate, the fractions with
zero and negative nominal wage changes were higher than usual.
Fourth, some of the household-survey-based U.S. literature, such as Kahn (1997), has
noted some evidence for dips in the distribution of nominal wage change in the bins immediately
surrounding zero, and has interpreted those dips as possibly reflecting menu costs in wage
setting. Such dips are not particularly apparent in our histograms from the British payroll-based
data. And, as shown in Table 9, the percentages of job stayers with positive and negative log
nominal wage changes no larger than 0.01 are non-trivial, reaching a combined share of more
than 11 percent in the last two years of our sample period. This leads us to wonder whether
rounding error in U.S. household surveys has not only exaggerated the spike at zero nominal
wage change, but has done so by reducing the reporting of small non-zero nominal wage
changes, thus creating the appearance of dips around zero in the histograms. Once again, settling
that question will require access to payroll-based longitudinal hourly wage data for the United
States.
Relatedly, our fifth observation is that the histograms for the last two years show a rise in
the prevalence of nominal wage increases below the rate of inflation. This indicates that the
reduction in British real wages during the Great Recession has arisen not only from increasing
prevalence of nominal wage freezes and reductions, but also from increasing prevalence of
nominal wage raises too small to keep up with inflation.16

16

Following an excellent suggestion from David Green, we have checked what happens if we redo our British
histograms with weekly instead of hourly earnings. The patterns are mostly the same. The percentage with nominal
wage reductions is very similar. The percentage with zero nominal change goes up somewhat, but is still strikingly
small compared to the U.S. estimates based on household surveys. In most years, it is less than 4 percent. The
increase in the zero spike from using weekly instead of hourly earnings is about equal to the reduction in the
percentage with positive or negative log changes no greater than 0.01. As a result, the percentage with log changes
between 0.01 and -0.01 is about the same with the weekly vs. hourly wage measures.

25

IV. Summary and Discussion
Our analyses of both U.S. and British data replicate and update the finding of previous
microdata-based studies that, by and large, real wages are substantially procyclical. The degree
of real wage cyclicality, however, varies over time and place. Our analysis of March Current
Population Survey data for the United States suggests that real wages took large hits in the
recessions of the early 1980s and 1990s, but that men’s real wages were somewhat less affected
in the Great Recession. Because of difficulty in separating cyclical effects from secular trends,
the picture for U.S. women is less clear, but a tentative impression is that the Great Recession’s
impact on U.S. women’s real wages was particularly adverse. Our analysis of New Earnings
Survey data for Great Britain also finds differences across recessions, with practically an
opposite pattern to that for U.S. men. In Great Britain, real wages were not much affected by the
severe recession of the early 1980s, displayed slowed growth in the severe recession of the early
1990s, and were affected very negatively by the Great Recession.

The between-country

difference in the evolution of real wage cyclicality over our sample period is all the more striking
given that both countries experienced reductions in inflation and unionization.
We also have used the CPS and NES data to replicate and update the literature that
documents the distribution of job stayers’ year-to-year nominal wage changes. Like previous
studies of U.S. household surveys, our CPS analysis finds a substantial minority of stayers
reporting the exact same nominal wage from one year to the next (seemingly indicating a degree
of nominal wage rigidity), but also a substantial minority reporting nominal wage reductions
(seemingly indicating a degree of wage flexibility). As previous writers have noted, both
findings may be distorted by reporting error. This makes the presumably more accurate NES
wage data, reported by employers from payroll records, of particularly high interest. These data
show a much lower frequency of zero year-to-year nominal wage change, but they show a
surprisingly high frequency of nominal wage reductions. Like the authors of previous British
studies of nominal wage change, we are struck by the apparent flexibility of British wages. We
also wonder whether the measured between-country difference in the prevalence of zero nominal
wage change is real or merely an artifact of rounding error in U.S. household surveys.
At an early stage of our project, we suspected that the sluggish response of U.S. men’s
real wages to the Great Recession might reflect an interaction of downward nominal wage
stickiness with an environment of very low inflation, and we wondered whether such wage
26

stickiness might have played an important role in the large upsurge of U.S. unemployment.
While there may be something to that story, it lines up poorly with many other empirical
patterns. Why did the Great Recession appear to have a particularly large effect on U.S.
women’s real wages? Even if the CPS data on the prevalence of zero nominal wage change are
accurate, why didn’t the prevalence rise more precipitously during the Great Recession? As
discussed in Section II, there are theoretical reasons to question whether wage stickiness has
major “allocative” effects on quantities like employment and unemployment. And empirically, if
it does, one would expect the Great Recession to have featured an extraordinarily large upsurge
in layoffs. Layoffs did indeed surge upwards, but similarly to how they did in previous severe
recessions, including the high-inflation environment of the early 1980s. The more distinctive
aspect of the U.S. labor market’s response to the Great Recession has been the extraordinary
length of unemployment spells. But it is hard to see why downward nominal wage rigidity
would be more constraining for the hiring of new workers from the unemployed than it is for the
retention of incumbent workers. Finally, if downward nominal wage stickiness was important in
the U.S. experience of the Great Recession, why was it so much less so in Great Britain?
Questions like these leave us keenly aware that the results in our paper raise more
questions than they answer. Beyond those just named in connection with nominal wage rigidity,
many broader puzzles remain.

For example, why have British real wages become more

procyclical over time, with wages rather than employment taking much of the Great Recession’s
brunt? Why has the same trend not appeared in the United States? Why has U.S. unemployment
duration become so long? In particular, why have primary-sector employers been so reluctant to
hire, and why have the unemployed been so slow to take secondary-sector jobs?
The Great Recession has served as a reminder of how deeply important and puzzling is
the behavior of labor markets over the business cycle. We are pleased that the NBER project of
which our study is a part has succeeded in drawing labor economists back into this research area.
Given the many important but unanswered questions, we hope that both labor economists and
macroeconomists will continue to pursue both theoretical and empirical approaches to
understanding how and why labor markets behave as they do over recessions and expansions.

27

Table 1. U.S. Men’s Mean and Median Log Real Wages (2009 Dollars) by Year

Year

Unemployment Rate

Mean
Log Real
Wage
(PCE)

1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

5.8
7.1
7.6
9.7
9.6
7.5
7.2
7.0
6.2
5.5
5.3
5.6
6.8
7.5
6.9
6.1
5.6
5.4
4.9
4.5
4.2
4.0
4.7
5.8
6.0
5.5
5.1
4.6
4.6
5.8
9.3
9.6
8.9

2.933
2.908
2.908
2.901
2.889
2.891
2.903
2.914
2.907
2.906
2.897
2.875
2.859
2.851
2.841
2.861
2.864
2.884
2.916
2.946
2.979
3.007
3.017
3.017
3.019
3.002
3.001
3.007
3.007
2.999
3.007
2.993
2.989

Mean
Log Real
Wage
(CPI-URS)
2.995
2.968
2.962
2.950
2.938
2.937
2.947
2.965
2.960
2.962
2.953
2.927
2.912
2.907
2.895
2.914
2.915
2.930
2.959
2.985
3.014
3.033
3.035
3.032
3.032
3.014
3.009
3.010
3.008
2.995
3.007
2.995
2.984

Standard
Error for
Means

Median
Log Real
Wage
(PCE)

0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.005
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.005
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004

2.991
2.984
2.975
2.972
2.935
2.960
2.963
2.977
2.977
2.974
2.943
2.915
2.902
2.907
2.889
2.905
2.892
2.918
2.924
2.968
2.992
3.017
3.003
3.012
3.021
3.018
3.005
3.016
2.989
2.982
3.005
2.986
2.990

Median
Log Real
Wage
(CPI-URS)
3.053
3.043
3.029
3.021
2.984
3.006
3.008
3.028
3.030
3.030
2.999
2.968
2.955
2.964
2.943
2.958
2.943
2.964
2.967
3.007
3.027
3.043
3.021
3.027
3.033
3.030
3.012
3.018
2.990
2.977
3.005
2.989
2.986

Standard
Error for
Medians
0.003
0.005
0.003
0.001
0.008
0.008
0.006
0.002
0.008
0.008
0.001
0.008
0.004
0.006
0.003
0.002
0.008
0.010
0.008
0.000
0.006
0.002
0.007
0.002
0.006
0.007
0.008
0.000
0.001
0.010
0.004
0.004
0.006

Notes: The standard errors for means are robust to heteroskedasticity. The standard errors for
medians are bootstrap estimates. In two years, the latter estimates are absolute zero. The reason
is that, because of a substantial mass point at the sample median, the estimated median came out
the same in every one of the 1,000 bootstrap replications.
28

Table 2. U.S. Men’s Log Real Wages (PCE Deflator) in Severe Recessions

Year
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983

2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

Mean Relative to
Pre-Recession
Year
0
(normalized)
-0.024
(0.005)
-0.024
(0.005)
-0.031
(0.005)
-0.044
(0.005)

0
(normalized)
0.000
(0.005)
-0.008
(0.005)
0.000
(0.005)
-0.014
(0.005)
-0.018
(0.005)

0
(normalized)
-0.025
(0.005)
-0.030
(0.005)
-0.043
(0.005)
-0.059
(0.005)

Median Relative
to Pre-Recession
Year
0
(normalized)
-0.007
(0.006)
-0.016
(0.004)
-0.018
(0.003)
-0.056
(0.008)

0
(normalized)
-0.004
(0.005)
-0.011
(0.005)
-0.006
(0.005)
-0.027
(0.005)
-0.032
(0.005)

0
(normalized)
-0.027
(0.001)
-0.034
(0.010)
-0.011
(0.004)
-0.030
(0.004)
-0.026
(0.006)

RegressionAdjusted Mean

RegressionAdjusted Median
0
(normalized)
-0.020
(0.005)
-0.030
(0.005)
-0.043
(0.006)
-0.057
(0.006)

0
(normalized)
0.001
(0.005)
-0.007
(0.005)
-0.003
(0.005)
-0.023
(0.005)
-0.034
(0.005)

Notes: The numbers in parentheses are standard errors. The standard errors for means are robust
to heteroskedasticity. The standard errors for medians are bootstrap estimates.

29

Table 3. Mean Year-to-Year Changes in Log Real Wages (PCE Deflator) by Gender from
Longitudinally Matched CPS Data

Year
1979-1980
1980-1981
1981-1982
1982-1983
1983-1984
1984-1985
1985-1986
1986-1987
1987-1988
1988-1989
1989-1990
1990-1991
1991-1992
1992-1993
1993-1994
1994-1995
1995-1996
1996-1997
1997-1998
1998-1999
1999-2000
2000-2001
2001-2002
2002-2003
2003-2004
2004-2005
2005-2006
2006-2007
2007-2008
2008-2009
2009-2010
2010-2011

Men’s Mean
Log Real Wage
Change
-0.012
0.010
0.004
0.003
--0.040
0.025
0.032
0.022
0.004
0.001
-0.001
0.006
0.010
-0.025
0.039
0.046
0.048
0.049
0.035
0.023
0.027
0.012
0.007
0.025
0.010
0.006
0.022
-0.003
0.016

Standard Error
0.004
0.005
0.005
0.005
--0.005
0.005
0.006
0.006
0.006
0.005
0.006
0.007
0.007
-0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.008
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007

Women’s Mean
Log Real Wage
Change
0.017
0.018
0.032
0.026
--0.031
0.039
0.015
0.015
0.008
0.025
0.012
0.014
0.028
-0.047
0.047
0.059
0.039
0.043
0.039
0.038
0.018
0.014
0.021
0.016
0.024
0.002
0.040
0.009
0.009

Standard Error
0.006
0.006
0.006
0.006
--0.006
0.006
0.007
0.006
0.006
0.006
0.007
0.007
0.008
-0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.007

Notes: The standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity. As explained in the text, data for
1983-1984, 1984-1985, and 1994-1995 could not be matched longitudinally because of the
absence of residential information in 1985, and because of changes in household identifiers in
1983-1984 and 1994-1995.

30

Table 4. U.S. Women’s Mean and Median Log Real Wages (2009 Dollars) by Year

Year

Unemployment Rate

Mean
Log Real
Wage
(PCE)

1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

5.8
7.1
7.6
9.7
9.6
7.5
7.2
7.0
6.2
5.5
5.3
5.6
6.8
7.5
6.9
6.1
5.6
5.4
4.9
4.5
4.2
4.0
4.7
5.8
6.0
5.5
5.1
4.6
4.6
5.8
9.3
9.6
8.9

2.408
2.405
2.407
2.429
2.435
2.446
2.463
2.482
2.498
2.498
2.516
2.522
2.527
2.540
2.540
2.557
2.560
2.589
2.614
2.655
2.670
2.706
2.737
2.754
2.764
2.752
2.758
2.774
2.780
2.760
2.783
2.779
2.772

Mean
Log Real
Wage
(CPI-URS)
2.471
2.464
2.461
2.478
2.484
2.493
2.508
2.533
2.551
2.553
2.572
2.574
2.579
2.597
2.594
2.610
2.610
2.635
2.657
2.694
2.705
2.732
2.754
2.769
2.776
2.764
2.766
2.777
2.781
2.755
2.783
2.781
2.768

Standard
Error for
Means

Median
Log Real
Wage
(PCE)

0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.005
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.005
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.005
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004

2.452
2.440
2.438
2.462
2.484
2.486
2.504
2.529
2.547
2.540
2.558
2.570
2.568
2.596
2.589
2.585
2.586
2.617
2.642
2.680
2.705
2.719
2.749
2.767
2.786
2.784
2.755
2.769
2.796
2.775
2.794
2.794
2.780

Median
Log Real
Wage
(CPI-URS)
2.514
2.499
2.492
2.511
2.533
2.532
2.549
2.580
2.600
2.595
2.614
2.622
2.620
2.652
2.643
2.638
2.637
2.664
2.685
2.719
2.739
2.745
2.766
2.782
2.799
2.796
2.763
2.772
2.797
2.770
2.794
2.797
2.776

Standard
Error for
Medians
0.006
0.006
0.007
0.000
0.008
0.006
0.006
0.008
0.007
0.002
0.003
0.003
0.007
0.009
0.000
0.011
0.004
0.006
0.006
0.000
0.003
0.000
0.008
0.007
0.008
0.002
0.002
0.010
0.007
0.006
0.005
0.006
0.008

Notes: The standard errors for means are robust to heteroskedasticity. The standard errors for
medians are bootstrap estimates. In four years, the latter estimates are absolute zero. The reason
is that, because of a substantial mass point at the sample median, the estimated median came out
the same in every one of the 1,000 bootstrap replications.
31

Table 5. U.S. Women’s Log Real Wages (PCE Deflator) in Severe Recessions

Year
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983

2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

Mean Relative to
Pre-Recession
Year
0
(normalized)
-0.003
(0.006)
-0.001
(0.006)
0.021
(0.006)
0.027
(0.006)

0
(normalized)
0.006
(0.005)
-0.014
(0.005)
0.009
(0.005)
0.005
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.005)

0
(normalized)
-0.006
(0.006)
-0.010
(0.006)
0.002
(0.006)
0.004
(0.006)

Median Relative
to Pre-Recession
Year
0
(normalized)
-0.012
(0.009)
-0.014
(0.009)
0.010
(0.006)
0.032
(0.010)

0
(normalized)
-0.003
(0.005)
-0.022
(0.005)
-0.003
(0.005)
-0.015
(0.005)
-0.025
(0.005)

0
(normalized)
0.027
(0.012)
0.006
(0.011)
0.025
(0.011)
0.026
(0.011)
0.011
(0.010)

RegressionAdjusted Mean

RegressionAdjusted Median
0
(normalized)
-0.012
(0.005)
-0.022
(0.005)
-0.006
(0.006)
0.008
(0.006)

0
(normalized)
0.003
(0.005)
-0.012
(0.005)
0.003
(0.005)
-0.012
(0.005)
-0.023
(0.005)

Notes: The numbers in parentheses are standard errors. The standard errors for means are robust
to heteroskedasticity. The standard errors for medians are bootstrap estimates.

32

Table 6. Nominal Wage Rigidity in the United States

Years

Annual
Unemployment Rate
in Year t-1

Survey-toSurvey
Change in
Log PCE
Deflator

1980-1981

7.1

1982-1983

Percentage of Hourly
Workers with:

Percentage of NonHourly Workers with:

Zero
Nominal
Wage
Change

Negative
Nominal
Wage
Change

Zero
Nominal
Wage
Change

Negative
Nominal
Wage
Change

0.099

6.2

11.2

11.0

21.5

9.7

0.046

14.4

16.6

12.4

23.5

1986-1987

7.0

0.023

15.2

17.9

11.8

27.9

1990-1991

5.6

0.047

12.4

19.9

11.1

30.1

1997-1998

4.9

0.009

14.6

17.7

9.3

26.8

1999-2000

4.2

0.025

14.7

15.9

8.9

26.0

2001-2002

4.7

0.007

16.2

14.2

11.9

26.5

2003-2004

6.0

0.021

17.6

19.5

12.9

30.2

2005-2006

5.1

0.032

17.6

17.0

12.0

26.6

2007-2008

4.6

0.035

17.7

18.7

9.4

37.1

2009-2010

9.3

0.024

19.3

23.4

14.9

33.7

2011-2012

8.9

0.024

19.5

25.5

13.9

33.1

33

Table 7. Mean Log Real Wages in Great Britain (2012 Pounds) by Gender and Year
Year
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

Unemployment
Rate
4.2
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.3
6.1
9.4
10.5
11.3
11.9
11.4
11.3
10.9
8.9
7.3
6.9
8.5
9.8
10.5
9.7
8.8
8.3
7.2
6.3
6.1
5.6
4.9
5.2
5.0
4.8
4.8
5.4
5.4
5.2
7.6
7.9
7.8

Men
2.270
2.275
2.204
2.240
2.282
2.294
2.317
2.328
2.363
2.384
2.396
2.435
2.471
2.506
2.536
2.551
2.577
2.583
2.592
2.586
2.587
2.594
2.609
2.619
2.637
2.651
2.688
2.712
2.709
2.711
2.731
2.741
2.749
2.743
2.747
2.693
2.640

Estimated
Standard Error
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002

Note: The standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity.

34

Women
1.873
1.904
1.843
1.860
1.888
1.910
1.937
1.936
1.981
2.002
2.021
2.060
2.093
2.139
2.184
2.200
2.244
2.261
2.276
2.277
2.287
2.293
2.313
2.328
2.359
2.374
2.409
2.430
2.450
2.463
2.493
2.507
2.510
2.508
2.532
2.491
2.450

Estimated
Standard Error
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002

Table 8. Mean Year-to Year Changes in Log Real Wages by Gender from Longitudinally
Matched NES Data

Year
1975-1976
1976-1977
1977-1978
1978-1979
1979-1980
1980-1981
1981-1982
1982-1983
1983-1984
1984-1985
1985-1986
1986-1987
1987-1988
1988-1989
1989-1990
1990-1991
1991-1992
1992-1993
1993-1994
1994-1995
1995-1996
1996-1997
1997-1998
1998-1999
1999-2000
2000-2001
2001-2002
2002-2003
2003-2004
2004-2005
2005-2006
2006-2007
2007-2008
2008-2009
2009-2010
2010-2011

Unemployment Rate
(End of
Period)
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.3
6.1
9.4
10.5
11.3
11.9
11.4
11.3
10.9
8.9
7.3
6.9
8.5
9.8
10.5
9.7
8.8
8.3
7.2
6.3
6.1
5.6
4.9
5.2
5.0
4.8
4.8
5.4
5.4
5.2
7.6
7.9
7.8

Men’s Mean
Women’s
Log Real Wage Standard Error Mean Log Real Standard Error
Change
Wage Change
0.011
-0.067
0.025
0.049
0.029
0.023
0.014
0.036
0.027
0.024
0.052
0.047
0.054
0.048
0.032
0.035
0.017
0.018
0.009
0.013
0.021
0.027
0.030
0.033
0.035
0.050
0.041
0.022
0.026
0.046
0.032
0.023
0.016
0.028
-0.026
-0.030

0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001

Note: The standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity.
35

0.040
-0.046
0.013
0.035
0.033
0.028
0.003
0.043
0.019
0.029
0.054
0.051
0.060
0.059
0.041
0.047
0.029
0.026
0.016
0.011
0.018
0.027
0.023
0.037
0.040
0.052
0.041
0.034
0.032
0.050
0.031
0.021
0.012
0.039
-0.018
-0.028

0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001

Table 9. Nominal Wage Rigidity in Great Britain

Years

Start-ofPeriod
Unemployment Rate

April-toApril
Change in
Log RPIX

1975-1976
1976-1977
1977-1978
1978-1979
1979-1980
1980-1981
1981-1982
1982-1983
1983-1984
1984-1985
1985-1986
1986-1987
1987-1988
1988-1989
1989-1990
1990-1991
1991-1992
1992-1993
1993-1994
1994-1995
1995-1996
1996-1997
1997-1998
1998-1999
1999-2000
2000-2001
2001-2002
2002-2003
2003-2004
2004-2005
2005-2006
2006-2007
2007-2008
2008-2009
2009-2010
2010-2011

4.2
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.3
6.1
9.4
10.5
11.3
11.9
11.4
11.3
10.9
8.9
7.3
6.9
8.5
9.8
10.5
9.7
8.8
8.3
7.2
6.3
6.1
5.6
4.9
5.2
5.0
4.8
4.8
5.4
5.4
5.2
7.6
7.9

0.175
0.160
0.083
0.087
0.188
0.117
0.087
0.048
0.048
0.052
0.033
0.035
0.041
0.057
0.076
0.066
0.055
0.029
0.023
0.026
0.029
0.025
0.030
0.024
0.019
0.020
0.023
0.030
0.020
0.023
0.024
0.035
0.039
0.017
0.053
0.052

Percentage of Log Nominal Wage Changes by Interval:
Exactly 0

[-0.01,0)

(0,0.01]

Less than 0

0.6
1.1
1.7
1.8
0.4
2.0
2.3
1.8
4.1
1.4
1.2
2.1
1.3
1.8
2.1
2.3
4.2
6.0
5.5
4.9
1.3
1.5
3.4
3.8
3.8
3.4
1.2
1.3
0.9
1.3
1.9
1.7
2.7
4.5
7.4
6.8

0.4
0.8
0.9
0.7
0.3
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.2
1.0
1.6
1.2
0.9
1.0
1.0
0.9
1.3
1.8
2.4
1.9
1.8
4.9
1.8
1.6
2.0
1.6
3.4
2.6
4.7
3.1
3.3
3.8
2.6
3.3
4.2
4.4

0.4
1.0
1.1
0.9
0.4
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.7
1.3
1.2
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.2
1.0
1.6
2.8
3.0
2.6
4.4
2.8
2.0
2.0
2.4
3.4
3.8
4.2
4.4
2.4
3.8
4.2
3.0
3.4
7.5
7.0

5.2
9.1
8.9
8.4
4.9
8.6
9.2
10.5
12.8
11.9
12.2
12.2
11.6
11.0
11.0
11.4
13.7
16.7
19.9
20.9
19.9
22.8
20.2
18.1
18.7
15.2
19.5
20.7
23.2
18.4
21.4
20.5
18.4
19.4
23.6
23.1

36

Figure 1. U.S. Men’s Mean Log Real Wages (PCE Deflator) over the Business Cycle

37

Figure 2. U.S. Women’s Mean Log Real Wages (PCE Deflator) over the Business Cycle

38

Figure 3. U.S. Men’s Mean Log Real and Nominal Wages

39

Figure 4. U.S. Women’s Mean Log Real and Nominal Wages

40

Figure 5. Distributions of Year-to-Year Change in Log Nominal Hourly Wages for U.S. Hourly Workers

41

Figure 5 continued

42

Figure 5 continued

43

Figure 6. Distributions of Year-toYear Change in Log Nominal Weekly Earnings for U.S. Non-Hourly Workers

44

Figure 6 continued

45

Figure 6 continued

46

Figure 7. Unemployment and Inflation in the United Kingdom, 1975 to 2012
A. Unemployment Rate

14
12

10
8
6
4

2
2007

2009

2011

2007

2009

2011

2005

2003

2001

1999

1997

1995

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

1983

1981

1979

1977

1975

0

Unemployment rate (%), Labour Force Survey
B. Inflation Rate

25
20
15
10
5

2005

2003

2001

1999

1997

1995

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

1983

1981

1979

1977

1975

0

Inflation rate (%), RPIX
Note: In line with the timing of the NES, both series report April-to-April data.

47

Figure 8. Mean Log Real Wages (2012 Pounds) in Great Britain, 1975 to 2011

2.9
2.7

2.5
2.3

Men
Women

2.1
1.9

1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011

1.7

Notes: Mean log hourly earnings excluding overtime, deflated using the RPIX series, for
individuals aged 25 to 59, excluding the top and bottom one percent of hourly earnings.

48

Figure 9. Mean Log Real Wage Changes in Great Britain, 1975 to 2011
A. Men

0.080

0.060
0.040

0.020
2010

2008

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

1976

-0.020

1978

0.000

-0.040

-0.060
-0.080

Men's mean log real wage change

Implied from mean levels

B. Women

0.080

0.060
0.040

0.020
2010

2008

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

1978

-0.020

1976

0.000

-0.040

-0.060
-0.080

Women's mean log real wage change

49

Implied from mean levels

Figure 10. Mean Changes in Log Real Wages in Great Britain Disaggregated by Union Status

Men
0.08
0.06

0.04
0.02

Non-union to nonunion

2011

2008

2005

2002

1999

1996

1993

1990

1987

1984

1981

1978

-0.02

1975

0

Union to union

-0.04
-0.06

-0.08
-0.1

Women
0.08
0.06
0.04
Non-union to nonunion

0.02

-0.04

-0.06
-0.08

50

2011

2008

2005

2002

1999

1996

1993

1990

1987

1984

1981

1978

-0.02

1975

0

Union to union

Figure 11. Distributions of Year-to-Year Change in Log Nominal Hourly Wages for British Job Stayers

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

1980

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

1979

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

1978

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

1977

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

1976

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

51

.2
0

.05

.1

.15

.2
0

.05

.1

.15

.2
0

.05

.1

.15

.2
0

.05

.1

.15

.2
.15
.1
.05
0
-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

.25

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

.25

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

.25

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

.25

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

.25

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

Figure 11 continued

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

1990

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

1989

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

1988

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

1987

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

1986

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

52

.2
0

.05

.1

.15

.2
0

.05

.1

.15

.2
0

.05

.1

.15

.2
0

.05

.1

.15

.2
.15
.1
.05
0
-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

.25

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

.25

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

.25

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

.25

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

.25

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

Figure 11 continued

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

2000

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

1999

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

1998

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

1997

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

1996

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

53

.2
0

.05

.1

.15

.2
0

.05

.1

.15

.2
0

.05

.1

.15

.2
0

.05

.1

.15

.2
.15
.1
.05
0
-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

.25

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

.25

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

.25

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

.25

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

.25

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

Figure 11 continued

.25
.15
.1

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

2011

-.3-.2-.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

54

0

.05
0

-.3-.2-.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

2010
.2

.25
.15
.1
.05
0

-.3-.2-.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

2009
.2

.25
.2
.15
.1

0
-.3-.2-.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

2008

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

2007

.05
0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

2006

-.3-.2-.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

-.3-.2-.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6

References
Altonji, Joseph G., and Paul J. Devereux. 1999. “The Extent and Consequences of Downward
Wage Rigidity.” Working Paper No. 7236, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Beaudry, Paul, and John DiNardo. 1991. “The Effect of Implicit Contracts on the Movement of
Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Micro Data.” Journal of Political
Economy, 99(4): 665-88.
Becker, Gary S. 1962. “Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis.” Journal of
Political Economy, 70(5): S9-49.
Bewley, Truman F. 1999. Why Wages Don’t Fall during a Recession. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Bils, Mark J. 1985. “Real Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Panel Data.” Journal
of Political Economy, 93(4): 666-89.
Blinder, Alan S., and Don H. Choi. 1990. “A Shred of Evidence on Theories of Wage
Stickiness.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(4): 1003-15.
Blundell, Richard, Claire Crawford, and Wenchao Jin. 2013. “What Can Wages and
Employment Tell Us about the UK’s Productivity Puzzle?” Working Paper No. 13/11,
Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Bowlus, Audra, Haoming Liu, and Chris Robinson. 2002. “Business Cycle Models,
Aggregation, and Real Wage Cyclicality.” Journal of Labor Economics, 20(2): 308-35.
Card, David, and Dean Hyslop. 1996. “Does Inflation ‘Grease the Wheels of the Labor
Market?’” Working Paper No. 5538, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Carneiro, Anabela, Paulo Guimarães, and Pedro Portugal. 2012. “Real Wages and the Business
Cycle: Accounting for Worker, Firm, and Job Title Heterogeneity.” American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(2): 133-52.
Daly, Mary, Bart Hobijn, and Brian Lucking. 2012. “Why Has Wage Growth Stayed Strong?”
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter No. 2012-10.
Devereux, Paul J. 2001. “The Cyclicality of Real Wages within Employer-Employee Matches.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 54(4): 835-50.
Devereux, Paul J., and Robert A. Hart. 2006. “Real Wage Cyclicality of Job Stayers, WithinCompany Job Movers, and Between-Company Job Movers.” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, 60(1): 105-19.
55

Elsby, Michael W. L. 2009. “Evaluating the Economic Significance of Downward Nominal
Wage Rigidity.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 56(2): 154-69.
Elsby, Michael W. L., Bart Hobijn, and Ayşegül Şahin. 2010. “The Labor Market in the Great
Recession.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2010(1): 1-48.
Farber, Henry S. 2008. “Employment Insecurity: The Decline in Worker-Firm Attachment in
the United States.” Working Paper No. 530, Industrial Relations Section, Princeton
University.
Gertler, Mark, and Antonella Trigari. 2009. “Unemployment Fluctuations with Staggered Nash
Wage Bargaining.” Journal of Political Economy, 117(1): 38-86.
Hall, Robert E. 2005. “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness.”
American Economic Review, 95(1): 50-65.
Hall, Robert E., and Paul R. Milgrom. 2008. “The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the
Wage Bargain.” American Economic Review, 98(4): 1653-74.
Jaeger, David A. 1997. “Reconciling the Old and New Census Bureau Education Questions:
Recommendations for Researchers.” Journal of Economic and Business Statistics, 15(3):
300-9.
Kahn, Shulamit. 1997. “Evidence of Nominal Wage Stickiness from Microdata.” American
Economic Review, 87(5): 993-1008.
Kennan, John. 2010. “Private Information, Wage Bargaining and Employment Fluctuations.”
Review of Economic Studies, 77(2): 633-64.
Keynes, John Maynard. 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money.
London: Macmillan.
Kudlyak, Marianna. 2009. “The Cyclicality of the User Cost of Labor with Search and
Matching.” Working Paper No. 09-12, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.
Madrian, Brigitte C., and Lars John Lefgren. 2000. “An Approach to Longitudinally Matching
Current Population Survey (CPS) Respondents.” Journal of Economic and Social
Measurement, 26(2000): 31-62.
Martins, Pedro S., Gary Solon, and Jonathan P. Thomas. 2012. “Measuring What Employers
Do about Entry Wages over the Business Cycle: A New Approach.” American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(4): 36-55.

56

McLaughlin, Kenneth. 1994. “Rigid Wages?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 34(3): 383414.
Mortensen, Dale T., and Christopher A. Pissarides. 1994. “Job Creation and Job Destruction in
the Theory of Unemployment.” Review of Economic Studies, 61(3): 397-415.
Nickell, Stephen, and Glenda Quintini. 2003. “Nominal Wage Rigidity and the Rate of
Inflation.” Economic Journal, 113(490): 762-81.
Office for National Statistics, New Earnings Survey Panel Dataset, 1975-2011: Secure Access
[computer file]. 2nd Edition. Colchester, Essex: UK Data Archive [distributor], October
2012. SN: 6706.
Shimer, Robert. 2004. “The Consequences of Rigid Wages in Search Models.” Journal of the
European Economic Association, 2(2-3): 469-79.
Shin, Donggyun. 2012. “Cyclicality of Real Wages in Korea.” B.E. Journal of Economic
Analysis and Policy (Contributions), 12(1): Article 2.
Shin, Donggyun, and Gary Solon. 2007. “New Evidence on Real Wage Cyclicality within
Employer-Employee Matches.” Scottish Journal of Political Economy, 54(5): 648-60.
Smith, Jennifer C. 2000. “Nominal Wage Rigidity in the United Kingdom.” Economic Journal,
110(462): C176-95.
Snell, Andy, and Jonathan P. Thomas. 2010. “Labor Contracts, Equal Treatment, and WageUnemployment Dynamics.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(3): 98127.
Solon, Gary, Robert Barsky, and Jonathan A. Parker. 1994. “Measuring the Cyclicality of Real
Wages: How Important Is Composition Bias?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(1):
1-25.
Stockman, Alan C. 1983. “Aggregation Bias and the Cyclical Behavior of Real Wages.”
Unpublished manuscript.

57

