NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DISTRIBUTIONAL INCENTIVES IN AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF DOMESTIC
SOVEREIGN DEFAULT
Pablo D'Erasmo
Enrique G. Mendoza
Working Paper 19477
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19477
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013

We acknowledge the generous support of the National Science Foundation under awards 1325122
and 1324740. Comments by Jesse Schreger, Fabrizio Perri, Vincenzo Quadrini and by participants
at presentations in Columbia University, the 2014 Winter Meetings of the Econometric Society, and
the NBER Conference on Sovereign Debt and Financial Crises are also gratefully acknowledged. We
thank Jingting Fan for excellent research assistance. The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily
reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Pablo D'Erasmo and Enrique G. Mendoza. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Distributional Incentives in an Equilibrium Model of Domestic Sovereign Default
Pablo D'Erasmo and Enrique G. Mendoza
NBER Working Paper No. 19477
September 2013, Revised July 2015
JEL No. E44,E6,F34,H63
ABSTRACT
Europe’s debt crisis resembles historical episodes of outright default on domestic public debt about
which little research exists. This paper proposes a theory of domestic sovereign default based on distributional
incentives affecting the welfare of risk-averse debt- and non-debt holders. A utilitarian government
cannot sustain debt if default is costless. If default is costly, debt with default risk is sustainable, and
debt falls as concentration of debt ownership rises. A government favoring bond holders can also sustain
debt, with debt rising as ownership becomes more concentrated. These results are robust to adding
foreign investors, redistributive taxes, or a second asset.
Pablo D'Erasmo
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Research Department
Ten Independence Mall, Philadelphia PA 19106
pabloderasmo@gmail.com
Enrique G. Mendoza
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
egme@sas.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

The seminal study by Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) identified 68 episodes in which governments
defaulted outright (i.e. by means other than inflation) on their domestic creditors in a crosscountry database going back to 1750. These domestic defaults occurred via mechanisms such
as forcible conversions, lower coupon rates, unilateral reductions of principal, and suspensions
of payments. Reinhart and Rogoff also documented that domestic public debt accounts for a
large fraction of total government debt in the majority of countries (about 2/3rds on average),
and that domestic defaults were associated with periods of severe financial turbulence, which
often included defaults on external debt, banking system collapses and full-blown economic
crises. Despite of these striking features, they also found that domestic sovereign default is a
“forgotten history” that remains largely unexplored in economic research.
The ongoing European debt crisis also highlights the importance of studying domestic
sovereign default. In particular, four features of this crisis make it more akin to a domestic
default than to the typical external default that dominates the literature on public debt default.
First, countries in the Eurozone are highly integrated, with the majority of their public debt
denominated in their common currency and held by European residents. Hence, from an European standpoint, default by one or more Eurozone governments means a suspension of payments
to “domestic” agents, instead of external creditors. Second, domestic public debt-GDP ratios
are high in the Eurozone in general, and very large in the countries at the epicenter of the
crisis (Greece, Ireland, Italy, Spain and Portugal). Third, the Eurozone’s common currency and
common central bank rule out the possibility of individual governments resorting to inflation as
a means to lighten their debt burden without an outright default. Fourth, and perhaps most
important from the standpoint of the theory proposed in this paper, European-wide institutions
such as the ECB and the European Commission are weighting the interests of both creditors
and debtors in assessing the pros and cons of sovereign defaults by individual countries, and
creditors and debtors are aware of these institutions’ concern and of their key role in influencing
expectations and default risk.1 Hall and Sargent (2014) document a similar situation in the
process by which the U.S. government handled the management of its debt in the aftermath of
the Revolutionary War.
Table 1 shows that the Eurozone fiscal crisis has been characterized by rapid increases in
public debt ratios and sovereign spreads that coincided with rising government expenditure
ratios. The Table also shows that debt ownership, as proxied by Gini coefficients of wealth
distributions, is unevenly distributed in the seven countries listed, with mean and median Gini
1

The analogy with a domestic default is imperfect, however, because the Eurozone is not a single country,
and in particular there is no fiscal entity with tax and debt-issuance powers over all the members.

2

coefficients of around 2/3rds.2
Table 1: Euro Area: Key Fiscal Statistics and Wealth Inequality

Moment (%)
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Portugal
Spain
Avg.
Median

Gov.
Avg.
34.87
33.34
84.25
14.07
95.46
35.21
39.97
48.17
35.21

Debt
2011
62.72
52.16
133.09
64.97
100.22
75.83
45.60
76.37
64.97

Gov. Exp.
Avg. “crisis peak”
23.40
24.90
18.80
20.00
18.40
23.60
16.10
20.50
19.40
21.40
20.00
22.10
17.60
21.40
19.10
21.99
18.80
21.40

Avg.
0.08
0.37
0.11
0.27
0.20
0.13
0.22
0.17

Spreads
“crisis peak”
1.04
21.00
6.99
3.99
9.05
4.35
7.74
5.67

Gini
Wealth
0.73
0.67
0.65
0.58
0.61
0.67
0.57
0.64
0.65

Note:
Author’s
calculations
based
on
OECD
Statistics,
Eurostat,
ECSB
and
Davies, Sandstrm, Shorrocks, and Wolff (2009). “Gov. Debt” refers to Total General Government Net
Financial Liabilities (avg 90-07); “Gov. Exp.” corresponds to government purchases in National Accounts (avg
00-07); “Sov Spreads” correspond to the difference between interest rates of the given country and Germany
(1+r i )
for bonds of similar maturity (avg 00-07). For a given country i, they are computed as (1+r
Ger ) − 1. “Crisis
Peak” refers to the maximum value observed during 2008-2012 using data from Eurostat. “Gini Wealth” are
Gini wealth coefficients for 2000 from Davies, Sandstrm, Shorrocks, and Wolff (2009) Appendix V.

Taken together, the history of domestic defaults and the risk of similar defaults in Europe
pose two important questions: What explains the existence of domestic debt ratios exposed to
default risk? And, can the concentration of the ownership of government debt be a determinant
of domestic debt exposed to default risk?
This paper aims to answer these questions by proposing a framework for explaining domestic
sovereign defaults driven by distributional incentives. This framework is motivated by the key
fact that a domestic default entails substantial redistribution across domestic agents, with all of
these agents, including government debt holders, entering in the payoff function of the sovereign.
This is in sharp contrast with what standard models of external sovereign default assume,
particularly those based on the classic work of Eaton and Gersovitz (1981).
We propose a tractable two-period model with heterogeneous agents and non-insurable aggregate risk in which domestic default can be optimal for a government responding to distributional
incentives. A fraction γ of agents are low-wealth (L) agents who do not hold government debt,
2

In Section A.1 of the Appendix, we present a more systematic analysis of the link between debt and inequality
and show that government debt is increasing in inequality when inequality is low but decreasing for high levels
of inequality.

3

and a fraction 1 − γ are high-wealth (H) agents who hold the debt. The government finances
the gap between exogenous stochastic expenditures and endogenous taxes by issuing non-statecontingent debt, retaining the option to default. In our benchmark case, the government is
utilitarian,, so the social welfare function assigns the weights γ and 1 − γ to the welfare of L
and H agents respectively.
If the government is utilitarian and default is costless, the model cannot support an equilibrium with debt. This is because for any given level of debt that could have been issued in
the first period, the government always attains the second period’s socially efficient levels of
consumption allocations and redistribution by choosing to default, and if default in period two
is certain the debt market collapses in the first period. An equilibrium with debt under a utilitarian government can exist if default entails an exogenous cost in terms of disposable income.
When default is costly, repayment becomes optimal if the amount of period-two consumption
dispersion that the competitive equilibrium with repayment supports yields higher welfare than
the default equilibrium net of default cost.
Alternatively, we show that an equilibrium with debt can be supported if the government’s
payoff function displays a “political” bias in favor of bond holders, even if default is costless.
In this case, the government’s weight on H-type agents is higher than the actual fraction of
these agents in the distribution of bond holdings. In this extension, the debt is an increasing
function of the concentration of debt ownership, instead of decreasing as in the utilitarian case.
This is because incentives to default get weaker as the government’s weight on L-type agents
falls increasingly below γ. The model with political bias also yields the interesting result that
agents that do not hold public debt may prefer a government that weighs bond holders more
than a utilitarian government. This is because the government with political bias has weaker
default incentives, and can thus sustain higher debt at lower default probabilities, which relaxes
a liquidity constraint affecting agents who do not hold public debt by improving tax smoothing.
We also explore other three important extensions of the model to show that the main result
of the benchmark model, namely the existence of equilibria with domestic public debt exposed
to default risk, is robust. We examine extensions opening the economy so that a portion of the
debt is held by foreign investors, introducing taxation as another instrument for redistributive
policy, and adding a second asset as an alternative vehicle for saving.
This work is related to various strands of the large literature on public debt. First, studies
on public debt as a self-insurance mechanism and a vehicle that alters consumption dispersion in heterogeneous agents models without default, such as Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998),
Golosov and Sargent (2012), Azzimonti, de Francisco, and Quadrini (2014), Floden (2001) and

4

Heathcote (2005).3
A second strand is the literature on external sovereign default in the line of the Eaton and Gersovitz
(1981) model (e.g. Aguiar and Gopinath (2006), Arellano (2008), Pitchford and Wright (2012),
Yue (2010)).4 Also in this literature, and closely related, Aguiar and Amador (2013) analyze
the interaction between public debt, taxes and default risk and Lorenzoni and Werning (2013)
study the dynamics of debt and interest rates in a model where default is driven by insolvency
and debt issuance follows a fiscal rule.
A third strand is the literature on political economy and sovereign default, which also focuses mostly on external default (e.g. Amador (2003), Dixit and Londregan (2000), D’Erasmo
(2011), Guembel and Sussman (2009), Hatchondo, Martinez, and Sapriza (2009) and Tabellini
(1991)). A few studies like those of Alesina and Tabellini (1990) and Aghion and Bolton (1990)
do focus on political economy aspects of government debt in a closed economy, including default,
and Aguiar, Amador, Farhi, and Gopinath (2013) examine optimal policy in a monetary union
subject to self-fulfilling debt crises.
A fourth important strand of the literature focuses on the consequences of default on domestic
agents, the role of secondary markets, discriminatory v. nondiscriminatory default and the role of
domestic debt in providing liquidity (see Guembel and Sussman (2009), Broner, Martin, and Ventura
(2010), Broner and Ventura (2011), Gennaioli, Martin, and Rossi (2014), Basu (2009), Brutti
(2011), Mengus (2014) and Di Casola and Sichlimiris (2014)).5 As in most of these studies, default in our setup is non-discriminatory, because the government cannot discriminate across any
of its creditors when it defaults. Our analysis differs in that default is driven by distributional
incentives.6
Finally, there is also a newer literature that is closer to our work in that it studies the tradeoffs between distributional incentives to default on domestic debt and the use of debt in infinitehorizon models with heterogeneous agents (see, in particular, D’Erasmo and Mendoza (2014)
and Dovis, Golosov, and Shourideh (2014)). In D’Erasmo and Mendoza, debt is determined by
3

A related literature initiated by Aiyagari, Marcet, Sargent, and Seppala (2002) studies optimal taxation
and public debt dynamics with aggregate uncertainty and incomplete markets, but in a representative-agent
environment. Pouzo and Presno (2014) extended this framework to incorporate default and renegotiation.
4
See Panizza, Sturzenegger, and Zettelmeyer (2009), Aguiar and Amador (2014), and Tomz and Wright
(2012) for recent reviews of the sovereign debt literature. Some studies in this area have examined models
that include tax and expenditure policies, as well as settings with foreign and domestic lenders, but always maintaining the representative agent assumption (e.g. Cuadra, Sanchez, and Sapriza (2010)), Vasishtha (2010) and
more recently Dias, Richmond, and Wright (2012) have examined the benefits of debt relief from the perspective
of a global social planner with utilitarian preferences.
5
Motivated by the recent financial crisis and extending the theoretical work of Gennaioli, Martin, and Rossi
(2014), a set of recent papers focuses on the interaction between sovereign debt and domestic financial institutions,
such as Sosa-Padilla (2012), Bocola (2014), Boz, D’Erasmo, and Durdu (2014) and Perez (2015).
6
Andreasen, Sandleris, and der Ghote (2011), Ferriere (2014) and Jeon and Kabukcuoglu (2014) study environments in which domestic income heterogeneity plays a central role in the determination of external defaults.

5

a fiscal rule, while in this paper we model public debt as an optimal choice and derive analytical
expressions that characterize equilibrium prices and the solution of the government’s problem.
Our work differs from Dovis et al. in that they assume complete domestic asset markets, so
their analysis abstracts from the role of public debt in providing social insurance, while the
non-state-contingent nature of public debt plays a central role in the distributional incentives
we examine here and in the endogenous default costs studied in D’Erasmo and Mendoza (2014).
In addition, Dovis et al. focus on the solution to a Ramsey problem that supports equilibria
in which default is not observed along the equilibrium path, while in our work default is an
equilibrium outcome.7

2

Model Environment

Consider a two-period economy inhabited by a continuum of agents with aggregate unit measure. Agents differ in their initial wealth position, which is characterized by their holdings of
government debt at the beginning of the first period. The government is represented by a social
planner with a utilitarian payoff who issues one-period, non-state-contingent debt, levies lumpsum taxes, and has the option to default. Government debt is the only asset available in the
economy and is entirely held by domestic agents.

2.1

Household Preferences & Budget Constraints

All agents have the same preferences, which are given by:
u(c0 ) + βE[u(c1)],

u(c) =

c1−σ
1−σ

where β ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor and ct for t = 0, 1 is individual consumption. The utility
function u(·) takes the standard CRRA form.
All agents receive a non-stochastic endowment y each period and pay lump-sum taxes τt ,
which are uniform across agents. Taxes and newly issued government debt are used to pay
for government consumption gt and repayment of outstanding government debt. The initial
supply of outstanding government bonds at t = 0 is denoted B0 . Given B0 , the initial wealth
distribution is defined by a fraction γ of households who are the L-type individuals with initial
L
bond holdings bL0 , and a fraction (1 − γ) who are the H-types and hold bH
0 > b0 . These initial
H
L
bond holdings satisfy market clearing: γbL0 + (1 − γ)bH
0 = B0 , which given b0 > b0 implies that
L
bH
0 > B0 and b0 < B0 .
7

See also Golosov and Sargent (2012) who study debt dynamics without default risk in a similar environment.

6

The budget constraints of the two types of households in the first period are given by:
ci0 + q0 bi1 = y + bi0 − τ0 for i = L, H.

(1)

Agents collect the payout on their initial holdings of government debt (bi0 ), receive endowment
income y, and pay lump-sum taxes τ0 . This net-of-tax resources are used to pay for consumption
and purchases of new government bonds bi1 at price q0 . Agents are not allowed to take short
positions in government bonds, which is equivalent to imposing the no-borrowing condition often
used in heterogeneous-agents models with incomplete markets: bi1 ≥ 0.
The budget constraints in the second period differ depending on whether the government
defaults or not. If the government repays, the budget constraints take the standard form:
ci1 = y + bi1 − τ1 for i = L, H.

(2)

If the government defaults, there is no repayment on the outstanding debt, and the agents’
budget constraints are:
ci1 = (1 − φ(g1 ))y − τ1 for i = L, H.

(3)

As is standard in the sovereign debt literature, we can allow for default to impose an exogenous
cost that reduces income by a fraction φ. This cost is usually modeled as a function of the
realization of a stochastic endowment income, but since income is constant in this setup, we
model it as a function of the realization of government expenditures in the second period g1 .
In particular, the cost is a non-increasing, step-wise function: φ(g1 ) ≥ 0, with φ′ (g1 ) ≤ 0 for
g1 ≤ g 1 , φ′ (g1 ) = 0 otherwise, and φ′′ (g1 ) = 0. Hence, g 1 is a threshold high value of g1 above
which the marginal cost of default is zero.8

2.2

Government

At the beginning of t = 0, the government has outstanding debt B0 and can issue one-period,
non-state contingent discount bonds B1 ∈ B ≡ [0, ∞) at the price q0 ≥ 0. Each period, the
government collects lump-sum revenues τt and pays for gt . Since g0 is known at the beginning
of the first period, the relevant uncertainty with respect to government expenditures is for g1 ,
8

This formulation is analogous to the step-wise default cost as a function of income proposed by Arellano
(2008) and now widely used in the external default literature, and it also captures the idea of asymmetric costs
of tax collection (see Barro (1979) and Calvo (1988)). Note, however, that for the model to support equilibria
with debt under a utilitarian government all we need is φ(g1 ) > 0. The additional structure is useful for the
quantitative analysis and for making it easier to compare the model with the standard external default models.
In external default models, the non-linear cost makes default more costly in “good” states, which alters default
incentives to make default more frequent in “bad” states, and it also contributes to support higher debt levels.

7

which is characterized by a well-defined probability distribution function with mean µg . We do
not restrict the sign of τt , so τt < 0 represents lump-sum transfers.
At equilibrium, the price of debt issued in the first period must be such that the government
bond market clears:
Bt = γbLt + (1 − γ)bH
for t = 0, 1.
(4)
t
This condition is satisfied by construction in period 0. In period 1, however, the price moves
endogenously to clear the market.
The government has the option to default at t = 1. The default decision is denoted by
d1 ∈ {0, 1} where d1 = 0 implies repayment. The government evaluates the values of repayment
and default as a benevolent planner with a social welfare function. In the rest of this Section we
focus on the case of a standard utilitarian social welfare function: γu(cL1 ) + (1 − γ)u(cH
1 ). The
government, however, cannot discriminate across the two types of agents when setting taxation,
debt and default policies.
At t = 0, the government budget constraint is
τ0 = g0 + B0 − q0 B1 .

(5)

The level of taxes in period 1 is determined after the default decision. If the government
repays, taxes are set to satisfy the following government budget constraint:
τ1d1 =0 = g1 + B1 .

(6)

Notice that, since this is a two-period model, equilibrium requires that there are no outstanding
assets at the end of period 1 (i.e. bi2 = B2 = 0 and q1 = 0). If the government defaults, taxes
are simply set to pay for government purchases:
τ1d1 =1 = g1 .

3

(7)

Equilibrium

The analysis of the model’s equilibrium proceeds in three stages. First, we characterize the
households’ optimal savings problem and determine their payoff (or value) functions, taking as
given the government debt, taxes and default decision. Second, we study how optimal government taxes and the default decision are determined. Third, we examine the optimal choice of
debt issuance that internalizes the outcomes of the first two stages.

8

3.1

Households’ Problem

Given B1 and γ, a household with initial debt holdings bi0 for i = L, H chooses bi1 by solving
this maximization problem:
n
v i (B1 , γ) = max u(y + bi0 − q0 (B1 , γ)bi1 − τ0 ) +
(8)
bi1
h
io
βEg1 (1 − d1 (B1 , g1 , γ))u(y + bi1 − τ1d1 =0 ) + d1 (B1 , g1 , γ)u(y(1 − φ(g1 )) − τ1d1 =1 ) ,
subject to bi1 ≥ 0. The term Eg1 [.] represents the expected payoff across the repayment and
default states in period 1.9
The first-order condition, evaluated at the equilibrium level of taxes, yields the following
Euler equation:


u′ (ci0 ) ≥ β(1/q0 (B1 , γ))Eg1 u′ (y − g1 + bi1 − B1 )(1 − d1 (B1 , g1 , γ)) , = if bi1 > 0

(9)

In states in which, given (B1 , γ), the value of g1 is such that the government chooses to default
(d1 (B1 , g1, γ) = 1), the marginal benefit of an extra unit of debt is zero.10 Thus, conditional
on B1 , a larger default set (i.e. a larger set of values of g1 such that the government defaults),
implies that the expected marginal benefit of an extra unit of savings decreases. This implies
that, everything else equal, a higher default probability results in a lower demand for government
bonds, a lower equilibrium bond price, and higher taxes.11
Given that income and taxes are homogeneous across agents, it has to be the case at equiL
librium that bH
1 > b1 , which therefore implies that H−types are never credit constrained. In
contrast, whether L − types are credit constrained or not depends on parameter values. This
is less likely to happen the higher bL0 , B0 or B1 . Whenever the L−types are constrained, the
H−types are the marginal investor and their Euler equation can be used to derive the equilibrium price. For the remainder of the paper we focus on equilibria in which L−types are
constrained (i.e. bL0 = bL1 = 0), in order to capture the feature of heterogeneous agents models
with incomplete markets that a fraction of agents is always credit constrained endogenously, and
public debt has the social benefit that it contributes to reduce the tightness of this constraint.
The equilibrium bond price is the value of q0 (B1 , γ) for which, as long as consumption for all
agents is non-negative and the default probability of the government is less than 1, the following
9

Notice in particular that the payoff in case of default does not depend on the level of individual debt holdings
reflecting the fact that the government cannot discriminate across households when it defaults.
Utility in the case of default equals u(y(1 − φ(g1 )) − g1 ), and is independent of bi1 .
11
Note also that from the agents’ perspective, their bond decisions do not affect d1 (B1 , g1 , γ).

(bi1 ),
10

9

market-clearing condition holds:
B1 = γbL1 (B1 , γ) + (1 − γ)bH
1 (B1 , γ),

(10)

where B1 in the left-hand-side of this expression represents the supply of public debt, and the
right-hand-side is the aggregate government bond demand.
It is instructive to analyze further the households’ problem assuming logarithmic utility
(u(c) = log(c)), because under these assumptions we can solve for q0 (B1 , γ) in closed form, and
use the solution to establish some important properties of bond prices and default risk spreads.
We show in Section A.4 of the Appendix that the equilibrium bond price is:


where Π(B1 , γ) ≡ Eg1




 
γ
y − g0 + 1−γ
B0 Π(B1 , γ)


q0 (B1 , γ) = β
γ
1 + 1−γ
βB1 Π(B1 , γ),
1−d(B1 ,g1 ,γ)
γ
y−g1 +( 1−γ
)B1



(11)

is the expected marginal utility of H−type agents for the

second period, which weights only non-default states because the marginal benefit of debt is zero
1 ,γ)
in default states. Since, as also shown in the Appendix (Section A.4), ∂Π(B
< 0, it follows
∂B1
∂q0 (B1 ,γ)
that ∂B1 < 0 for cH
0 > 0. Moreover, since bond prices are decreasing in B1 , it follows that
the “revenue” the government generates by selling debt, q0 (B1 , γ)B1 , behaves like the familiar

debt Laffer curve of the Eaton-Gersovitz models derived by Arellano (2008).12 This Laffer curve
will play a key role later in determining the government’s optimal debt choice. In particular, the
government internalizes that higher debt eventually produces decreasing revenues, and that in
the decreasing segment of the Laffer curve revenues fall faster as the debt increases, and much
faster as default risk rises sharply.
A similar expression can be obtained for the “risk-free” price (i.e., the bond price that arises
in a model with full commitment), to show that the risk premium is non-negative, and it is
strictly positive if there is default in equilibrium. The premium is increasing in B1 since the
default set is increasing
 in B1 . We alsoshow in Section A.4 of the Appendix that the spread
γ
is a multiple of 1/β y − g0 + 1−γ
B0 . As a result, the total date-0 resources available for


γ
consumption of the H-types (y − g0 + 1−γ B0 ) have a first-order negative effect on default
risk spreads. This is because, as this measure of income rises, the marginal utility of date-0
consumption of H types falls, which pushes up bond prices. Changes in γ have a similar impact
12

It is straightforward to show that revenue R(B1 ) = q0 (B1 , γ)B1 follows a Laffer curve in the [0, B1max ]
interval, where B1max is the upper bound of debt such that the government chooses default for any realization
of g1 and thus q0 (B1max , γ) = 0. Since R(0) = 0 with R′ (0) = q(0, γ) > 0, and R(B1max ) = 0 with R′ (B1max ) =
q0′ (B1max , γ)B1max < 0, it follows by Rolle’s theorem that R(B1 ) has at least one local maximum in (0, B1max ).

10

on this ratio also pushing spreads downward. However, as γ increases default incentives also
strengthen, as the welfare of debt holders is valued less. Thus, in principle the response of
spreads to increases in the concentration of debt ownership is ambiguous.

3.2
3.2.1

Government’s Problem
Government Default Decision at t = 1

At t = 1, the government chooses to default or not by solving this optimization problem:
max

d∈{0,1}

 d=0
W1 (B1 , g1 , γ), W1d=1(g1 ) ,

(12)

where W1d=0 (B1 , g1 , γ) and W1d=1 (g1 ) denote the values of the social welfare function at the
beginning of period 1 in the case of repayment and default respectively. Using the government
budget constraint to substitute for τ1d=0 and τ1d=1 , the government’s utilitarian payoffs can be
expressed as:
W1d=0 (B1 , g1 , γ) = γu(y − g1 + bL1 − B1 ) + (1 − γ)u(y − g1 + bH
1 − B1 )

(13)

W1d=1 (g1 ) = u(y(1 − φ(g1 )) − g1 ).

(14)

and

Notice that all households lose g1 of their income to government absorption regardless of the
default choice. Moreover, debt repayment reduces consumption and welfare of L types and rises
them for H types (since (bL1 − B1 ) ≤ 0 and (bH
1 − B1 ) ≥ 0), whereas default implies the same
consumption and utility for both types of agents.
The distributional mechanism determining the default decision can be illustrated by means
of a graphical tool. To this end, it is helpful to express the values of optimal debt holdings
γ
as bL1 = B1 − ǫ and bH
1 (γ) = B1 + 1−γ ǫ, for some hypothetical decentralized allocation of
debt holdings given by ǫ ∈ [0, B1 ]. Consumption allocations under repayment would therefore
γ
be cL1 (ǫ) = y − g1 − ǫ and cH
1 (γ, ǫ) = y − g1 + 1−γ ǫ, so ǫ also determines the decentralized

consumption dispersion. The efficient dispersion of consumption that the social planner would
choose is characterized by the value of ǫSP that maximizes social welfare under repayment, which
satisfies this first-order condition:



γ SP
′
(15)
u y − g1 +
ǫ
= u′ y − g1 − ǫSP .
1−γ
Hence, the efficient allocations are characterized by zero consumption dispersion, because equal
11

marginal utilities imply cL,SP =cH,SP = y − g1 , which is attained with ǫSP = 0.
Consider now the government’s default decision when default is costless (φ(g1) = 0). This
scenario is depicted in Figure 1, which plots the social welfare function under repayment as a
function of ǫ as the bell-shaped curve, and the social welfare under default (which is independent
of ǫ), as the black dashed line.
Figure 1: Default Decision and Consumption Dispersion
−1.1

W d=0 (ǫ)

default zone (φ = 0)

−1.15

u(y − g1 )
−1.2

−1.25

u(y(1 − φ) − g1 )

−1.3

repayment zone
(φ > 0)

default zone (φ > 0)

−1.35

−1.4

−1.45

−1.5
−0.5

−0.4

−0.3

−0.2

−0.1

0

ǫ SP

0.1

0.2

ǫ̂

0.3

0.4

0.5
(ǫ)

Clearly, the maximum welfare under repayment is attained when ǫ = 0 which is also the
efficient amount of consumption dispersion ǫSP .13 Given that the only policy instruments the
government can use, other than the default decision, are non-state contingent debt and lump-sum
taxes, it is straightforward to conclude that default is always optimal. This is because default
produces identical allocations in a decentralized equilibrium as the socially efficient ones, since
default produces zero consumption dispersion with consumption levels cL =cH = y − g1 . This
outcome is invariant to the values of B1 , g1 and γ. This result also implies that the model
without default costs cannot support equilibria with domestic debt subject to default risk,
because default is always optimal.
The outcome is very different when default is costly. With φ(g1) > 0, default still yields
zero consumption dispersion, but at lower levels of consumption and therefore utility, since
consumption allocations in the default state become cL =cH = (1 − φ(g1))y − g1 . This does not
alter the result that the first-best social optimum is ǫSP = 0, but what changes is that default
13

Recall also that we defined the relevant range of decentralized consumption dispersion for ǫ > 0, so welfare
under repayment is decreasing in ǫ over the relevant range.

12

can no longer support the consumption allocations of the first best. Hence, there is now a
threshold amount of consumption dispersion in the decentralized equilibrium, b
ǫ(γ), which varies

with γ and such that for ǫ ≥ b
ǫ(γ) default is again optimal, but for lower ǫ repayment is now
optimal. This is because when ǫ is below the threshold, repayment produces a level of social
welfare higher than the one that default yields. Figure 1 also illustrates this scenario.

3.2.2

Government Debt Decision at t = 0

We can now examine how the government chooses the optimal amount of debt to issue in
the initial period. Before studying the government’s optimization problem, it is important to
emphasize that in this model debt is a mechanism for altering consumption dispersion across
agents, both within a period and across periods. In particular, since bL0 = bL1 = 0, consumption
1
L
dispersion in each period and repayment state can be written as: cH
0 −c0 = 1−γ [B0 − q(B1 , γ)B1 ],
1
B1 , and cH,d=1
− cL,d=1
= 0. These expressions make it clear that, given B0 ,
cH,d=0
− cL,d=0
= 1−γ
1
1
1
1
issuing at least some debt (B1 > 0) reduces consumption dispersion at t = 0 compared with no

debt (B1 = 0), but increases it at t = 1 if the government repays (i.e., d = 0). Moreover, the debt
Laffer curve that governs q0 (B1 , γ)B1 limits the extent to which debt can reduce consumption
dispersion at t = 0. Starting from B1 = 0, consumption dispersion in the initial period falls as
B1 increases, but there is a critical positive value of B1 beyond which it increases with debt.
At t = 0, the government chooses its debt policy internalizing the above effects, including
the dependence of bond prices on the debt issuance choice. The government chooses B1 so as
to maximize the “indirect” social welfare function:

W0 (γ) = max γv L (B1 , γ) + (1 − γ)v H (B1 , γ) .
B1

(16)

where v L and v H are the value functions obtained from solving the households’ problems defined
in the Bellman equation (8) taking into account the government budget constraints and the
equilibrium pricing function of bonds.
We can gain some intuition about the solution of this maximization problem by deriving
its first-order condition and re-arranging it as follows (assuming that the relevant functions are
differentiable):
′ L
u′ (cH
0 ) = u (c0 ) +


η
βEg1 [∆d∆W1 ] + γµL
q(B1 , γ)γ

13

(17)

where
η ≡ q(B1 , γ)/ (q ′ (B1 , γ)B1 ) < 0,
∆d ≡ d(B1 + δ, g1 , γ) − d(B1 , g1 , γ) ≥ 0, for δ > 0 small,
∆W1 ≡ W1d=1 (g1 , γ) − W1d=0 (B1 , g1 , γ) ≥ 0,


µL ≡ q(B1 , γ)u′(cL0 ) − βEg1 (1 − d1 )u′ (cL1 ) > 0.

In these expressions, η is the price elasticity of the demand for government bonds, ∆d∆W1
represents the marginal distributional benefit of a default, and µL is the shadow value of the
borrowing constraint faced by L-type agents.
If both types of agents were unconstrained in their bonds’ choice, so that in particular
µL = 0, and if there is no change in the risk of default (or assuming commitment to remove
default risk entirely), so that Eg1 [∆d∆W1 ] = 0, then the optimality condition simplifies to
′ L
u′ (cH
0 ) = u (c0 ). Hence, in this case the social planner issues debt so as to equalize marginal
utilities of consumption across agents at date 0, which requires simply setting B1 to satisfy
q(B1 , γ)B1 = B0 .
If H-type agents are unconstrained and L-types are constrained (i.e. µL > 0), which is
the scenario we are focusing on, and still assuming no change in default risk or a government
ηµL
′ L
committed to repay, the optimality condition reduces to u′ (cH
0 ) = u (c0 ) + q(B1 ,γ) . Since η < 0,
′ L
′ H
this result implies cL0 < cH
0 , because u (c0 ) > u (c0 ). Thus, the government’s debt choice sets
B1 as needed to maintain an optimal, positive level of consumption dispersion. Moreover, since
optimal consumption dispersion is positive, we can also ascertain that B0 > q(B1 , γ)B1 , which
using the government budget constraint implies that the government runs a primary surplus at
t = 0. The government borrows resources, but less than it would need in order to eliminate all
consumption dispersion (which requires zero primary balance).
The intuition for the optimality of issuing debt can be presented in terms of tax smoothing
and savings: Date-0 consumption dispersion without debt issuance would be B0 /(1 − γ), but
this is more dispersion than what the government finds optimal, because by choosing B1 > 0 the
government provides tax smoothing (i.e. reduces date-0 taxes) for everyone, which in particular
eases the L-type agents credit constraint, and provides also a desired vehicle of savings for H
L
types. Thus, positive debt increases consumption of L types
 (since
 c0 = y−g0 −B0 +q(B1 , γ)B1 ),
γ
and reduces consumption of H types (since cH
0 = y − g0 + 1−γ (B0 − q(B1 , γ)B1 )). But issuing

debt (assuming repayment) also increases consumption dispersion a t = 1, since debt is then
paid with higher taxes on all agents, while H agents collect also the debt repayment. Thus, the
debt is being chosen optimally to trade off the social costs and benefits of reducing (increasing)

14

date-0 consumption and increasing (reducing) date-1 consumption for rich (poor) agents.
In the presence of default risk and if default risk changes near the optimal debt choice, the
term Eg1 [∆d∆W1 ] enters in the government’s optimality condition with a positive sign, which
means the optimal gap in the date-0 marginal utilities of the two agents widens even more.
Hence, the government’s optimal choice of consumption dispersion for t = 0 is greater than
without default risk, and the expected dispersion for t = 1 is lower, because in some states of
the world the government will choose to default and consumption dispersion would then drop
to zero. Moreover, the debt Laffer curve now plays a central role in the government’s weakened
incentives to borrow, because as default risk rises the price of bonds drops to zero faster and
the resources available to reduce date-0 consumption dispersion peak at lower debt levels. In
short, default risk reduces the government’s ability to use non-state-contingent debt in order to
reduce consumption dispersion.

3.3

Competitive Equilibrium with Optimal Debt & Default Policy

For a given value of γ, a Competitive Equilibrium with Optimal Debt and Default
Policy is a pair of household value functions v i (B1 , γ) and decision rules bi (B1 , γ) for i = L, H,
a government bond pricing function q0 (B1 , γ) and a set of government policy functions τ0 (B1 , γ),
d∈{0,1}
τ1
(B1 , g1 , γ), d(B1 , g1, γ), B1 (γ) such that:
1. Given the pricing function and government policy functions, v i (B1 , γ) and bi1 (B1 , γ) solve
the households’ problem.
2. q0 (B1 , γ) satisfies the market-clearing condition of the bond market (equation (10)).
3. The government default decision d(B1 , g1 , γ) solves problem (12).
4. Taxes τ0 (B1 , γ) and τ1d (B1 , g1 , γ) are consistent with the government budget constraints.
5. The government debt policy B1 (γ) solves problem (16).

4

Quantitative Analysis

In this Section, we study the model’s quantitative predictions based on a calibration using
European data. The goal is to show whether a reasonable set of parameter values can produce an
equilibrium with debt subject to default risk, and to study how the properties of this equilibrium
change with the model’s key parameters. Since the two-period model is not well suited to account
for the time-series dynamics of the data, we see the results more as an illustration of the potential
15

relevance of the model’s argument for explaining domestic default rather than as an evaluation
of the model’s general ability to match observed public debt dynamics.14

4.1

Calibration

The model is calibrated to annual frequency, and most of the parameter values are set so that the
model matches moments from European data. The calibrated parameter values are summarized
in Table 2. The details of the calibration are available in Section
 A.5 of the Appendix. Note also

σe2
15
that we assume a log-normal process for g1 , so that ln(g1 ) ∼ N (1 − ρg ) ln(µg ) + ρg ln(g0 ), (1−ρ
2) .
g
and the cost of default takes the following functional form: φ(g1) = φ0 + (g 1 − g1 )/y.
Table 2: Model Parameters
Parameter
Discount Factor
Risk Aversion
Avg. Income
Low household wealth
Avg. Gov. Consumption
Autocorrel. G
Std Dev Error
Initial Gov. Debt
Output Cost Default

β
σ
y
bL0
µg
ρg
σe
B0
φ0

Value
0.96
1.00
0.79
0.00
0.18
0.88
0.017
0.35
0.004

Note: Government expenditures, income and debt values are derived using data from France,
Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Spain and Portugal.

We abstain from setting a calibrated value for γ and instead show results for γ ∈ [0, 1].
Data from the United States and Europe suggest that the empirically relevant range for γ is
[0.55, 0.85], and hence when taking a stance on a particular value of γ is useful we use γ = 0.7,
which is the mid point of the plausible range.16
14

We solve the model following a similar backward-recursive strategy as in the theoretical analysis. First,
taking as given a set of values {B1 , γ}, we solve for the equilibrium pricing and default functions by iterating on
(q0 , bi1 ) and the default decision rule d1 until the date-0 bond market clears when the date-1 default decision rule
solves the government’s optimal default problem (12). Then, in the second stage we complete the solution of the
equilibrium by finding the optimal choice of B1 that solves the government’s date-0 optimization problem (16).
It is important to recall that, as explained earlier, for given values of B1 and γ, an equilibrium with debt will not
exist if either the government finds it optimal to default on B1 for all realizations of g1 or if at the givenB1 the
consumption of L types is non-positive. In these cases, there is no finite price that can clear the debt market.
15
This specification allows us to control the correlation between g0 and g1 via ρg , the mean of the shock via
σ2

µg and the variance of the unpredicted portion via σe2 . Note that if g0 = µg , ln(g1 ) ∼ N (ln(µg ), (1−ρg 2 ) ).
e
16
In the United States, the 2010 Survey of Consumer Finances indicates that only 12 percent of households

16

4.2

Results

We examine the quantitative results in the same order in which the backward solution algorithm
works. We start with the second period’s utility of households under repayment and default.
We then move to the first period and examine the equilibrium bond prices. Finally, we study
the optimal government debt issuance B1 for a range of values of γ.
4.2.1

Second period default incentives for given (B1 , g1 , γ)

Using the agents’ optimal choice of bond holdings, we compute the equilibrium utility levels
they attain at t = 1 under repayment v. default for different triples (B1 , g1, γ). Since we are
looking at the last period of a two-period model, these compensating variations reduce simply
to the percent changes in consumption across the default and no-default states of each agent:17
αi (B1 , g1, γ) =

ci,d=1
(B1 , g1 , γ)
1
ci,d=0
(B1 , g1 , γ)
1

−1 =

(1 − φ(g1))y − g1
−1
y − g1 + bi1 − B1

A positive (negative) value of αi (B1 , g1, γ) implies that agent i prefers government default (repayment) by an amount equivalent to an increase (cut) of αi (·) percent in consumption.
The individual welfare gains of default are aggregated using γ to obtain the utilitarian
representation of the social welfare gain of default:
α(B1 , g1, γ) = γαL (B1 , g1, γ) + (1 − γ)αH (B1 , g1 , γ).
A positive value indicates that default induces a social welfare gain and a negative value a loss.
The default decision is directly linked to the values of α(B1 , g1 , γ). In particular, the repayment
region of the default decision (d(B1 , g1 , γ) = 0) corresponds to α(B1 , g1 , γ) < 0 and the default
region (d(B1 , g1 , γ) = 1) to α(B1 , g1 , γ) > 0.
hold savings bonds and 50.4 percent have retirement accounts (which are very likely to include government
bonds). These figures would suggest values of γ ranging from 0.5 to 0.88. In Europe, comparable statistics are
not available for several countries, but Davies, Sandstrm, Shorrocks, and Wolff (2009) document that the wealth
distribution is highly concentrated with Gini coefficients ranging between 0.55 and 0.85. In our model, since
bL
0 = 0, the Gini coefficient of wealth is equal to γ.
17
H
These calculations are straightforward given that in the equilibria we solve for bL
1 = 0, and hence b1 =
B1 /(1 − γ). The same formula would apply, however, even if these conditions do not hold, using instead the
policy functions bi1 (B1 , g1 , γ) that solve the households’ problems for any given pair of functions d1 (B1 , g1 , γ)
and q0 (B1 , γ), including the ones that are consistent with the government’s default decision and equilibrium in
the bond market.

17

Figure 2: Social Welfare Gain of Default α(B1 , g1, γ)

Figure 2 shows two intensity plots of the social welfare gain of default for the ranges of
values of B1 and γ in the vertical and horizontal axes respectively. Panel (i) is for a low value of
government purchases, g 1 , set 3 standard deviations below µg , and panel (ii) is for a high value
g 1 set 3 standard deviations above µg . Figure A.2 in the Appendix shows the default decision
rules that correspond to these two plots. The intensity of the color or shading in these plots
indicates the magnitude of the welfare gain according to the legend shown to the right of each.
The regions shown in white color and marked as “No Equilibrium Zone”, represent values of
(B1 , γ) for which the debt market collapses and no equilibrium exists. In this zone, there is no
equilibrium because, at the given γ, the government chooses to default on the given B1 for all
values of g1 .18
The area in which the social welfare gains of default are well defined in these intensity
plots illustrates two of the key mechanisms driving the government’s distributional incentives
to default: First, fixing γ, the welfare gain of default is higher at higher levels of debt, or
conversely the gain of repayment is lower. Second, keeping B1 constant, the welfare gain of
18

There is another potential “No Equilibrium Zone” that could arise if the given (B1 , γ) would yield cL
0 ≤ 0
at the price that induces market clearing, and so the government would not supply that particular B1 . This
happens for low levels of B1 relative to B0 . To determine if cL
0 ≤ 0 at some (B1 , γ) we need q0 (B1 , γ), since
combining the budget constraints of the L types and the government yields cL
0 = y − g0 − B0 + q0 B1 . Hence,
to evaluate this condition we take the given B1 and use the H types Euler equation and the market clearing
condition to solve for q0 (B1 , γ), and then determine if y − g0 − B0 + q0 B1 ≤ 0, if this is true, then (B1 , γ) is in
the lower no equilibrium zone.

18

default is also increasing in γ (i.e. higher concentration of debt ownership increases the welfare
gain of default). This implies that lower concentration of debt ownership is sufficient to trigger
default at higher levels of debt.19 For example, for a debt of 20 percent of GDP (B1 = 0.20)
and g1 = g 1 , social welfare is higher under repayment if 0 ≤ γ ≤ 0.10 but it becomes higher
under default if 0.10 < γ ≤ 0.6, and for higher γ there is no equilibrium because the government
prefers default not only for g1 = g 1 but for all possible g1 . If instead the debt is 35 percent of
GDP, then social welfare is higher under default for all the values of γ for which an equilibrium
exists.
The two panels in Figure 2 differ in that panel (ii) displays a well-defined transition from a
region in which repayment is socially optimal (α(B1 , g1 , γ) < 0) to one where default is optimal
(α(B1 , g1 , γ) > 0) but in panel (i) the social welfare gain of default is never positive, so repayment
is always optimal. This reflects the fact that higher g1 also weakens the incentives to repay.
4.2.2

Bond prices for given (B1 , γ)

Figure 3 shows q0 (B1 , γ) as a function of γ for three values of B1 (BL < BM < BH ) and a
comparison with the prices from the model with the government committed to repay q RF .The
bond price functions are truncated when the equilibrium does not exist.
Figure 3: Equilibrium Bond Price
Bond Prices q(B1 , γ) and q RF (B1 , γ)

1.2

1

q(B1 , γ)

0.8

0.6
q(B1,L , γ)

0.4

q(B1,M , γ)
q(B1,H , γ)

0.2

q RF (B1,L , γ)
q RF (B1,M , γ)
q RF (B1,H , γ)

0
0.3

0.4

0.5
0.6
Fraction "low" wealth agents (γ)

0.7

0.8

γ
Note that the cross-sectional variance of initial debt holdings is given by V ar(b) = B 2 1−γ
when bL
0 = 0.
γ
This implies that the cross-sectional coefficient of variation is equal to CV (b) = 1−γ , which is increasing in γ for
γ ≤ 1/2.
19

19

Figure 3 illustrates three key features of public debt prices discussed in Section 3:
(i) The equilibrium price is decreasing in B1 for given γ (the pricing functions shift downward
as B1 rises). This follows from a standard demand-and-supply argument: For a given γ, as the
government borrows more, the price at which households are willing to demand the additional
debt falls and the interest rate rises. This effect is present even without uncertainty, but it is
stronger in the presence of default risk.20
(ii) Default risk reduces the price of bonds below the risk-free price and thus induces a risk
premium. Prices are either identical or nearly identical for the values shown of B1 when γ ≤ 0.5
since the probability of default is either zero or very close to zero. As γ increases above 0.5,
however, the risk premium becomes nontrivial and bond prices subject to default risk fall sharply
below the risk free prices.
(iii) Bond prices are a non-monotonic function of γ: When default risk is sufficiently low,
bond prices are increasing in γ, but eventually they become a steep decreasing function of γ.
Whether bond prices are increasing or decreasing in γ depends on the relative strength of a
demand composition effect v. the effect of increasing γ on default incentives. The composition
effect results from the fact that, as γ increases, H-type agents become a smaller fraction of
the population and wealthier in per-capita terms, and therefore a higher q0 (B1 , γ) is needed
to clear the market. On the other hand, higher concentration of debt ownership strengthens
distributional incentives to default, which pushes for lower bond prices. This second effect starts
to dominate for γ > 0.5, producing bond prices that fall sharply as γ rises, while for lower γ the
composition effect dominates and prices rise gradually with γ.21
4.2.3

Optimal Debt Choice and Competitive Equilibrium

Given the solutions for household decision rules, tax policies, bond pricing function and default
decision rule, we finally solve for the government’s optimal choice of debt issuance in the first
period (i.e. the optimal B1 that solves problem (16)) for a range of values of γ. Given this
optimal debt, we can go back and identify the equilibrium values of the rest of the model’s
endogenous variables that are associated with the optimal debt choices.
Figure 4 shows the four main components of the equilibrium: Panel (i) plots the optimal
first-period debt issuance in the model with default risk, B1∗ (γ), and in the case when the
government is committed to repay so that the debt is risk free, B1RF (γ); Panel (ii) shows the
equilibrium debt prices that correspond to the optimal debt of the same two economies; Panel
20

Sections A.3 and A.4 of the Appendix provide proofs showing that q ′ (B1 , γ) < 0 in the log-utility case. In
Figure 3, the scale of the vertical axis is too wide to make the fall in q(B1 , γ) as B1 rises visible for γ < 0.5.
21
Sections A.3 and A.4 of the Appendix provide further details, including an analysis of the bond demand
decision rules that validates the intuition provided here.

20

(iii) shows the default spread (the difference in the inverses of the bond prices); and Panel (iv)
shows the probability of default. Since the government that has the option to default can still
choose a debt level for which it prefers to repay in all realizations of g1 , we identify with a square
in Panel (i) the equilibria in which B1∗ (γ) has a positive default probability. This is the case for
all but the smallest value of γ considered (γ = 0.05), in which the government sets B1∗ (γ) at 20
percent of GDP with zero default probability.
Figure 4: Competitive Equilibrium with Optimal Debt Policy
Panel (ii): Bond Price q(B1∗ (γ), γ)

Panel (i): Debt. Choice B1∗ (γ)

3.5
q(B1∗ (γ))

3

0.15

q RF (B1∗ (γ))

2.5
0.1

2

0

1.5

B1∗ (γ)

0.05

B1RF (γ)
Def. Ind
0

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

1
0.5

1

0

Panel (iii): Spread (%)

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

1

Panel (iv): Def. Prob. p(B1∗ (γ), γ)
0.015

spread (%)

1
0.8

0.01

0.6
0.4

0.005

0.2
0

0

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

0

1

0

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

1

It is evident from Panel (i) of Figure 4 that optimal debt falls as γ increases in both the
economy with default risk and the economy with a government committed to repay. This
occurs because in both cases the government seeks to reallocate consumption across agents and
across periods by altering the product q(B1 , γ)B1 optimally, and in doing this it internalizes the
response of bond prices to its choice of debt. As γ rises, this response is influenced by the stronger
default incentives and demand composition effect. At equilibrium, the latter dominates in this
quantitative experiment, because panel (ii) shows that the equilibrium bond prices rise with γ.
21

Hence,the government internalizes that as γ rises the demand composition effect strengthens
demand for bonds, pushing bond prices higher, and as a result it can actually attain a higher
q(B1 , γ)B1 by choosing lower B1 . This is a standard Laffer curve argument: In the upward
slopping segment of this curve, increasing debt increases the amount of resources the government
acquires by borrowing in the first period.
Although the Laffer curve argument and the demand composition effect explain why both
and B1RF (γ) are decreasing in γ, default risk is not innocuous. As Panel (i) shows, the

B1∗ (γ)

optimal B1 choices of the government that cannot commit to repay are lower than those of the
government that can. This reflects the fact that the government optimally chooses smaller debt
levels once it internalizes the effect of default risk on the debt Laffer curve and its distributional implications. The negative relationship between B1 and γ is in line with the empirical
evidence on the negative relationship between public debt ratios and wealth Gini coefficients at
relatively high levels of inequality noted in the Introduction and documented in Section A.1 of
the Appendix.
Panels (iii) and (iv) show that, in contrast with standard models of external default, in
this model the default spread is neither similar to the probability of default nor does it have a
monotonic relationship with it.22 Both the spread and the default probability start at zero for
γ = 0.05 because B1∗ (0.05) has zero default probability. As γ increases up to 0.5, both the spread
and the default probability of the optimal debt choice are similar in magnitude and increase
together, but for the regions where the default probability is constant (for γ > 0.5) the spread
falls with γ.23 These results are in line with the findings of the theoretical analysis in Section 3.
The determination of the optimal debt choice and the relationship between the four panels
of Figure 4 can be illustrated further as follows. Define a default-threshold value of γ, γ̂(B1 , g1 ),
as the one such that the government is indifferent between defaulting and repaying for a given
(B1 , g1 ). The government chooses to default if γ ≥ γ̂. Figure 5 shows the optimal debt choice
B1∗ (γ) together with curves representing γ̂(B1 , g1 ) for several realizations of g1 . The curves for
the lowest (g), highest (g), and mean (µg ) realizations are identified with labels.
Figure 5 shows that, because of the stronger default incentives at higher γ and higher realizations of g1 , the default-threshold curves are decreasing in B1 and g1 . There are, therefore,
two key “border curves.” First, for pairs (B1 , γ) below γ̂(B1 , g 1 ) repayment can be expected to
occur for sure, because the government will repay even if the highest realization of g1 is observed.
Second, for pairs (B1 , γ) above γ̂(B1 , g 1 ) default can be expected to occur for sure, because the
22

In the standard models, the two are similar and a monotonic function of each other because of the arbitrage
condition of a representative risk-neutral lender.
23
As we explained before, this is derived from the composition effect that strengthens the demand for bonds
and results in increasing prices (with default risk and without) as γ increases. This result disappears in the
extension of the model that introduces foreign lenders (see Section 5).

22

government will choose default even if the lowest realization of g1 is observed.
Figure 5: Default Threshold, Debt Policy and Equilibrium Default
Default Threshold and Debt Policy
1

γ̂(B1 , g)
γ̂(B1 , µg )
γ̂(B1 , g)
B1 (γ)

0.9

Default Threshold (γ̂) and γ

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

0.05

0.1

0.15
0.2
0.25
Gov. Debt (B1 )

0.3

0.35

Note: g and g are the smallest and largest possible realizations of g1 in the Markov process
of government expenditures, which are set to -/+ 3 standard deviations off the mean respectively.
The dotted lines correspond to a set of selected thresholds for different values of g1 .

It follows from the above that, for equilibria with debt exposed to default risk to exist, the
optimal debt choice B1∗ (γ) must lie in between the two borders (if it is below γ̂(B1 , g 1 ) the
debt is issued at zero default risk, and if it were to be above γ̂(B1 , g 1 ) there is no equilibrium).
Moreover, the probability of default is implicitly determined as the cumulative probability of
the value of g1 corresponding to the highest debt-threshold curve that B1∗ (γ) reaches. This
explains why the default probability in Panel (iv) of Figure 4 shows constant segments as γ rises
above 0.5. As Figure 5 shows, for γ ≤ 0.5 the optimal debt is relatively invariant to increases
in γ, starting from a level that is actually in the region of risk-free debt and then moving into
the region exposed to default risk. In this segment, the optimal debt falls slightly and the
probability of default rises gradually as γ rises. For γ just a little about 0.5 to 0.6, the optimal
debt falls but along the same default threshold curve (not shown in the plot), and hence the
default probability remains constant at about 0.007. For γ > 0.6, the debt choice falls gradually
but always along the default-threshold curve associated with a default probability of 0.015.
The above findings suggests that the optimal debt is being chosen seeking to sell the “most
debt” that can be issued while keeping default risk low. In turn, the “most debt” that is optimal
to issue responds to the incentives to reallocate consumption across agents and across periods
23

internalizing the dependence of the debt Laffer curve on the debt choice. In fact, for all values
of B1∗ (γ) that are exposed to nontrivial risk of default (those corresponding to γ ≥ 0.5), B1∗ (γ)
coincides with the maximum point of the corresponding debt Laffer curve (see Figure A.6 of the
Appendix). Hence, the optimal debt yields the maximum resources to the government that it
can procure given its inability to commit to repay. Setting debt higher is suboptimal because
default risk reduces bond prices sharply, resulting in a lower amount of resources, and setting it
lower is also suboptimal, because then default risk is low and extra borrowing generates more
resources since bond prices fall little.

5

Extensions

This Section summarizes results of four important extensions of the model. First, a political
bias case in which the social welfare function assigns weighs to agents that deviate from the
fraction of L and H types observed in the economy. Second, an economy in which risk-neutral
foreign investors can buy government debt. Third, a case in which proportional distortionary
taxes on consumption are used as an alternative tool for redistributive policy. Fourth, a case in
which agents have access to a second asset as vehicle for saving.

5.1

Biased Welfare Weights

Assume now that the weights of the government’s payoff function differ from the utilitarian
weights γ and 1 − γ. This can be viewed as a situation in which, for political reasons, the
government’s welfare weights are biased in favor of one group of agents. The government’s
welfare weights on L- and H-type households are denoted ω and (1 − ω) respectively, and we
refer to ω as the government’s political bias.
The government’s default decision at t = 1 is determined by the following optimization
problem:

max W1d=0 (B1 , g1 , γ, ω), W1d=1(g1 ) ,
(18)
d∈{0,1}

where W1d=0 (B1 , g1 , γ, ω) and W1d=1 (g1 ) denote the government’s payoffs in the cases of no-default

and default respectively. Using the government budget constraints to substitute for τ1d=0 and
τ1d=1 , the government payoffs can be expressed as:
W1d=0 (B1 , g1 , γ, ω) = ωu(y − g1 + bL1 − B1 ) + (1 − ω)u(y − g1 + bH
1 − B1 )

24

(19)

and
W1d=1 (g1 ) = u(y(1 − φ(g1 )) − g1 ).

(20)

We can follow a similar approach as before to characterize the optimal default decision by
comparing the allocations it supports with the first-best allocations. The parameter ǫ is used
again to represent the dispersion of hypothetical decentralized consumption allocations under
γ
repayment: cL (ǫ) = y − g1 − ǫ and cH (γ, ǫ) = y − g1 + 1−γ
ǫ. Under default the consumption
L
H
allocations are again c = c = y(1 − φ(g1)) − g1 . Recall that under repayment, the dispersion

of consumption across agents increases with ǫ, and under default there is zero consumption
dispersion. The repayment government payoff can now be rewritten as:
W

d=0


(ǫ, g1 , γ, ω) = ωu(y − g1 + ǫ) + (1 − ω)u y − g1 +


γ
ǫ .
1−γ

The socially efficient planner chooses its optimal consumption dispersion ǫSP as the value of ǫ
that maximizes the above expression. Since as of t = 1 the only instrument the government can
use to manage consumption dispersion relative to what the decentralized allocations support is
the default decision, it will repay only if doing so allows it to get closer to ǫSP than by defaulting.
The planner’s optimality condition is now:
′

u (cH
1 )
u′ (cL1 )

=


u ′ y − g1 +

γ SP
ǫ
1−γ

u′ (y − g1 − ǫSP )



 

ω
1−γ
=
.
γ
1−ω

(21)

This condition implies that optimal consumption dispersion for the planner is zero only if ω = γ.
For ω > γ the planner likes consumption dispersion to favor L types so that cL1 > cH
1 , and the
opposite holds for ω < γ.
The key difference with political bias v. the model with a utilitarian government is that
the former can support equilibria with debt subject to default risk even without default costs.
Assuming φ(g1 ) = 0, there are two possible scenarios depending on the relative size of γ and ω.
First, if ω ≥ γ, the planner again always chooses default as in the setup of Section 2. This is
because for any decentralized consumption dispersion ǫ > 0, the consumption allocations feature
cH > cL , while the planner’s optimal consumption dispersion requires cH ≤ cL , and hence ǫSP
cannot be implemented. Default brings the planner the closest it can get to the payoff associated
with ǫSP and hence it is always chosen. In the second scenario ω < γ (i.e. the political bias
assigns more (less) weight to H (L) types than the fraction of each type of agents that actually
exists). In this case, the model can support equilibria with debt even without default costs. In
particular, there is a threshold consumption dispersion ǫ̂ such that default is optimal for ǫ ≥ ǫ̂,

25

where ǫ̂ is the value of ǫ at which W1d=0 (ǫ, g1 , γ, ω) and W1d=1 (g1 ) intersect. For ǫ < ǫ̂, repayment
is preferable because W1d=0 (ǫ, g1 , γ, ω) > W1d=0 (g1 ). Thus, without default costs, equilibria for
which repayment is optimal require two conditions: (a) that the government’s political bias
favors bond holders (ω < γ), and (b) that the debt holdings chosen by private agents do not
produce consumption dispersion in excess of ǫ̂.
Figure 6 illustrates the main quantitative predictions of the model with political bias. The
scenario with ω = γ, shown in blue corresponds to the utilitarian case of Section 4, and the other
two scenarios correspond to high and low values of ω (ωL = 0.25 and ωH = 0.45 respectively).24
Figure 6: Equilibrium of the Model with Political Bias for different values of ω
Panel (i): Debt. Choice B1∗ (γ)

Panel (ii): Bond Price q(B1∗ (γ), γ)

0.5

4

0.4

ω = γ (bench.)
ωL
ωH

3

0.3
2

0.2
1

0.1
0

0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

0

1

0

Panel (iii): Spread (%)

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

1

Panel (iv): Def. Prob. p(B1∗ (γ), γ)

8

0.06
0.05

spread (%)

6
0.04

4

0.03
0.02

2
0.01

0

0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

0

1

0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

1

Figure 6 shows that the optimal debt level is increasing in γ. This is because the incentives
to default grow weaker and the repayment zone widens as γ increases for a fixed value of ω.
Moreover, the demand composition effect of higher γ is still present, so along with the lower
default incentives we still have the increasing per capita demand for bonds of H types. These
24

Note that along the blue curve of the utilitarian case both ω and γ effectively vary together because they
are always equal to each other, while in the other two plots ω is fixed and γ varies. For this reason, the line
corresponding to the ωL case intersects the benchmark solution when γ = 0.25, and the one for ωH intersects
the benchmark when γ = 0.45.

26

two effects combined drive the increase in the optimal debt choice of the government. It is also
interesting to note that in the ωL and ωH cases the equilibrium exists for all values of γ (even
those that are lower than ω). Without default costs each curve would be truncated exactly
where γ equals either ωL or ωH , but since these simulations retain the default costs used in the
utilitarian case, there can still be equilibria with debt for lower values of γ (as explained earlier).
In this model with political bias, the government is still aiming to optimize debt by focusing
on the resources it can reallocate across periods and agents, which are still determined by
the debt Laffer curve, and internalizing the response of bond prices to debt choices.25 This
relationship, however, behaves very differently than in the benchmark model, because now higher
optimal debt is carried at decreasing default probabilities, which leads the planner internalizing
the price response to choose higher debt, whereas in the benchmark model lower optimal debt
was carried at increasing equilibrium default probabilities, which led the planner internalizing
the price response to choose lower debt.
In the empirically relevant range of γ, and for values of ω lower than that range (since
ωL = 0.25 and ωH = 0.45, while the relevant range of γ is [0.55 − 0.85]), this model can sustain
significantly higher debt ratios than the model with utilitarian payoff, and those ratios are close
to the observed European median. At the lower end of that range of γ, a government with ωH
chooses a debt ratio of about 25 percent, while a government with ωL chooses a debt ratio of
about 35 percent.
The behavior of equilibrium bond prices (panel (ii)) with either ωL = 0.25 or ωH = 0.45 differs
markedly from the utilitarian case. In particular, the prices no longer display an increasing,
convex shape, instead they are (for most values of γ) a decreasing function of γ. This occurs
because the higher supply of bonds that the government finds optimal to provide offsets the
demand composition effect that increases individual demand for bonds as γ rises. At low values
of γ the government chooses lower debt levels (panel (i)) in part because the default probability
is higher (panel (iv)), which also results in higher spreads (panel (iii)). But as γ rises and
repayment incentives strengthen (because ω becomes relatively smaller than γ), the probability
of default falls to zero, the spreads vanish, and debt levels increase. The price remains relatively
flat because, again, the higher debt supply offsets the demand composition effect.
The political bias extension yields an additional interesting result: For a sufficiently concentrated distribution of bond holdings (high γ), L−type agents prefer that the government
weighs the bond holders more than a utilitarian government (i.e, there are values of γ and ω
for which, comparing equilibrium payoffs under a government with political bias v. a utilitarian
25

When choosing B1 , the government takes into account that higher debt increases disposable income for
L-type agents in the initial period but it also implies higher taxes in the second period (as long as default is not
optimal). Thus, the government is willing to take on more debt when ω is lower.

27

government, v L (B1 , ω, γ) > v L (B1 , γ)). To illustrate this result, Figure 7 plots the equilibrium
payoffs in the political-bias model for the two types of agents as ω varies for two values of γ
(γL = 0.15 and γH = 0.85). The payoffs for the L− and H− types are in Panels (i) and (ii),
respectively. The vertical lines identify the payoffs that would be attained with a utilitarian
government (which by construction coincide with those under political bias when ω=γ).
Figure 7: Welfare as a function of Political Bias for different values of γ
Panel (i): v0L (γ, ω)

Panel (ii): v0H (γ, ω)
0.6

−1.5

v0H (γL , ω)
v0H (γH , ω)

max

max
0.4
0.2

−2
0
ω = γH

−0.2

−2.5

ω = γL

−0.4
ω = γH
ω = γL

−0.6

−3

max

−0.8

v0L (γL , ω)
v0L (γH , ω)
0

0.2

0.4
0.6
0.8
Welfare weights (ω)

−1

1

0

0.2

0.4
0.6
0.8
Welfare weights (ω)

1

Panel (ii) shows that the payoff of H-types is monotonically decreasing in ω, because H
types always prefer the higher debt levels attained by low ω governments, since it enhances
their ability to smooth consumption at a lower risk of default. In contrast, Panel (i) shows
that the payoff of L-types is non-monotonic in ω, and has a well-defined maximum. In the
γ = γL case, the maximum point is at ω = γL , which corresponds to the equilibrium under the
utilitarian government, but when γ = γH the maximum point is at about ω = 0.75, which is
smaller than γH . Thus, in this case, ownership of public debt is sufficiently concentrated for
the agents that do not hold it to prefer a government that chooses B1 weighting the welfare
of bond holders by more than the utilitarian government. This occurs because with γH the
utilitarian government has strong incentives to default, and thus the equilibrium supports low
debt, but L−type agents would be better off if the government could sustain more debt, which
the government with ω = 0.75 can do because it weighs the welfare of bond holders more, and
thus has weaker default incentives. The L− type agents desire more debt because they are
liquidity-constrained (i.e. µL > 0) and higher debt improves the smoothing of taxation and thus
makes this constraint less tight.
28

The above results yield an important political economy implication: Under a majority voting
electoral system, in which candidates are represented by values of ω, it can be the case that
majorities of either L or H types elect governments with political bias ω < γ. This possibility is
captured in Figure 7. When the actual distribution of bond holdings is given by γH , the majority
of voters are L types, and thus it follows from Panel (i) that the government represented by the ω
at the maximum point (around 0.75) is elected. In this case, agents that do not hold government
bonds vote for a government that favors bond holders (i.e. L types are weighed at 0.75 instead
of 0.85 in the government’s payoff function). When the distribution of bond holdings is given
by γL , the majority of voters are H types and the electoral outcome is determined in Panel (ii).
Since the payoff of H types is decreasing in ω, they elect the government at the lower bound of
ω. Hence, under both γL and γH , a candidate with political bias beats the utilitarian candidate.
This result is not general, however, because we cannot rule out the possibility that there could
be a γ ≥ 0.5 such that the maximum point of the L-types payoff is where ω = γ, and hence the
utilitarian government is elected under majority voting.

5.2

International Investors

While a large fraction of sovereign debt in Europe is in hands of domestic households (for the
countries in Table 1, 60 percent is the median and 75 percent the average), the fraction in
hands of foreign investors is not negligible. For this reason, we extend the benchmark model
to incorporate foreign investors and move from a closed to an open economy. In particular,
we assume that there is a pool of international investors modeled in the same way as in the
Eaton-Gersovitz class of external default models: risk-neutral lenders with an opportunity cost
of funds equal to an exogenous, world-determined real interest rate r̄. As is common practice,
we assume that these bonds are pari passu contracts, which rules out the possibility for the
government to discriminate among borrowers when choosing to default. This also maintains the
symmetry with the baseline model, in which the government was not allowed to default on a
particular set of domestic households.
Since foreign lenders are the marginal investor of sovereign debt, in this model the price
1 ,γ)
of the bond is given by q(B1 , γ) = 1−p(B
where p(B1 , γ) is the default probability. More
(1+r̄)
precisely, p(B1 , γ) = Eg1 [d(B1 , γ, g1)]. While the arbitrage condition is functionally identical to
the one of the Eaton-Gersovitz models, they embody different mechanisms. The two are similar
in indicating that, because of risk neutrality, risk premia are equal to default probabilities. But
there is a critical difference in how these probabilities are determined. In Eaton-Gersovitz models
they follow from the values of continuation v. default of a representative agent, while in our
model they are determined by comparing those values for a utilitarian social welfare function,
29

which in turn depend on the dispersion of individual payoffs of default v. repayment (and on
the welfare weights). Hence, concentration of debt ownership affects default probabilities via
changes in the relative magnitudes of individual payoffs of default v. repayment.
We let the position of foreign investors be denoted Btf , which defines also the economy’s
net foreign asset position. We assume that a fraction φf of the initial stock of debt is in their
hands.26 That is B0f = φf B0 . A fraction (1 − φf ) is distributed among domestic households
according to γ. We denote the domestic demand by Btd = γbLt + (1 − γ)bH
t . The debt market
clearing condition is
Btd + Btf = Bt

(22)

f
We do not restrict the value of [γbL1 + (1 − γ)bH
1 ] to be less than or equal to B1 , so B1 could be
positive or negative. When B1f > 0 the country is a net external borrower, because the bonds
issued by the government are less than the domestic demand for them, and when B1f < 0 the

country is a net external saver.
The problems of the agents and the government remain identical to those described in Section
3. Of course, agents understand that there is a new pricing equation and that market-clearing
conditions incorporate the foreign demand. We solve the model numerically using the same
parameter values of the benchmark model. We set φf = 0.25 to match the average fraction
of foreign debt observed in our sample of European countries and r to 2 percent to match the
average real interest rate in Germany in the 2000-2007 period.
Figure 8 shows how the planner’s welfare gain of default varies with γ and B1 for different
levels of government expenditures (g1 = g 1 and g1 = g 1 ). The no-equilibrium region, which
exists for the same reasons as before, is shown in dark blue. In line with the characteristics
of default incentives of the benchmark model, within the region where the equilibrium is well
defined, for a given γ, the planner’s value of default increases monotonically with the level of
debt B1 . However, we observe that, contrary to the benchmark case, in the economy with
foreign lenders, conditional on B1 , the welfare gain of default has an inverted-U shape in the γ
dimension. That is, for a given B1 the value of α decreases with γ for low γ, reaches a minimum
point and then increases with γ. This also determines a bell-shaped “No Equilibrium Zone.”
The intuition for this result is simple and derives from the decision rules of domestic agents (see
Figure A.12 of the Appendix for the corresponding plot). For a given level of B1 , when γ is
below (γ < 0.25 for B1 = BM for example), the country is on average a foreign borrower (i.e.
B f > 0). That implies that a default generates a direct increase in domestic resources equal to
26

This assumption is made only to approximate the quantitative predictions of the model with the data but
is not crucial for any of the results presented below.

30

the forgone debt payments to foreign lenders. In this region, both L−type and H−type agents
are at the borrowing limit. As γ increases, the country becomes a net saver in foreign markets.
Increases in γ are associated with an increasing portion of domestic debt in hands of H−types.
This reduces the benefit of a default on foreign lenders. However, as in the model without foreign
lenders, domestic consumption dispersion increases. For mid-range γ’s the first effect dominates
the second and repayment is the preferred option. As γ increases even further the dispersion
in domestic consumption increases to points where default is again the optimal alternative for
the government. In this region, the main driver of domestic default is redistribution among
domestic agents as in our benchmark economy.
Figure 8: Planner’s welfare gain of default α(B1 , g1 , γ)

Figure 9 shows the comparison of the equilibrium functions in the economy with foreign
lenders v. the benchmark economy. As we described before, the introduction of foreign lenders
and the possibility of a “foreign” default constraint debt values and result in lower debt levels
than in the benchmark, for values of γ lower than 0.75 (see Panel (i)). This is also reflected
in higher default probabilities and spreads in the economy with foreign lenders than in the
benchmark (see Panel (iii) and (iv)). By construction, the upper bound on the price of the
31

economy with foreign lenders is (1 + r)−1, so the the distributive effect that negative real interest
rates have in the benchmark economy dissipate (see Panel (ii)). This induces the government to
take on more risk and redistribute via debt issuance in the economy with foreign lenders than
in the benchmark.
Figure 9: Equilibrium Domestic and Foreign Debt Holdings
Panel (i): Debt. Choice B1∗ (γ)

Panel (ii): Bond Price q(B1∗ (γ), γ)
3.5

0.2

Benchmark
Foreign Lenders

3
0.15

2.5
2

0.1

1.5
0.05

1
0

0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

0.5

1

0

Panel (iii): Spread (%)

spread (%)

1

Panel (iv): Def. Prob. p(B1∗ (γ), γ)

7

0.06

6

0.05

5

0.04

4

0.03
3

0.02

2

0.01

1
0

5.3

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

0

1

0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

1

Redistributive Taxation (Partial Default)

In the benchmark model, issuing debt in the first period and defaulting in the second are the
only tools the government can use to reduce consumption dispersion. We now examine how the
model’s predictions change by adding an alternative tool for redistribution. In particular, we
introduce a proportional consumption tax that is invariant across periods and realizations of
g1 .27
27

Using this tax as opposed to other taxes simplifies the solution of the model, because aggregate consumption
(as a function of y and gt ) is pinned down by the resource constraint, and thus known before solving the agents’
problem. As a result, the algorithm does not need to iterate on the level of transfers to close the government
budget constraint, while introducing a wealth tax would require it. An income tax would require not only
iterating on aggregate transfers but also extending the model to consider endogenous labor supply, because the

32

With consumption taxes, the cost of purchasing goods in the left-hand-side of the agents’
budget constraints becomes (1 + τ c )cit for i = L, H and t = 0, 1. Since aggregate consumption in
each period is still given by y − gt , the government budget constraints simplify to the following
expressions. At date 0, the constraint is:
τ0 + τ c y = g0 (1 + τ c ) + B0 − q0 B1 .

(23)

In the second period, under repayment, the constraint is:
τ1d1 =0 + τ c y = g1 (1 + τ c ) + B1 .

(24)

In the second period, under default the budget constraint is:
τ1d1 =1 + τ c y(1 − φ(g1 )) = g1 (1 + τ c ).

(25)

Using the budget constraints of agents and the government, we can proceed as with the
benchmark model and derive expressions for the difference
in consumption
of the two agents in
h
i
B
−q(B
,γ)B
H,d=0
B1
1
0
1
1
1
L
the two periods and default scenarios: cH
, c1
− cL,d=0
= 1−γ
1
0 − c0 = 1−γ
(1+τ c )
(1+τ c )
and cH,d=1
− cL,d=1
= 0. These expressions are similar to those presented in Section 4, except
1
1

that the terms that include public debt in the date-0 difference and the date-1 difference under
repayment are divided by (1 + τ c ). Consumption taxes reduce consumption dispersion in both
instances. Intuitively, the consumption tax plays a role akin to inflation in reducing the real
value of public debt. Hence, this tax always reduces consumption dispersion in the first period
(as long as there is a primary deficit), and also always reduces dispersion in the second period
under repayment. In fact, assuming repayment, this tax is a better mechanism for redistribution
because debt can only reduce dispersion at date 0 at the expense of increasing it a date 1.
Moreover, the tax’s ability to redistribute is not hampered by the debt Laffer curve that hampers
the ability to redistribute with debt because of default risk. The tax acts in fact as a de-facto
partial default in both periods. As a result, if we allow it to be chosen optimally, letting τ c go to
infinity would be optimal because it completely removes consumption dispersion in all periods
at no cost. The purpose of this analysis, however, is to see how the existence of an alternative
redistribution tool affects the results we have obtained for debt and default risk, rather than
focus on the optimal use of the consumption tax.28
benchmark model assumes no income heterogeneity, which makes proportional income tax close to a lump-sum
tax.
28
The consumption tax as modeled lacks important trade-offs that would make it suboptimal to set it infinitely
large. In particular, it is non-distortionary, because there is no labor supply choice, and because, since the tax

33

We solve the model numerically using the parameters of the benchmark calibration. For the
value of the consumption tax, we use τ c = 0.16 which is the value estimated for the Eurozone
in Mendoza, Tesar, and Zhang (2014). We also solve the model for τ c = 0.32 and τ c = 0.48,
which are two and three times larger that the data proxy.29 Figure 10 presents the comparison
of the equilibrium of the benchmark economy with the three economies with taxes. This figure
shows that the main result of the paper (the ability to support the existence of public debt with
positive default risk) is robust to incorporating distributive taxes.
Figure 10: Comparison Equilibrium Benchmark vs Proportional Consumption Taxes
Panel (i): Debt. Choice B1∗ (γ)

Panel (ii): Bond Price q(B1∗ (γ), γ)

0.18

3.5

0.16

3

0.14

τc
τc
τc
τc

2.5

= 0 (bench.)
= 0.16
= 0.32
= 0.48

0.12
2

0.1
1.5

0.08

1

0.06
0.04

0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

0.5

1

0

1

Panel (iv): Def. Prob. p(B1∗ (γ), γ)

Panel (iii): Spread (%)

1.4

0.016

1.2

0.014
0.012

1

spread (%)

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

0.01

0.8
0.008

0.6
0.006

0.4

0.004

0.2
0

0.002

0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

0

1

0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

1

As consumption taxes increase, default incentives grow weaker (see lower default probabilities in Panel (iv)), which is natural because the tax reduces consumption dispersion, and hence
reduces the need for the government to use default to lower dispersion. As a result, the government can sustain higher debt levels(see Panel (iv)), although the effect is not very large (debt
is constant, it does not distort savings decisions. The tax is also assumed to be known with perfect foresight,
whereas uncertainty about inflation would have an effect similar to a partial risk of default that would affect
demand for bonds and bond prices.
29
In the tax rate estimates in Mendoza, Tesar, and Zhang (2014), the highest consumption tax is observed in
Finland at 24 percent.

34

increases by at most 5 percentage points for γ = 0.6 and a change in the consumption tax
from 0 to 48 percent). This effect is negligible when default incentives are weak to start with,
which occurs at low values of γ. The properties of the price function observed in the benchmark
case (i.e. increasing in γ for a given level of default risk) are sustained in the economy with
consumption taxes (see Panel (ii)). In line with the reduction in default probabilities, the model
with consumption taxes also displays lower spreads than the benchmark (see Panel (iii)).
The findings in this Section suggest that the existence of other tools for redistribution contributes to support higher debt levels at lower default frequencies. The results are also interesting
as an illustration of what happens if we combine de-jure outright default with partial, de-facto
default (the latter commonly takes place via inflation, but as noted earlier the consumption tax
in this setup plays the same role as inflation in reducing the real debt burden).

5.4

A Second Asset

We review now the implications of adding a risk-free asset that agents can use as a vehicle of
savings, in addition to public debt. In particular, agents have access to a non-stochastic production technology yti = z(kti )θ with 0 < θ < 1, where yti is total output and kti is capital for
agent of type i in period t, respectively.30 The initial aggregate level of capital is denoted by K0 .
L-type agents are now endowed with bL0 and k0L units of public debt and capital respectively,
B0 −γbL
K0 −γk0L
H
0
whileH-type agents have endowments given by bH
0 = (1−γ) and k0 = (1−γ) . Capital depreciates at rate δ. At period 0, agents choose how much of their savings they want to allocate to
public bonds bi1 ≥ 0 and capital k1i ≥ 0.
The full characterization of the equilibrium and the detailed quantitative results are discussed
in Section A.10 of the Appendix. Here we focus only on the main results. Intuitively, the
existence of the second asset implies that agents arbitrage returns across public debt and riskfree capital, taking into account the risk of default on public debt. In particular, the optimality
conditions for H− type agents imply:
q0
[θz(k1i )θ−1 + 1 − δ]

−1

=

h
i
Eg1 u′(ci,d=0
)(1
−
d
)
1
1

h
i.
Eg1 u′ (c1i,d=0 )(1 − d1 ) + u′(ci,d=1
)d
1
1

(26)

Thus, the default spread of this model (i.e. the gap between the yield on government bonds and
the marginal productivity of capital) is determined by default risk, weighted by marginal utility
in each state of the world, since agents are risk-averse. From this perspective, the second asset
30

The curvature in production allows us to obtain a well-defined portfolio choice of bonds and capital for
private agents.

35

has a similar effect as introducing the foreign investor, because it introduces an opportunity
cost of funds, but with the difference that in this cost is now endogenous and falls as capital
investment rises.
Adding the second asset also affects the government’s debt and default choices. In particular,
the government now has to consider the initial distributions of both bonds and capital across
agents, and the effects of its choices on the individual capital and bond decisions {bi1 , k1i },
which depend on B1 and default risk. Default is more costly, because via its effects on capital
allocations it can cause higher consumption dispersion than before.
To make this case as close as possible to the benchmark model for the quantitative analysis,
we assume k0i = K0 (i.e. all initial heterogeneity is in initial bond holdings). Still, this results
in heterogeneous bond and capital holdings for the second period. We set z to normalize GDP
to 1, θ = 0.33 andδ = 0.10 ( standard values), and set K0 so the capital to output ratio is equal
to 2. All other parameters are the same as in the benchmark.
Agents in this setup have the option to switch from debt to capital as default risk rises, which
affects adversely the capacity of the government to issue debt. On the other hand, the weaker
default incentives because of the additional adverse consumption dispersion effects enhance the
ability to issue debt. In line with these arguments, we found that for low enough γ, so that
default is a zero-probability event, both models have nearly identical results. As γ rises up to
γ < 0.6, the model with two assets sustains higher optimal debt than the benchmark (by at
most 4 percentage points), but at higher values of γ the opposite is true (debt in the bechnmark
is at most 2 percentage points higher). Thus, optimal debt levels do not differ by wide margins,
even tough the effects of adding the second asset are noticeable.
The arbitrage condition connecting bond prices and capital returns also has interesting quantitative implications for spreads and bond prices. First, since reallocation of savings from debt
to capital reduces the marginal product of capital, the default risk spread rises as γ rises, and
this happens even tough the probability of default, which rises with γ, is actually lower than in
the benchmark. Second, bond prices rise at a much lower rate as γ rises than in the benchmark,
and in fact are never higher than 1 even at the highest values of γ considered (i.e. bond yields
are never negative). In this dimension, the quantitative results are very different in the setup
with two assets, although they are qualitatively similar.

6

Conclusions

This paper proposes a framework in which domestic sovereign default and public debt subject
to default risk emerge as an equilibrium outcome. In contrast with standard models of sovereign

36

default on external debt, this model highlights the role of the domestic distribution of public
debt ownership and the distributional effects of default across domestic agents in shaping the
government’s default incentives. These are features common to both the historical episodes of
outright domestic default documented by Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) and the ongoing European
debt crisis.
In this environment, the distribution of public debt across private agents interacts with the
government’s optimal default, debt issuance and tax decisions. Distributional incentives alone
cannot support equilibria with debt, because default is always optimal in the second period,
and hence the debt market cannot function in the first period. We also showed that equilibria
with debt exposed to default risk can exist if we introduce either exogenous default costs or
government preferences biased in favor of bond holders.
The main finding of the paper (i.e. that distributional incentives to default tempered by
default costs can support equilibria with debt exposed to default risk) is robust to other three
important extensions of the model: Adding foreign investors who can hold a portion of the debt
issued by the government, introducing consumption taxes as an alternative tool for redistributing
resources across agents, and adding a second asset as a vehicle for saving.
This paper is a first attempt at developing a blueprint for research into models of domestic
sovereign default driven by distributional incentives, and their interaction with agent heterogeneity and incomplete insurance markets. It has two main limitations, both byproducts of the
two-period life horizon: First, it takes as given a distribution of bond ownership across agents.
Second, it does not capture endogenous costs of default that would result from losing the benefits
of public debt as a vehicle for self-insurance and liquidity-provision (see Aiyagari and McGrattan
(1998))). In further work D’Erasmo and Mendoza (2014)) we are aiming to develop a framework
that takes both issues into account.

37

References
Aghion, P. and P. Bolton, 1990. “Government Domestic Debt and the Risk of Default:
A Political-Economic Model of the Strategic Role of Debt.” In Public Debt Management:
Theory and History, edited by Rudiger Dornbusch and Mario Draghi. New York: Cambridge
University Press: 31544.
Aguiar, M. and M. Amador, 2013. “Fiscal Policy in Debt Constrained Economies.” NBER
Working Papers 17457.
Aguiar, M. and M. Amador, 2014. “Sovereign Debt.” Handbook of International Economics,
4: 647–87.
Aguiar, M. and G. Gopinath, 2006. “Defaultable debt, interest rates and the current account.” Journal of International Economics, 69(1): 64–83.
Aguiar, M., M. Amador, E. Farhi, and G. Gopinath, 2013. “Crisis and Commitment:
Inflation Credibility and the Vulnerability to Sovereign Debt Crises.” NBER Working Papers
19516.
Aiyagari, R. and E. McGrattan, 1998. “The optimum quantity of debt.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 42: 447–469.
Aiyagari, R., A. Marcet, T. Sargent, and J. Seppala, 2002. “Optimal Taxation without
State-Contingent Debt.” Journal of Political Economy, 110(6): 1220–1254.
Alesina, A. and G. Tabellini, 1990. “A Positive Theory of Fiscal Deficits and Government
Debt.” The Review of Economic Studies, 57: 403–414.
Amador, M., 2003. “A Political Economy Model of Sovereign Debt Repayment.” Stanford
University mimeo.
Andreasen, E., G. Sandleris, and A. Van der Ghote, 2011. “The Political Economy of
Sovereign Defaults.” Universidad Torcuato Di Tella, Business School Working Paper.
Arellano, C., 2008. “Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Economies.” American
Economic Review, 98(3): 690–712.
Azzimonti, M., E. de Francisco, and V. Quadrini, 2014. “Financial Globalization, Inequality, and the Rising Public Debt.” American Economic Review, 104(8): 2267–2302.
Barro, R., 1979. “On the determination of the public debt.” Journal of Political Economy,
87(5): 940–971.
Basu, S., 2009. “Sovereign debt and domestic economic fragility.” Manuscript, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.
Bocola, L., 2014. “The Pass-Through of Sovereign Risk.” Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.
38

Boz, E., P. D’Erasmo, and B. Durdu, 2014. “Sovereign Risk and Bank Balance Sheets:
The Role of Macroprudential Policies.” Manuscript.
Broner, F. and J. Ventura, 2011. “Globalization and Risk Sharing.” Review of Economic
Studies, 78(1): 49–82.
Broner, F., A. Martin, and J. Ventura, 2010. “Sovereign Risk and Secondary Markets.”
American Economic Review, 100(4): 1523–55.
Brutti, 2011. “Sovereign defaults and liquidity crises.” Journal of International Economics, 84
(1): 6572.
Calvo, G., 1988. “Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of Expectations.” American Economic
Review, 78(4): 647–61.
Cuadra, G., J. Sanchez, and H. Sapriza, 2010. “Fiscal Policy and Default Risk in Emerging
Markets.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 13(2): 452–469.
Davies, J., S. Sandstrm, A. Shorrocks, and E. Wolff, 2009. “The Level and Distribution
of Global Household Wealth.” NBER Working Paper 15508.
Davies, J., R. Lluberas, and A. Shorrocks, 2012. “Credit Suisse Global Wealth Databook.”
Zurich: Credit Suisse Reseach Institute.
D’Erasmo, P., 2011. “Government Reputation and Debt Repayment in Emerging Economies.”
mimeo.
D’Erasmo, P. and E. Mendoza, 2014. “Optimal Domestic Sovereign Default.” Manuscript,
University of Pennsylvania.
Di Casola, P. and S. Sichlimiris, 2014. “Domestic and External Sovereign Debt.” Working
Paper, Stockholm School of Economics.
Dias, D., C. Richmond, and M. Wright, 2012. “In for a Penny, In for a 100 Billion Pounds:
Quantifying the Welfare Benefits from Debt Relief.” mimeo.
Dixit, A. and J. Londregan, 2000. “Political Power and the Credibility of Government Debt.”
Journal of Economic Theory, 94: 80105.
Dovis, A., M. Golosov, and A. Shourideh, 2014. “Sovereign Debt vs Redistributive Taxes:
Financing Recoveries in Unequal and Uncommitted Economies.” mimeo.
Eaton, J. and M. Gersovitz, 1981. “Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and
Empirical Analysis.” Review of Economic Studies, 48(2): 289–309.
Ferriere, 2014. “Sovereign Default, Inequality, and Progressive Taxation.” mimeo.
Floden, M., 2001. “The effectiveness of government debt and transfers as insurance.” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 48: 81–108.
39

Gennaioli, N., A. Martin, and S. Rossi, 2014. “Sovereign default, domestic banks and
financial institutions.” Journal of Finance.
Golosov, M. and T. Sargent, 2012. “Taxation, redistribution, and debt with aggregate
shocks.” working paper Princeton University.
Guembel, A. and O. Sussman, 2009. “Sovereign Debt without Default Penalties.” Review
of Economic Studies, 76: 1297–1320.
Hall, G. and T. Sargent, 2014. “Fiscal Discrimination in Three Wars.” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 61: 148–166.
Hatchondo, J.C., L. Martinez, and H. Sapriza, 2009. “Heterogeneous Borrowers in Quantitative Models of Sovereign Default.” International Economic Review, 50: 12951.
Heathcote, J., 2005. “Fiscal Policy with Heterogeneous Agents.” Review of Economic Studies,
72: 161–188.
Jeon, K. and Z. Kabukcuoglu, 2014. “Income Inequality and Sovereign Default.” working
paper, University of Pittsburgh.
Lorenzoni, G. and I. Werning, 2013. “Slow moving debt crises.” NBER Working Paper No.
w19228.
Mendoza, E.G. and V.Z. Yue, 2012. “A General Equilibrium Model of Sovereign Default
and Business Cycles.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2): 889–946.
Mendoza, E.G., L. Tesar, and J. Zhang, 2014. “Saving europe?: The unpleasant arithmetic of fiscal austerity in integrated economies.” National Bureau of Economic Research,
No. w20200.
Mengus, E., 2014. “Honoring Sovereign Debt or Bailing Out Domestic Residents? A Theory
of Internal Cost of Default.” WP Banque de France 480.
Panizza, U., F. Sturzenegger, and J. Zettelmeyer, 2009. “The Economics and Law of
Sovereign Debt and Default.” Journal of Economic Literature, 47(3): 651–98.
Perez, D., 2015. “Sovereign Debt, Domestic Banks and the Provision of Public Liquidity.”
Manuscript.
Pitchford and Wright, 2012. “Holdouts in Sovereign Debt Restructuring: A Theory of Negotiation in a Weak Contractual Environment.” Review of Economic Studies, 79(2): 812–837.
Pouzo, D. and I. Presno, 2014. “Optimal Taxation with Endogenous Default under Incomplete Markets.” U.C. Berkeley, mimeo.
Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff, 2011. “The Forgotten History of Domestic Debt.” Economic
Journal, 121, Issue 552: 319–350.

40

Sosa-Padilla, C., 2012. “Sovereign Defaults and Banking Crises.” Manuscript.
Tabellini, G., 1991. “The Politics of Intergenerational Redistribution.” Journal of Political
Economy, 99: 33557.
Tauchen, G., 1986. “Finite state Markov-chain approximation to univariate and vector autoregressions.” Economics Letters, 20: 177–81.
Tomz and Wright, 2012. “Empirical research on sovereign debt and default.” Working Paper
Series WP-2012-06, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Vasishtha, 2010. “Domestic versus external borrowing and fiscal policy in emerging markets.”
Review of International Economics, 18(5): 1058–1074.
Yue, V., 2010. “Sovereign Default and Debt Renegotiation.” Journal of International Economics, 80 (2): 176–187.

41

Appendix
Distributional Incentives in an Equilibrium Model
of Domestic Sovereign Default
This Appendix includes additional material that provides background for some of the arguments made in the paper. Section A.1 provides an empirical analysis of the relationship between
domestic debt and inequality. Section A.2 presents a deterministic version of our model without
default risk and log preferences. Section A.3 extends this simplified model to incorporate aggregate risk. Section A.4 derives analytically the equilibrium price function for this model and
describes its determinants. Section A.5 provides the details of the calibration exercise presented
in the paper. Section A.6 displays a set of additional figures of the benchmark model. Section
A.7 contains a sensitivity analysis of the benchmark model. Sections A.8 and A.9 introduce additional figures for the extension of the model with biased welfare weights and foreign investors,
respectively. Finally, Section A.10 describes the extension of the model with two assets in detail
and presents a set of figures that complement those in the main body of the paper.

A.1

Empirical Analysis Debt and Inequality

Further and more systematic empirical analysis of the relationship between wealth inequality
and public debt shows a statistically significant, bell-shaped relationship: Debt is increasing
in wealth inequality when inequality is low, until the Gini coefficient reaches about 0.75, and
then becomes decreasing in wealth inequality. This finding follows from estimating a crosscountry panel regression using the international database of Gini coefficients for wealth produced
by Davies, Sandstrm, Shorrocks, and Wolff (2009) and Davies, Lluberas, and Shorrocks (2012),
together with data on public debt-output ratios and control variables (i.e. the size of the
government, proxied by the ratio of government expenditures to GDP, and country fixed effects).
The results of panel regressions of the debt ratio on the Gini coefficient, the square of this
coefficient, and the controls (using the observations for 2000 and 2012) are shown in Table A.3,
and Figure A.11 shows a plot of the 2012 data and the fitted regression curve. The regressions
only explain about a tenth of the cross-country variations on debt ratios, but the linear and
quadratic effects of the wealth Gini coefficient are statistically significant and opposite in sign.

42

1.5

Figure A.11: Public Debt Ratios and Wealth Inequality

Iceland
Cyprus
Singapore
Greece
Ireland
United Kingdom
Barbados
France
Portugal
Belgium
Malta
Hungary

B/Y

1

Italy

United States

Austria

0

.5

Netherlands
New Zealand
Jordan
Germany
Spain
Brazil
Colombia
Canada
Malaysia
Denmark
India Turkey
MongoliaUruguay
Slovakia Finland
Lithuania
Belarus Latvia
Hong Kong
Czech
Sweden
Georgia
Australia
Thailand
Ukraine
Indonesia
Moldova
Trinidad and Tobago Peru
Norway
Bahamas
Luxembourg
Bulgaria
Kazakhstan
Russia
Estonia

.6

.7

.8
Wealth Gini

.9

1

Note: Author’s calculations based on WDI, Davies, Sandstrm, Shorrocks, and Wolff (2009) and
Davies, Lluberas, and Shorrocks (2012). Fitted line from results presented in Table A.3

Table A.3: Panel Regressions of Public Debt Ratios and Wealth Inequality

Wealth Gini
s.e.
Wealth Gini2
s.e.
G/Y
s.e.
avg. country FE
s.e.
years
R2
# obs.
Note:

Panel Country Fixed Effect
Dep. Var: Debt to GDP
17.65∗∗
18.11∗∗
7.06
7.22
-11.80∗∗
-12.03∗∗
4.76
4.85
-0.010
0.012
∗∗
-5.92
-5.95∗∗
2.60
2.64
2000-2012
2000-2012
0.118
0.136
139
139

Author’s calculations based on WDI, Davies, Sandstrm, Shorrocks, and Wolff (2009) and Davies, Lluberas, and Shorrocks (2012).

Debt to

GDP refers to Central Government Debt as share of GDP (source WDI). Wealth Gini as reported for each country for year 2000 and 2012 by
Davies, Sandstrm, Shorrocks, and Wolff (2009) and Davies, Lluberas, and Shorrocks (2012). G/Y corresponds to government final consumption as a
share of GDP (source WDI). Coefficients and standard errors reported are derived from a panel linear regression with Country Fixed Effects. The
sample contains 87 countries with data for years 2000 and 2012. If debt to GDP or government expenditure ratio is not available for year 2000 or 2012
data for year 1999 or 2011 is used.

43

A.2

Deterministic Model without Default Risk and Log
Utility

This part of the Appendix derives solutions for a version of the model in which low-wealth (L)
types do not hold any bonds and high-wealth (H) types buy all the debt. We cover first the fully
deterministic case, without any shocks to income or government policies, and no default risk,
but government expenditures may be deterministically different across periods. Government
wants to use debt to relocate consumption across agents and across periods optimally given a
utilitarian welfare function. Ruling out default on initial outstanding debt, the planner trades
off the desire to use debt to smooth taxation for L types (reduce date-0 taxes by issuing debt)
against the cost of the postponement of consumption this induces on H types who save to buy
the debt. In what follows, we work with cases where bL1 = 0 which might not hold depending
on the parameters of the model; however, it is a relevant benchmark since this holds for our
baseline parameterization and all the extensions of the model we present.31 This assumption
together with log utility provides closed form solutions. The goal is to illustrate the mechanisms
that are driving the model when default risk and stochastic government purchases are taken
out. Later in the Appendix we derive some results for the model with stochastic government
purchases, and make some inferences for the case with default risk.

A.2.1

Households

A fraction γ of agents are L types, and 1 − γ are H types. Preferences are:
ln(ci0 ) + β ln(ci1 )

f or

i = L, H

(A.1)

If bL1 = 0, budget constraints are:
cL0 = y − τ0 ,
cL1 = y − τ1 ,

H
H
cH
0 = y − τ0 + b0 − qb1
H
cH
1 = y − τ1 + b1

(A.2)
(A.3)

Since L types do not save they can only consume what their budget constraints allow. This is
important because altering taxes affects disposable income, which will in turn affect the optimal
debt choice of the government. For H types, the Euler equation is:
q=β

cH
0
cH
1

(A.4)

For L types, in order to make the assumption that they hold no assets consistent at equilibrium,
it must be the case that they are credit constrained (i.e. they would want to hold negative
assets). That is, at the equilibrium price of debt their Euler equation for bonds would satisfy:
q>β
31

cL0
cL1

L
The L− type agents will be credit constrained (i.e. bL
1 = 0) the lower b0 , B0 and B1 .

44

(A.5)

A.2.2

Government

The government budget constraints are:
τ0 = g0 + B0 − qB1
τ1 = g1 + B1

(A.6)
(A.7)

The initial debt B0 ≥ 0 is taken as given and the government is assumed to be committed to
repay it.
The social planner seeks to maximize this utilitarian social welfare function:
H
γ(ln(cL0 ) + β ln(cL1 )) + (1 − γ)(ln(cH
0 ) + β ln(c1 ))

A.2.3

(A.8)

Competitive equilibrium in the bond market

A competitive equilibrium in the bond market for a given supply of government debt B1 is given
by a price q that satisfies the market-clearing condition of the bond market: γbL1 +(1−γ)bH
1 = B1 .
H
By construction the same condition is assumed to hold for the initial conditions b0 and B0 . Since
bL0 = 0, this implies that the initial wealth of H-types is given by bH
0 = B0 /(1 − γ).
Rewriting the Euler equation of H types using the budget constraint, the government budget
constraints and the bond market-clearing conditions when bL1 = 0 yields:




γ
γ
y − g0 + 1−γ
B0 − q 1−γ
B1


q=β
(A.9)
γ
y − g1 + 1−γ
B1
Hence, the equilibrium price of bonds for a given government supply is:


γ
y − g0 + 1−γ B0


q(B1 ) = β
γ
y − g1 + 1−γ
(1 + β)B1

(A.10)

Note that this price is not restricted to be lower than 1 (i.e. q(B1 ) > 1 which implies a
negative real rate of return on government debt can be an equilibrium outcome). In particular,
as γ rises the per capita bond demand of H-types increases and this puts upward pressure on
bond prices, and even more so if the government finds it optimal to offer less debt than the
initial debt, as we showed numerically and explain further below. As γ → 1, the limit of the
β B0
equilibrium price goes to q(B1 ) = 1+β
even tough market-clearing requires the demand of the
B1
infinitesimal small H type to rise to infinity.
After some simplification, the derivative of this price is given by:


γ
−q(B1 ) 1−γ
(1 + β)
i


(A.11)
q ′ (B1 ) = h
γ
y − g1 + 1−γ
(1 + β)B1
45

which at any equilibrium with a positive bond price satisfies q ′ (B1 ) < 0 (notice cH
1 > 0 implies
that the denominator of this expression must be positive).
Consider now what happens to this equilibrium as the fraction of L-types vanishes. As
γ → 0, the economy converges to a case where there is only an H type representative agent,
0
and the price is simply q(B1 ) = β y−g
, which is in fact independent of B1 and reduces to β if
y−g1
government purchases are stationary. Trivially, in this case the planner solves the same problem
as the representative agent and the equilibrium is efficient. Also, for an exogenously given B0
and stationary g, the competitive equilibrium is stationary at this consumption level:


B0
γ
H
c =y−g+
(A.12)
1−γ 1+β
and the optimal debt is:
B1 =

B0
1+β

(A.13)

Hence, in this case consumption and disposable income each period are fully stationary, yet the
optimal debt policy is always to reduce the initial debt by the fraction 1/(1 + β). This is only
because of the two-period nature of the model. With an infinite horizon, the same bond price
would imply that an equilibrium with stationary consumption and an optimal policy that is
simply B1 = B0 . It also follows trivially that carrying no initial debt to start with would be
first-best, using lump-sum taxation to pay for g.

A.2.4

Optimal debt choice

The government’s optimal choice of B1 in the first period solves this maximization problem:
(
)
h  γ [ln (y −g0 −B0 + q(B1 )B1 ) +β ln (y − g1 − B1 )] 

i
max
γ
γ
γ
+(1 − γ) ln y − g0 + 1−γ
B0 − q(B1 ) 1−γ
B1 + β ln(y − g1 + 1−γ
B1 )
B1
(A.14)
γ
y−g0 +( 1−γ
)B0
where q(B1 ) = β y−g + γ (1+β)B .
1 ( 1−γ )
1
The first-order condition is:


γ u′ (cL0 ) [q ′ (B1 )B1 + q(B1 )] − βu′(cL1 )
(A.15)


 ′ H ′

γ
+(1 − γ)
−u (c0 ) [q (B1 )B1 + q(B1 )] + βu′(cH
1 ) = 0
1−γ
Using the Euler equation of the H types and simplifying:
 ′ L

u (c0 )q(B1 ) − βu′(cL1 )
′ L
u (c0 ) +
= u′ (cH
0 )
q ′ (B1 )B1

(A.16)

This expression is important, because it defines a wedge between equating the two agents’
marginal utility of consumption that the planner finds optimal to maintain, given that the only
instrument that it has to reallocate consumption across agents is the debt. Notice that, since as
46

noted earlier for L types to find it optimal to hold zero assets it must be that they are ”credit
constrained,” their Euler equation implies that at the equilibrium price: u′ (cL0 )q(B1 ) −βu′(cL1 ) >
0. Hence, the above optimality condition for the planner together with this condition imply that
H
L
the optimal debt choice supports u′ (cL0 ) > u′(cH
0 ) or c0 > c0 , and notice that from the budget
constraints this also implies B0 − q(B1 )B1 > 0, which implies B1 /B0 < 1/q(B1 ). Furthermore,
the latter implies that the optimal debt must be lower than any initial B0 for any q(B1 ) ≥ 1,
and also for ”sufficiently high” q(B1 ).
Comparison with no-debt equilibrium: Notice that since B0 −q(B1 )B1 > 0, the planner
is allocating less utility to L type agents than those agents would attain without any debt.
Without debt, and a tax policy τt = gt , all agents consume y − gt every period, but with debt
L-types consume less each period given that B1 > 0 and B0 − q(B1 )B1 > 0. Compared with
these allocations, when the planner finds optimal to choose B1 > 0 is because he is trading off
the pain of imposing higher taxes in both periods, which hurts L types, against the benefit the
H types get of having the ability to smooth using government bonds. Also, B0 − q(B1 )B1 > 0
highlights that there is a nontrivial role to the value of B0 , because if B0 were zero B1 would
need to be negative which is not possible by construction. Hence, the model only has a sensible
solution if there is already enough outstanding debt (and wealth owned by H type agents) that
gives the government room to be able to improve the H type’s ability to smooth across the two
periods, which they desire to do more the higher is B0 .
Comparison with sub-optimal debt equilibrium: By choosing positive debt, the government provides tax smoothing for L types. Given B0 and the fact that B0 − q(B1 )B1 > 0,
positive debt allows to lower date-0 taxes, which increases consumption of L types (since
cL0 = y − g0 −B0 +
 q(B1 )B1 ). The same policy lowers the consumption of H types (since
γ
H
c0 = y − g0 + 1−γ (B0 − q(B1 )B1 )). Hence, debt serves to redistribute consumption across
the two agents within the period. This also changes inter-temporal consumption allocations,
with the debt reducing L types consumption in the second period and increasing H types consumption. Hence, with commitment to repay B0 , the debt will be chosen optimally to trade
off these social costs and benefits of issuing debt to reallocate consumption atemporally across
agents and intertemporally.
It is also useful to notice that the demand elasticity
by η ≡ q(B1 )/ (q ′ (B1 )B1 ) ,
h of bonds is′ given
i
βu (cL )
so the marginal utility wedge can be expressed as η u′ (cL0 ) − q(B11) and the planner’s optimality condition reduces to:


βu′(cL1 )
u′(cH
0 )
1+η 1−
=
(A.17)
q(B1 )u′ (cL0 )
u′(cL0 )
Hence, the planner’s marginal utility wedge is the product of the demand elasticity of bonds and
βu′ (cL )
the L-type agents shadow value of being credit constrained (the difference 1 − q(B1 )u′1(cL ) > 0,
0
which can be interpreted as an effective real interest rate faced by L-type agents that is higher
than the return on bonds). The planner wants to use positive debt to support an optimal
wedge in marginal utilities only when the demand for bonds is elastic AND L-type agents are
constrained.

47

A.3

Extension to Include Government Expenditure Shocks

Now consider the same model but government expenditures are stochastic. In particular, realizations of government purchases in the second period are given by the set [g11 < g12 < ... < g1M ]
M
P
with transition probabilities denoted by π(g1i |g0 ) for i = 1, ..., M with
π(g1i |g0 ) = 1.
i=1

A.3.1

Households

Preferences are now:
ln(ci0 ) + β

M
X

π(g1i |g0 ) ln(ci1 )

i=1

!

f or

i = L, H

(A.18)

Budget constraints are unchanged:
cL0 = y − τ0 ,
cL1 = y − τ1 ,

H
H
cH
0 = y − τ0 + b0 − qb1
H
cH
1 = y − τ1 + b1

(A.19)
(A.20)

We still analyze cases where L types do not save, so they only consume what their budget
constraints allow. For H types, the Euler equation becomes:
q=β

M
X

π(g1i |g0 )

i=1



cH
0
cH
1



(A.21)

For L types, in order to make the assumption that they hold no assets consistent at equilibrium,
their Euler equation for bonds must satisfy:
q>β

M
X

π(g1i |g0 )

i=1

A.3.2



cL0
cL1



(A.22)

Government

The government budget constraints are unchanged:
τ0 = g0 + B0 − qB1
τ1 = g1 + B1
The initial debt B0 ≥ 0 is taken as given and the government is assumed to be committed to
repay it.
The social planner seeks to maximize this utilitarian social welfare function:
!
!
M
M
X
X
γ ln(cL0 ) + β
π(g1i |g0 ) ln(cL1 ) + (1 − γ) ln(cH
π(g1i |g0 ) ln(cH
(A.23)
0 )+β
1 )
i=1

i=1

48

A.3.3

Competitive equilibrium in the bond market

A competitive equilibrium in the bond market for a given supply of government debt B1 is given
by a price q that satisfies the market-clearing condition of the bond market: bH
1 = B1 /(1 − γ).
L
When b1 = 0 the equilibrium price can be derived from the H-types Euler equation.
We can solve the model in the same steps as before. First, rewrite the Euler equation of H
types using their budget constraints, the government budget constraints and the market-clearing
conditions:



 

γ
γ
M
y − g0 + 1−γ B0 − q 1−γ B1
X



q=β
π(g1i |g0 ) 
(A.24)
γ
y − g1 + 1−γ B1
i=1

From here, we can solve again for the equilibrium price at a given supply of bonds:



  P
M
π(g1i |g0 )
γ
y − g0 + 1−γ B0
γ
y−g1 +( 1−γ
)B1
i=1


q(B1 ) = β


M
P
π(g1i |g0 )
γ
1 + 1−γ βB1
γ
y−g1 +( 1−γ
)B1
i=1

(A.25)

As γ → 0 we converge again to the world where there is only an H type representative agent, but
now the pricing formula
reduces to
the standard formula for the pricing of a non-state-contingent
M
P
0
asset q(B1 ) = β
π(g1i |g0 ) y−g
. As γ → 1 the equilibrium degenerates again into a situation
y−g1
i=1

where market clearing requires the demand of the infinitesimal small H type to rise to infinity.
The derivative of the price at any equilibrium with a positive bond price satisfies q ′ (B1 ) < 0.
γ
M
M
P
P
π(g1i |g0 )( 1−γ
)
π(g1i |g0 )
′
which
To show this, define Π(B1 ) ≡
yields
Π
(B
)
=
−
2 < 0.
1
γ
γ
i
y−g1i +( 1−γ )B1
i=1
i=1 (y−g1 +( 1−γ )B1 )
Then taking the derivative q ′ (B1 ) and simplifying we get:


 h


i
2
γ
γ
′
β y − g0 + 1−γ B0 Π (B1 ) − β 1−γ (Π(B1 ))
q ′ (B1 ) =
(A.26)



2
γ
1 + β 1−γ
B1 Π(B1 )



γ
Since Π′ (B1 ) < 0 and positive cH
implies
y
−
g
+
B0 > 0, it follows that q ′ (B1 ) < 0.
0
0
1−γ
We can also gain some insight into the implicit risk premium (the ratio q(B1 )/β)) and the
related question of why the asset price can exceed 1 in this setup. Recall that in fact the
latter was already possible without uncertainty when γ is large enough, because of the demand
composition effect (higher γ implies by market clearing that the fewer H type agents need to
demand more bonds per capita, so the bond price is increasing in γ and can exceed 1). The
issue now is that, as numerical experiments show, an increase in the variance of g1 also results in
higher bond prices, and higher than in the absence of uncertainty, and again for γ large enough
we get both q(B1 ) > 1 and q(B1 )/β > 1. The reason bond prices increase with the variability
of government purchases is precautionary savings. Government bonds are the only vehicle of

49

saving, and the incentive for this gets stronger the larger the variability of g1 . Hence, the price
of bonds is higher in this stochastic model than in the analogous deterministic model because
of precautionary demand for bonds, which adds to the effect of demand composition (i.e. the
price is higher with uncertainty than without at a given γ).

A.3.4

Optimal debt choice

The government’s optimal choice of B1 solves again a standard maximization problem:
 
 
M
P



γ ln (y − g0 − B0 + q(B1 )B1 ) + β
π(g1i |g0 ) ln (y − g1 − B1 ) 






i=1


"












γ
γ
+(1
−
γ)
ln
y
−
g
+
B
−
q(B
)
B
0
0
1
1
max
(A.27)
1−γ
1−γ
B1 



#






M


P


γ
i


B
)
+β
π(g
|g
)
ln(y
−
g
+


1
0
1
1


1−γ
i=1

where q(B1 ) is given by the expression solved for in the competitive equilibrium.
The first-order condition is:
"
#
M
X
γ u′ (cL0 ) [q ′ (B1 )B1 + q(B1 )] − β
π(g1i |g0 )u′(cL1 )
+(1 − γ)



(A.28)

i=1

γ
1−γ

#
"
M
X
′
−u′ (cH
π(g1i |g0 )u′(cH
0 ) [q (B1 )B1 + q(B1 )] + β
1 ) = 0
i=1

Using the stochastic Euler equation of the H types and simplifying:
u

′

(cL0 ) [q ′ (B1 )B1

u

′

+ q(B1 )] − β

(cL0 )




+


M
X

′
π(g1i |g0 )u′ (cL1 ) = u′ (cH
0 )q (B1 )B1

i=1

u

′

(cL0 )q(B1 )

−β

M
P



π(g1i |g0 )u′ (cL1 )


i=1
′
q (B1 )B1

 = u′ (cH
0 )


(A.29)

(A.30)

This last expression, compared with the similar expression of the planner without uncertainty,
implies that in the planner’s view, the government expenditure shocks only matter to the extent that they affect the shadow price of the binding credit constraint of the L types. As
before, since for L types to find it optimal to hold zero assets it must be that they are ”credit
constrained,” their Euler equation would imply that at the equilibrium price: u′(cL0 )q(B1 ) −
M
P
β
π(g1i |g0 )u′ (cL1 ) > 0. Hence, the above optimality condition for the planner together with
i=1

H
L
this condition imply that the optimal debt choice supports u′ (cL0 ) > u′ (cH
0 ) or c0 > c0 , and
notice that from the budget constraints this implies again B0 − q(B1 )B1 > 0, which implies

50

B1 /B0 < 1/q(B1 ). Furthermore, the latter implies that the optimal debt must be lower than
any initial B0 for any q(B1 ) ≥ 1, and also for ”sufficiently high” q(B1 ). Thus the optimal debt
choice again has an incentive to be lower than the initial debt.

A.4

Pricing Function: Stochastic Model with Default

We can also make an inference about what the pricing function looks like in the model with
default risk, because with default we have a similar Euler equation, except that the summation
that defines the term Π(B1 ) above will exclude all the states of g1 for which the government
chooses to default on a given B1 (and also at a given value of γ). That is, the term in question
M
P
π(g1i |g0 )
≤ Π(B1 ), and the pricing function with default
becomes ΠD (B1 ) ≡
γ
i
y−g1 +( 1−γ
)B1
{i:d(B ,g i ,γ)=0}
1

risk is:

1




 
γ
y − g0 + 1−γ
B0 ΠD (B1 )
D


q (B1 ) = β
≤ q(B1 )
γ
1 + 1−γ
βB1 ΠD (B1 )

(A.31)

Moreover, it follows from the previous analysis that this pricing function is also decreasing
γ
M
P
π(g1i |g0 )( 1−γ
)
in B1 (q D′ (B1 ) < 0), and ΠD′ (B1 ) = −
2 is negative but such that
γ
i
y−g1 +( 1−γ )B1 )
{i:d(B1 ,g i ,γ)=0} (
1

Π′ (B1 ) ≤ ΠD′ (B1 ) < 0. Also, it is clear from the above pricing functions that if the probability
of default is small, so that are only a few values of i for which d(B1 , g1i , γ) = 1 and/or the
associated probability π(g1i |g0 ) is very low, the default pricing function will be very similar to
the no-default pricing function.
If we define the default risk spread as S(B1 , γ) ≡ [1/q D (B1 , γ)] − [1/q(B1 , γ)], where γ has
been added as an argument of the price functions because those prices also depend on variations
in inequality, the spread reduces to the following expression:




1
1
1




 
S(B1 , γ) =
−
ΠD (B1 , γ) Π(B1 , γ)
β y−g + γ B
0

0

1−γ

Clearly since ΠD (B1 , γ) ≤ Π(B1 , γ) the spread is non-negative, and it is strictly positive if there
is default at equilibrium. The spread is increasing in B1 , because as the debt rises default is
chosen optimally in more of the possible realizations of g1i and hence ΠD (B1 , γ) falls further
below Π(B1 , γ), so that the gap between the reciprocals of these two terms widens. Note also
thatthe spread
of the gap between these reciprocals, with the multiple given by
 is a multiple

γ
1/β y − g0 + 1−γ B0 . As a result, the total date-0 resources available for consumption of


γ
the H-types (y −g0 + 1−γ
B0 ) have a first-order negative effect on the spreads. This is because,
as this measure of income rises, the marginal utility of date-0 consumption of H types falls, which
pushes up bond prices. The are also second order effects, because the equilibrium allocation of
B1 also depends on that income measure, and thus ΠD (B1 , γ) and Π(B1 , γ) vary with it as well,
51

but these are not considered here.
In terms of the effect of changes in γ on S, notice that there are two effects. First, there is
a negative effect because higher γ means that, for a given B0 , the resources available for date0 consumption of H types increase, since fewer H type agents need to demand enough initial
bonds to clear the bond market, which means that per-capita each of the H types hold more
date-0 bonds and have more bond income. Second, there is a positive effect because rising γ
weakens default incentives as the welfare of the wealthy is valued more, and
 hence default is
D
optimally chosen in more states, which increases 1/Π (B1 , γ) − 1/Π(B1 , γ) . Thus, in principle
the response of the spread to increases in inequality is ambiguous. The weaker the response of
the default probability to changes in γ, however, the more likely it is that the first effect will
dominate and the spreads will be a decreasing function of inequality.

A.5

Calibration of the Benchmark Model

The model is calibrated to annual frequency, and most of the parameter values are set so as to
approximate some of the model’s predicted moments to those observed in the European data.
The preference parameters are set to standard values: β = 0.96, σ = 1. We also assume for
simplicity that L types start with zero wealth, bL0 = 0.32 We assume that


σe2
.33
ln(g1 ) ∼ N (1 − ρg ) ln(µg ) + ρg ln(g0 ),
(1 − ρ2g )
The parameters of this process are pinned down by estimating an AR(1) model with 1995-2012
data of the government expenditures-GDP ratio (in logs) for France, Germany, Greece, Ireland,
Italy, Spain and Portugal. Given the parameter estimates for each country, we set µg , ρg and
σe to the corresponding cross-country average. This results in the following values µg = 0.1812,
ρg = 0.8802 and σe = 0.017. Given these moments, we set g0 = µg and use Tauchen (1986)
quadrature method with 45 nodes in G1 ≡ {g 1 , . . . , g 1 } to generate the realizations and transition
probabilities of the Markov process that drives expectations about g1 .34
We abstain from setting a calibrated value for γ and instead show results for γ ∈ [0, 1]. Note,
however, that data for the United States and Europe suggest that the empirically relevant range
for γ is [0.55, 0.85], and hence when taking a stance on a particular value of γ is useful we use
γ = 0.7, which is the mid point of the plausible range.35
32

σ = 1 and bL
0 = 0 are also useful because, as we show in the Appendix, under these assumptions we can
obtain closed-form solutions and establish some results analytically.
33
This specification allows us to control the correlation between g0 and g1 via ρg , the mean of the shock via
σ2

µg and the variance of the unpredicted portion via σe2 . Note that if g0 = µg , ln(g1 ) ∼ N (ln(µg ), (1−ρg 2 ) ).
e
34
As it is standard, we assume that g1 is an equally spaced grid with log(g 1 ) and log(g 1 ) located -/+ 3 standard
deviations from log(µg ) respectively.
35
In the United States, the 2010 Survey of Consumer Finances indicates that only 12% of households hold
savings bonds but 50.4% have retirement accounts (which are very likely to own government bonds). These
figures would suggest values of γ ranging from 50% to 88%. In Europe, comparable statistics are not available
for several countries, but recent studies show that the wealth distribution is highly concentrated and that the
wealth Gini coefficient ranges between 0.55 and 0.85 depending on the country and the year of the study (see

52

Average income y is calibrated such that the model’s aggregate resource constraint is consistent with the data when GDP is normalized to one. This implies that the value of households’
aggregate endowment must equal GDP net of fixed capital investment and net exports, since
the latter two are not explicitly modeled. The average for the period 1970-2012 for the same
set of countries used to estimate the g1 process implies y = 0.7883. Note also that under this
calibration of y and the Markov process of g1 , the gap y − g1 is always positive, even for g1 = g 1 ,
which in turn guarantees cH
1 > 0 in all repayment states.
We set the value of B0 to match the median value of government debt for Euro-zone countries
reported in Table 1 of the paper. As we describe in the next section, even though the optimal B1
(close to 15 percent of GDP for γ ∈ [0.55, 0.85]) is higher than those observed in the sovereign
debt literature, in this two-period model the consumption smoothing mechanism induces a
reduction in the optimal B1 relative to the initial condition B0 even in a deterministic version of
the model with stationary government purchases. Under these assumptions, the optimal debt
choice is decreasing in γ and has an upper bound of B1 = B0 /(1 + β) as γ → 0.36 In addition,
when default risk is introduced debt needs to be below the level that would lead the government
to default in the second period with probability 1, and above the level at which either cL0 or cH
1
become non-positive, otherwise there is no equilibrium.
The functional form of the default cost function is the following: φ(g1) = φ0 + (g 1 − g1 )/y,
where g 1 is calibrated to represent an “unusually large” realization of g1 set equal to the largest
realization in the Markov process of government expenditures, which is in turn set equal to
3 standard deviations from the mean (in the process in logs).37 We calibrate φ0 to match
an estimate of the observed frequency of domestic defaults. According to Reinhart and Rogoff
(2011), historically, domestic defaults are about 1/4 as frequent as external defaults (68 domestic
v. 250 external in data since 1750). Since the probability of an external default has been
estimated in the range of 3 to 5% (see for example Arellano (2008)), we estimate the probability
of a domestic default at about 1%. The model is close to this default frequency on average when
solved over the empirically relevant range of γ ′ s (γ ∈ [0.55, 0.85]) if we set φ0 = 0.004. Note,
however, that this calibration of φ0 to target the default probability and the calibration of B0 to
the target described early needs to be done jointly by repeatedly solving the model until both
targets are well approximated.
Davies, Sandstrm, Shorrocks, and Wolff (2009)). In our model, if bL
0 = 0, the Gini coefficient of wealth is equal
to γ.
36
This occurs because as γ → 0, the model in deterministic form collapses to a representative agent economy
inhabited by H types where the optimal debt choice yields stationary consumption, q0 = 1/β, and B1 = B0 /(1 +
β). In contrast, an infinite horizon, stationary economy yields B1 = B0 (see Appendix for details).
37
This cost function shares a key feature of the default cost functions widely used in the external default
literature to align default incentives so as to support higher debt ratios and trigger default during recessions (see
Arellano (2008) and Mendoza and Yue (2012)): The default cost is an increasing function of disposable income
(y − g1 ). In addition, this formulation ensures that households’ consumption during a default never goes above
a given threshold.

53

A.6

Additional Figures: Benchmark Model

Figure A.12 shows two panels with the optimal default decision for different values of g1 . The
plots separate the regions where the government chooses to repay (d(B1 , g1 , γ) = 0 shown in
white), where it chooses to default (d(B1 , g1 , γ) = 1 in green) and where the equilibrium does
not exist (in blue).
Figure A.12: Government default decision d(B1 , g1 , γ)

The repayment region (d(B1 , g1 , γ) = 0) corresponds to the region with α(B1 , g1 , γ) < 0.
Hence, the government defaults at higher B1 the lower a given γ, or at higher γ the lower
a given B1 . Moreover, the two plots show that when g1 = g 1 the government defaults for
combinations of γ and B1 for which it repays when g1 = g 1 . Thus, default occurs over a wider
set of (B1 , γ) pairs at higher levels of government expenditures, and thus it is also more likely
to occur.
We examine further the behavior of the default decision by computing the threshold value of
γ such that the government is indifferent between defaulting and repaying in period for a given
(B1 , g1 ). These indifference thresholds (γ̂(B1 , g1 )) are plotted in Figure A.13 against debt levels
ranging from 0 to 0.4 for three values of government expenditures {g1 , µg , g 1 }. For any given
(B1 , g1 ), the government chooses to default if γ ≥ γ̂.

54

Figure A.13: Default Threshold γ̂(B1 , g1 )
1
γ̂(B1 , g)
γ̂(B1 , µg )
γ̂(B1 , g)

0.9

Default Threshold (γ̂)

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

0.05

0.1

0.15
0.2
0.25
Gov. Debt (B1 )

0.3

0.35

Figure A.13 shows that the default threshold is decreasing in B1 . Hence, the government
tolerates higher debt ratios without defaulting only if wealth concentration is sufficiently low.
Also, default thresholds are decreasing in g1 , because the government has stronger incentives
to default when government expenditures are higher (i.e. the threshold curves shift inward).38
This last feature of γ̂ is very important to determine equilibria with debt subject to default risk.
If, for a given value of B1 , γ is higher than the curve representing γ̂ for the lowest realization in
the Markov process of g1 (which is also the value of g1 ), the government defaults for sure and,
as explained earlier, there is no equilibrium. Alternatively, if for a given value of B1 , γ is lower
than the curve representing γ̂ for the highest realization of g1 (which is the value of g 1 ), the
government repays for sure and debt would be issued effectively without default risk. Thus, for
the model to support equilibria with debt subject to default risk, the optimal debt chosen by
the government in the first period for a given γ must lie between these two extreme threshold
curves. We show that this is the case later in this Section. Figure A.14 shows intensity plots of
the equilibrium tax functions.
38

γ̂ approaches zero for B1 sufficiently large, but in Figure A.13 B1 reaches 0.40 only for exposition purposes.

55

d(B1 ,g1 ,γ)

Figure A.14: Equilibrium Tax Functions τ1

Putting together these plots with those of the default decision in Figure A.12 illustrates the
model’s distributional incentives to default from the perspective of tax policy. If the government
defaults, the tax is τ1 = g1 , but if it repays the tax is τ1 = g1 + B1 . Since all agents pay the
same taxes but L types do not collect bond repayments, the lower taxes under default provide a
distributional incentive to default that is larger when wealth is more concentrated. Figure A.14
shows that, for given g1 , the repayment scenarios with higher taxes are more likely when a large
fraction of households hold debt (low γ) and thus benefit from a repayment, or when the debt
is low so that the distributional incentives to default are weak. Moreover, equilibria with higher
taxes are more likely to be observed at low than at high levels of government expenditures,
because default is far likely with the latter.
Figure A.15 plots the bond demand decision rules (for given B1 ) of the H types in the same
layout as the bond prices (i.e. as functions of γ for three values of B1 ).39 This plot validates
the intuition provided above about the properties of these agents’ bond demand function. In
particular, as γ increases, the demand for bonds of H types grows at an increasing rate, reflecting
the combined effects of higher per-capita demand by a smaller fraction of H-type agents and a
rising default risk premium. Thus, the convexity of these bond decision rules reflects the effects
of wealth dispersion on demand composition and default risk explained earlier.
39

We do not include the bond decision rules for L types because they are credit constrained (i.e. their Euler
L
condition holds with inequality) and choose bL
1 = b0 = 0.

56

Figure A.15: Equilibrium HH bond decision rules bi1
1.5

bH
1 (B1,L , γ)
bH
1 (B1,M , γ)
bH
1 (B1,H , γ)
1

0.5

0
0.2

0.3

0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Fraction "low" wealth agents (γ)

0.8

0.9

Figure A.16 shows the debt Laffer curves for five values of γ in the [0.05,0.95] range.40
40

Each curve is truncated at values of B1 in the horizontal axis that are either low enough for cL
0 ≤ 0 or
high enough for default to be chosen for all realizations of g1 , because as noted before in these cases there is no
equilibrium.

57

Figure A.16: Debt Laffer Curve
”Laffer” Curve B1 ∗ q(B1 , γ)
0.35
B1 ∗ q(B1 , γ
B1 ∗ q(B1 , γ
B1 ∗ q(B1 , γ
B1 ∗ q(B1 , γ
B1 ∗ q(B1 , γ
B1x

0.3

B1 ∗ q(B1 , γ)

0.25

= 0.05)
= 0.25)
= 0.50)
= 0.75)
= 0.95)

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

0

0.05

0.1

0.15
0.2
0.25
Government Debt (B )

0.3

0.35

0.4

1

When γ ≥ 0.50, B1∗ (γ) is located at the maximum of the corresponding Laffer curve. In these
cases, setting debt higher than at the maximum of the Laffer curve is suboptimal because default
risk reduces bond prices sharply, moving the government to the downward sloping region of the
Laffer curve, and setting it lower is also suboptimal because then default risk is low and extra
borrowing generates more resources since bond prices change little, leaving the government in the
upward sloping region of the Laffer curve. Thus, if the optimal debt has a nontrivial probability
of default, the government’s debt choice exhausts its ability to raise resources by borrowing.

A.7

Sensitivity Analysis: Benchmark Model

This Section presents the results of a set of counterfactuals that shed more light on the workings
of the model and also show some results for the case in which the social welfare function has
biased weights that do not correspond to the fractions of L and H types in the economy. The
sensitivity analysis studies how the main results are affected by changes in the initial debt B0 ,
initial government expenditures g0 , and the constant in the default cost function φ0 .

A.7.1

Lower Initial Debt Level B0

Figure A.17 compares the optimal government debt and associated equilibrium bond prices,
spreads and default probability under the original calibration with B0 = 0.35 and a value that
is 20% lower (B0,L = 0.28).
58

Panel (i) shows that the optimal debt choice is always lower for the lower B0 , but the
difference narrows as γ rises. This occurs because at low γ default risk plays a negligible role,
and the demand composition effect implies lower per-capita demand for bonds from H type
agents and a smaller fraction of credit-constrained L types, so the government wants to sell less
debt. But once default risk becomes relevant, the optimal debt choice is about the same.
With the lower B0 , bond prices are uniformly lower albeit slightly (panel (ii)), spreads are
increasing as γ rises for a wider range of γ and attain a lower maximum (panel (iii)), and
the same is true for default probabilities (panel (iv)). Bond prices are lower with lower initial
debt because for a given γ this implies lower initial wealth of H types (bH
0 ), and in turn this
requires a lower bond price to clear the market. This effect is stronger than two other effects that
push bond prices in the opposite direction: First, the slightly lower debt B1 that the government
finds optimal to supply at lower levels of B0 . Second, the higher disposable income of households
resulting from the lower date-0 taxes needed to repay lower levels of B0 , which increases demand
for bonds.
Figure A.17: Changes in Initial Government Debt B0
Panel (i): Debt. Choice B1∗ (γ)

Panel (ii): Bond Price q(B1∗ (γ), γ)

0.25

3.5
B0 (bench.)
B0,L

0.2

3
2.5

0.15
2
0.1
1.5
0.05
0

1
0

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

0.5

1

0

Panel (iii): Spread (%)

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

1

Panel (iv): Def. Prob. p(B1∗ (γ), γ)

1.4

0.02

1.2
0.015

spread (%)

1
0.8

0.01
0.6
0.4

0.005

0.2
0

0

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

0

1

59

0

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

1

In terms of the implications for the empirically relevant range of γ in the European data,
these results show that at the lower B0 the model continues to predict debt ratios of about 8 to
12%, but now at spreads that are only half (40 v. 100 basis points) and at default probabilities
below 1 percent instead of 1 to 1.5 percent. Moreover, these results also show that spreads and
default probabilities can display richer patterns than the ones found in the initial calibration.

A.7.2

Lower Initial Government Expenditures g0

Figure A.18 compares the model’s equilibrium outcomes under the calibrated value of initial
government expenditures, g0 = µg = 0.181, and a scenario in which g0 is 1.5 standard deviations
below the mean, g0,L = 0.171.
Figure A.18: Changes in Initial Government Expenditures g0
Panel (i): Debt. Choice B1∗ (γ)

Panel (ii): Bond Price q(B1∗ (γ), γ)

0.2

3.5
g0 = µg (bench.)
g0,L

3

0.15
2.5

0.1

2
1.5

0.05
1

0

0

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

0.5

1

0

Panel (iii): Spread (%)

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

1

Panel (iv): Def. Prob. p(B1∗ (γ), γ)

1.5

0.02

spread (%)

0.015

1
0.01

0.5
0.005

0

0

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

0

1

0

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

1

Like the reduction in B0 , the reduction in g0 increases date-0 disposable income via lower
date-0 taxes. They differ, however, in two key respects: First, changes in g0 affect the expected
level of government expenditures for t = 1, as reflected in changes in the transition probabilities
which are conditional on g0 . Second, changes in g0 do not affect the aggregate wealth of the
economy and the initial bond holdings of H types.
Panel (i) shows that the optimally debt is slightly higher with lower g0 , unless γ is below
0.35. This reflects the fact that the lower g0 allows the government to issue more debt in the
initial period, because the likelihood of hitting states with sufficiently high g1 for optimal default
to occur in the second period is lower. This also explains why in panels (ii)-(iv), despite the
higher optimal debt with the lower g0 , bond prices, default probabilities and spreads are lower.
60

Moreover, optimal debt is about the same with lower g0 as in the initial calibration for γ ≤ 0.35
because at this low level of wealth concentration default risk is not an issue and the mechanism
that we just described is irrelevant.

A.7.3

Fixed Cost of Default φ0

Panels (i) − (iv) in Figure A.19 compare the equilibrium outcomes for the initial calibration of
the default cost parameter (φ0 = 0.004) with an scenario with a higher values (φ0,H = 0.02).
Figure A.19: Changes in Cost of Default φ0
Panel (i): Debt. Choice B1∗ (γ)

Panel (ii): Bond Price q(B1∗ (γ), γ)
3.5

0.2

φ0 (bench.)
φ0,H

3
0.15

2.5
2

0.1

1.5
0.05

1
0

0

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

0.5

1

0

Panel (iii): Spread (%)

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

1

Panel (iv): Def. Prob. p(B1∗ (γ), γ)
0.02

1.5

spread (%)

0.015
1

0.01
0.5

0.005

0

0

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

0

1

0

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

1

Qualitatively, the changes in the equilibrium are in the direction that would be expected.
Higher default costs increase the optimal debt and reduce bond prices, spreads and default
probabilities. Quantitatively, however, the changes in optimal debt and bond prices are small,
while the reduction in spreads and default probabilities are significantly larger.

A.8

Additional Figures: Model with Biased Welfare Weights

Adding default costs to the political bias setup (φ(g1 ) > 0) makes it possible to support repayment equilibria even when ω ≥ γ. As Figure A.20 shows, with default costs there are threshold
values of consumption dispersion, ǫ̂, separating repayment from default zones for ω >=< γ.
61

Figure A.20: Default decision with non-utilitarian planner when φ(g1 ) > 0

W d=0 (ǫ)
ω>γ
ω<γ

W d=1

u(y − g)
ω=γ

W d=1

u(y(1 − φ) − g)

0 ǫ̂(ω > γ)

ǫ̂(ω = γ)

ǫ̂(ω < γ)

ǫ

It is also evident in Figure A.20 that the range of values of ǫ for which repayment is chosen
widens as γ rises relative to ω. Thus, when default is costly, equilibria with repayment require
only the condition that the debt holdings chosen by private agents, which are implicit in ǫ, do
not produce consumption dispersion larger than the value of ǫ̂ associated with a given (ω,γ)
pair. Intuitively, the consumption of H-type agents must not exceed that of L-type agents by
more than what ǫ̂ allows, because otherwise default is optimal.
Figure A.21 shows the default decision rule induced by the planner’s welfare gains of default,
again as a function of ω and γ for the same two values of B1 . The region in white corresponds
to cases where d(B1 , g1 , γ, ω) = 0, the green region corresponds to d(B1 , g1 , γ, ω) = 1 and the
blue region corresponds to cases in which there is no equilibrium.

62

Figure A.21: Default Decision Rule d(B1 , g1 , γ, ω)

This Figure shows that when the ω is low enough, the government chooses default, and for
a given ω the default region is larger the lower is γ. Taxes and prices for given values of B1 and
ω are linked to the default decision and γ as in the benchmark model and the intuition behind
their behavior is straightforward.

A.9

Additional Figures: Model with Foreign Investors

Figure A.22 shows the bond decision rules for domestic and foreign investors as the value of γ
and B1 change.

63

Figure A.22: Decision Rule Domestic and Foreign Agents
2.5

1

bL
1 (B1,L , γ)
2

bH
1 (B1,L , γ)
bH
1 (B1,M , γ)
bH
1 (B1,H , γ)

1.5

bL
1 (B1,M , γ)

0.5

bL
1 (B1,H , γ)
0

1
−0.5

0.5
0

0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Fraction "low" wealth agents (γ)

−1

1

0.2

0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Fraction "low" wealth agents (γ)

1

0.05

B1d (B1,L , γ)
0.15

0

B1d (B1,M , γ)
B1d (B1,H , γ)

0.1

−0.05

B1f (B1,L , γ)
0.05

B1f (B1,M , γ)

−0.1

B1f (B1,H , γ)
0

0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Fraction "low" wealth agents (γ)

−0.15

1

0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Fraction "low" wealth agents (γ)

1

Figure A.23 presents the optimal domestic and foreign demand (Panel (i)) and the optimal
debt issuance of the government (Panel (ii)). This Panel also marks with red squares the debt
levels where there is positive risk of default and shows that the feature of equilibrium domestic
default is also robust to the introduction of foreign lenders.

64

Figure A.23: Equilibrium Domestic and Foreign Debt Holdings
Panel (i): Domestic and Foreign Positions
0.15

B1d (γ)
0.1

B1f (γ)

0.05

0

−0.05

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Fraction "low" wealth agents (γ)

0.8

0.9

1

0.8

0.9

1

Panel (ii): B1 (γ)
B1 (γ)
Def. Ind.
0.1

0.05

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Fraction "low" wealth agents (γ)

Panel (i) of Figure A.23 shows that domestic (foreign) demand is an increasing (decreasing)
function of γ. Panel (ii) of Figure A.23 shows that the debt choice of the government is a concave
function of γ. This is a direct result of default incentives. When γ is low the government has
strong incentives to default of foreign lenders, so debt issuance remains low. As γ increases and
domestic households increase their demand for sovereign debt, forces for a “foreign” default decrease and higher debt levels are attainable. As higher levels of γ, “domestic” default incentives
constraint the government to increase the debt further and the optimal choice decreases.

A.10

Details for the Model with Two Assets

We now extend the baseline model by allowing domestic agents to save using a risk-free asset, in
addition to government bonds. In particular, agents have access to a non-stochastic production
technology yti = z(kti )θ with 0 < θ < 1, where yti is total output and kti is capital for agent
of type i in period t, respectively. The initial aggregate level of capital is denoted by K0 . As
before, there is a fraction γ of L−type agents that are endowed with bL0 and k0L units of domestic
sovereign debt and capital respectively. A fraction (1 − γ) of agents are of the H − type and
K0 −γk0L
B0 −γbL
H
0
have endowments given by bH
0 = (1−γ) and k0 = (1−γ) . We assume that capital depreciates
at rate δ. At period 0, agents choose how much of their savings they want to allocate to public
bonds bi1 ≥ 0 and capital k1i ≥ 0.
65

The assumptions we made above to introduce the second asset, particularly the curvature
of the production function, serve the purpose of supporting a well-defined portfolio choice for
private agents (i.e. the fraction of wealth to allocate to bonds and capital), which is in turn useful
to solve the government’s problem.41 This formulation is also helpful because it approximates
the cases in which agents could buy a foreign risk-free asset or a domestic asset that is in zero
net supply (and is also risk free). If, for example, agents could buy a foreign risk-free asset, we
could obtain well defined portfolios by introducing adjustment costs.
The agents’ budget constraint in the initial period is:
ci0 + q0 bi1 + k1i = z(k0i )θ + k0i (1 − δ) + bi0 − τ0 for i = L, H.

(A.32)

The budget constraints in period 1 for the case of no-default and default are:
ci,d=0
= z(k1i )θ + k1i (1 − δ) + bi1 − τ1 for i = L, H.
1

(A.33)

ci,d=1
= (1 − φ(g1))z(k1i )θ + k1i (1 − δ) − τ1 for i = L, H.
1

(A.34)

The first-order condition with respect to bi1 is
h
i
′ i
′ i,d=0
u (c0 ) ≥ (β/q0 )Eg1 u (c1 )(1 − d1 ) , = if bi1 > 0.

As in the benchmark, the marginal benefit of an extra unit of domestic bond is positive only
in those states where the government chooses to repay. Similarly, the first-order condition with
respect to capital is given by
h
i

′ i,d=1
u′ (ci0 ) ≥ βEg1 u′ (ci,d=0
)(1
−
d
)
+
u
(c
)d
θz(k1i )θ−1 + 1 − δ , = if k1i > 0.
1
1
1
1

Since the asset is risk-free, the marginal benefit of an extra unit of capital is positive in all possible
future states of the world. However, it will be more valuable in those states where the government
chooses to default since the marginal utility is higher. These first-order conditions also show
that the level of government debt B1 (as well as the initial wealth dispersion γ) influence the
individual asset demand through the default decision directly, and indirectly through the bond
price.
When the borrowing constraint on bonds binds, this introduces a wedge between the agents’
expected marginal product of capital and the expected return on the bond. However, if both
decisions are interior (which is likely to happen for H−type agents), agents equalize the expected
return across assets, which implies:
h
i
′ i,d=0
E
u
(c
)(1
−
d
)
g1
1
1
q0
h
i.
=
(A.35)
−1
i,d=0
i,d=1
′
′
[θz(k1i )θ−1 + 1 − δ]
Eg1 u (c1 )(1 − d1 ) + u (c1 )d1
This equation shows that when capital and bond decisions are interior, the wedge between
41

This statement is of course conditional on parameters supporting the interesting case in which at least some
agents do hold both assets at equilibrium.

66

the price of the bond and the marginal productivity of capital is driven uniquely by default
risk (weighted by marginal utility in each state of the world). In the particular case in which
in addition we are in a combination of B1 and γ where there is no default risk, the optimal
individual choice of capital is given by:
(1/q0 ) = (αz(k1i )α−1 + 1 − δ)
1

 1−α
αzq
0
⇒ k1i =
.
1 − q0 (1 − δ)
The demand for capital increases with the price of the bond, or falls with the interest rate, as
in standard investment models.
In this environment, the government faces similar budget constraints to those presented in
the benchmark model. However, when choosing the optimal level of debt and whether to default
or not, it takes into account not only the distribution of bond holdings across agents but also
the distribution of capital. In particular, at t = 1, the repayment value is given by:
W1d=0 (B1 , g1 , γ) = γu(z(k1L )θ +(1−δ)k1L −g1 +bL1 −B1 )+(1−γ)u(z(k1H )θ +(1−δ)k1H −g1 +bH
1 −B1 )
and the value of default is
W1d=1 (g1 , γ) = γu(z(k1L )θ (1−φ(g1))+(1−δ)k1L −g1 )+(1−γ)u(z(k1H )θ (1−φ(g1 ))+(1−δ)k1H −g1 ).
Note that in each case, the individual capital and bond decisions {bi1 , k1i } are a function of B1 and
γ. This implies that the variance of consumption, a key moment to determine the differential
value of repayment v. default, is a function of the amount of debt the government has issued in
period 0.
The model seems simple, but its solution needs to be obtained numerically. To make this
case as close as possible to the benchmark model, we assume that k0i = K0 (i.e. all initial
heterogeneity is in initial bond holdings). Still, this results in heterogeneous bond and capital
holdings in the second period. We set z to normalize GDP to 1, θ equal to 0.33 (a standard
value), δ = 0.10 and set K0 so the capital to output ratio is equal to 2. All other parameters
are set equal to those in the benchmark.
Figure A.24 presents the decision rules of the model. The top panels correspond to those
for the H−type and the bottom panels to those for the L − type. They are truncated for
combinations of B1 and γ where the equilibrium does not exist because the government defaults
for all possible realizations of g1 .

67

Figure A.24: Bond and Capital Decision Rules in Model with Two Assets
4

0.8

bH
1 (B1,L , γ)

k1H (B1,L , γ)

3.5

k1H (B1,M , γ)

bH
1 (B1,M , γ)

0.6

bH
1 (B1,H , γ)

k1H (B1,H , γ)

3
2.5

0.4

2
0.2
1.5
1

0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Fraction "low" wealth agents (γ)

0

1

1.2

0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Fraction "low" wealth agents (γ)

1

1

1.15

0.5

1.1

k1L (B1,M , γ)
k1L (B1,H , γ)

1
0.95

0

k1L (B1,L , γ)

1.05

0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Fraction "low" wealth agents (γ)

bL1 (B1,L , γ)
bL1 (B1,M , γ)
bL1 (B1,H , γ)

−0.5
−1

1

0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Fraction "low" wealth agents (γ)

1

As in the benchmark model, L − type agents are at the borrowing constraint for all values
of B1 . Their capital choice is determined completely by the first-order condition for capital. As
we get close to a region with default risk, their demand for capital decreases since the marginal
benefit of an extra unit of savings decreases, because they expect to receive a transfer in the
case of a default. On the other hand, H−type agents are never at the borrowing constraint,
so their choice of capital is given by equation (A.35). As in the benchmark economy with one
asset, while default risk is low (B1 = B1,L ), the bond price increases with γ to induce the
H−type to demand a decreasing fraction of their initial bond position (but still increasing in
γ). This increase in bond prices drives the increasing demand for capital for the H−type when
B1 = B1,L . As we move to higher levels of B1 , similar factors are at play but since default risk is
not trivially small, bond prices do not rise as fast, inducing a relatively flat demand for capital
with slightly increasing demand for domestic bonds for H−types with a decreasing demand for
capital for L−types.

68

Figure A.25: Equilibrium Model with Two Assets
Panel (i): Debt. Choice B1∗ (γ)

Panel (ii): Bond Price q(B1∗ (γ), γ)
1
q(B1∗ (γ))

0.15

1/mpk H
0.95

0.1
B1∗ (γ)

0

0.9

B1RF (γ)
Def. Ind

0.05

0

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

0.85

1

0

Panel (iii): Spread (%)

1

Panel (iv): Def. Prob. p(B1∗ (γ), γ)

2

spread (%)

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

0.015

1.5
0.01
1
0.005

0.5
0
0

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

0

1

0

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

1

Note: mpk H denotes the marginal product of capital for the H−type and is given by
θz(k H )θ−1 + 1 − δ. The spread is computed as 1/q(B1 , γ) − mpk H .

Figure A.25 presents the equilibrium functions as they vary with γ. As before, we present
the optimal debt choice of the government, and the associated bond prices, spreads (measured
against the marginal product of capital of the H−type) and the default probability.42 This figure
shows that the results of the benchmark model are robust to the introduction of an additional
asset.
Panel (i) shows that optimal debt falls as γ increases and Panel (iv) that default risk is
not zero for γ > 0.20 (non negligible for γ > 0.50). Importantly, the probability of a default
event is increasing in the initial level of wealth inequality. As default risk increases, the wedge
between the marginal product of capital and the equilibrium bond price increases driving up
the spreads (see Panels (ii) and (iii)). Different from our baseline model, bond prices remain
below 1, implying positive real interest payments for all values of γ.
Figure A.26 compares the equilibrium functions of the benchmark model with those of the
economy with two assets.
42

We measure spreads against the marginal product of capital of the H−type since the wedge is only driven by
default risk. In the case of the L−type agents there is an additional component that arises from the multiplier
on the non negativity constraint on domestic bonds.

69

Figure A.26: Comparison Equilibrium Benchmark vs Two Asset Model
Panel (i): Debt. Choice B1∗ (γ)

Panel (ii): Bond Price q(B1∗ (γ), γ)

0.2

4

0.15

3

0.1

2

0.05

1

0

0

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)
Panel (iii): Spread (%)

0

1

0

0.5
1
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)
Panel (iv): Def. Prob. p(B1∗ (γ), γ)

0

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

0.02

2
1.5
spread (%)

Benchmark
Two Assets

0.015

1

0.01
0.5

0.005

0
−0.5

0

0.5
Frac. "low" wealth agents (γ)

0

1

1

The model with two assets sustains higher levels of debt, but as default risk increases the
government chooses to reduce debt issuance faster in the economy with capital than in the
benchmark. Even though we observe a lower default probability and spreads, the previous
result derives from the fact that lower levels of debt are sustainable when agents have access
to another asset. The cost of a default is not as high for the H−types and a default reduces
consumption dispersion that increases faster with γ in the economy with capital than in the
benchmark since initial dispersion is amplified via capital.

70

