                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 ENDOPHILIA OR EXOPHOBIA:
                                  BEYOND DISCRIMINATION

                                              Jan Feld
                                         Nicolás Salamanca
                                        Daniel S. Hamermesh

                                        Working Paper 19471
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19471


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2013




We thank Jeannette Hommes, Ad van Iterson and Caroline Kortbeek for their assistance in making
this experiment possible. Eric Bonsang, George Borjas, Deborah Cobb-Clark, Hannah Ebin, Matthew
Embrey, Ilyana Kuziemko, Corinne Low, Arjan Non, Christopher Parsons, Joseph Price, Stephen Trejo,
participants in seminars at a number of universities and institutes, and especially Leigh Linden provided
very helpful comments. The Board of Examiners of the School of Business and Economics at Maastricht
University formally approved this project. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Jan Feld, Nicolás Salamanca, and Daniel S. Hamermesh. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Endophilia or Exophobia: Beyond Discrimination
Jan Feld, Nicolás Salamanca, and Daniel S. Hamermesh
NBER Working Paper No. 19471
September 2013
JEL No. B40,I24,J71

                                             ABSTRACT

The immense literature on discrimination treats outcomes as relative: One group suffers compared
to another. But does a difference arise because agents discriminate against others—are exophobic—or
because they favor their own kind—are endophilic? This difference matters, as the relative importance
of the types of discrimination and their inter-relation affect market outcomes. Using a field experiment
in which graders at one university were randomly assigned students’ exams that did or did not contain
the students’ names, on average we find favoritism but no discrimination by nationality, and neither
favoritism nor discrimination by gender, findings that are robust to a wide variety of potential concerns.
We observe heterogeneity in both discrimination and favoritism by nationality and by gender in the
distributions of graders’ preferences. We show that a changing correlation between endophilia and
exophobia can generate perverse changes in observed market discrimination.


Jan Feld                                            Daniel S. Hamermesh
Maastricht University                               Department of Economics
Tongersestraat 53                                   University of Texas
Maastricht, 6211 LM                                 Austin, TX 78712-1173
The Netherlands                                     and Royal Holloway University of London
j.feld@maastrichtuniversity.nl                      and also NBER
                                                    hamermes@eco.utexas.edu
Nicolás Salamanca
Maastricht University
Tongersestraat 53
Maastricht, 6211 LM
The Netherlands
n.salamancaacosta@maastrichtuniversity.nl
         Although we could not perceive our own in-groups excepting as they contrast to out-
         groups, still the in-groups are psychologically primary. Hostility toward out-groups helps
         strengthen our sense of belonging, but it is not required. [Allport, 1954]

    I.       Introduction

         Economists have studied labor-market discrimination at least since Becker (1957). Differences in

labor-market and other outcomes by race, gender, ethnicity, religion, weight, height, appearance and other

characteristics have been examined in immense detail, over time and in many economies. The focus has,

however, been nearly exclusively on measuring differences in outcomes between groups, under the

assumption that the “majority” group’s outcome is the norm while the “minority” group is discriminated

against. But since the only concept that is measured is a difference, it could just as easily be that the

majority group is favored while the minority group’s outcome is the norm.

         The possibility that we are measuring the extent of favoritism rather than discrimination has been

pointed out by Goldberg (1982) and by Cain (1986) in his survey; but beyond that the issue appears to

have been completely neglected, including by the more recent Handbook surveys of the literature on

discrimination (Altonji and Blank, 1999; Fryer, 2011). Once we recognize that favoritism need not be the

obverse of discrimination, the importance of studying preferences for favoritism/discrimination increases.

Although the distribution of discriminating agents’ tastes underlay Becker’s theory, in most empirical

research the demand side—the behavior of discriminatory agents—has not been studied explicitly. Only

recently has there been even a small upwelling of interest in examining their behavior and its impacts on

outcomes, typically considering how agents’ behavior toward those who match them along some

dimension differs from their behavior toward those who do not match them.1 Even most of these studies,

however, have looked only at averages, and none has combined this with the analysis of the distributions

of preferences.

1
 See Price and Wolfers (2010) and Parsons et al (2011) for evidence from professional sports; Fong and Luttmer
(2009) on charitable giving; Dee (2005), Lavy (2008), Hinnerich et al (2011), and Hanna and Linden (2012) for
examinations of education; Cardoso and Winter-Ebmer (2010) and Giuliano et al (2011) on wages and hiring;
Baguës and Esteve-Volart (2010) on parliamentary elections; and Dillingham et al (1994), Donald and Hamermesh
(2006) and Abrevaya and Hamermesh (2012) for studies of economists’ behavior.



                                                                                                            1
         To distinguish clearly the who and the how in discrimination, we introduce four terms:

Endophilia, endophobia, exophilia, and exophobia. The prefix endo refers to preferences towards people

like oneself, the prefix exo to people unlike oneself. The suffix philia refers to favoritism and phobia to

discrimination. Hence, endophilia denotes preferences for member of one’s own group, while exophobia

denotes preferences against members of other groups. One can also imagine, however, that some agents

prefer members of other groups—are exophilic, while other agents are endophobic—discriminate against

people like themselves.

         Here we discuss the results of a field experiment that allows us to examine whether agents are

endophilic and/or exophobic, and to characterize the distributions of the tastes of the

discriminating/favoring agents. We do this by randomly revealing or concealing names on students’ final

exams, and thus randomly allowing or not allowing graders to infer the gender and nationality of the

students.2 The key to separating endophilia from exophobia is that, instead of only having two groups with

visible characteristics, we create two additional groups that have the same characteristics, except that they

are anonymous and are arguably neither discriminated against nor favored by any of the agents. 3 These

groups provide two clear baselines against which we can measure endophilia/exophobia by the agents on

the demand side. Hence, we identify endophilia (exophobia) as the treatment of members of one’s own

group (another group) with visible names compared to the treatment of members of one’s own group

(another group) with concealed names. We focus specifically on endophilia/exophobia by nationality and

gender, but this method could be applied to any of the outcomes that have been studied in this immense

literature.



2
 A number of studies (e.g., Goldin and Rouse, 2000, Burgess and Greaves, 2013) have focused on “blindness” in
quasi-experimental situations to infer the extent of discrimination (or favoritism, since neither study could
distinguish between these).
3
 The only experiments like ours were conducted in laboratories (Fershtman et al, 2005; Ahmed, 2007). The latter
had artificially-designated in- and out-groups; the former dealt with nationalities but was based on statements by
students on how they would behave in a trust game. While laboratory evidence is useful, as discussed by Levitt and
List (2007) it suffers from a number of difficulties that can be addressed in field experiments.



                                                                                                                2
II.     Empirical and Theoretical Motivation

        The importance of the distinction between favoritism and discrimination can be seen in a variety

of ways. First, discrimination and favoritism can lead to different distributions of outcomes and to

differences in overall welfare. Consider, for example, a supervisor who distributes a bonus payment of

$300 among one Black, one White and one Hispanic worker. The norm is to give $100 to each worker, but

a favoring (discriminating) supervisor will give $10 more (less) to a certain worker. A supervisor who

favors the White worker will give her $10 extra, leaving $95 each for the Black and Hispanic workers (B

= $95, W = $110, H = $95). A supervisor who discriminates against the Black worker gives her $10 less,

leaving $105 each for the White and Hispanic workers (B = $90, W = $105, H = $105). In both cases the

difference in outcomes between the White and the Black worker is $15, but White-Hispanic relative

wages differ under each alternative. The importance of this difference is strengthened if we consider

convexity in utility and the likely differences in the initial situations of the workers. Under these

conditions it is straightforward to show that, for the same gap in outcomes, the sum of utility losses is

greater when the gap is generated by discrimination than when the gap is generated by favoritism.

        Second, the concepts of endophilia and exophobia can be measured, albeit imperfectly, in the real

world, and these measures show that they are not necessarily opposite. Beginning in 1996, and biennially

except in 2002, the U.S. General Social Survey has asked questions, “In general, how close do you feel to

Whites [Blacks]?” with answers on a nine-point scale ranging from 9 = very close to 1 = not close at all.

Table 1 describes these data, separating answers by Whites and Blacks, and pooling 1996-2000 as an early

period, 2004-2006 as a later period. (We exclude the 2008 and 2010 data because the campaign and

election of President Obama may have altered expressed preferences.) Several things stand out: 1)

Unsurprisingly, expressed closeness to one’s own group exceeds that to the other group; 2) While Whites’

closeness to other Whites changed little over this period, there was a very large increase in their expressed

closeness to Blacks; 3) There are only small changes in Blacks’ expressed closeness to either Whites or

Blacks; and 4) The correlation between expressed closeness to one’s own group and the other is positive

and increases (significantly) between the two sub-periods. Implicitly, those who favor members of their

                                                                                                           3
own group more disfavor members of the other group less, or, in our terminology, there is a negative

correlation between endophilia and exophobia. They are thus distinct concepts, not opposite sides of the

same coin, and are notions that correspond mutatis mutandis to items included in social surveys.

        The distinction between favoritism and discrimination also has important theoretical implications.

As Goldberg (1982) showed, if favoritism toward one’s own group drives observed, apparently

discriminatory differentials, these differentials can persist in a competitive market. Goldberg reached this

conclusion by assuming favoring preferences instead of the discriminatory preferences of Becker (1957).

If, however, both discrimination and favoritism are present in this model, the predictions that they

generate about measured intergroup wage differentials will depend upon the relationship between them.

        Assume, as Becker does, that all employers are White and that there is a fixed labor force, some

fractions of which are White and Black. Let employers have endophilic and exophobic preferences

simultaneously, so that we can characterize a typical employer’s utility as:



where we assume as usual that White and Black workers are perfect substitutes in the production function

Q for the good sold at a constant price of unity. This utility function implies that employers obtain or

forgo a fixed amount of utility when they hire Blacks or Whites according to their preferences.4

Analogous to both Becker’s and Goldberg’s models, employers here will hire Whites or Blacks depending

on whether             is smaller or larger than δ =        , the relative preference for Whites over Blacks.

        In equilibrium, Blacks will be employed by employers with lower values of             and Whites will be

employed by the remaining employers. Knowing this, we can find a simple expression that implicitly

identifies the preferences of the marginal employer. Assume that the distribution of endophilia is             and

of exophobia is         across the population of jobs on offer, and denote the relative preference of the




4
 Goldberg and Becker model discrimination and favoritism as wage premia and discounts rather than as a fixed
utility gain or loss. Although more complex, the model here and the general intuition do not change if we choose to
model discrimination and favoritism as they do.


                                                                                                                 4
marginal employer, for whom                                , as     . Then the share of Blacks in the economy

determines         :




where             is the density function of     which, in general, will depend on         and     and their relation.

If                     and             :




where          is the cumulative standard normal distribution and        is the correlation between endophilic and

exophobic preferences in the population of jobs being offered. It is easy to see that, keeping the shares of

Blacks and Whites and the means of the densities f and h constant, an increase in                     will result in a

marginal discriminator with stronger relative preferences for Whites over Blacks. With a more positive

correlation of endophilia and exophobia, we would observe a decrease in the absolute value of the

equilibrium Black-White wage gap.5 This simple model illustrates that differences in the joint distribution

of endophilia and exophobia generate different market wage differentials. For the same preferences,

distributions of employers and of workers, the wage gap is smaller if the most bigoted (against Blacks)

employers are also those who favor Whites most.

       III.      Constructing the Experiment

       A. The Environment

              To make the distinction between favoritism and discrimination empirically we set up a field

experiment that we carried out during the final exam week in June 2012 at the School of Business and

Economics (SBE) of Maastricht University in The Netherlands. The language of instruction throughout

the SBE is English. This environment has a number of features that make it particularly appropriate for

distinguishing between favoritism and discrimination. Partly because Maastricht is near the German


5
    See Charles and Guryan (2008) for a discussion of the empirical importance of the marginal discriminator.


                                                                                                                    5
border, the SBE has a large share of German students (51 percent) and academic staff (22 percent) mixed

with Dutch and other nationalities. The student population is 36 percent female, and the academic staff is

28 percent female.6 German students have a reputation for being more hard-working than Dutch and other

students. These contrasts by nationality could potentially be the basis for discrimination/favoritism,

although it is unclear a priori in which direction these will be.7

         The grading of final exams, which we examine here, is a good setting for identifying

discrimination/favoritism, because graders do not gain anything from favoring or disfavoring specific

groups. Also, until the teaching period that we examine all students were required to write their names on
                                                                                                 8
their exams, enabling the graders to identify the students’ gender and nationality. Finally, and most

important, this experiment has real-world consequences: The grades are important to students; also, much

of the graders’ jobs revolves around their role in scoring exams.

         In the SBE written exams are given in ten sessions spread over a week, with many courses giving

their exams simultaneously. Students in all the courses assigned to each session take their exams together

in a large conference hall filled with desks that are arranged in blocks of 5 columns and 10 rows.9 To

prevent cheating each student’s desk is predetermined by the Exams Office (the organization responsible



6
 The SBE homepage (http://www.fdewb.unimaas.nl/miso/index.htm) provides these statistics for enrolled students in
2010 for nationality and 2012 for gender. Statistics about staff refer to full-time-equivalent academic staff in 2012
and are taken from the internal information system “Be Involved.”
7
 While it is often found that people favor (discriminate against) groups with same (different) characteristics, there are
also situations in which the opposite is the case. One can, for example, think of many situations in which relative
outcomes suggest that males are exophilic or endophobic (e.g., Donald and Hamermesh, 2006, although that study
cannot distinguish between these two types of preferences).
8
 The grader can infer the nationality and gender of the students when she sees the family name, even if she does not
know the student, because Dutch and German names are quite distinct. To test this we asked 9 staff (5 German and 4
Dutch, of whom 5 were female) to guess the nationality and gender of 50 student names from our sample. We
selected the student names block-randomly to reflect the nationality mix in our sample (19 German, 17 Dutch and 14
other nationalities, of whom 16 were female). The staff correctly identified the German names in 64 percent and
Dutch names in 65 percent of cases, and they correctly guessed gender in 90 percent of the cases. On the other hand,
graders may be more able to infer student gender than nationality from handwriting per se.
9
 Exams in courses with more than 50 students are written in the same session in multiple blocks. Exams in courses
with fewer than 50 students are either kept in one block or are combined with the exams in other courses. There are a
few blocks that have as many as 12 rows.


                                                                                                                       6
for examination procedures). The desk assignment is based on student ID numbers, first by sorting them

from lowest to highest within each block, and then filling in sequentially within each column from left to

right.10 Figure 1 illustrates the arrangement of desks in each block.

     B. The Experiment and Data Collection

         The students in each session arrive at the exam hall and locate their assigned block based on the

course they are taking. Within the block they then locate their assigned desk, which is marked with their

student ID number. Once the exam session starts students have three hours to complete their exams.

During that time one invigilator (not the same person as the exam grader) supervises each block. We

asked the invigilators to place yellow sheets on all desks in the first three rows of each block (see Figure

1), thus ensuring that the recipients were mixed by ID number, and thus more or less random by seniority

in the University. The sheets stated that the students on whose desk one was placed should not write their

name but only their ID number on the exam sheets (see Figure A1 in the Appendix).11 Because of the

predetermined arrangement of desks this meant that a random sample of students within each course—the

“blind” group—was asked not to write their names, so that the grader would only observe their ID

numbers when grading. For the rest of the students—the “visible” group—graders could observe both

names and IDs, as in previous teaching periods.

         We collected additional information from several other sources. The Exams Office provided us

with the nationality and gender of the students, grades in previous courses, and the desk arrangement

during the exam. From the seating arrangement we could infer which students were asked not to write

their names (yellow sheets, rows 1-3) and which were allowed to do so. To check students’ compliance


10
 Student IDs are assigned in ascending order based on the moment a prospective student contacts Studielink (the
Dutch centralized system for university application; https://app.studielink.nl/front-office/). This means that earlier
cohorts have lower-number IDs, and later cohorts and exchange students have higher-number IDs.
11
  We placed the sheets on entire rows instead of scattered seats within each block for simplicity. We treated rows
instead of columns in order to capture students with a variety of high and low ID numbers within each course. The
Exams Office informed the course coordinators—who were in charge of organizing the grading of the exams—
before the examination period that a new examination procedure was being tested, so that some exams might only
have ID numbers. They were asked to have those exams graded as they usually would.



                                                                                                                    7
with the experiment’s instructions, we manually went through all the exams and noted which students

wrote down their names and which students did not.12

        At the SBE it is common practice to split the grading burden among various graders by letting

each one handle all the answers to a particular set of questions on the same exam. The course coordinators

identified the grader of each question and provided us with information on the grading. This information

included the score on each question and the maximum possible points per question. They also provided

other grades that the student had attained in the course, including on course participation, presentation and

any term paper.13 A survey sent after the grading to all graders and course coordinators provided

information on the grader’s gender, nationality, teaching experience and grading behavior during the

experiment.14 From the SBE’s online tool for course evaluations we gathered the total number of courses

in which the grader had been involved at the SBE and the average instructor evaluations provided by

students for that grader in all previous courses since the creation of the online tool. Our sample contains

25 out of the 42 courses that had final exams, including 42 different graders and 1,495 exams.15

        The upper part of Table 2 examines the internal validity of the experiment, testing whether the

questions in the treated (Visible) group were answered by students whose characteristics before they

entered the examination room differed in measurable dimensions from those in the untreated (Blind)

group. We present these results separately for those students whom we intended to treat (ITT) and those




12
 This was done immediately after the exam, before the course coordinators received the exams and started the
grading process.
13
 Most course coordinators had this information readily available in an Excel file. We manually collected the scores
on each exam question for 7 courses.
14
  We manually added the gender and nationality of the graders who did not fill out the survey. Grading behavior
includes whether graders looked up any names while grading.
15
  We excluded 8 courses that only used Multiple Choice or Fill-In-The-Blank questions. In 7 out of the 34 eligible
courses the coordinators either declined permission to use the data or did not respond to repeated requests for this
information. We excluded one course for which the answer sheets did not ask for the students’ names but only for
their IDs and another course which did not hold the exam in the conference hall.



                                                                                                                  8
who were actually treated.16 We first examine differences by gender and nationality, the two

characteristics on which we focus, and in the students’ grades before the final exam. The Blind and

Visible groups are balanced in both gender and nationality: The p-values indicate that none of the tests of

differences in the means between the Blind and Visible groups along the dimensions that form the focus of

this study can reject the hypothesis that they are zero. Indeed, not only are the fractions of men and

women, Germans and Dutch, insignificantly different from each other; the absolute differences are never

greater than two in the second decimal place between the Blind and Visible groups.

         We have additional information on some of the students—other grades that were received before

the exams were given, such as prior grade point average (GPA), and classroom participation, presentation

in class and term-paper grades in the particular course. We find no significant differences between the

Blind and Visible students in GPA and their participation grades. The Visible group performs slightly

better in the grades assigned for student presentations. This difference is not quite statistically significant,

however; and perhaps more important, grades for classroom presentations were given to only about one-

third of the students.

         We also have grades from Multiple Choice and Fill-In-The-Blank questions that were included in

a minority of the final exams. We can thus test whether, despite the apparent randomness of assignment,

outcomes differed between the two groups on questions on which the grading was unambiguous and could

not have been affected by the mechanisms we study here. As the bottom part of Table 2 shows, the Blind

group did have marginally higher scores on the Multiple Choice questions, but here too the differences are

not quite statistically significant. These results confirm that the research design created equivalent groups

of students.17




16
  The blind treatment group had a little over 80-percent effectiveness, and an additional 2 percent of the students got
into the blind group but should not have. This latter was most likely due to mistakes by the invigilators when placing
the yellow sheets or by students forgetting to write their names.
17
 Considering that we tested several separate characteristics, it is not unlikely that some of those tests will reject the
null hypothesis at the 10 percent level purely by chance. If we correct the p-values for multiple testing (using the


                                                                                                                       9
            IV. Inferring Average Outcomes and Distributions of Preferences

            Let a student, denoted by s, answer an exam with several questions, and let the grader of each

question be denoted by g. We index each answer by the pair (s, g).18 We also know the pair (C(s),C(g)),

where C is either some student-invariant bivariate characteristic, such as gender, or some characteristic

vector, such as nationality. Finally, we know whether a particular answer by a particular student was

graded blind or visible, so that each pair (C(s),C(g)) can be expanded to the triplet (C(s),C(g),v), where

v=1 if the grading is visible and 0 if not.19

            Consider the score function S(C(s),C(g),v) for each exam question, where we are especially

interested in examining how S varies between cases when s and g match (i.e. share a common

characteristic) and when they do not, and how that variation is affected by v. Define the following

indicators:

(1a)         I1{(C(s),C(g), v)} = 1, if C(s)=C(g) and v=1, 0 if not;

(1b)         I2{(C(s),C(g),v)} = 1, if C(s)=C(g) and v=0, 0 if not;

(1c)         I3{(C(s),C(g),v)} = 1, if C(s)≠C(g) and v=1, 0 if not;

and

(1d)         I4{(C(s),C(g),v)} = 1, if C(s) ≠C(g) and v=0, 0 if not.

            The average score of all students is:

(2)         T = θ1S*(I1) + θ2S*(I2) + θ3S*(I3) + [1- θ1- θ2 - θ3]S*(I4),




Bonferroni, Šidák, or Holm adjustments), we find no significant differences between Blind and Visible students in
any of the characteristics, even at the 10 percent level of significance.
18
     We ignore course identifiers for simplicity, since all graders except one were uniquely assigned to one course.
19
  Presumably all particular (s, g) combinations are either blind or visible (although we investigate the extent of
blindness in the blind grading in Section VI).



                                                                                                                       10
where the weights θi are the shares of answers graded under each regime, and the (*) denotes an average

over those answers.20 Because we created the neutral categories with blind grading, we can estimate the

average treatment effect on students for whom C(s) = C(g) (i.e., grader and student “match” on

characteristic C) as:

(3a)        e* = [S*(I1) - S*(I2)];

and the treatment of students for whom C(i) ≠ C(g) (who do not “match” on C) as:

(3b)        x*= [S*(I4) - S*(I3)].

If graders are endophilic and exophobic, e*, x* > 0. In Section V we present estimates of each of the

effects discussed here.

            From Equation (2) we can also recover the average “total” effect of the characteristic C(s) for a

particular value, C(s) = C’. This is particularly important if we want to address the question of whether

disclosing certain information (such as gender or nationality) affects an outcome, given a distribution of

preferences and graders. Consider a variant of (2):

(4)         TC = η1S*(I1|C(s)=C’) + η2S*(I2|C(s)=C’) + η3S*(I3|C(s)=C’) + [1- η1- η2 - η3]S*(I4|C(s)=C’),

where the weights η represent the shares of answers graded under each regime for all students with

characteristic C(s) = C’. The total treatment effect of a particular characteristic C’ being observable is the

weighted average of the treatments when C(g) = C’ and when C(g) ≠ C’. Thus:

(5)         MC’ = (η1 + η2)[S*(I1|C(g)=C’) - S*(I2|C(g)=C’)] - (1- η1 - η2)[S*(I4|C(g)=C’) - S*(I3|C(g)=C’)].

            Equation (5) shows that the average treatment effect of a characteristic will depend on two factors:

1) The degree of endophilia and exophobia (the two bracketed expressions); and 2) The share of questions

that are graded by graders with matching characteristics (η1 + η2) versus non-matching characteristics (1-

η1 - η2).




20
 While the same average would apply for a n-fold characteristic if we focus only on whether or not C(s)=C(g), we
could analogously and generally calculate n2 average treatment effects, one for each of the n aspects of the
characteristic compared to itself and each other aspect.


                                                                                                             11
         We can also observe the behavior of individual graders toward the student groups as defined by

C(s). Each grader scores answers written by many different students, some with characteristics that match

hers, others with characteristics that do not match, some of whom are graded Blind, others graded Visible.

Then for a grader g we can calculate her average treatment of students, Tg, in a manner analogous to the

average effect in (2) and obtain a distribution over all graders. More interesting for our purposes, we can

estimate each grader’s preferences for students who do and do not match their characteristics as:

(6a)     eg = S*g(I1)-S*g(I2) ;

and

(6b)     xg = S*g(I4)-S*g(I3) ,

where S*g(Ij), j=1,2,3,4, is the average over all students whose exams are scored by grader g under each

regime Ij. Using these grader-specific average treatments, we can then obtain non-parametric estimates of

the distributions of endophilia and exophobia, f(e) and h(x), as discussed in Section II. Thus, in addition to

being able to distinguish the average extent of favoritism toward one’s own group from the average extent

of discrimination against other group(s), the data allow us to obtain complete distributions of agents’

implicit preferences.

V. Empirical Strategy and Basic Results

         To estimate the impacts of nationality and gender matches on the points that graders assigned to

students’ answers, and to infer the differences discussed above, we estimate the regression:

(7)      S = β1MATCH*VISIBLE + β2MATCH*BLIND + β3NON-MATCH*VISIBLE

         + β4NON-MATCH*BLIND + γ’Z+ ε,

where here S is a unit normal deviate calculated for each exam question, and the other variable names are

self-explanatory.21 The matrix Z includes nationality or gender indicators for both students and graders, ε

is a zero-mean error term and the regression is estimated without a constant. From this equation the

estimates of the average extent of endophilia and exophobia are:

21
  The distribution of the standardized question scores is roughly normal and slightly negatively skewed, but it is the
same for all four groups defined by VISIBLE, BLIND, MATCH, and NON-MATCH.


                                                                                                                   12
(8a)    e* = S*(I1) - S*(I2) = β1 – β2,

and:

(8b)    x*= S*(I4) - S*(I3) = β4 – β3.

Thus the estimates of (7) provide direct analogs to the concepts we seek to measure. Note that these

calculations mean that endophilia (exophobia) is indicated by a positive e* (x*).

        One special benefit that we obtain from our setting is that we can be sure that the implied

preferences on matching are not being driven by confounding factors like unobserved heterogeneity. In

our experimental setting we are comparing arguably identical groups whose only difference—because the

treatment was random—is that the graders observed the names of some but not of other students. The

experiment allows us explicitly to compare e.g., Visible to Blind German students. This means that

anything specifically German, such as writing style in English or particular calligraphic patterns, washes

out in this comparison. This framework also makes it easy to expand Equation (7) to include interactions

with some of the graders’ measurable characteristics and thus to examine how e* and x* vary with them.

We deal with these extensions in Section VI.

         The first two columns of Table 3 present the estimated β and their standard errors for the basic

equations describing matches/non-matches along the criteria of nationality and gender. Since the

experimental design randomized by blocks of students within each course, we cluster the standard errors

at the Intention-To-Treat and course (ITT-course) level, allowing for two clusters per course. We focus

throughout on the estimates of e* and x* and their statistical significance.

        It is clear that there is substantial endophilia by nationality in the grading. A student who matches

the grader’s nationality receives a score that is 0.17 standard deviations higher when her name is visible

than when it is not. This addition to a matched student’s grade is statistically significant at conventional

levels. This effect is also economically important: Given that all the scores have been unit-normalized, it

is equivalent to moving from the median score to the 57th percentile of the distribution of scores. Its

magnitude is similar to that of the effect of large differences in teacher quality on students’ test scores that

was found by Rivkin et al (2005). While favoritism by nationality exists in grading, there is no apparent

                                                                                                             13
exophobia by nationality: The estimated impact of being visible when not matching by nationality is small

and positive.

         The results of estimating the regression examining gender matching are shown in Column (2) of

Table 3. Although the point estimate suggests the existence of endophilia, we cannot reject the hypothesis

that it is zero. For non-matches there is exophilia, but here too the impact is statistically insignificant and

also minute. On average grading seems gender-neutral in all dimensions.22

         Going behind the information in Columns (1) and (2), we can ask whether, for examples,

endophilia by nationality is the same for Dutch and German graders, and whether the absence of

endophilia or exophobia exists for both male and female graders. We do this by expanding Equation (7) to

include interactions of student nationality or gender with MATCH*VISIBLE, MATCH*BLIND, NON-

MATCH*VISIBLE, and NON-MATCH*BLIND. Columns (3) of Table 3 show the estimates of this

expanded specification by nationality. A comparison of the results suggests that endophilia by nationality

arises more from the behavior of Dutch than of German graders, although the difference between the two

point estimates is not statistically significant.

         Columns (4) of Table 3 show estimates of expanding Equation (7) by gender. The results look

very much like those in Column (2): Neither male nor female graders exhibit significant endophilia or

exophobia, and for both men and women the absolute impacts are tiny. Again, there is no sign of either

statistically significant or important differences in behavior depending on the match or non-match of the

grader’s and student’s gender.

VI. Robustness and Extensions

     A. Treatment Failures

         In interpreting these main results it is important to note that there are two potential sources of

slippage in our treatment: Some students did not comply with the experimental instructions shown in the


22
  The results are also essentially the same when we include additional controls for seat number (see Figure 1) and the
student’s prior GPA.



                                                                                                                   14
Appendix and wrote their name; and some graders may have looked up at least some of the students’

names.23 To account for the first source of slippage we re-estimated the models described in the first two

columns of Table 3 using intention to treat (ITT) as an instrument for VISIBLE. As Table 4 shows, the

results are qualitatively identical to the ones in Table 3.

          To account for the second source of slippage—that the grader may have been able to identify the

characteristic of the Blind group—in the post-grading survey we asked graders whether they looked up

any names on the exams that only contained ID numbers. Six of the thirty-three graders who responded to

the survey acknowledged having done this. When we re-estimated (7) including only those graders who

did not look up names, the estimated endophilia by nationality is the same and is even more precisely

estimated. There is no significant endophilia but marginally significant exophilia by gender among those

graders who did not look up names. The results of both slippages suggest that, if anything, our results

understate the true extent of favoritism by nationality.

       B. Alternative Behavioral Assumptions

          So far we have implicitly assumed that the graders are indifferent toward “blind” exams and treat

these groups as a neutral baseline against which we measure endophilia and exophobia. Graders, however,

might also form rational expectations about the “blind” exams, considering the underlying distribution of

characteristics of students who wrote those exams and might score them accordingly. Let Ag be the share

of students in the course who match grader g on the characteristic of interest, and let           and      be the

grader’s latent endophilic and exophobic preferences. Under rational expectations we can rewrite Equation

(7) as:

(7’)      S=    MATCH*VISIBLE +          NON-MATCH*VISIBLE -[            Ag+     (1-Ag)] + γ2’Z + ε,

where, from the grader’s perspective, the students can either visibly match him, visibly not match him, or

be in the Blind group (the omitted category). Equation (7’) specifies that the grader will treat the students


23
 Evidence on the magnitude of the first type of slippage can be seen in Table 2 in the differences between ITT and
Treatment.



                                                                                                               15
in the Blind group as the weighted average of how he would have treated students who matched him or

not, with weights based on the characteristics of the Visible groups.

         To determine whether assuming rational expectations about the Blind group’s students can alter

our results, we estimate (7’) by non-linear least squares. The results confirm our main findings: We again

find endophilia by nationality, although of slightly lesser but still statistically significant magnitude (0.133

standard deviations, p=0.025). We find no endophilia by gender and no exophobia by either gender or

nationality. Moreover, the root mean square error of estimating (7’) exceeds that of the estimate of (7).

Because the blind-as-neutral assumption better fits the data, we continue defining endophilia and

exophobia as discussed in Section IV throughout the rest of the paper.

     C. Prior Grader-Student Contact, and Exam Type

         The graders and exams differ along several dimensions on which we have information and which

might affect their ability or interest in favoring/discriminating for/against students. We first look at

whether the graders knew the students they graded, and thus whether endophilia/exophobia is present

towards anonymous and familiar students alike.24 We have no specific hypothesis on this possibility. On

the one hand, it could be that prejudices are overridden by personal experience with the students. If so,

discriminatory preferences should be stronger toward unknown students. On the other hand, it might not

be the characteristic per se that the graders pay attention to, but something that graders can only observe

on students with whom they interact. In this case discriminatory preferences should be stronger toward

and against students whom the grader knows.

         We construct an indicator of whether the grader may know a student based on whether the grader

also taught him or her. Most of the teaching at the SBE is done in small groups of 10 to 15 students for

about 10 sessions in each seven-week block, so teachers have a fair chance to get to know their students.

Some graders taught none of the students they graded, others taught all of the students they graded. By

24
  The assignment of students and teachers to classes within a course is done by the Scheduling Department of the
SBE, which does not consider students’ preferences for particular teacher or teachers’ preferences for a particular
class. (See Feld and Zölitz, 2013, for a detailed explanation on the assignment of students and teachers to classes at
the SBE.) Also, the students have no way of knowing ex ante who their grader will be.


                                                                                                                   16
this measure the median grader knew 47 percent of the students graded (although obviously in most cases

the grader could not identify individual students in the Blind group).

        The first two columns of Table 5 present re-estimates of Equation (7), expanded to include

interactions of the Know indicator with the four Match/Visible variables. The results show that endophilia

by nationality is only present when graders did not know the students. This effect is twice as large as the

mean effect in the baseline model. There is no evidence of exophobia by nationality regardless of whether

the grader knew the student or not. There is evidence of endophilia and exophilia by gender, but again

only when the grader did not know the student.

        The exams at the SBE differ in the extent to which they have mathematical questions. Answers on

the more mathematical exams are arguably less ambiguous, so that showing favoritism/discrimination on

them might be more difficult. To separate the more from the less mathematical exams we asked three

raters (from the SBE’s pool of potential graders) to rate the exams as mathematical or not. Two of the

three agreed in their categorizations of all the exams, while the third agreed in 80 percent of the cases. We

thus created an indicator for Mathematical when at least two of the three raters designated an exam as

such, which occurred in 9 out of 25 exams.

        The third and fourth columns of Table 5 present estimates of Equation (7), expanded to include

interactions of the Mathematical indicator with the main variables. The point estimates suggest that

endophilia by nationality is stronger for less mathematical exams. The point estimate for endophilia by

gender is marginally significant for the more mathematical exams. This latter result is surprising, as one

might expect that Blind exams might be less likely to be assignable to gender based on handwriting styles

if the exam is more mathematical. None of the other results in the two columns is statistically significant.

    D. Distinguishing by Graders’ Other Characteristics

        We also examine whether discrimination or favoritism varies with grader experience and grader

quality. We measure grader experience at this University as the number of separate courses taught or

tutored during the grader’s tenure. We have no hypotheses about how university-specific experience might

mitigate or exacerbate endophilia/exophobia. On the one hand, the set of more experienced graders may

                                                                                                          17
exclude those whose behavior was so egregiously unfair that the University did not renew their contracts.

On the other hand, more experienced graders may be secure in their positions and feel able to indulge their

preferences for students who match their characteristics and/or against those who do not.

        The total number of courses taught/tutored at the University since the online data became

available (including the courses we are using here) ranges from 1 to 94; the 5 th, 50th and 95th percentiles,

for which we present estimation results, are 1, 8 and 59 courses.25 Figure 2 shows the kernel density of

courses taught by grader, which demonstrates the distribution’s very long right tail. The first and second

columns of Table 6 present re-estimates of Equation (7), expanded to include interactions of grader

experience with the four match/visible variables.

        While the point estimate of the extent of endophilia by nationality is almost identical to the

estimate in Table 3 at the median value of grader experience, it is not quite significantly nonzero. Rather,

the significant average endophilia shown in Table 3 results disproportionately from the behavior of the

more experienced graders. By inference, they feel less inhibited about indulging their preferences for

students who match their nationality. Inexperienced graders, perhaps because they feel themselves to be

under greater scrutiny, show no significant endophilia (although the point estimate of their behavior is 60

percent of that of highly experienced graders). As with the basic estimates, there is no evidence of

exophobia by nationality at any level of grader experience. The results by gender remain the same: Just as

at the sample means, so too at various levels of grader experience the parameter estimates show no sign of

any significant endophilia or exophobia.

        We measure grader quality as the average of all the evaluations that the instructor received from

students during her career at the University. Evaluations are given on a ten-point scale. In our sample the

averages range from 6.5 to 9.2, with the 5th percentile being 7.1, the median being 8.0, and the 95th

percentile equaling 8.8. As Figure 3 shows, the distribution of average evaluations is quite close to

symmetric.

25
  59 and 94 might seem outlandishly large; but at this University there are 6 teaching blocks in each academic year,
so it is not difficult to accumulate 50 or more courses of experience.


                                                                                                                 18
        We interact the grader’s average instructional evaluation with all the variables in Equation (7) and

present the results in Columns (3) and (4) of Table 6. Our finding of endophilia by nationality at the mean

demonstrated in Table 3 arose from behavior that varies sharply with the regard in which graders have

been held by students. Those graders/instructors who have been rated highest by students show no

significant endophilia, and the point estimate of this effect is small. An instructor whose teaching has been

rated at the median of this measure behaves much like the mean instructor—substantially favoring those

who match her nationality, unsurprisingly given the symmetry in the distribution of teaching evaluations.

The worst-rated instructors, however, favor those students who match their nationality much more

strongly than does the median or average instructor. Implicitly a poorly rated instructor raises the score of

the median student who matches her nationality from the mean to the 61 st percentile of the distribution of

scores. There is no evidence of exophobia by nationality. As with the other results, there is little evidence

of endophilia or exophobia by gender, regardless of how badly or well the grader’s teaching is rated by

students. In sum, worse teachers behave differently from better ones, favoring students of their own

nationality.

VII. The Average Treatment Effect of Visibility of a Student Characteristic

        To evaluate whether the visibility of names differentially favors or disadvantages certain groups

of students, and also to see how these students would be affected by the introduction of anonymous

grading, we calculate the average treatment effect (ATE) of each characteristic’s visibility. Recall from

Equation (5) that the ATE can be calculated as the difference between endophilia and exophobia, each

weighted by the share of questions that was graded by graders with matching and non-matching

characteristics. Table 7 shows the ATE of being seen as German, Dutch, or any other nationality, and of

being seen as female or male. The point estimates for German and Dutch students are similar in size and

(marginally) significantly positive, which shows that German and Dutch students both benefit from visible

grading. The point estimates further suggest that other nationalities are disadvantaged by it, although the

ATE is not statistically significant. Even if they are not suffering from an absolute disadvantage, however,

the notion that other nationalities are disadvantaged becomes straightforward for situations in which they

                                                                                                          19
compete with German and Dutch students. An example is the allocation of student exchange positions at

popular universities abroad, which is done based on relative grades. The difference between Germans and

others is significant (p=0.004) as is the difference between Dutch and others (p= 0.025). Consistent with

our previous results, the point estimates for females and males are positive but smaller in size.

           Columns (1) to (4) of Table 7 decompose the ATE by showing endophilia and exophobia

(Columns (2) and (4)) and the share of students with the given characteristic that was graded under each

regime (Columns (1) and (3)). (The estimated effects of endophilia and exophobia are taken from Table

3.) The ATE for German and Dutch students is small because of the relatively small shares of questions

that are graded by graders of the same nationality. This outcome results from the heterogeneous mix of

nationalities of the graders. It is easy to simulate the sizes of these effects for a situation in which a large

share of the students in either category were matched to the graders. Notice also that the mix of graders is

not always the most important determinant of the ATE: The difference between the effects when matched

and not matched for females is rather small, so that the ATE will be small regardless of the gender mix of

graders.

VIII. Heterogeneity in the Distributions of Preferences

           The results thus far describe either average responses of endophilia or exophobia by nationality or

gender over all graders, or examine how this behavior differs in relation to a few of the graders’ specific

characteristics. In this section we first consider the shapes of the entire distributions of graders’

preferences and then calculate their correlation.

           To obtain a feel for why examining heterogeneity in preferences might be interesting, consider the

kernel density estimates of endophilia and exophobia by nationality, shown in Figure 4, and their kernel

densities by gender, shown in Figure 5. Each kernel is based on those graders for whom we could infer the

extent of both endophilia and exophobia (for nationality, 24 graders, for gender, 38 graders).26 The


26                                                                         g      g
  We derive the shape of the graders’ preferences based on the estimates of e and x . We infer these two measures
for each grader based on how each scores the student who does or does not match them under the blind and visible
regimes.


                                                                                                              20
estimates along the criterion of nationality suggest that preferences are distributed fairly symmetrically, in

the case of endophilia around a positive mean, and around zero in the case of exophobia. Both densities

are consistent with our inferences in Table 3 about the mean effects. A similar conclusion is suggested by

the kernels of endophilia and exophobia by gender, although there are a few outliers.27

        By observing the entire distribution of preferences we can also test two hypotheses: 1) There is

evidence of endophilia or exophobia in the overall distribution (not just at the mean), and 2) There is

heterogeneity in endophilia or exophobia among graders. Testing these two hypotheses is equivalent to

testing whether eg=0 (xg=0) for all g, and whether the eg (xg) are equal to each other for all g, respectively.

The F-tests of these hypotheses (eight in total) all reject the null hypothesis at all conventional

significance levels, showing that endophilia and exophobia in both nationality and gender are real

phenomena (even though at the mean only endophilia by nationality seems to matter), and that there is

significant heterogeneity in these preferences across graders. 28

        As we showed in Section II, the impact of the interaction of endophilia and exophobia depends on

their correlation across potentially discriminating agents. In our data the correlations are -0.36 for

preferences on nationality, and -0.16 for preferences on gender (weighting each grader by the number of

students graded). Those who are more endophilic are less exophobic. Interestingly, and remarkably, in the

GSS data summarized in Table 1, the correlations are in the same direction: Those Whites who feel closer

to Whites also feel closer to Blacks, and to roughly the same extent as implied by behavior in our sample.




27
  We can examine whether extreme values in the distributions of preferences for nationality or gender are driving our
mean effects. We trim those graders with the most extreme preferences from the samples, dropping the two most
extremely endophilic/endophobic and exophobic/exophilic graders in each case. Despite the small amounts of
asymmetry in some of the distributions, trimming does not qualitatively alter the conclusions about the absence of
endophilia or exophobia by gender on average, nor does it alter the conclusions about these outcomes by nationality.
28
  The demonstrated heterogeneity of preferences should reduce any concern about the absence of exophobia at the
mean because the possibly large (psychological) costs of giving lower grades. Also, it should vitiate concerns about
our behavioral assumption on how graders treat Blind exams, since it shows that Visible non-matches are treated
differently from Blind ones by most graders.


                                                                                                                 21
IX. Conclusions and Implications

        We have demonstrated that what is called discrimination—a relative difference in outcomes

between two groups—is composed of differential treatment of the in-group and the out-group, and that it

is possible in real-world situations to measure the sizes of these two components simultaneously. In our

example we find that most of the apparent discrimination by nationality results from substantial endophilia

and that there is no evidence on average of exophobia. We find no evidence of differential treatment by

gender on average, whether or not the discriminating agents match their subjects.

        These are average effects. At least as interesting is the heterogeneity in the demonstrated

preferences of the individuals deciding how to treat those who match or do not match them. We have

further shown that apparently discriminatory outcomes can be vitiated in a variety of ways, operating both

on the endophilic and exophobic preferences of the discriminating agents and the share of matching and

non-matching characteristics. Not surprisingly, a neutral outcome can also be achieved in a variety of

ways.

        We also show the importance of measuring the relation between endophilia and exophobia in the

labor market: Their joint distribution will influence market-based measures of discrimination. This result

makes it even clearer that they are non-redundant measures. It also forces us to reconsider what we know

about the effectiveness of anti-discrimination policies and the advances against discrimination in the labor

market. The change over time in measures of discrimination, such as the market discrimination

coefficient, may not only reflect a change in the means and variances of the distributions of expressed

preferences. It may also reflect a change in the correlation between endophilia and exophobia. This

changing correlation might explain the unchanging black-white wage gap over a period when racial

attitudes appear to have become more tolerant.

        Assuming that the dominance of endophilia over exophobia that we have demonstrated for

nationality is ubiquitous in labor markets, the fact has important implications for the measurement of

“discrimination” in labor markets. Decompositions that adjust a gross wage differential into parts due to

different characteristics or different treatments in the labor market can made using either the majority or

                                                                                                         22
the minority wage as the base case. In the literature (e.g., Neumark, 1988; Booth et al, 2007); Elder et al,

2010) that discusses these decompositions of wage differentials (by race, gender, and many others) a

crucial question has always been which group’s actual wage to treat as the baseline.            Endophilia

dominating exophobia would suggest using the minority group’s wage as the baseline and adjusting the

wages of the majority. More generally, if we knew the relative importance of each type of behavior the

appropriate treatment would be a weighted average of the different methods of decomposition.

        Having shown that we can distinguish endophilia from exophobia, it is also worth considering

how policy might be tailored to reduce relative differences arising from prejudice. Assume that our results

carry over to the labor and other markets, and that endophilia is the main source of apparently

discriminatory outcomes. If so, we can infer, for example, that moral suasion that stresses to members of

the majority group that minority-group members are not “bad” might be ineffective.

        Can the distinctions that we have defined and measured here be inferred in the still more

important labor-market context using actual wage and/or employment outcomes? One might imagine

cases where a majority group deals with several minority groups, about one of which it feels demonstrably

neutral. In that case too endophilia and exophobia (toward the other minorities) are identifiable. So too,

one might link differences in economic outcomes to information on attitudes in a population about one’s

own and other groups. The main point is that these preferences generate different outcomes with different

distributions of welfare, so that determining their relative size is economically important and, as we have

shown, possible.




                                                                                                         23
References

Jason Abrevaya and Daniel Hamermesh, “Charity and Favoritism in the Field: Are Female Economists
       Nicer (to Each Other)?” Review of Economics and Statistics, 94 (Feb. 2012): 202-7.

Ali M. Ahmed, “Group Identity, Social Distance and Intergroup Bias,” Journal of Economic Psychology,
       28 (2007): 324-37.

Gordon Allport, The Nature of Prejudice. Cambridge, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1954.

Joseph Altonji and Rebecca Blank, “Race and Gender in the Labor Market,” in Orley Ashenfelter and
       David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol 3C. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1999, pp.
       3143-3259.

Wiji Arulampalm, Alison Booth and Mark Bryan, “Is There a Glass Ceiling over Europe? Exploring the
       Gender Pay Gap across the Wage Distribution,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 60 (Jan.
       2007): 163-86.

Manuel Baguës and Berta Esteve-Volart, “Can Gender Parity Break the Glass Ceiling? Evidence from a
       Repeated Randomized Experiment,” Review of Economic Studies, 77 (Oct. 2010): 1301-28.

Gary Becker, The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957.

Simon Burgess and Ellen Greaves, “Test Scores, Subjective Assessment, and Stereotyping of Ethnic
      Minorities,” Journal of Labor Economics, 31 (July 2013): 535-76.

Glen Cain, “The Economic Analysis of Labor Market Discrimination: A Survey,” in Orley Ashenfelter
       and Richard Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 2. Amsterdam: North-Holland,
       1986, pp. 693-785.

Ana Rute Cardoso and Rudolf Winter-Ebmer, “Female-Led Firms and Gender Wage Policies,” Industrial
       and Labor Relations Review, 64 (Oct. 2010): 143-63.

Kerwin Charles and Jonathan Guryan, “Prejudice and Wages: An Empirical Assessment of Becker’s The
       Economics of Discrimination,” Journal of Political Economy, 116 (Oct. 2008): 773-809.

Thomas Dee, “A Teacher Like Me: Does Race, Ethnicity or Gender Matter?” American Economic
      Association, Papers and Proceedings, 95 (May 2005): 158-65.

Alan Dillingham, Marianne Ferber and Daniel Hamermesh, “Gender Discrimination by Gender: Voting in
       a Professional Society,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 47 (July 1994): 622-33.

Stephen Donald and Daniel Hamermesh, “What Is Discrimination? Gender in the American Economic
       Association, 1935-2004,” American Economic Review, 96 (Sept. 2006): 1283-92.

Todd Elder, John Goddeeris and Steven Haider, “Unexplained Gaps and Oaxaca-Blinder
     Decompositions,” Labour Economics, 17 (Jan. 2010): 284-90.

Jan Feld and Ulf Zölitz, “Bad Apples and Blinding Lights - On the Nature of Peer Effects in Academic
        Achievement,” Unpublished paper, SBE, Maastricht University, 2013.


                                                                                                 24
Chaim Fershtman, Uri Gneezy and Frank Verboven, “Discrimination and Nepotism: The Efficiency of the
       Anonymity Rule,” Journal of Legal Studies, 34 (June 2005): 371-96.

Christina Fong and Erzo Luttmer, “What Determines Giving to Hurricane Katrina Victims? Experimental
        Evidence on Racial Group Loyalty,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1 (April
        2009): 64-87.

Roland Fryer, “Racial Inequality in the 21st Century: The Declining Significance of Discrimination,” in
       Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4B, 2011,
       Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 855-971.

Laura Giuliano, David Levine and Jonathan Leonard, “Racial Bias in the Manager-Employee
      Relationship: An Analysis of Quits, Dismissals and Promotions at a Large Retail Firm,” Journal
      of Human Resources, 46 (Winter 2011): 26-52.

Matthew Goldberg, “Discrimination, Nepotism and Long-Run Wage Differentials,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 97 (May 1982): 307-19.

Claudia Goldin and Cecilia Rouse, “Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of “Blind” Auditions on
       Female Musicians,” American Economic Review, 90 (Sept. 2000): 715-41.

Rema Hanna and Leigh Linden, “Discrimination in Grading,” American Economic Journal: Economic
      Policy, 4 (Nov. 2012): 146-68.

Björn Tyrefors Hinnerich, Erik Höglin and Magnus Johannesson, “Are Boys Discriminated in Swedish
       High Schools?” Economics of Education Review, 30 (Aug. 2011): 682-90.

Victor Lavy, “Do Gender Stereotypes Reduce Girls’ or Boys’ Human Capital Outcomes? Evidence from a
        Natural Experiment” Journal of Public Economics, 92 (Oct. 2008): 2083-105.

Steven Levitt and John List, “What Do Laboratory Experiments Measuring Social Preferences Reveal
       About the Real World?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21 (Spring 2007): 153-74.

David Neumark, “Employers’ Discriminatory Behavior and the Estimation of Wage Discrimination,”
       Journal of Human Resources, 23 (Summer 1988): 279-95.

Christopher Parsons, Johan Sulaeman, Michael Yates and Daniel Hamermesh, “Strike Three:
        Discrimination, Incentives and Evaluation,” American Economic Review, 101 (June 2011): 1410-
        35.

Joseph Price and Justin Wolfers, “Racial Discrimination among NBA Referees,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 125 (Nov. 2010): 1859-87.

Steven Rivkin, Eric Hanushek and John Kain, “Teachers, Schools and Academic Achievement,”
       Econometrica, 73 (March 2005): 417-58.




                                                                                                    25
Table 1. Endophilia and Exophobia in the U.S. General Social Survey, 1996-2006, 9-point scale*

                               Time period:           1996-2000                         2004-2006

WHITES

Feel Close to Whites                                     7.060                            6.966
                                                        (0.031)                           (0.038)


Feel Close to Blacks                                     5.121                            5.494
                                                        (0.032)                           (0.039)


N                                                        3,550                            2,174

ρ                                                        0.146                            0.226

BLACKS

Feel Close to Whites                                     5.799                            5.945
                                                        (0.084)                           (0.106)


Feel Close to Blacks                                     7.547                            7.685
                                                        (0.079)                           (0.093)


N                                                         651                              387

ρ                                                        0.242                            0.318
*In general, how close do you feel to …? 9 = very close; 1 = not close at all. Standard errors of means in
parentheses.




                                                                                                       26
Table 2. Student Characteristics by Intended and Actual Treatment Status*

                                             Internal validity: Pre-experiment
                                                    (1)                        (2)
                                                 Blind                       Visible                     p-value of difference
                                           Mean     SD       N        Mean     SD             N             Blind-Visible
Female                 ITT                 0.369 0.483 452             0.352 0.478          1,043                [0.502]
                       Treatment           0.363 0.482 399             0.355 0.479          1,096                [0.758]
German                 ITT                 0.374 0.484 452             0.353 0.478          1,043                [0.420]
                       Treatment           0.373 0.484 399             0.354 0.478          1,096                [0.486]
Dutch                  ITT                 0.363 0.481 452             0.343 0.475          1,043                [0.452]
                       Treatment           0.351 0.478 399             0.349 0.477          1,096                [0.932]
GPA                    ITT                 7.197 0.628 443             7.215 0.665          1,021                [0.607]
                       Treatment           7.178 0.618 389             7.221 0.667          1,075                [0.241]
Participation          ITT                 7.690 0.986 306             7.633 1.031            706                [0.386]
                       Treatment           7.612 0.968 263             7.664 1.035            749                [0.452]
Presentation           ITT                 7.795 1.164 191             7.930 1.059            436                [0.179]
                       Treatment           7.758 1.172 181             7.942 1.055            446                [0.070]
Term paper             ITT                 7.870 0.665 109             7.743 0.898            281                [0.126]
                       Treatment           7.870 0.697         97      7.748 0.882            293                [0.166]
                                            Internal validity: Within-experiment
                                                      (1)                       (2)
                                                  Blind                       Visible                    p-value of difference
                                           Mean      SD        N       Mean    SD             N             Blind-Visible
Multiple Choice        ITT                  5.829    1.972    277        6.043     1.942      661                [0.128]
                       Treatment            5.792    2.009    253        6.049     1.928      685                [0.078]
Fill-In-The-Blank      ITT                  5.325    2.208    152        5.555     1.996      382                [0.264]
                       Treatment            5.367    2.167    148        5.536     2.016      386                 [0.411]
*p-values of differences between the Visible and Blind groups are calculated with standard errors clustered by student.




                                                                                                                27
Table 3. Basic Estimates of the Extent of Favoritism and Discrimination by Nationality and Gender
(N = 9330)*

                                       (1)         (2)                    (3)                           (4)
                                   Nationality    Gender              Nationality                     Gender
Interaction with:                       -           -           German Dutch Other                 Female Male

(1) MATCH*VISIBLE                     0.287        0.203          0.306     -0.012       -          0.156    -0.039
                                     (0.038)       (0.041)       (0.021)    (0.099)      -         (0.028)   (0.027)
(2) MATCH*BLIND                       0.115        0.146          0.165     -0.204       -          0.101    -0.101
                                     (0.081)       (0.069)       (0.101)    (0.106)      -         (0.075)   (0.042)
(3) NON-MATCH*VISIBLE                 0.177        0.206          0.148     -0.048    -0.123        0.150    -0.101
                                     (0.050)       (0.062)       (0.070)    (0.053)   (0.067)      (0.047)   (0.046)
(4) NON-MATCH*BLIND                   0.172        0.174          0.060     -0.095    -0.035        0.053    -0.071
                                     (0.057)       (0.055)       (0.080)    (0.077)   (0.072)      (0.038)   (0.079)



Endophilia [(1)-(2)]                  0.172        0.058          0.140     0.193        -          0.055     0.062
p=                                   [0.028]       [0.260]       [0.171]    [0.049]      -         [0.471]   [0.188]
Exophobia [(4)-(3)]                  -0.005        -0.033        -0.087     -0.047    0.088        -0.097     0.030
p=                                   [0.904]       [0.619]       [0.098]    [0.531]   [0.180]      [0.124]   [0.740]

Adj. R2                               0.015        0.014                   0.017                         0.010
*Standard errors in parentheses and p-values in square brackets. Both are clustered by ITT-Course. Columns (1) and
(2) present the estimates of Equation (7) without a constant. Columns (3) and (4) are based on Equation (7), with the
main variables interacted with CHARACTERISTIC, where CHARACTERISTIC are indicators for nationality in (3)
and for gender in (4). MATCH*Other interactions in (3) are empty because we define MATCH = 1 only for German
and Dutch students. Other nationalities almost never matched.




                                                                                                                 28
Table 4. The Effects of Treatment Slippage by Students and Graders on Estimates of Endophilia
and Exophobia*

                               (1)                (2)                         (3)              (4)
                           Nationality           Gender                   Nationality        Gender
Regression:                              IV                                Did Not Look Up Names

Endophilia                    0.193               0.092                      0.174                  0.002
p=                            [0.034]             [0.222]                   [0.009]                 [0.971]
Exophobia                     -0.033              -0.055                     -0.008                 -0.103
p=                            [0.538]             [0.457]                   [0.878]                 [0.093]

N                             9,330               9,330                      5,108                  5,108
Adj. R2                       0.015               0.013                      0.015                  0.015
*p-values in squared brackets, based on standard errors clustered at the ITT-Course level. We report linear
combinations based on extensions of Equation (7). Columns (1) and (2) are based on an instrumental variable
regression (IV) estimated by GMM, where we use ITT to instrument for the treatment. The F-statistics for the
instruments are well above 100. Columns (3) and (4) are based on Equation (7) with the sample of graders who did
not look up any of the names in the Blind group of exams.




                                                                                                              29
Table 5. Endophilia and Exophobia When Graders Know the Students They Grade, and When the
Exams are Mathematical (N = 9330)*

                                    (1)         (2)                                        (3)         (4)
                                Nationality    Gender                                  Nationality    Gender
Grader knows the                                              Exam was
student?:                                                     mathematical?:

                        No         0.320        0.124                          No         0.220        0.042
                        p=        [0.003]       [0.051]                        p=        [0.125]       [0.589]
    Endophilia                                                 Endophilia
                        Yes        0.050        -0.008                         Yes        0.058        0.080
                        p=        [0.652]       [0.911]                        p=        [0.493]       [0.085]


                        No        -0.068        -0.121                         No         0.050        -0.003
     Exophobia          p=        [0.165]       [0.028]        Exophobia       p=        [0.449]       [0.974]
                        Yes        0.066        0.087                          Yes       -0.086        -0.072
                        p=        [0.469]       [0.422]                        p=        [0.103]       [0.236]

 F-test interactions
                                  [0.077]       [0.051]                                  [0.037]       [0.656]
*p-values in squared brackets, based on standard errors clustered at the ITT-Course level. We report linear
combinations based on extensions of Equation (7). Columns (1) and (2) report interactions of the main variables
with GRADERKNOWSSTUDENT, Columns (3) and (4) of the main variables with MATHEMATICALEXAM.
Main effects are included throughout.




                                                                                                            30
Table 6. Effects of Grader Experience and Grader Teaching Quality on Outcomes (N = 9197)*

                                                       (1)          (2)               (3)        (4)
                               Percentile:         Nationality    Gender          Nationality Gender
 At the mth percentile of:                               Experience                 Teacher Quality

                               5th                    0.154         0.077            0.378         0.020
                               p=                     [0.162]      [0.202]           [0.057]       [0.853]
                               50th                   0.166         0.074            0.168         0.072
         Endophilia
                               p=                     [0.097]      [0.171]           [0.137]       [0.140]
                               95th                   0.248         0.048            0.056         0.100
                               p=                     [0.001]      [0.505]           [0.747]       [0.138]


                               5th                    -0.024        0.005            -0.018        -0.253
                               p=                     [0.639]      [0.945]           [0.863]       [0.059]
                               50th                   -0.016       -0.009            -0.005        -0.013
         Exophobia
                               p=                     [0.718]      [0.893]           [0.900]       [0.838]
                               95th                   0.045        -0.117            0.001         0.114
                               p=                     [0.635]      [0.107]           [0.982]       [0.249]

      F-test interactions
                                                      [0.860]      [0.001]           [0.599]       [0.150]
*p-values in square brackets, based on standard errors clustered at the ITT-Course level. We report linear
combinations based on extensions of Equation (7). Columns (1) and (2) interact the main variables with
TEACHEREXPERIENCE and evaluate the linear combinations at different percentiles. Columns (3) and (4) do the
same with TEACHERQUALITY. Main effects are included throughout.




                                                                                                        31
Table 7. The Average Treatment Effect (ATE) of the Visibility of Student Characteristics*

                                                    (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)
                                                   Share                            Share not
               Total ATE        p-value                          Endophilia                         Exophobia
                                                  matched                           matched
                                                  (η1+η2)                           (1-η1-η2)

German             0.103        [0.050]             0.29            0.140             0.71             -0.087
Dutch              0.107        [0.068]             0.41            0.193             0.59             -0.047
Other             -0.088        [0.180]               -               -                1                0.088

Female            0.078         [0.142]             0.45            0.055             0.55             -0.097
Male              0.027          [0.548]             0.62             0.062            0.38            0.030
*p-values in square brackets, based on standard errors clustered at the ITT-Course level. The ATE is calculated as
in Equation (5). Columns (1) and (3) show the share of questions for a given characteristic which were graded by
graders with matching and non-matching characteristics. Columns (2) and (4) show the ATE on the treated, as
reported in Table 3.




                                                                                                                32
Figure 1: Seating Arrangement for the Experiment*




*
 One square represents one desk. Students were seated in order of their ID numbers. Each number indicates the order
of student ID numbers in each block. The student with the lowest ID number sat in desk 1, the one with the highest
ID in desk 50. Rows 1-3 had yellow sheets on the desks with instructions not to write their name, thus creating the
Blind group. Rows 4-10 had no extra sheets. In these rows students were expected to write their name to create the
Visible group.


                                                                                                                33
                      .03
                      .02
            Density


                      .01
                            0




                                0      20            40           60            80   100
                                    Grader's total number of courses taught at SBE




Figure 2. Kernel Density of the Distribution of Grader Experience




                                                                                           34
                       .5
                       .4
                       .3
             Density



                       .2
                       .1
                        0




                            4               6                       8              10
                                   Grader's averrage evaluation over all courses




Figure 3. Kernel Density of the Distribution of Student Evaluations of Graders




                                                                                        35
              2
        1.5
              1
        .5
              0




                  -.5              0                 .5              1      1.5
                                                 g            g
                                               e             x



Figure 4. Kernel Density Estimates of Graders’ Preferences by Nationality




                                                                                  36
        1.5
              1
        .5
              0




                  -1               0               1               2   3
                                               g            g
                                              e            x



Figure 5. Kernel Density Estimates of Graders’ Preferences by Gender




                                                                           37
Appendix




Figure A1. Yellow Sheet Placed on Some Students’ Desks Before the Exam.




                                                                          38
