NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE REGULATION OF PRESCRIPTION DRUG COMPETITION AND MARKET RESPONSES:
PATTERNS IN PRICES AND SALES FOLLOWING LOSS OF EXCLUSIVITY
Murray L. Aitken
Ernst R. Berndt
Barry Bosworth
Iain M. Cockburn
Richard Frank
Michael Kleinrock
Bradley T. Shapiro
Working Paper 19487
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19487

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013




This research was supported by the National Institute of Aging of the National Institutes of Health
under grant number R01 AG043560 to the National Bureau of Economic Research. In addition, Mr.
Shapiro's research was supported in part by a Health and Aging Fellowship from the National Institute
of Aging via the National Bureau of Economic Research , Grant Number T32-AG000186. The statements,
findings, conclusions, views and opinions contained and expressed herein are based in part on data
provided under license from IMS Health Incorporated Information Services: National Prescription
Audit (June 2009-May 2013), IMS Health Incorporated. All Rights Reserved. The statements, findings,
conclusions, views, and opinions contained and expressed herein are solely the responsibility of the
authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health, IMS
Health Incorporated, any of its affiliated or subsidiary entities, the National Bureau of Economic Research,
or the institutions with whom the authors are affiliated.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19487.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Murray L. Aitken, Ernst R. Berndt, Barry Bosworth, Iain M. Cockburn, Richard Frank,
Michael Kleinrock, and Bradley T. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Regulation of Prescription Drug Competition and Market Responses: Patterns in Prices and
Sales Following Loss of Exclusivity
Murray L. Aitken, Ernst R. Berndt, Barry Bosworth, Iain M. Cockburn, Richard Frank, Michael
Kleinrock, and Bradley T. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 19487
October 2013
JEL No. D01,D02,D43,I1,L65,L78
ABSTRACT
We examine six molecules facing initial loss of US exclusivity (LOE, from patent expiration or
challenges) between June 2009 and May 2013 that were among the 50 most prescribed molecules
in May 2013. We examine prices per day of therapy (from the perspective of average revenue
received by retail pharmacy per day of therapy) and utilization separately for four payer types (cash,
Medicare Part D, Medicaid, and other third party payer – TPP) and age under vs. 65 and older. We
find that quantity substitutions away from the brand are much larger proportionately and more rapid
than average price reductions during the first six months following initial LOE. Brands continue
to raise prices after generics enter. Expansion of total molecule sales (brand plus generic) following
LOE is an increasingly common phenomenon compared with earlier eras. The number of days of
therapy in a prescription has generally increased over time. Generic penetration rates are typically
highest and most rapid for TPPs, and lowest and slowest for Medicaid. Cash customers and seniors
generally pay the highest prices for brands and generics, third party payers and those under 65 pay
the lowest prices, with Medicaid and Medicare Part D in between. The presence of an authorized
generic during the 180-day exclusivity period has a significant impact on prices and volumes of
prescriptions, but this varies across molecules.
Murray L. Aitken
The IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics
11 Waterview Boulevard
Parsippany, NJ 07054
maitken@theimsinstitute.org
Ernst R. Berndt
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-518
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
eberndt@mit.edu
Barry Bosworth
Senior Fellow
The Brookings Institution
1775 Massachusetts Avenue
Washington, DC 20036
bbosworth@brookings.edu

Iain M. Cockburn
School of Management
Boston University
595 Commonwealth Ave
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
cockburn@bu.edu
Richard Frank
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
frank@hcp.med.harvard.edu
Michael Kleinrock
IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics
mkleinrock@theimsinstitute.org
Bradley T. Shapiro
MIT
btshapir@mit.edu

I.

INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Since the early 2000s large numbers of brand name prescription drugs have lost the exclusive

right to sell their products due to patent expiration and challenges. This loss of exclusivity (LOE) resulted
in substantially lower prices for payers and consumers and reduced revenues for brand name
prescription drug manufacturers. Compared with the 1980s and 1990s, the speed with which generics
have gained market share from brands following LOE has accelerated.1 Research has investigated
market responses to LOE by examining generic entry, focusing on the rate at which generics are
substituted for brands2, the path of prices (generic, brand and molecule) paid,,3 total (brand plus
generic) molecule utilization following LOE,4 the relationship between number of generic manufacturers
entering markets and prices, and trends in the duration of market exclusivity prior to initial LOE5, among
other issues.6
In recent years the policy debate related to LOE in the U.S. has centered on provisions in the
Hatch-Waxman Act that govern entry of generics. Most recently these provisions have figured
prominently in the 2013 Supreme Court ruling on “pay for delay”. Under the Hatch-Waxman
framework, generic drug companies have increased the rate at which they file so-called Paragraph IV
challenges to the patent position of originator companies, either contesting the validity of the patents
that protect brand name products or claiming that their version of the drug does not infringe them. .The
substantial number of these challenges is in large measure due to the strong incentives created by the
provision of the Hatch-Waxman Act that grants a 180-day period during which the successful challenger
is the exclusive seller of the generic. In these circumstances, the generic may be able to win substantial
market share from the brand with only a modest discount off the brand price, though it is important to
note that the substantial profits that can accrue to the generic during this period may be reduced by
additional competition from the brand that has the right to contract with a generic manufacturer to

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

2

market a so-called authorized generic product.7 In fact launching an authorized generic in the face of
challenges from a generic manufacturer has become a widespread industry practice.8 Following the 180day limited competition (duopoly with brand and exclusive generic, or triopoly with an additional
authorized generic entrant), unfettered competition emerges, typically characterized by extensive
generic entry and sharp price declines. In such situations the generic penetration and price reductions
during the first 180 days following LOE can differ substantially from subsequent generic price and
quantity movements when generic entry is unfettered.9
We extend and expand upon this literature by comparing the magnitude of quantity movements
with the size of price reductions during and after the 180-day exclusivity period. We do so by carefully
examining six molecules facing initial LOE between June 2009 and May 2013 that were among the fifty
most prescribed molecules in the US in May 2013. We focus on retail rather than wholesale prices, and
are able to disaggregate buyers in the overall retail market and separately examine the relative price
and quantity movements before and following LOE for four distinct payers: Medicaid, Medicare Part D,
commercial and other third party payers (TPPs), and cash customers. Relatively little is known about
retail price and quantity movements during the 180 day exclusivity period10, or about the magnitude of
any differences by payer type in prices paid, and the in the speed and extent of shifts from brand to
generic. Finally, since information is available on the age of customers receiving medications, we
examine relative prices and generic substitution rates for those under age 65 with those age 65 and
older. We are not aware of any published research that examines these brand and generic price and
quantity movements following LOE by payer type and patient age.
Our analyses yield the following main findings. First, quantity substitutions away from the brand
are much larger proportionately and more rapid than average molecule price reductions during the first
six months following LOE. Second, brands continue to raise prices after generics enter. Third, expansion
of total molecule sales (brand plus generic) following LOE is an increasingly common phenomenon

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

3

compared with prior observations. Fourth, generic penetration rates are generally highest for third party
payers and lowest for Medicaid. Fifth, cash (and seniors over age 65) generally pay the highest prices
for brands and generics, third party payers (and those under age 65) pay the lowest prices, with
Medicaid and Medicare Part D prices being in between those of cash and third party payers. Sixth, the
presence of an authorized generic during the 180-day exclusivity period has a significant impact on
prices and volume of prescriptions, but this varies across molecules. In two of the cases studied, the
brand and its licensee collectively retained almost two-thirds share of the market by volume, in the
others they captured less than half. Price discounts off the brand prevailing during the “triopoly” period
also showed substantial variation. In some cases, the price of the authorized generic product was
between the brand and the independent generic, in others it was significantly below the independent
generic.
II.

DATA AND METHODS
The IMS Health Incorporated National Prescription Audit (NPA} data base tracks prescriptions

dispensed at a nationally representative sample of retail, mail order and long term care pharmacies and
is projected to an estimate of total national prescriptions dispensed through these pharmacies on a
monthly basis. We limit our analysis to prescriptions dispensed at retail pharmacies, and focus on the
50 most prescribed molecules (measured by number of prescriptions dispensed during May 2013). For
each of these molecules, data are available on the distribution by payer type: Medicaid, Medicare Part
D, commercial or other third party payer, and cash; for about half the transactions, information is also
available on the age of the patient dispensed the prescription: 65 and over, or under age 65.
These NPA data reflect the perspective of the retail pharmacy, and prices measured at this point
in the distribution chain correspond to the retail prices that the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics attempts
to measure in constructing its monthly Consumer Price Index for Prescription Drugs.11 The total revenue
received by the dispensing pharmacy is the sum of the customer’s copayment or coinsurance

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

4

contribution, plus the amount (if any) reimbursed the dispensing pharmacy by the third party payer –
Medicare Part D insurer, Medicaid, or commercial or other third party payer. This pharmacy price
therefore includes reimbursement for the active pharmaceutical ingredient, a dispensing fee, and any
customer copayment or coinsurance contribution. If the customer presents the pharmacy with a
coupon, the value of that coupon is attributed to the patient copayment or coinsurance contribution;
how well the NPA is able to capture coupon transactions is not publicly known. For our purposes,
however, it is important to note that this pharmacy price already includes margins realized by
wholesalers, pharmacies and any other distributors, and is therefore generally larger than the price (net
of rebates and discounts) received by the brand and generic manufacturers. These rebates and
discounts can be substantial, in some cases larger than the amount that consumers actually pay.12
Starting from the 50 most prescribed molecules in May 2013 we used information from the
FDA’s Orange Book to identify the six of these molecules that faced initial LOE during the June 2009 –
May 2013 time period.13 For each of the six molecules, we identified NDC codes of the brand’s
strengths/formulations, and monthly number of prescriptions dispensed by payer type (Medicare Part
D, Medicaid, third party commercial payer, and cash customer) and customer age (number under age
65, age 65 and over, and age unknown), average customer copayment/coinsurance contributions, and
mean reimbursement to the pharmacy by third party payer. Similar monthly data were obtained for
generic and authorized generic versions of the strengths/formulations of the molecule. The National
Drug Codes (NDCs) of authorized generics were identified, and were alternatively treated separately or
combined with NDC codes of abbreviated new drug application (ANDA) holders. Data on the mean
number of extended units (EUs, e.g., tablets, capsules) per prescription along with recommended daily
dosing data from the Drugs@FDA website were used to convert average price per prescription to
average price per day of therapy (only Augmentin XR differed from once-daily dosing, with its
recommended dosing being twice daily for 7-10 days). These NDC-specific average data were then

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

5

aggregated up to the molecule level separately for brands, generics and authorized generics, by payer
type and customer age, using relative number of prescriptions by NDC code as weights.
III.

FINDINGS: CHARACTERISTICS OF SIX INITIAL GENERIC LAUNCHES, JUNE 2009-MAY 2013
The most salient characteristics of the six molecules are summarized in Table 1, in chronological

order by date of LOE from left to right. When originally approved by the FDA as New Drug Applications
(NDAs), three of the six were new molecular entities, whereas the other three were new formulations of
a previously approved molecular entity. Four of the six were designated standard review by the FDA,
and two were tagged for priority review. The six molecules are in six different therapeutic classes, and
represent five different original NDA holders (Sanofi Aventis is the only multiple NDA holder at two).
Effective market exclusivity (time between initial NDA approval and first ANDA entry) varies
substantially among the six molecules—from about 5.5 years for Ambien CR to about 15.0 years for both
Cozaar and Lipitor. Although all six derive from the 50 most prescribed molecules, because several are
new formulations of an older molecule, the market size (measured by total number of monthly
prescriptions) varies dramatically. Specifically, for the three months prior to initial LOE, the market size
(“Mean TRX Before LOE” in Table 1) varied from largest (Lipitor – atorvastatin) to smallest (Augmentin
XR –amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium) by a factor of 1251:1; market size of the second largest (Plavix –
clopidogrel) relative to second smallest (Ambien CR – zolpidem tartrate) varied by a factor of 4.66:1,
while the market size of the third largest (Lexapro – escitalopram oxalate) relative to the third smallest
(Cozaar – losartan) was 2.33:1. Hence, even though the sample of six molecules is small and comes
entirely from among the 50 most prescribed molecules, the variation in market size of the molecular
formulations in our sample is large.
All six brands faced successful Paragraph IV challengers, although because of its infringing prepatent expiration entry, Apotex forfeited its 180-day exclusivity for Plavix (clopidogrel). As a result,
Plavix was the only brand to face unrestricted generic entry at the time of its LOE. Of the remaining five

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

6

molecules, following LOE four of the brands (Cozaar, Ambien CR, Lipitor and Lexapro) launched
authorized generics thereby creating a triopoly market for 180 days, while the remaining brand
(Augmentin XR) did not launch an authorized generic and thereby faced duopoly competition between
brand and generic for 180 days. By seven (twelve) months after initial generic entry, the molecule with
the smallest pre-patent expiration market size that also involved complex manufacturing processes,
(Augmentin XR) had just two (two) competitors, a reformulated extended release molecule with modest
pre-patent expiration market size (Ambien CR) had four (five) competitors, while the molecule with the
largest pre-patent expiration market size (Lipitor) had only six (seven) competitors. Three other
molecules (Cozaar, Lexapro and Plavix) each had 13 or 14 competitors at both seven and twelve months
following initial ANDA entry.
A more detailed discussion of each of the six molecules, in chronological order of initial ANDA
launch, is provided in the Appendix.
IV.

RESULTS
We now discuss results, in separate sub-sections for generic penetration rates by payer type and

age; quantities post-LOE relative to pre-LOE; number extended units per prescription; prices by payer
type pre-LOE, during any 180-day exclusivity periods, and post-180-day exclusivity; as well as
prescription shares and prices for brands, Paragraph IV challengers and authorized generics (AGs) during
the 180-day exclusivity period.
A. GENERIC PENETRATION RATES, OVER ALL AND BY PAYER TYPE AND AGE
We compute the generic penetration rate as the proportion of all prescriptions for a given
molecule dispensed as generics (or authorized generic). With six molecules, five payer types and two
age groups, the number of quantitative findings is voluminous. As an overview, we first ask, how long in
number of months does it take for a molecule to reach certain specified generic penetration thresholds?

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

7

Results for 60% and 90% generic penetration thresholds are presented in Table 2. A number of findings
are striking.
First, looking at the six molecules over all payer types, we observe that for all six drugs, the time
required to reach a 60% generic penetration threshold is three months or less. A 60% generic
penetration threshold was reached in one month or less by Lexapro, Plavix, Cozaar and Lipitor (<1
month is interpreted as the average generic penetration in the first month of entry exceeding 0.6); for
the two smallest market drugs, Augmentin XR and Ambien CR, the 60% threshold over all payer types
was two and three months, respectively. The 90% threshold for all payer types is attained within two
months for Plavix (that faced unfettered generic entry throughout), four months for Cozaar and
Augmentin XR, six months for Lexapro, and nine months for Lipitor; only for Ambien CR is the 90%
threshold more than a year (13 months). This very rapid shift from brand to generic following LOE is
much greater than has been reported in earlier US studies.14
A second set of findings in Table 2 reflects difference in the speed of generic penetration by
payer type. Looking at the four payer types and over all payers within each molecule (the top row in
each panel), we see that for all six molecules, third party payer (TPP) is always the most (or tied for
most) rapid in reaching the 60% generic penetration threshold, whereas Medicaid is the slowest. To
reach the 90% generic penetration threshold, in all cases but one (Lipitor, Medicare), TPPs take the
shortest amount of time, followed by Medicare, cash customers, and finally, Medicaid. The relative
speed with which TPPs reached high generic penetration thresholds could reflect in part aggressive
formulary management by pharmaceutical benefit managers (PBMs) working on behalf of TPPs and
Medicare Part D prescription drug plans. Other researchers have noted the relatively slow generic takeup by Medicaid and have leveled criticism at the program for failing to exploit available cost savings
(e.g., Brill [2010].) It is worth noting, however, that manufacturer rebates to Medicaid from brands are
several times larger than those from generic manufacturers (currently on average about 30+% for

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

8

brands having recent price increases vs. 13% for generics)15, and during the first few months following
LOE in which there is only limited competition (say, at the beginning of the 180-day exclusivity period), it
is possible that net of rebates, prices to Medicaid may be lower for brands than generics, thereby
rationalizing a slower speed of generic substitution by the Medicaid programs. Recall that the prices we
measure here are the total consumer plus third party payer payments to retail pharmacies, not prices
net of rebates paid by payers or received by generic manufacturers. The lower brand than generic price
net of rebates to Medicaid is not just a theoretical possibility. In their evaluation of state Medicaid
program responses to Prozac’s (fluoxetine) LOE in August 2001, Kelton, Chang and Kreling [2013, p.
1207] report that during 2001Q3 – the first full quarter in which generic fluoxetine was available – net of
estimated Medicaid rebates the average price of a 20 mg tablet/capsule of branded Prozac at $1.91 was
slightly less than the average price of a 20 mg tablet/capsule of generic fluoxetine at $1.95.
A third set of results in Table 2 is a negative finding: Evaluated at either the time required to
reach a 60% or 90% generic penetration threshold, over all payer types those under age 65 take on
average about the same length of time to reach the 60% generic penetration as do senior citizens age 65
and over; for the 90% threshold over all payers, for three of the six drugs seniors substitute more
rapidly, and for one more slowly, than do those under age 65; for the other two drugs the switching
speed is the same. Moreover, when one examines time to reach thresholds across payer types, there
does not appear to be any dominant pattern for seniors vs. those under age 65.
The patterns observed in Table 2 suggest that consumers take FDA judgments about
interchangeability at face value and benefits managers make polices independent of clinical or
demographic circumstances. We note in passing because TPPs often manage prescription drug benefits
for both employees and retirees age 65 and over, and because Medicare beneficiaries include some
individuals under age 65 (e.g., End-Stage Renal Disease beneficiaries and most dually eligible

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

9

beneficiaries), there is a considerable overlap between prescriptions paid for by Medicare and those
dispensed to customers age 65 and over.
Finally, the extent and speed of generic penetration in the single case with 180-day exclusivity
but no authorized generic -- Augmentin XR – appear to be a bit less aggressive and rapid than for
Cozaar, Lexapro, and Lipitor (but not for Ambien CR), each of which had an authorized generic during its
180-day exclusivity period; Cozaar, Lexapro and Lipitor reached the 60% threshold in one month or less,
whereas Augmentin XR and Ambien CR needed two-three months. With no 180-day exclusivity and
unfettered generic entry at patent expiry, Plavix reached the 90% generic penetration threshold in the
shortest amount of time – two months.
B.

QUANTITIES POST-LOE RELATIVE TO PRE-LOE

For quite some time it has been conventional wisdom that total brand plus generic utilization of
a molecule declines following patent expiration.16 This is in large part because brands reduce their
marketing as the date of patent expiration and initial loss of exclusivity (LOE) approaches. They then
tend to terminate almost all marketing efforts immediately following LOE. As reported by Aitken, Berndt
and Cutler [2008], however, this is not always the case. When the statin Zocor went off-patent in 2006,
payers and PBMs aggressively switched individuals taking the relatively costly statin brand drug Lipitor
(still under patent protection) to generic versions of Zocor (simvastatin), and also initiated new patients
on simvastatin instead of Lipitor. We now examine whether the Zocor experience is unique or has
become more common. Results are presented in Table 3, for average utilization six to nine months postLOE relative to the three months pre-LOE, and for 10-12 months post-LOE relative to the three months
pre-LOE, over all payer (buyer) types and both age groups. A number of results are worth noting.
First, for four of the six molecules, over all payer types, the total molecule utilization at both sixnine and ten-twelve months post-LOE is greater than during the three complete months prior to LOE.
For one of the molecules (Plavix-clopidogrel) total molecule utilization is essentially flat, whereas for one

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

10

other molecule (Ambien CR – zolpidem tartrate) there is a very slight reduction in total molecule
utilization post-LOE across all payer types. The reason for post-LOE total molecule utilization being so
large for Augmentin XR is unclear to us, but we note from Table 1 that the number of monthly
prescriptions in the three complete months pre-LOE was very small for Augmentin XR.17
Second, considerable variation occurs among payer types. Notably, in the four cases when postLOE total molecule utilization increases, the increase is driven primarily by TPP payers (although for
Lipitor cash and Medicare customers are also large drivers of increased molecule utilization). This is
consistent with the large shift to generics and the substantial reduction in average molecule price that
results. The smallest utilization increase or largest decrease occurs for Medicaid payers. In the one case
where total molecule utilization decreases slightly post-LOE (Ambien CR), it is Medicare and Medicaid
prescriptions that decline most post-LOE. Since we observed that Medicaid is generally the slowest
payer to switch from brand to generic, the relatively large reductions post-LOE by Medicaid payers
suggests they are not staying with the brand, but rather are either discontinuing treatment with that
molecule altogether or are instead switching to another molecule, either brand or generic. This issue
merits further examination.
Table 3 shows that in all four cases in which 10-12 months post-LOE total molecule utilization
increased, total molecule utilization by cash customers increased. Note that because certain retail
chains such as WalMart and Target introduced $4 prescriptions for 30 days and $9.99 prescriptions for
90 days, customer out-of-pocket cash payments for these prescriptions were likely less than the typical
copayment or coinsurance customer contribution to the pharmacy for a first-tier generic drug under a
private or public insurance plan formulary arrangement. While this shift to box merchandiser
pharmacies might explain some of the growth in cash payer total molecule utilization, because Medicaid
beneficiaries typically have very low if any copayment for first tier generic drugs, the shift to box
merchandiser pharmacies is unlikely to be the source of the post-LOE decline in Medicaid total molecule

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

11

utilization. Alternatively, price declines to the uninsured may generate more demand response for the
molecule than do price declines to an insured population. The extent to which the increase in utilization
can be decomposed into increased demand from existing patients (through better compliance) versus
demand from new patients, for example those that switch in to a newly genericized molecule from
another branded molecule, is unclear and also merits further analysis.
Third, there is considerable heterogeneity among the five molecules having a 180-day exclusivity
period. For Augmentin XR having no authorized generic entry, and for Ambien CR -- both extended
release reformulations – the post-LOE utilization experiences are dramatically different, with Augmentin
XR showing a very substantial increase and Ambien CR a slight decline. While the other three molecules
having an authorized generic present during the 180-day exclusivity each experienced a post-LOE total
molecule utilization increase, the extent of this increased utilization varied considerably – being largest
for Cozaar, followed by Lipitor and then Lexapro.
Finally, regarding total molecule utilization post- vs. pre-LOE by age group, as seen in the final
columns of Table 3, there is no striking pattern. In most but certainly not all cases, those under age 65
increase more or decrease less in their total molecule utilization than do those age 65 and over six to
nine months after LOE, but even this modest trend is mitigated at ten to twelve months after LOE.
C. NUMBER EXTENDED UNITS PER PRESCRIPTION
One of the strategies employed by PBMs has been to encourage beneficiaries to switch from
obtaining 30-day prescriptions at brick and mortar retail pharmacies to ordering 90-day prescriptions via
mail order. Such a switch has been accomplished in part by 90-day copayments being only twice as
large as 30-day copayments, thereby reducing beneficiaries’ per diem copayment amount. This strategy
has been particularly attractive for maintenance medications that treat chronic diseases (i.e. taken each
day indefinitely), but obviously is less practical for medicines needed immediately to treat acute
conditions or episodes.18 In response to seeing reduced foot traffic in their brick and mortar stores from

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

12

this shift to 90-day mail order prescriptions, several retail pharmacy chains have begun offering
copayment incentive schemes similar to those by the PBM mail order firms.19
One implication of this shift from 30- to 90-day prescriptions is that the number of extended
units (EUs, e.g., tablets, capsules) per prescription is likely to have increased somewhat during our 48month sample time period (June 2009 – May 2013). Since our data are limited to retail pharmacy
dispensing and excludes mail order, we expect this increase in number of EUs per Rx to be modest.
However, we also expect that the extent to which prescriptions contain more EUs per prescription will
vary among the six molecules in our sample since they are in six distinct therapeutic classes of
medicines. A consequence is that the average price per prescription not taking into account shifts in the
number of EUs per Rx could give a misleading picture of prescription drug per diem price changes over
time. Therefore, before presenting results on price differences among payer types and age groups, we
digress and first examine trends among our six molecules on number of EUs per Rx.
Due to space limitations, we do not present detailed results on EUs per Rx here; detailed figures
can be accessed at the IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics website. Our principal findings on
number of EUs per Rx can be summarized as follows. For all molecules except Augmentin XR, the
number of EUs per Rx increased over time, with the largest increasing being from about 39 to 45 for
Cozaar. For Augmentin XR with twice daily dosing recommended for 7-10 days, while the number of EUs
per Rx for the branded version increased from about 32 to 38 (16 to 19 days’ supply), for the generic
version it declined from 36 to 32 (18 to 16 days’ supply). The smallest number of EUs per Rx occurred
with Ambien CR prescriptions, for whom the increase during the sample time period was from almost 29
to just under 31 EUs per Rx. We conclude that while there is heterogeneity in EUs per Rx across the six
molecules, the additional variability over time implies that it is preferable to measure trends in price per
day of therapy rather than price per prescription.

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013
D.

13

PRICE PER DAY OF THERAPY BY PAYER TYPE

Price per day of therapy by payer type for the six molecules over the June 2009 – May 2013 time
period are graphed in the six panels of Figure 1; the solid vertical red line denotes the date of initial LOE,
while the dotted red vertical line represents 180 days later, corresponding with the expiry of any 180day exclusivity (except for Plavix). Several results in Figure 1 merit special attention.
First, although the decline in average molecule price per day of therapy at the time of initial LOE
is evident for all molecules, the price drop is most dramatic for Plavix (clopidogrel), for which generic
entry at the time of LOE was unfettered, resulting in price per day of therapy falling from about $6.50 to
about $3.50 (46%) within a month after initial LOE.
Second, we see important differences in prices across different classes of payers. We treat
these cautiously, given the potential for differences in the level of unobserved rebates received by
different classes of payers. (Recall that our price measure is from the perspective of average revenue
per Rx received by the pharmacy, which does not include manufacturers’ rebates to Medicaid and other
payers; net of such rebates, Medicaid price premia might be much smaller, and perhaps may even be
non-existent.) Nonetheless, it is interesting to note that both pre-LOE and during the 180-day exclusivity
window, cash payers paid the highest prices, TPPs the lowest price, with Medicaid and then Medicare
Part D in between. Price differences among payer types generally tended to decline over time, and by
the end of the sample time period (May 2013) cash payers paid the highest prices for four of the six
molecules (Ambien CR, Augmentin XR, Lexapro and Plavix), while Medicaid paid the highest prices for
Cozaar and Lipitor. For Lipitor, the average price per day of therapy for Medicaid at just under $3 was
about twice that paid by TPPs.
Third, an intriguing phenomenon we observe in Figure 1 is that while at the time of initial LOE
there is a noticeable immediate price decline, for Cozaar, Ambien CR, Lipitor and Lexapro – each of
which was in a triopoly market structure including an authorized generic during the 180-day exclusivity

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

14

period – the average price per day of therapy is relatively flat during the remainder of the 180-day
exclusivity window, and then (except for Ambien CR) falls sharply immediately following expiry of the
exclusivity window. Somewhat counter-intuitively, the post-LOE price decline is larger and more
sustained for Augmentin XR – in a duopoly market structures with no authorized generic entrant during
the 180-day window. Why a three-competitor market structure generates higher and more stable
prices than does a duopoly runs counter to basic economic intuition and merits further analysis. 20 In
particular, future research might focus on the role played by the brand and its authorized generic agent
in creating price discipline during the 180-day exclusivity window.
Finally, although we do not present price trends per day of therapy separately for those under
age 65 and age 65 and over, we find there do not appear to be systematic differences paid per day of
therapy by age group, and that any differences are relatively small in magnitude.
What is clear, however, in comparing quantity data in Tables 2 and 3 with price trends in Figure
1 is that even though the price reductions in the 180 days immediately following initial LOE are
significant, they are much smaller and slower than the very dramatic increases in generic penetration
rates, i.e., for these prescription drugs, following LOE quantities move much more quickly and
proportionately than do prices.
E.

PRICES AND PRESCRIPTION SHARES DURING THE 180-DAY TRIOPOLY

In Table 4 we present means (and standard deviations) of price per day of therapy and
prescription shares during the four 180-day triopolies we observe in our data set (Cozaar, Ambien CR,
Lipitor and Lexapro) in which not only does the brand face a successful Paragraph IV challenger, but it
also launches an authorized generic (AG) that both competes with and contributes revenues to the
branded franchise. Although our sample size is but four molecules, and any results should therefore be
viewed as tentative requiring confirmation with a larger data set, several preliminary results are worth
noting.

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

15

First, in terms of maintaining market share in the face of LOE, Sanofi’s experience with Ambien
CR and Pfizer’s experience with Lipitor stand out. As seen in the bottom three panels of Table 4, while
for both Cozaar and Lexapro the mean brand share during the triopoly falls to about 15%, at 44% and
40%, respectively, the Ambien CR and Lipitor brand shares were much larger; in addition, while the AG
share for both Cozaar and Lexapro was about 35%, for Ambien CR and Lipitor it was just under 25%. An
implication is that when one sums the prescription share for the brand plus that of its authorized
generic, for both Cozaar and Lexapro this comes to about 50%, whereas for Ambien CR and Lipitor it
soars to 65-68%.21 For the successful Paragraph IV challenger, therefore, while being able to capture
approximately 50% of prescriptions during the triopolies involving Cozaar and Lexapro, during Ambien
CR’s and Lipitor’s180-day exclusivity period, Actavis Elizabeth and Ranbaxy – the independent nonauthorized generic entrants -- only garnered about 35% of prescriptions. Industry analysts have
suggested that Pfizer was able to secure this substantial share by giving payers, mail order firms and
pharmaceutical benefit managers (PBMs) large rebates, aggressively marketing $4 copay coupons in
print media, and maintaining and perhaps even increasing direct-to-consumer marketing efforts before
LOE and during the 180-day exclusivity period.22 We have no information regarding whether Sanofi
undertook similar actions to protect its brand and authorized generic shares during the Ambien CR
exclusivity period. Whether the more recent Lipitor experience remains historically unique or instead
ushers in a new form of triopoly competition remains to be seen; the only other major brand facing
initial LOE since the 2011-2012 Lipitor LOE was Plavix, but as noted earlier, because Apotex forfeited its
Paragraph IV exclusivity, Plavix faced unfettered generic entry at the time of its initial LOE later in 2012
rather than a triopoly market structure.
A second set of findings (in the top panels of Table 4) involves revenues or average prices (any
patient copayment plus third party payer reimbursements) received by retail pharmacies. Here the
outlier drugs are Cozaar and Ambien CR, not Lipitor. For both Lipitor and Lexapro, the AG average price

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

16

is in between that of the brand and the generic (the successful Paragraph IV challenger), whereas for
Ambien CR and Cozaar the AG average price is even lower than that of the generic; this latter
phenomenon of AG retail prices being lowest was reported by the Federal Trade Commission [2011, ch.
3], but our finding based on more recent data of the independent generic average price being the lowest
is novel. In all four cases, however, the brand has the highest price, being 25-30% higher than the
generic except in the cases of Ambien CR and Cozaar where the brand-generic premium ranges between
about 15-22%. It is worth emphasizing again that the prices measured here are those recouped by the
retail pharmacy, and not the prices at which they acquire drugs from generic manufacturers (which are
typically much lower).23
F. CASH VS. FULL SAMPLE AVERAGE PRICE LEVELS AND GROWTH RATES
Our final set of analyses involves examining relative price levels and growth rates of
prescriptions paid for by cash in comparison to the full sample of retail dispensed prescriptions. Several
outcomes are plausible. One line of reasoning is that because cash customers must pay the full price of
the drug, cash purchasers must value the prescription at a relatively high level, and knowing this,
pharmacies can exploit this fact by charging cash customers higher prescription prices. A related view is
that cash customers are less informed and cannot move market share across products, whereas benefit
managers for third party payer insurers are more knowledgeable concerning alternative treatments for
various conditions, and can use this knowledge and bargaining power to obtain lower prescription prices
from pharmacies. An alternative view is that cash customers will be on average more price sensitive,
and therefore will seek out those pharmacies advertising discounted prescriptions, such as the mass
merchandiser pharmacies, thereby paying lower prices than those with insurance. While these views
have diverse predictions for relative price levels paid by insured vs. the uninsured, without additional
assumptions they make no predictions on relative growth rates of prescription prices for cash vs.
insured customers.

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

17

To measure mean price growth rates, for each molecule we compute the average of log
[P(t)/P(t-1)] over the selected time interval, which for relatively small price changes such as that
observed with our monthly data, yield results that can be interpreted as the mean percent growth rate
in price.
In the top row of each of the six drug molecule panels in Table 5, we present mean cash/full
sample prices (standard deviations in parentheses) over the full 48-month June 2009 – May 2013 sample
time period, and then for three sub-periods: pre-LOE, during the 180-day exclusivity, and post-180 day
exclusivity. In the case of Plavix, there was no 180-day exclusivity and we therefore present relative
cash/full sample prices for only the pre-LOE and post-LOE time periods where generic entry is
unfettered by any exclusivity. Several results are worth highlighting.
First, for all six molecules prices paid by cash customers are generally greater than those for the
full sample. Over the entire 48-month time period and six molecules, the average cash price premium is
about 17%, ranging from 11% for Lipitor to 24% for Augmentin XR. In the pre-LOE time periods, cash
prices for brands are on average about 16% greater than for the full sample, and this cash price
premium grows slightly to about 18% during and following 180-day exclusivity. There is remarkable
little variability in the cash price premium during the 180-day exclusivity window (small standard
deviation), and generally (except for Augmentin XR) considerably more variability following unfettered
generic entry in the post-180 day time frame.
While results on relative price levels are quite robust and unambiguous, for relative growth
rates our findings are more nuanced. Looking at the pre-LOE column in Table 5, when we compare the
mean log [P(t)/P(t-1)] over the six molecules, we observe that cash prices increase on average about
0.0078 percent per month, very slightly greater than the full-sample prices that increase on average
0.0073 percent monthly, which when accumulated over 12 months results in cash prices annually
growing at 0.6% more rapidly than full sample prices. During any 180-day exclusivity period, on average

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

18

cash prices fall slightly less rapidly (-0.0268 vs. -0.0294) than do full sample prices, but this inequality is
reversed following any 180-day exclusivity or when unfettered generic entry occurs, during which time
cash prices fall about 1.2% more rapidly (-0.0345 vs. -0.0228) than do full sample prices. This last result
is consistent with the pricing strategies of the mass merchandisers such as WalMart that offer $4 30-day
or $9.99 90-day prescriptions to their customers once unfettered generic entry occurs, typically lower
prices than those available from chain and independent retail pharmacies. Finally, averaged over all six
molecules and the entire 48-month time period, cash prices fall very slightly more rapidly (-0.0117 vs.
-0.0097, a difference of -0.0020 per month, or about 2.4% annually) than do full sample prices. Hence,
cash vs. full-sample differences in price levels are quite substantial though stable over time, but
differences in the growth rates vary during exclusivity and LOE sub-periods, although in general these
growth rate differences are relatively small, i.e. the cash price level premia are proportionately stable
over time.
V.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUDING REMARKS

The extent and rate at which generic drugs capture market share in U.S. retail drug markets as
brands lose market exclusivity has increased sharply over the last decade. This heightened generic
penetration has been particularly evident for third party payers (TPPs), and likely reflects the increased
bargaining power derived from formulary design by pharmaceutical benefit management (PBM) firms
serving TPPs’ drug benefit plans. One implication of this phenomenon is that to the extent “reverse
payment” or “pay for delay” settlements result in delayed generic entry, consumers are harmed
immediately by not gaining access to lower cost medicines. The relatively large number of top-selling
drugs facing initial loss of exclusivity (LOE) in the U.S. in 2012 and 2013 has been unprecedented, with
the resulting patent cliff revenue losses for brands in 2012 alone approaching $29 billion and
contributing to an overall 1% decline in U.S. nominal pharmaceutical spending24, but providing a
temporary windfall for the profit margins of wholesalers, retail and mail order pharmacies. Whether

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

19

these recent impacts on pharmaceutical spending will be repeated is unclear, particularly since the total
dollar revenues of brand drugs facing initial LOE in the next few years is expected to be considerably
smaller than in 2012 and 2013.25
For four of the six molecules experiencing initial LOE in our 2009-2013 time frame, total monthly
molecule utilization post-LOE exceeded that prior to patent expiration, reflecting the combined effects
of cross-molecule substitution, new patients gaining access to lower-cost medicines, and non-adherent
patients resuming drug treatment. This post-LOE increase in molecule utilization runs counter to prior
understanding of this market, and also likely reflects the increased formulary design policies by PBMs.
An implication is that not only do patent protected brands need to worry about their own patents
expiring, but their brand’s revenues can also be adversely affected if a competitive brand faces initial
generic entry, for the newly competitive generic molecule can steal market share. More generally, these
post-LOE utilization increases are creating novel complexities in defining drug markets for antitrust and
other litigation-related damage assessments.
Our data also document that the probability of a brand’s patent being challenged by a potential
generic entrant is now very high, continuing an aggressive litigation trend reported by the Federal Trade
Commission [2011], that often results in the Paragraph IV first-filer being awarded 180-days of
exclusivity. With their expected revenues being threatened, brands have responded by launching their
authorized generic (AG), thereby creating a 180-day triopoly calm before the patent cliff storm, with
competition among the brand, its authorized generic and the successful Paragraph IV challenger. In
spite of only modest average molecule price reductions during this 180-day exclusivity period (much less
than after it expires), the substitution of prescription quantities away from the brand is already very
large. Since through its combined sales of the brand and its AG the brand franchise can moderate the
revenue loss from LOE, the financial lure of generics being awarded 180-day exclusivity is decreased.
However, the evidence we find, as has the Federal Trade Commission [2013, chapter 7], suggests that

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

20

the existence of an AG during the 180-day exclusivity period does not dampen the extent of generic
entry post-exclusivity: on the 181st day following initial LOE, the number of generics competing with the
brand and with each other tends consistently to be large, in our sample between seven and 14.
Whether Pfizer’s relatively successful defense of Lipitor during the 180-day exclusivity period through
the use of coupons, rebates and other discounts is an historical quirk or instead is a harbinger of future
more aggressive attempts by brands to protect brand revenues as patents expire remains to be seen.
A novel set of findings we have reported here involves identifying separate retail prices by payer
type – cash, Medicare Part D, Medicaid and other commercial TPP. Our results suggest that declines in
retail prices follow the incentives to each payer to pursue policies that result in price declines. In
particular, the slower decline in Medicaid prices following LOE may be more rational than previously
thought. Three caveats are worth noting, however. First, the prices we calculate represent the average
total revenue received by a retail pharmacy for a dispensed prescription, converted to price per day of
therapy. This average revenue is the sum of any reimbursement the pharmacy receives from a private
or public payer for a dispensed prescription, plus any copayment or coinsurance amount contributed
directly by the patient at the point of sale. This average revenue, viewed from the perspective of the
retail pharmacy, differs from and is likely considerably larger than the average acquisition cost of the
drug the retail pharmacy pays wholesalers or manufacturers.26 It also differs from the average revenue
net of rebates and other discounts that is received by the manufacturer selling to wholesalers or
providers, and the average amount per prescription contracted among payers, PBMs and manufacturers
– in both these latter cases, rebates from the manufacturer to payers and PBMs make it likely that these
other prices are lower than the average total revenue received by the retail pharmacy. Second, because
the retail pharmacy average revenue price is not directly affected by rebates from manufacturers to
public and private payers, the relative brand-generic prices that payers provide retail pharmacies might
differ considerably once rebates from manufacturers to payers are taken into account. In particular, as

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

21

noted earlier, provisions of the Affordable Care Act of 2010 mandate that Medicaid receive a rebate of
13% off the average manufacturers’ price (AMP) for a generic, and on average approximately 30+%
discount off AMP for a branded patent-protected drug. Third, our sample is very small – six molecules
each for 48 months, and thus these small sample findings cannot at this point be generalized to the
entire U.S. retail pharmaceutical market (a similar analysis of a much larger sample is on our research
agenda).
With these caveats regarding rebates and small sample size in mind, we find that in general the
price levels paid retail pharmacies per day of therapy are highest for cash and Medicaid payers, and are
lowest for other TPPs, with the cash price premium over TPP prices being on average just under 20%. In
terms of growth rates, however, cash prices of patent protected molecules grow at virtually the same
rate as overall market prices (the annualized difference being +0.06%), during 180-day exclusivity the
cash prices fall slightly less rapidly than overall market prices, and post any exclusivity cash prices fall
about 1% more rapidly per month than do overall market prices. Averaged over all six molecules and all
48 months, cash prices fall slightly more rapidly (about 2.4% annually) than do overall market prices. An
implication of this is that if for administrative and logistical reasons statistical agencies such as the U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics find themselves disproportionately reliant on cash transaction price quotes,
the potential consequences for price mis-measurement are likely to be relatively minor. Establishing
this last conclusion will be the focus of our immediate future research program.

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

22

REFERENCES CITED
Aitken, Murray L. and Ernst R. Berndt [2011], “Medicare Part D at Age Five: What Has Happened to
Seniors’ Prescription Drug Prices?”, Report by the IMS Institute for Healthcare Bioinformatics, July.
Aitken, Murray L., Ernst R. Berndt and David M. Cutler [2008], “Prescription Drug Spending Trends in
the United States: Looking Beyond The Turning Point”, Health Affairs Web Exclusive 28(1):W151-60,
2009. Published online 16 December 2008, 10.1377/hlthaff.28.1.w151.
Alpert, Abby, Mark Duggan and Judith K. Hellerstein [2013], “Perverse Reverse Price Competition:
Average Wholesale Prices and Medicaid Pharmaceutical Spending”, August. Available from lead author
at aealpert@uci.edu. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper,
forthcoming September. Forthcoming, Journal of Public Economics.
Appelt, Silvia [2013], “Authorized Generic Entry Prior to Patent Expiry: Reassessing Incentives for
Independent Generic Entry”, Working Paper, University of Munich, May. Available from the author at
silvia.appelt@lrz.uni-muenchen.de.
Avalere Health LLC [2010], “State Policies Regarding Generic Substitution, 2010”. Powerpoint
presentation. Available online at www.avalerehealth.net/research/docs/Generic_Substitution.pdf.
Berndt, Ernst R. and Murray L. Aitken [2011], “Brand Loyalty, Generic Entry and Price Competition in
Pharmaceuticals in the Quarter Century After the 1984 Waxman-Hatch Legislation”, International
Journal of the Economics of Business 18(2):177-201, July 2011.
Berndt, Ernst R., Iain M. Cockburn and Zvi Griliches [1996], “Pharmaceutical Innovation and Market
Dynamics: Tracking Effects on Price Indexes for Antidepressant Drugs”, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity: Microeconomics 1996(2):1133-88.
Berndt, Ernst R., David M. Cutler, Richard G. Frank, Zvi Griliches, Joseph P. Newhouse and Jack E.
Triplett [2000], “Medical Care Prices and Output”, ch. 3 in Anthony Culyer and Joseph P. Newhouse,
eds., Handbook of Health Economics, Amsterdam and New York: Elsevier Sciences B.V., Vol. 1A:11780.
Berndt, Ernst R., Richard Mortimer, Ashoke M. Bhattacharjya, Andrew Parece and Edward Tuttle [2007],
“Authorized Generic Drugs, Price Competition, and Consumers’ Welfare”, Health Affairs 26(3):790-799,
May/June.
Berndt, Ernst R. and Joseph P. Newhouse [2012], “Pricing and Reimbursement in US Pharmaceutical
Markets”, ch. 8 in Patricia M. Danzon and Sean Nicholson, eds., The Oxford Handbook of the Economics
of the Biopharmaceutical Industry, New York: Oxford University Press, 201-265.
Branstetter, Lee G., Chirantan Chatterjee and Matthew J. Higgins [2011], “Regulation and Welfare:
Evidence from Paragraph IV Generic Entry in the Pharmaceutical Industry”, Cambridge, MA: National
Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 17188, June.

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

23

Brill, Alex [2010], “Overspending on Multi-Source Drugs in Medicaid”, Washington DC: American
Enterprise Institute, AEI Health Policy Studies Working Paper @2010-01, July 21. Available online at
http://www.aei.org/paper/100127.
Caves, Richard E., Michael D. Whinston and Mark A. Hurwitz [1991], “Patent Expiration, Entry, and
Competition in the U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity:
Microeconomics, 1991, 1-66.
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services [2012]. “Survey of Retail Prices”, May 31. Available online
at http://medicaid.gov/Medicaid-CHIP-Program-Information/By-Topics/Benefits/PrescriptionDrugs/Survey-of-Retail-Prices.html.
Cook, Anna [1998], How Increased Competition from Generic Drugs Has Affected Prices and Returns in
the Pharmaceutical Industry, Washington DC: The Congress of the United States, Congressional Budget
Office. Available online at http://www.cbo.gov/.
Drug Channels [2012], “Pfizer’s Lipitor Strategy and the 2012 Generic Monster”, March 15. Available
online at http://www.drugchannels.net/2012/03/pfizers-lipitor-strategy-and-2012.html.
Drug Channels [2011], “Ranbaxy Makes Three: The Battle for Generic Lipitor Profits”, December 1.
Available online at http://www.drugchannels.net/2011//12/ranbaxy-makes-three-battle-for-generic.html.
Drug Facts and Comparisons 2011 Edition [2011], St. Louis, MO: Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.
Ellison, Glenn and Sara Fisher Ellison [2011], “Strategic Entry Deterrence and the Behavior of
Pharmaceutical Incumbents Prior to Patent Expiration”, American Economic Journal: Microeconomics
3(1):1-36.
Ellison, Sara Fisher, Iain M. Cockburn, Zvi Griliches and Jerry A. Hausman [1997], “Characteristics of
Demand for Pharmaceutical Products: An Examination of Four Cephalosporins”, RAND Journal of
Economics 28(3):426-46.
Federal Trade Commission [2011], Authorized Generic Drugs: Short-Term Effects and Long-Term
Impact, August. Available online at http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2011/08/genericdrugs.shtm.
Federal Trade Commission [2009], Authorized Generics: An Interim Report of the Federal Trade
Commission, June 24. Available online at
http://www.ftc.gov/os/2009/06/P062105authorizedgenericsreport.pdf.
Federal Trade Commission [2002], Generic Drug Entry Prior to Patent Expiration: An FTC Study, July.
Available online at http://www.ftc.gov/os/2002/07/genericdrugstudy.pdf.
FiercePharma [2012], “Top 15 drug patent losses for 2013”, November 1. Available online at
http://www.fiercepharma.com/special-reports/top-15-patent-expirations-2013.
Frank, Richard G. and David S. Salkever [1997], “Generic Entry and the Pricing of Pharmaceuticals”,
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 6(1):75-90.

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

24

Frank, Richard G. and David S. Salkever [1992], “Pricing, Patent Loss and the Market for
Pharmaceuticals”, Southern Economic Journal 59:165-79.
Generic Pharmaceutical Association [2013], “Generic Industry by the Numbers”, Generic
Pharmaceutical Association 2012 Annual Report. Available online at www.gphaonline.org.
Generic Pharmaceutical Association [2012], Generic Drug Savings in the U.S.: Savings $1 Trillion Over
10 Years, Fourth Annual Edition, August 2. Available online at www.gphaonline.org.
Grabowski, Henry G., Margaret K. Kyle, Richard Mortimer, Genia Long and Noam Kirson [2011],
“Evolving Brand-Name And Generic Drug Competition May Warrant A Revision Of The Hatch-Waxman
Act”, Health Affairs 30(11):2157-66, November.
Grabowski, Henry G. and Margaret K. Kyle [2007], “Generic Competition and Market Exclusivity
Periods in Pharmaceuticals”, Managerial Decision and Economics 28:491-502.
Grabowski, Henry G., Genia Long and Richard Mortimer [2013], “Biosimilars”, unpublished manuscript,
Duke University, August. Forthcoming as ch. 12.8 in Patricia Danzon, ed., Encyclopedia of Health
Economics, New York: Elsevier.
Grabowski, Henry G., Genia Long and Richard Mortimer [2011], “Implementation of the Biosimilar
Pathway: Economic and Policy Issues”, Seton Hall Law Review 41(2):511-557
Grabowski, Henry G. and John M. Vernon [1996], “Longer Patents for Increased Generic Competition in
the US: The Waxman-Hatch Act After One Decade”, PharmacoEconomics 10 Suppl2:110-123.
Grabowski, Henry G. and John M. Vernon [1992], “Brand Loyalty, Entry, and Price Competition in
Pharmaceuticals After the 1984 Drug Act”, Journal of Law and Economics 35:331-350, October.
Griliches, Zvi and Iain M. Cockburn [1994], “Generics and New Goods in Pharmaceutical Price Indexes”,
American Economic Review 84(5):1213-32.
Hemphill, C. Scott and Bhaven N. Sampat [2012], “Evergreening, Patent Challenges, and Effective
Market Life in Pharmaceuticals”, Journal of Health Economics 31(2):327-39, March.
Hurwitz, Mark A. and Richard E. Caves [1988], “Persuasion or Information? Promotion and the Shares
of Brand Name and Generic Pharmaceuticals”, Journal of Law and Economics 31:299-320, October.
Huskamp, Haiden A., Julie M. Donohue, Catherine Koss, Ernst R. Berndt and Richard G. Frank [2008],
“Generic Entry, Reformulations, and Promotion of SSRIs”, PharmacoEconomics 26(7):603-16.
IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics [2013], Declining Medicine Use and Costs: For Better or
Worse?, May. Available online at www.theimsinstitute.org.
Kelton, Christina M. L, Lenisa V. Chang and David H. Kreling [2013], “State Medicaid Programs Missed
$220 Million in Uncaptured Savings As Generic Fluoxetine Came to Market, 2001-05”, Health Affairs
32(7):1204-11, July.

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

25

Medicaid Drug Rebate Program [2013], last updated August 15, 2013. Available online at
http://www.medicaid.gov.
Olson, Luke M. and Brett W. Wendling [2013], “The Effect of Generic Drug Competition on Generic
Drug Prices During the Hatch-Waxman 180-Day Exclusivity Period”, Washington DC: Federal Trade
Commission, Bureau of Economics, Working Paper No. 317, April. Available online at
bwendling@ftc.gov.
Panattoni, Laura E. [2011], “The Effect of Paragraph IV Decisions and Generic Entry Before Patent
Expiration on Brand Pharmaceutical Firms”, Journal of Health Economics 30(1):126-45.
Regan, Tracy L. [2008], “Generic Entry, Price Competition, and Market Segmentation in the Prescription
Drug Market”, International Journal of Industrial Organization 26(4):930-48.
Reiffen, David E. and Michael E. Ward [2007], “’Branded Generics’ as a Strategy to Limit
Cannibalization of Pharmaceutical Markets”, Managerial and Decision Economics 28:251.267.
Reiffen, David E. and Michael E. Ward [2005], “Generic Drug Industry Dynamics”, Review of
Economics and Statistics 87(1):37-49.
Saha, Atanu, Henry G. Grabowski, Howard M. Birnbaum, Paul E. Greenberg and Oded Bizan [2006],
“Generic Competition in the U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry”, International Journal of the Economics of
Business 13(1):15-38, February.
Scott Morton, Fiona M. [2000], “Barriers to Entry, Brand Advertising and Generic Entry in the U.S.
Pharmaceutical Industry”, International Journal of Industrial Organization 18:1085-104.
Scott Morton, Fiona M. [1999], “Entry Decisions in the Generic Pharmaceutical Industry”, The RAND
Journal of Economics 30:421-440.
Smith, Aaron [2007], “Federal judge whacks generic Plavix”, CNN Money.com, June 10, 2007.
Available online at http://money.cnn.com/2007/06/19/news/companies/plavix/index.htm.
Somers, Julie [2010], Effects of Using Generic Drugs on Medicare’s Prescription Drug Spending,
Washington DC: The Congress of the United States, Congressional Budget Office, September. Available
online at http://www.cbo.gov/.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics [2011], “The Pharmaceutical Industry: An
Overview of CPI, PPI, and IPP Methodology”, Office of Prices & Living Conditions, October. Available
online at http://www.bls.gov/ppi/pharmpricescomparison.pdf.
Wang, Xiangnong [2012], “Understanding Current Trends and Outcomes in Generic Drug Patent
Litigation: An Empirical Investigation”, unpublished Masters’ honors thesis, Stanford University: Public
Policy Program, May.
Wiggins, Steven N. and Robert Maness [2004], “Price Competition in Pharmaceuticals: The Case of AntiInfectives”, Economic Inquiry 42(2):247-63.

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

26

Wosinska, Marta and Robert S. Huckman [2004], “Generic Dispensing and Substitution in Mail and
Retail Pharmacies”, Health Affairs – Web Exclusive, W4-409 to W4-416, posted 28 July 2004. Available
online at www.healthaffairs.org. An abstract of the article was published in the hardcopy edition of
Health Affairs 23(5):284, September/October 2004.

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

27
TABLE 1

CHARACTERISTICS OF SIX INITIAL GENERIC LAUNCHES, JUNE 2009 – MAY 2013
(IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER -- ANDA ENTRY DATE, LEFT TO RIGHT)
Trade Name
Generic
Name
NDA
Approval
NME or New
Formulation
Review
Status
Therapeutic
Class

Cozaar
losartan
4/14/1995

Augmentin XR
Ambien CR
amoxicillin/clavu- zolpidem
lanate potassium tartrate
9/25/2002
4/2/2005

Lipitor
Lexapro
Plavix
atorvastatin escitalopram clopidogrel
oxalate
11/17/1996
8/14/02
11/17/97

NME

NF

NF

NME

NF

NME

Standard

Standard

Standard

Priority

Standard

Priority

AIIRA Antihypertensive

Aminopenicillin
antibiotic

Insomnia

Antihyperlipidemic

SSRI antidepressant

NDA Sponsor

Merck

Dr. Reddys Labs

Pfizer

Forest

Mean TRX
Before LOE
Paragraph IV
Challenger
Initial ANDA
Entry Date
Authorized
Generic
Max. No.
Mfrs. during
1-6 Months
No. Mfrs. At
7 Months
No. Mfrs. At
12 Months

634,846

2,281

Sanofi
Aventis
US
371,580

Antiplatelet
aggregation
inhibitor
Sanofi
Aventis US

2,854,162

1,485,203

1,730,464

Teva

Sandoz

4/6/2010

Ranbaxy

Ivax

4/21/2010

Actavis
Elizabeth
10/13/2010

11/30/2011

3/14/2012

Apotex
(forfeited)
5/17/2012

Sandoz

Winthrop

None

Watson

Mylan

None

2

2

2

3

3

12

14

2

4

6

14

13

14

2

5

7

14

13

Notes: NF is new formulation; AIIRA is Angiotensin II Receptor Antagonists; SSRI is selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitor; NDA Sponsor is patent holder at time of patent expiration; Mean TRX Before LOE is
the mean monthly number of prescriptions dispensed in the three full months preceding loss of
exclusivity.

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

28

TABLE 2
MONTHS TO GENERIC PENETRATION RATE THRESHOLDS, JUNE 2009 – MAY 2013
(IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER -- ANDA ENTRY DATE, TOP TO BOTTOM)
Trade Name
Generic Name
Cozaar losartan

Buyer
Type

All
TPP
Medicare
Cash
Medicaid
Augmentin XR
All
amoxicillin/clavu- TPP
lanate potassium Medicare
Cash
Medicaid
Ambien CR
All
zolpidem tartrate TPP
Medicare
Cash
Medicaid
Lipitor
All
atorvastatin
TPP
Medicare
Cash
Medicaid
Lexapro
All
Escitalopram
TPP
oxalate
Medicare
Cash
Medicaid
Plavix clopidogrel All
TPP
Medicare
Cash
Medicaid

Threshold
All Buyers
60%
90%
1
4
1
2
1
3
1
9
8
21
2
4
2
3
2
3
2
9
5
9
3
13
3
10
3
20
3
22
10
1
9
1
9
2
8
1
10
8
11
<1
6
<1
4
<1
4
<1
8
7
11
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
3
1
4

Threshold
Under 65
60%
90%
1
5
1
2
1
2
1
7
8
17
2
4
2
3
2
3
2
9
5
9
3
12
3
10
3
20
3
22
10
31
1
9
1
9
2
8
1
10
8
12
<1
6
<1
4
<1
3
<1
8
7
11
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
4

Threshold
Over 65
60%
90%
1
3
1
3
1
3
1
9
8
24
2
4
2
4
2
3
4
5
4
4
3
17
3
14
3
23
3
16
27
1
8
1
8
2
8
1
11
8
11
<1
5
<1
4
<1
5
1
9
7
13
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
3
1
3

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

29

TABLE 3
QUANTITIES POST-LOE SIX TO NINE MONTHS, AND POST-LOE TEN TO 12 MONTHS,
RELATIVE TO PRE-LOE QUANTITIES, JUNE 2009 – MAY 2013
(IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER -- ANDA ENTRY DATE, TOP TO BOTTOM)
Trade Name
Generic Name
Cozaar losartan

Buyer
Type

All
TPP
Medicare
Cash
Medicaid
Augmentin XR
All
amoxicillin/clavu- TPP
lanate potassium Medicare
Cash
Medicaid
Ambien CR
All
zolpidem tartrate TPP
Medicare
Cash
Medicaid
Lipitor
All
atorvastatin
TPP
Medicare
Cash
Medicaid
Lexapro
All
Escitalopram
TPP
xalate
Medicare
Cash
Medicaid
Plavix clopidogrel All
TPP
Medicare
Cash
Medicaid

All Buyers
Under 65
Over 65
POST/PRE POST/PRE POST/PRE POST/PRE POST/PRE POST/PRE
6-9
10-12
6-9
10-12
6-9
10-12
1.60
1.86
1.67
1.89
1.54
1.81
1.61
1.84
1.72
1.97
1.43
1.58
1.30
1.68
1.78
1.91
1.66
2.04
1.40
1.59
1.57
1.80
1.23
1.37
1.11
1.20
1.13
1.22
1.03
1.09
4.52
4.68
4.50
4.55
4.59
5.17
5.76
5.93
5.87
5.95
4.85
5.25
4.83
5.46
4.46
4.53
5.03
5.99
2.82
2.94
3.09
3.09
1.78
2.06
0.64
0.61
0.64
0.62
0.43
0.41
0.96
0.96
0.97
0.97
0.92
0.89
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.97
0.77
0.78
0.85
0.87
0.71
0.70
0.86
0.84
0.80
0.80
1.12
1.04
0.80
0.73
0.81
0.74
0.62
0.52
1.24
1.31
1.25
1.35
1.22
1.24
1.24
1.29
1.29
1.37
1.11
1.10
1.29
1.36
1.23
1.38
1.31
1.35
1.40
1.89
1.34
1.88
1.49
1.90
0.63
0.75
0.63
0.75
0.63
0.73
1.09
1.14
1.11
1.15
1.01
1.08
1.13
1.18
1.15
1.20
0.94
0.97
1.07
1.10
1.07
1.02
1.06
1.15
0.92
1.12
0.93
1.12
0.90
1.16
0.83
0.81
0.83
0.81
0.70
0.72
1.00
0.98
1.05
0.99
0.98
0.97
1.00
0.95
1.05
1.00
0.93
0.88
1.00
1.00
1.08
0.97
0.99
1.00
1.60
1.45
1.62
1.56
1.56
1.35
0.86
0.80
0.85
0.78
0.96
0.92

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

30

Table 4
Prices and Prescription Shares During the 180-Day Exclusivity Period
for Branded, Generic and Authorized Generic Molecules
Variable/Molecule
Cozaar
Ambien CR
Lipitor
Lexapro
Mean (s.d.) Branded
2.55 (0.06)
6.27 (0.04)
5.13 (0.12)
4.49 (0.20)
Price
Mean (s.d.) Generic
Price
Mean (s.d.) Authorized
Generic Price
Mean (s.d.) Branded
Share
Mean (s.d.) Generic
Share
Mean (s.d.) Authorized
Generic Share

2.19 (0.07)

5.15 (0.35)

3.82 (0.44)

3.06 (0.14)

1.86 (0.10)

4.46 (0.07)

4.46 (0.20)

3.99 (0.10)

0.16 (0.14)

0.44 (0.36)

0.40 (0.27)

0.15 (0.07)

0.50 (0.09)

0.32 (0.23)

0.36 (0.18)

0.48 (0.14)

0.34 (0.05)

0.24 (0.16)

0.24 (0.12)

0.37 (0.07)

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

31

TABLE 5
CASH VERSUS FULL SAMPLE PRICE LEVELS AND GROWTH RATES
(STANDARD DEVIATIONS IN PARENTHESES)
Trade Name
Generic Name
Cozaar losartan

Measure
Mean Cash/Full
Log[P(t)/P(t-1)] Full

Augmentin XR
amoxicillin/clavu
-lanate
potassium

Ambien CR
zolpidem
tartrate

Lipitor
atorvastatin

Log[P(t)/P(t-1)]
Cash
Mean Cash/Full
Log[P(t)/P(t-1)] Full
Log[P(t)/P(t-1)]
Cash
Mean Cash/Full
Log[P(t)/P(t-1)] Full
Log[P(t)/P(t-1)]
Cash
Mean Cash/Full
Log[P(t)/P(t-1)] Full

Lexapro
Escitalopram
oxalate

Plavix
clopidogrel

Log[P(t)/P(t-1)]
Cash
Mean Cash/Full
Log[P(t)/P(t-1)] Full
Log[P(t)/P(t-1)]
Cash
Mean Cash/Full
Log[P(t)/P(t-1)] Full
Log [P(t)/P(t-1)
Cash

Full 48
Months
1.19
(0.107)
-0.017
(0.046)
-0.019
(0.048)
1.24
(0.027)
-0.006
(0.019)
-0.005
(0.029)
1.21
(0.041)
-0.005
(0.022)
-0.003
(0.020)
1.11
(0.157)
-0.013
(0.061)
-0.024
(0.092)
1.16
(0.039)
-0.005
(0.044)
-0.007
(0.036)
1.11
(0.053)
-0.012
(0.079)
-0.012
(0.063)

Pre LOE
1.17
(0.014)
0.007
(0.013)
0.010
(0.011)
1.23
(0.015)
-0.002
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.019)
1.16
(0.013)
0.011
(0.021)
0.012
(0.018)
1.15
(0.009)
0.009
(0.021)
0.009
(0.024)
1.16
(0.007)
0.010
(0.020)
0.010
(0.018)
1.09
(0.013)
0.009
(0.019)
0.008
(0.017)

During
180 Day
1.20
(0.005)
-0.031
(0.039)
-0.032
(0.043)
1.25
(0.035)
-0.035
(0.039)
-0.031
(0.056)
1.18
(0.021)
-0.033
(0.035)
-0.026
(0.031)
1.14
(0.011)
-0.023
(0.041)
-0.019
(0.032)
1.13
(0.012)
-0.025
(0.034)
-0.026
(0.032)
-

Post 180
Day
1.20
(0.133)
-0.011
(0.026)
-0.018
(0.047)
1.23
(0.034)
-0.003
(0.010)
-0.0002
(0.026)
1.24
(0.022)
-0.008
(0.010)
-0.008
(0.010)
1.02
(0.303)
-0.039
(0.064)
-0.093
(0.156)
1.21
(0.078)
-0.016
(0.031)
-0.032
(0.028)
1.17
(0.078)
-0.060
(0.140)
-0.056
(0.010)

Figure 1 – Price per Day of Therapy

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

32

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

33

APPENDIX: BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE SIX MOLECULES IN THE DATA SAMPLE
Cozaar (losartan)
Two weeks after Cozaar, an antihypertensive, was approved by the FDA, Merck obtained FDA
approval for Hyzaar, a combination product that contained Cozaar (losartan potassium) as one
component and a very old off-patent beta blocker called hydrochlorothiazide as the other component.
Teva successfully challenged a Merck patent underyling both Cozaar and Hyzaar, and was granted 180day exclusivity effective April 5, 2010 and launched its product one day later. Merck contracted with
Sandoz to launch an authorized generic version of Cozaar coinciding with the launch of Teva’s generic
Cozaar. On October 6, 2010 when 180-day exclusivity expired, massive generic entry occurred at all
three Cozaar dosages, with 12 new ANDAs entering.
Augmentin XR (amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium)
Although GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) was the original NDA holder for Augmentin XR, a combination
antibiotic product with amoxicillin – an old penicillin) and clavulate potassium as components, at the
time of patent expiration in 2010, the NDA holder was Dr. Reddys Labs, Inc., a manufacturer best known
as a generic manufacturer. According to Drugs@FDA, Sandoz is the only FDA-recognized ANDA entrant.
Currently there are only two manufacturers (Dr. Reddy’s Labs, Inc. and Sandoz).This may be explained by
the relatively small market size (2,281 mean monthly prescriptions) and the complexity of
manufacturing processes of the extended release version. Notably, the recommended use of this
antibiotic is a twice-daily dosing for 7-10 days27, implying that the recommended number of extended
units in a typical single episode prescription (14-20) is smaller than for 30 or 90-day prescriptions of
once daily maintenance medications (in effect an even smaller market than is implied by the
prescription count).

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

34

Ambien CR (zolpidem tartrate)
Ambien CR is an extended release version of Ambien immediate release (Ambien CR has a
pharmacokinetic activity that provides an immediate dose release to facilitate getting to sleep, but then
provides a sustained release that facilitates a longer duration of sleeping). Sanofi Aventis US obtained
FDA approval for Ambien CR about 18 months before the Ambien immediate release patent expiry.
Actavis was granted 180-day exclusivity for the 6.25 mg formulation on October 13, 2010, while Anchen
was awarded exclusivity for the 12.5 mg formulation on December 3, 2010. Winthrop, a subsidiary of
Sanofi Aventis US, launched an authorized generic for each of the dosage forms within days of each
exclusivity taking effect. Sublingual (under the tongue) and oral spray formulations at varying dosages
are also available having different brand names Edluar, Intermezzo and Zolpimist, but they are not rated
as therapeutic equivalents to Ambien CR by the FDA.
Lipitor (atorvastatin)
Perhaps the most highly publicized patent expiry in the last decade was that for Pfizer’s Lipitor
(atorvastatin), a drug controlling cholesterol lipids. Patents on all formulations were successfully
challenged by Ranbaxy, who was awarded 180-day exclusivity on its ANDA on November 30, 2011 that
expired May 28, 2012. However, Pfizer contracted with Watson (later Actavis)28 to market an
authorized generic version of all dosages, and also initiated an aggressive coupon program that reduced
considerably the customer copayment typically required for branded drugs on the second or higher tier
of a formulary.29 During the exclusivity period, therefore, there were three competitors (Pfizer’s brand,
its authorized generic through Watson, and Ranbaxy) and on the day exclusivity expired, three
additional ANDA holders entered at all four dosages (Apotex, Mylan and Sandoz). A notable feature of
the Lipitor-atorvastatin patent expiry is that even though it had the largest pre-LOE market size, more
than a year after the May 2012 unfettered ANDA entry, there are only five ANDA holders competing at
each dosage strength; as seen in Table 1, for other molecules the number of ANDA holder entrants is

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

35

much larger, at 12-15 entrants. The small number of competitors in this market is curious – it may
reflect the fact that the small number of approved ANDA holders are each known to have substantial
manufacturing capacity, or that Pfizer’s highly publicized aggressive protection of its brand reduced the
perceived payoff to entry by generic manufacturers.30
Lexapro
Lexapro (escitalopram oxalate) is an antidepressant marketed in the US by Forest Labs; its NDA was
approved as a new formulation (it is an isomer of the earlier Forest antidepressant drug Celexa –
citalopram – both of which were licensed into Forest after being on the European market for a number
of years). Ivax was awarded 180-day exclusivity effective March 14, 2012 for all three tablet versions.
On the day after exclusivity expiration – September 11, 2012 -- a total of nine additional generic entrants
came to market, each offering tablets at all three dosages, and the next day two additional entrants
were launched, for a total of 12 generic manufacturers of escitalopram immediately following the
exclusivity period.
Plavix
The launch of Plavix (clopidogrel) represented the culmination of contentious legal skirmishes
among Sanofi, Bristol Myers Squibb (the US marketer of Plavix), Apotex and various states’ Attorneys
General. Initial proposed settlements between BMS and Apotex allowing Apotex to have several
months of exclusivity were rejected by the Attorneys General, and eventually Apotex acceded to
forfeiting any rights to exclusivity. The Plavix patent finally expired on May 17, 2012, on which date with
unfettered generic entry seven ANDAs launched at 75 mg and four at 300 mg; as of June 10, 2013, there
appear to be 13 ANDA entrants at the 75 mg formulation, and six at the 300 mg dosage.

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

36

ENDNOTES
1

See, for example, Aitken, Berndt and Cutler [2008], Aitken and Berndt [2011], Berndt and Aitken [2011], and
Generic Pharmaceutical Association [2012, 2013].
2
Berndt, Cockburn and Griliches [1996], Caves, Whinston and Hurwitz [1991], Cook [1998], Ellison, Cockburn,
Griliches and Hausman [1997], Ellison and Ellison [2011], Frank and Salkever [1992, 1997], Grabowski and Kyle
[2007], Grabowski, Kyle, Mortimer, Long and Kirson [2011], Grabowski, Long and Mortimer [2011, 2013],
Grabowski and Vernon [1992, 1996],Griliches and Cockburn [2004], Hurwitz and Caves [1998], Reiffen and Ward
[2005], Saha, Grabowski, Birnbaum, Greenberg and Bizan [2006], Scott Morton [1999, 2000] and Wiggins and
Maness [2004].
3
Cook [1998], Frank and Salkever [1992, 1997], Regan [2008], and Wiggins and Maness [2004].
4
Aitken, Berndt and Cutler [2008], and Caves, Whinston and Hurwitz [1991].
5
Grabowski, Kyle, Mortimer, Long and Kirson [2011], Grabowski and Kyle [2007], and Hemphill and Sampat [2012].
6
Other aspects studied include factors determining the extent and composition of generic manufacturer entry
(Scott Morton [1999, 2000]), characteristics of molecules that impede or accelerate generic penetration
(Grabowski, Long and Mortimer [2011,2013]), differential therapeutic class composition between retail and mail
order generic drug dispensing (Wosinska and Huckman [2004]), and variation among states with large public
funded programs such as Medicaid in exploiting cost savings opportunities following the brand’s LOE (Avalere
Health LLC [2010], Brill [2010] and Kelton, Chang and Kreling [2013]).
7
Appelt [[2013]; Berndt, Mortimer, Bhattacharjya, Parece and Tuttle [2007], Branstetter, Chatterjee and Higgins
[2011]; Federal Trade Commission [2002, 2009, 2011], Grabowski, Kyle, Mortimer, Long and Kirson [2011],
Hemphill and Sampat [2012], Olson and Wendling [2013], Panattoni [2011], and Wang [2012].
8
Federal Trade Commission [2011].
9
Appelt [2013], Berndt, Mortimer, Bhattacharjya, Parece and Tuttle [2007], Olson and Wendling [2013] and
Reiffen and Ward [2007]. For a discussion of the implications of Paragraph IV challenges on consumers’ and
producers’ welfare, see Branstetter, Chatterjee and Higgins [2011].
10
See, however, Federal Trade Commission [2011], ch. 3 and Alpert, Duggan and Hellerstein [2013].
11
Berndt, Cutler, Frank, Griliches, Newhouse and Triplett [2000], and U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
Statistics [2011].
12
Federal Trade Commission [2011] and Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services [2012].
13
One brand product, Plavix (generic name clopidogrel), faced an at-risk launch by Apotex in August 2006; later
that month Bristol Myers Squibb (the firm marketing Plavix in the US) obtained an injunction preventing further
production and distribution by Apotex, and subsequently won a patent infringement case against Apotex. As the
single non-brand entrant in the market for the three-week period, Apotex charged about 87% of the brand’s price,
but stuffed inventory channels with massive sales. Although Apotex had been awarded tentative Paragraph IV
exclusivity, this exclusivity was forfeited by Apotex. By late 2007 Apotex’s clopidogrel inventory had essentially
disappeared from the US retail marketplace. We therefore treat the May 2012 launch of generic clopidogrel as the
initial LOE for Plavix, and not the August 2006 at-risk launch by Apotex. Additional details are given in BerndtAitken [2011]; for a journalist’s account of the Plavix – clopidogrel episode, see Smith [2007].
14
See, for example, Grabowski and Vernon [1992,1996], Griliches and Cockburn [1994], Ellison, Cockburn, Griliches
and Hausman [1997], Cook [1998], Aitken, Berndt and Cutler [2008], and Berndt and Newhouse [2012].
15
For the purpose of calculating Average Manufacturer’s Price (AMP) and Best Prices that trigger Medicaid
rebates, since 2007 the prices of authorized generics have been treated as brand prices, not generic (Federal Trade
Commission [2011], p. 13 and Appendix J). For brands, in addition to the statutory 23.1% rebate, the extent to
which the brand’s current quarter AMP has exceeded growth in the Consumer Price Index-Urban since product
launch is applied to the rebate, implying that for many brands, the total Medicaid rebate is above 30%. For noninnovator multisource drugs (independent generics), the rebate is 13% of AMP, with no adjustment for excess
price inflation. See Medicaid Drug Rebate Program [2013].

Generics and Loss of Exclusivity 2013

16

37

See, for example, Berndt, Cockburn and Griliches [1996], Caves, Whinston and Hurwitz [1991], Cook [1998],
Ellison and Ellison [2011], Grabowski and Vernon [1996], Hurwitz and Caves [1988], Huskamp, Donohue, Koss,
Berndt and Frank [2008] and Regan [2008].
17
The number of Augmentin XR prescriptions in the three months pre-LOE displayed no growth pattern; the
increase post-LOE represents a break in trend (results not shown).
18
Wosinska and Huckman [2004] discuss variations in the therapeutic class composition between prescriptions
dispensed by retail versus mail order.
19
Trends in mail order vs. retail prescription copayment levels and coinsurance rates are discussed in Berndt and
Newhouse [2012], pp. 241-48.
20
For a preliminary theoretical analysis and empirical implementation based on data from the 1980s and 1990s,
see Reiffen and Ward [2007].
21
When the authorized generic is launched by the subsidiary of the brand (e.g., Winthrop for Sanofi Aventis), the
brand franchise captures all non-independent generic sales dollars. However, when the brand licenses out
authorized generic marketing rights to an independent generic manufacturer, the brand franchise still benefits
from royalties it receives from the independent generic manufacturer. In recent years, according to the Federal
Trade Commission [2011, p. 85], this royalty rate has been 90% and above.
22
See, for example, Drug Channels [2012].
23
Ibid. Also see Federal Trade Commission [2011, chs. 3 and 6] and Olson and Wendling [2013].
24
IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics [2013], pp. 8,12; FiercePharma [2012].
25
Drug Channels [2011, 2012].
26
For details, see Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services [2012]; also see Drug Channels [2011, 2012].
27
Drug Facts and Comparisons [2011], p. 2088.
28
Pfizer entered into an authorized generic arrangement with a generic challenger (Arrow) on a separate patent
dispute, and Arrow was subsequently acquired by Watson, which merged with Actavis.
29
rd
The coupon program was only available to cash or 3 party patients in states that did not preclude use of
coupons. Though highly visible and heavily promoted in mass media, the number of patients that participated in
the program appears to have been quite small, likely well below 10% of those eligible.
30
On the market’s perception of the reputation of Pfizer and its generic subsidiary, Greenstone, see Federal Trade
Commission [2011], p. 82.

