                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   DOES ECONOMIC GROWTH REDUCE CORRUPTION? THEORY AND EVIDENCE
                          FROM VIETNAM

                                              Jie Bai
                                        Seema Jayachandran
                                        Edmund J. Malesky
                                        Benjamin A. Olken

                                        Working Paper 19483
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19483


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2013




We thank Lori Beaman, Raymond Fisman, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Supreet Kaur, Neil McCulloch, Andrei
Shleifer, Matthew Stephenson, Eric Verhoogen, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya for helpful comments.
The PCI survey data used in this paper was funded by USAID, and was collected by Development
Alternatives Incorporated with the cooperation of the Vietnam Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of any of
these organizations or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19483.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Jie Bai, Seema Jayachandran, Edmund J. Malesky, and Benjamin A. Olken. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Economic Growth Reduce Corruption? Theory and Evidence from Vietnam
Jie Bai, Seema Jayachandran, Edmund J. Malesky, and Benjamin A. Olken
NBER Working Paper No. 19483
September 2013
JEL No. D73,O11,O40

                                             ABSTRACT

Government corruption is more prevalent in poor countries than in rich countries. This paper uses
cross-industry heterogeneity in growth rates within Vietnam to test empirically whether growth leads
to lower corruption. We find that it does. We begin by developing a model of government officials'
choice of how much bribe money to extract from firms that is based on the notion of inter-regional
tax competition, and consider how officials' choices change as the economy grows. We show that
economic growth is predicted to decrease the rate of bribe extraction under plausible assumptions,
with the benefit to officials of demanding a given share of revenue as bribes outweighed by the increased
risk that firms will move elsewhere. This effect is dampened if firms are less mobile. Our empirical
analysis uses survey data collected from over 13,000 Vietnamese firms between 2006 and 2010 and
an instrumental variables strategy based on industry growth in other provinces. We find, first, that
firm growth indeed causes a decrease in bribe extraction. Second, this pattern is particularly true for
firms with strong land rights and those with operations in multiple provinces, consistent with these
firms being more mobile. Our results suggest that as poor countries grow, corruption could subside
"on its own,'' and they demonstrate one type of positive feedback between economic growth and good
institutions.


Jie Bai                                             Edmund J. Malesky
Department of Economics                             Duke University
Massachusetts Institute of Technology               Gross Hall
77 Massachusetts Ave                                140 Science Drive
Cambridge, MA 02139                                 Durham, NC 27708
jieb@mit.edu                                        ejm5@duke.edu

Seema Jayachandran                                  Benjamin A. Olken
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
Northwestern University                             Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2001 Sheridan Road                                  77 Massachusetts Avenue
Evanston, IL 60208                                  Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER                                            and NBER
seema@northwestern.edu                              bolken@mit.edu
1     Introduction
A striking fact about government corruption is that, no matter how you measure it, it is
higher in poor countries. For example, the 10 least corrupt countries in the 2009 Trans-
parency International Corruption Perceptions Index, such as New Zealand, the Netherlands,
and Canada, had an average real GDP per capita of $36,700; the 10 most corrupt coun-
tries, such as Haiti, Turkmenistan, and Afghanistan, had an average real GDP per capita
of $5,100. This relationship is easy to see in the raw data: Figure 1 shows scatter plots of
the two major corruption indices, the Transparency International Corruption Index and the
World Bank Control of Corruption Index, plotted against real (i.e., PPP-adjusted) GDP per
capita, and shows a clear downward-sloping relationship between corruption and GDP.
    The strong correlation between economic development and corruption does not appear to
be an artifact of misplaced perceptions. Data on individual bribe payments from household
surveys conducted in several countries show the same pattern (e.g., Mocan (2004)), as do
survey data collected from firms around the world. Figure 2 plots the fraction of firms
surveyed by the World Bank Enterprise Survey that reported they were expected to give
gifts to public officials in order to “get anything done” against real GDP per capita, and
once again, there is a downward-sloping relationship.
    While there is a general consensus about the cross-sectional facts, we know relatively little
about why corruption is lower in rich countries. One hypothesis is that this pattern reflects a
negative causal effect of corruption on economic growth: Corruption discourages investment
which, in turn, depresses growth (Mauro, 1995; Wei, 1999a). Such a link suggests that
rooting out corruption could be critical in achieving higher growth in developing countries.
    However, the correlation between income and corruption could also reflect the reverse
causal link: Economic growth may reduce corruption, so as countries grow, corruption nat-
urally declines (Treisman, 2000). In this paper, we propose a mechanism through which this
may occur, based on the idea of inter-regional competition. We model how economic growth
affects the bribes that bureaucrats extract from firms, and then test the predictions using
a data set of firms in Vietnam that includes information on the bribes the firms paid to
government officials.
    We begin by laying out a simple neoclassical model in which the government is able to
extract an unlimited amount of bribes from a firm, for example, because it could shut down
the firm if it does not comply. What puts a check on bribe extraction is that if the amount


                                                1
is too high, a firm will move elsewhere. The government chooses a percentage of a firm’s
revenues to extract as bribes, trading off higher bribe income generated by a higher bribe
rate against the increase in the firm’s incentive to leave.
   The model predicts, under reasonable assumptions about firms’ moving costs, that an
exogenous increase in firm productivity reduces the proportion of firm revenues that are
extracted as bribes. Specifically, the assumption needed is that moving costs are concave in
firm size, which would be true for example if there is any fixed costs associated with moving.
If this is true, then for a fixed bribe rate, a firm’s net benefits of moving (reduced bribes
minus moving costs) increase as the firm grows. To offset this greater incentive of firms to
move, the government will respond by reducing the proportion of revenues that it extracts
as bribes. Bribes become a smaller part of the economy as firms grow.
   The model also predicts that if corrupt officials can price-discriminate among firms (as
in, e.g., Svensson (2003)), this negative effect of growth on corruption will be heterogeneous,
depending on individual firms’ ability to move. Intuitively, if firms are completely tied to
one region, then inter-regional competition as a check on the level of bribes vanishes. We
show that this intuition also holds for how growth affects bribes: Economic growth reduces
corruption by a greater amount if firms are more able to move elsewhere.
   We examine the relationship between economic growth and corruption empirically, and
show that the data are consistent the predictions of the model, using within-country variation
and firm-level data from Vietnam. We use the Provincial Competitiveness Index (PCI)
survey (Malesky, 2011), an annual survey of firms that asks how much the firm paid in
bribes to government officials as a percentage of their revenues. We construct a repeated
cross-section across province-industries from 2006 to 2010, comprised of data on a total of
about 13,000 individual firms, and examine how the bribe-paying rate varies with firms’
growth (or more precisely, with their predicted growth).
   The PCI survey is designed to study the investment environment across Vietnam’s 63
provinces and therefore collects data on a representative sample of firms in each province.
The survey instrument asks respondents to reflect specifically on their interactions with
provincial officials, allowing us to treat each province as a jurisdiction in which bureaucrats
determine how much to extract from local firms. The reason the PCI specifically asks
about dealings with provincial officials is that bureaucratic corruption is largely decentralized
in Vietnam, with provincial governments, as opposed to the central government, wielding



                                               2
the most power to extract bribes from firms (Meyer and Nguyen, 2005; Cung, Tuan, Van,
and Dapice, 2004; Tran, Grafton, and Kompas, 2009). This institutional feature informs
our theoretical and empirical frameworks, in which we treat the province as the relevant
geographic unit for bribe extraction and inter-provincial competition as a force that can
keep corruption in check. There is also suggestive evidence of corruption as a factor in firms’
location decisions: The most recent wave of the PCI collected data from some firms on what
might prompt them to relocate, and 20 percent of them cited the quality of local governance.
       As shown in Figure 3, during our study period of 2006 to 2010, nationally Vietnam was
growing rapidly, and corruption as measured in the PCI was falling. These time trends
are suggestive, but do not isolate the causal impact of growth on corruption. To test for
a causal relationship, we use detailed micro data and track how shocks to predicted firm
profitability affect the bribes that provincial officials extract from the firm. As a source
of plausibly exogenous variation in a firm’s economic performance, we predict a firm’s size
(employment level) using the aggregate size of the firm’s industry in the rest of Vietnam,
excluding the firm’s province itself. This identification strategy is similar to the “shift-share”
or Bartik approach that is commonly used (Bartik, 1991; Blanchard and Katz, 1992; Bound
and Holzer, 2000). To construct this aggregate measure, we use a census of firms conducted
by Vietnam’s General Statistical Organization (GSO) and calculate aggregate employment
at the province-industry-year level. We show that industry-wide performance is indeed a
strong predictor of a firm’s performance.1
       Using this approach, we find that when a firm’s predicted growth increases, the rate
of bribe extraction decreases, consistent with the model’s predictions. To the best of our
knowledge, this provides the first within-country causal evidence that economic growth leads
to lower corruption.
       We then test for the heterogeneous patterns predicted by the model. To capture het-
erogeneity in moving costs, we use variation in whether firms possess a Land Use Rights
Certificate (LURC), which gives them secure and transferable property rights over their
land. These property rights make firms more mobile, since they increase their ability to sell
their land and relocate should they wish to do so.2 We test whether having more secure
   1
     Growth in aggregate employment arises from both growth in the number of firms and employment growth
of existing firms. Our theoretical predictions are about the growth of existing firms. Empirically, most of
the growth in aggregate industry employment at the province-year level occurs via the growth of existing
firms. See footnote 19 for further details.
   2
     Several recent papers have documented an analogous positive effect of property rights over land on


                                                    3
and transferable property rights enhances the negative effect of growth on corruption and
find that it indeed does. When a firm owns the plot of land on which it operates and has
official permits for that land—so that it is presumably more mobile—economic growth has
a stronger negative effect on bribes.
    We also find similar patterns using a second measure of mobility: having operations in
multiple provinces. Firms with a presence in multiple provinces can more easily scale back
operations in one province and shift elsewhere where they might be subject to less corruption.
Thus, the economic growth should put more downward pressure on bribes for this group.
We find empirical support for this prediction as well.
    While the data are consistent with interjurisdictional competition being a mechanism
through which economic growth reduces bribery, it is not the only potential mechanism
for this effect. We discuss several alternative models, such as a fixed cost of enforcement or
changes in industry concentration associated with the employment shock. A key differentiat-
ing factor is that these other models do not generally explain the fact that the responsiveness
of bribes to shocks is stronger for firms that appear more mobile. While we argue that no
other model explains the complete set of facts we find – so the model we lay out is likely
at play – it is also important to note interjurisdictional competition is not the only possible
mechanism and that other mechanisms likely also contribute to the overall effect of growth
on bribery that we detect empirically.
    Our findings make several contributions to the literature on corruption in developing
countries. First, we provide some of the first micro empirical evidence on the effect of
economic growth on corruption. Our finding that economic growth reduces bribery suggests
that countries might “grow” their way out of corruption. In this case, it may not be necessary
to root out corruption to spur growth, but rather corruption might subside as a country
grows.3
    Second, our findings contribute to the broader literature on the effects of economic growth
on institutions, providing the first empirical evidence that we know of for the idea that inter-
regional competition could reduce corruption and showing that this effect is greater for more
migration for individuals, showing that land titling in Mexico increased both domestic (de Janvry, Emerick,
Gonzalez-Navarro, and Sadoulet, 2012) and international (Valsecchi, 2011) migration.
    3
      At the cross-country level, the most related work is Treisman (2000), who finds that per-capita income,
instrumented by geography, negatively predicts corruption. Treisman (2007), however, notes that this re-
lationship does not necessarily hold once one uses microdata-based measures of corruption of the sort we
examine here.



                                                     4
mobile firms.4 The literature on institutions and growth suggests that economic growth could
improve the quality of political and economic institutions, and we confirm this hypothesis
for the case of bureaucratic corruption (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2005; Glaeser,
La Porta, Lopez-de Silanes, and Shleifer, 2004).
       Third, our finding that better property rights for firms coupled with economic growth
can reduce corruption adds to the literature on the economics benefits of property rights.
Strong theoretical and empirical evidence exists for the relationship between property rights,
domestic investment, and growth (North, 1991; De Long and Shleifer, 1993; Weingast, 1995;
Goldstein and Udry, 2008; Jones, 1981; Acemoglu and Johnson, 2005; Olson, 2000). De Soto
(1989) and De Soto (2000) famously predicted that through the provision of land titles, en-
trepreneurs in the informal sector could be transformed into an important source of economic
growth in the developing world. Since the publication of that piece, convincing evidence
has been found that allocation of land rights increases household investment (Galiani and
Schargrodsky, 2010), belief in the power and fairness of the market (Di Tella, Galiant, and
Schargrodsky, 2007), and the number of hours dedicated to productive work (Field, 2007).
We provide a new dimension to literature on the economic benefits of property rights by
demonstrating how land titling can restrain the grabbing hand of local authorities in the
presence of economic growth.
       Besides contributing to the literatures on corruption and property rights, our paper is
also related to the literature on inter-regional tax competition. The decision problem we
model of a bureaucrat setting a bribe rate is analogous to the problem of local governments
setting tax rates (Epple and Zelenitz, 1981; Epple and Romer, 1991; Wildasin, 2003; Wilson,
1986). A recent study by Diamond (2012) uses a similar framework to study the effect of
workers’ migration elasticity on the magnitude of rent extraction by state and local gov-
ernments. Where we differ from her study and many previous tax competition papers is in
the comparative statics we are interested in: We derive (and test) not just the determinants
of the level of rents (taxes or bribes) but also the effects of economic growth in such an
   4
     From a theoretical perspective, Rose-Ackerman (1978) and Shleifer and Vishny (1993) are among the
first to argue that competition between bureaucrats can reduce corruption, though they consider a different
framework than the one we present here. The closest analogue to the ideas developed here is Menes (2006),
who noted in her qualitative study of US cities that the ability of firms to relocate to other jurisdictions
was one potential reason why urban corruption in the pre-Progressive era was not more severe. Burgess
et al. (2012) show in the context of illegal logging in Indonesia that Cournot-style competition between
jurisdictions can decrease the price of bribes, though in their context that actually leads to more corrupt
activity, rather than less.



                                                     5
environment, which, to our knowledge, has not been a focus of the tax literature but could
also apply in that context.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model. Section
3 describes our data and background information on Vietnam. Section 4 describes the
empirical strategy, and section 5 presents the results and discusses alternative explanations.
Section 6 concludes.



2     Model
We consider a model in which governments choose how much to extract from firms to max-
imize their bribe revenue. Governments balance the revenues they raise from extracting
higher bribes from firms with an increased risk that by extracting too much from firms in
their jurisdictions, some firms may choose to relocate to other jurisdictions with lower cor-
ruption. For firms, a bribe is just an additional payment to government, analogous to a tax.
The model is therefore similar to models of inter-regional tax competition, where we think
of a bribe payment as a type of tax.
    The basic idea that underlies most of the papers in the tax competition literature is
that mobile factors can adjust their location to any inter-regional differentials in taxation
or benefits. Local governments thus need to take into account such potential reaction when
designing redistributive policies. Each local government chooses its tax parameters strate-
gically trying to influence migration or capital movement. Models either assume that each
region is a small economy among many, or that two regions (usually perfectly symmetric)
play a Nash game, though the implications are generally robust to the choice of modeling
approach. Cremer and Fourgeaud (1995) provide a comprehensive survey of this literature.
In this paper, we adopt the second approach and consider a two-region Nash equilibrium.
    The key distinction of our model compared to the previous literature is that we focus
not just on the equilibrium level of taxes/bribes, but also examine how the level of bribes
changes with productivity shocks. It is this comparative static that generates predictions
about how economic development affects the amount of corruption in the economy. We
also derive how the relationship between productivity shocks and the equilibrium bribe rate
varies based on the firm’s ease of relocating to another jurisdiction. In this section, we will
set up the problem and state the key propositions. Details of the mathematical derivations


                                              6
and proofs can be found in the Appendix.
       We assume that there are two provinces, denoted 1 and 2.5 Each province is endowed
with a unit mass of incumbent firms. Government and firms play a static game and move
sequentially. First, the government in each province p sets a bribe rate bp , which is the
percent of a firm’s revenues that it must pay in bribes.6 Next, firms in each province choose
whether to stay in the province or relocate to the other province. Finally, firms choose their
factors of production, they produce, and the government collects bribes.
       We begin by specifying the firm’s problem, then the problem for local governments, and
lastly characterize the equilibrium. Suppose all firms have the same two-factor Cobb-Douglas
production function with diminishing returns to scale. We assume diminishing returns to
scale in order to pin down firm size and generate profits in equilibrium. Capital and labor are
perfectly elastically supplied at the same wage rate w and interest rate r in both provinces.
Denote the bribe rate set in period 1 in province p as bp . We focus on the problem for firms
in province 1 (naturally the analysis is symmetric for firms in province 2). A typical firm in
province 1 solves
                                   max (1 − b1 )AK α Lβ − wL − rK                                       (1)
                                 K≥0,L≥0

where A is the total factor productivity of the firm. We can also think of A as encompassing
the price of the products in the firm’s industry. This maximization problem yields the
following familiar results:

                              L∗    rβ
                                ∗
                                  =                                                                     (2)
                              K     wα
                                                                          1
                                                                 −β ! α+β−1
                                                r            rβ
                              K∗ =                                                                      (3)
                                           (1 − b1 )Aα       wα
                               π ∗ = (1 − b1 )AK ∗α L∗β − wL∗ − rK ∗                                    (4)


In addition to affecting the firm’s decision of whether to move as described below, the bribe
rate also affects the firm’s optimal choice of capital and its profits: the higher the rate of
bribe extraction b1 , the smaller the firm’s capital stock and profits will be.
   5
     The same results apply in a context where we have a large number of jurisdictions, and firms everywhere
face some fixed outside option.
   6
     We focus on bribes as a percent of revenues because this is the variable we observe in our empirical
analysis. All of the results shown here go through if we instead use bribes as a proportion of the firm’s
capital stock K. Details for the alternative model are available upon request.



                                                     7
       The firm will choose to stay in province 1 if and only if profits in province 1 are greater
than profits in province 2 less moving costs, i.e. if πf∗1 ≥ πf∗2 − m, where m is the firm’s
moving costs. To proceed, we need to impose some structure on the moving costs m. We
specify the moving costs for firm i as


                                                 mi = θAη i .                                                (5)


The term Aη captures the fact that the moving costs should be increasing in firm size. For
example, the firm’s capital stock would need to be moved or sold and repurchased with
transaction costs, and larger firms have a larger capital stock. Similarly, new employees
would have to be recruited, hired, and trained, and larger firms have more employees. In
the context of the model, A is directly related to firm size; higher TFP firms have a larger
                                                                                      7
capital stock and more employees, and therefore larger moving costs.                      The exponent η ≥ 0
captures the degree to which moving costs are increasing in the size of the firm.
       Conditional on firm size, moving costs vary across firms in two ways. First, the θ term
captures the part of the firm’s moving costs that is observable to the government, with
higher θ corresponding to higher moving costs. In our empirical analysis, we focus on a
firm’s property rights status and whether it has operations in multiple provinces as proxies
for the observable components of its moving costs. Second, moving costs include a stochastic
term  that varies across firms. Crucially, while θ will be observable to the government in
determining bribe rates, the idiosyncratic part of the moving costs  is unobserved.
       Putting the pieces together, a firm in province 1 chooses to stay if and only if


                                          π1∗ ≥ π2∗ − θAη ,         or
                                                π∗ − π∗
                                            ≥ 2 η 1                                                          (6)
                                                   θA

To simplify the algebra, we further assume that  is uniformly distributed over [0, 1].8 The
   7
      Note that all of our key results are robust to instead parameterizing the moving costs in terms of the
capital stock K ∗ , rather than in terms of A, but this is more complicated because K ∗ is endogenously
determined, whereas A is an exogenous parameter of the model. To do so, one could parameterize moving
costs as θK ∗η i , where K ∗ refers to the equilibrium level of capital that is chosen in province 1. The idea
is that if you move, you must move your existing capital stock to province 2, and then readjust. Details for
this alternative model are available upon request.
    8
      This assumption simplifies the algebra but is not essential; all of the key results go through for arbitrary
distributional forms of the error term.



                                                        8
                                                                                              π2∗ −π1∗ 9
equilibrium number of firms for a given θ in province 1 is therefore simply 1 −                 θAη
                                                                                                      .    Since
the problem is symmetric for both provinces, this expression will be greater than 1 if b1 < b2
(firms are moving into province 1 from province 2), and less than 1 if b1 > b2 (firms are
moving out of province 1 to province 2).
       The two governments in period 1 set bribe rates, taking firms’ response and the other
province’s bribe rate as given. To solve this, we consider the government in province 1. It
takes b2 as given and solves,

                                                   π2∗ − π1∗
                                                            
                                                  ∗α   ∗β
                                   max b1 AK L  1−                                                           (7)
                                   b1 ≥0              θAη

Assuming a symmetric equilibrium, the first-order condition can be simplified to:

                                                       dK ∗ b∗1 K ∗ dπ1∗
                                 K ∗ + b∗1 (α + β)         +             =0                                  (8)
                                                       db1   θAη db1

After some algebra, we get:
                                          β                               !
                          1 1−η       rβ                   α+β       1
                            A                   K ∗α+β +                        b∗ = 1                       (9)
                          θ           wα                 1 − α − β 1 − b∗

Note that we have suppressed the province subscript since b∗1 = b∗2 in equilibrium.
       Several aspects of the equilibrium condition in Equation (9) are worth noting. First,
as θ goes to +∞, or firms are completely immobile, the expression simplifies such that
b∗ = 1 − α − β. This implies that the greater the diminishing returns to scale, the higher
the bribe rate. Intuitively, if output is highly concave in capital, even when the bribe rate is
reduced, firms will not expand their capital stock much due to diminishing returns. Thus,
the elasticity of capital with respect to the bribe rate is low. The same applies to labor.
Therefore, when the government increases the bribe rate, it can extract more revenue from
firms without discouraging production. Hence, the optimal bribe rate is higher.
       The second observation is that as θ decreases, so that moving costs decrease, inter-
   9
    Even though we have in mind a world of many firms with heterogenous θ, we are solving the model for
a particular θ. (This would correspond to firms with the same property right status or same status of single
or multi-province operations in our empirical section.) After we obtain the equilibrium bribe rate, which is a
function of θ, we will examine how bribes and the effect of firm growth on bribes vary with θ. It is important
to bear in mind that by doing so, we are assuming there is no interaction, either through factor markets or
products market, among different types of firms. This is a non-trivial simplifying assumption, but it makes
the problem tractable.



                                                         9
regional competition increases and the equilibrium bribe rate decreases. Thus far, the model
captures the idea that increasing competition between political jurisdictions can drive down
corruption, as in Shleifer and Vishny (1993) and Burgess et al. (2012).
       Next, we examine how the equilibrium bribe rate responds to increases in the profitability
of firms, i.e. increases in A. Taking the derivative with respect to log A on both sides of
Equation (9) and re-arranging terms, we get our first result:

                         db∗                        1                      1                          1
Proposition 1.         d log A
                                 < 0 if 0 ≤ η <   1−α−β
                                                        ;   = 0 if η =   1−α−β
                                                                               ;   and > 0 if η >   1−α−β
                                                                                                          .

       The critical factor that determines the sign of db∗ /d log A is η, which characterizes the
concavity of the moving costs with respect to the capital stock. The intuition is that with
a positive shock to A, for a given size, firms enjoy higher revenues and hence care more
about the bribes they will pay and less about the moving costs. This tends to drive down
the equilibrium bribe rate due to inter-regional competition. However, at the same time,
the cost of moving rises as firms expand in size to take advantage of the higher productivity.
This instead tends to drive up the equilibrium bribe rate. The two effects exactly cancel at
          1                    1
η=      1−α−β
              .10   If η <   1−α−β
                                   ,   then the first effect (inter-regional competition effect) dominates
the second effect (moving cost effect), and the equilibrium bribe rate falls. Given that
                                                        db∗
1 − α − β < 1, a sufficient condition for             d log A
                                                                < 0 is that moving costs scale up less than
linearly with firm size, as proxied by A. In practice, since moving entails at least some
element of fixed costs and, moreover, since 1 − α − β can in fact be much less than 1, it
seems plausible that η <             1
                                   1−α−β
                                           and therefore db∗ /d log A < 0 in most settings. We will test
this prediction in the empirical section below.11
       Proposition 1 specifies conditions when the rate of bribe extraction falls as A increases;
the rate b is the size of the distortion to production. It is worth noting that another (testable)
prediction is that the total amount of bribes extracted from the firm will increase when A
increases. To see this note that the firm’s moving decision is a tradeoff between its total
  10
      Though the specific cut-off value for η at which the sign of the comparative statics switches depends on
the Cobb-Douglas functional form for production and the particular parameterization of the moving costs,
the general intuition is robust: The more concave the moving costs with respect to firm size are, the more
likely that equilibrium bribe rate decreases with A.
   11
      To the extent that taxes follow similar patterns to bribes, another implication of the model is that taxes
on firms should also be lower in rich countries than in poor countries. This turns out to be true: Gordon and
Li (2009) show that for poor countries (with per-capita GDP below $745), corporate income taxes represent
7.5 percent of GDP, whereas for rich countries (with per-capita GDP above $9,200), corporate income taxes
represent only 4.5 percent of GDP, although they suggest a different explanation than the one proposed here.



                                                          10
moving costs and its total bribes. Since when A increases, the firm’s moving costs increase,
the government can retain the same firms even with a higher total bribe extraction.
       Next, we examine how the effect of a productivity shock on bribes varies across firms with
different θ. As discussed above, we focus on the firm’s property right status or multi-province
operations as the empirical analogue of θ, where higher θ corresponds to less transferable
property rights or concentration of operations in one province and thus a higher cost of
moving. The next proposition derives how the elasticity of bribes with respect to productivity
varies with θ.
                                                                     ∗
Proposition 2. If 0 ≤ η <            1
                                   1−α−β
                                         ,   the elasticity − dd log b
                                                                 log A
                                                                       is monotonically decreasing in θ,
           d2 log b∗
that is,   d log Adθ
                       > 0.

       Intuitively, Proposition 1 implies that bribes fall when there is an increase in A, because
more profitable firms are more willing to pay moving costs and escape from high bribe rates.
Proposition 2 states that the bribe rate falls more after such a shock for firms with lower
observable moving costs because the fraction of firms who are on the margin of moving is
larger, so a given change in bribes will induce a larger number of them to leave.12 We will
test these predictions in the empirical part of this paper below.


3        Setting and data

3.1        Background on Vietnam
Vietnam provides a unique opportunity to test the implications of our model. At its 6th
Party Congress in 1986, the country initiated the Doi Moi (Renovation) economic reforms,
which eliminated the role of central planning in the economy and opened the country’s
borders to international capital and trade flows (Fforde and De Vylder, 1996; Riedel and
Turley, 1999). Since that time, the country has achieved an average annual growth rate of
7.3 percent, ranking it among the very fastest growing countries in the world over the period.
       Three post-Doi Moi events are critical for understanding the role these drivers play in
Vietnam’s economic development and the context of our research design. The Enterprise
  12
    Note that Proposition 2 is stated in terms of elasticity or percentage change in the bribe rate (i.e. the
                                                                            d2 b∗
change in log b). The sign for the cross-partial of the level change (ie. dAdθ    ) is in general indeterminant
because though the elasticity falls with θ (under the condition in Proposition 2), the level of bribe also falls
                                                                      ∗
with θ. In particular, we can show that the relationship between db dA and θ is U-shaped and increasing as
             d2 b∗
θ → ∞, and dAdθ    > 0 for a reasonable range of θ as assessed by the ratio of moving costs to revenue.

                                                      11
Law in 2000 created the formal legal basis for the private, corporate sector in Vietnam
and eased registration into all non-restricted activities. One year after the Enterprise Law,
Vietnam finalized the long-standing negotiations with the United States over their bilateral
trade agreement (US-VN BTA), which granted Vietnam Most-Favored Nation (MFN) status
in accessing US markets. Finally, in 2007 Vietnam joined the World Trade Organization.
Combined, these reforms led the period we study to be one of dramatic expansion in private
activity in Vietnam: today, there are well over 350,000 private companies in Vietnam, op-
erating in a range of sectors from food processing and light manufacturing to sophisticated
financial services. The degree of economic growth over this period varied substantially across
provinces, as shown in Figure 4.13
       Despite this growth, there is still substantial corruption in Vietnam. For example, most
international perceptions-based indices put Vietnam around the 30th percentile of corruption
(where lower is more corrupt). Similarly, Transparency International’s Global Corruption
Barometer reports that 44 percent of Vietnamese report paying a bribe in 2011 (Transparency
International, 2011).
       Existing research has noted that corruption in Vietnam takes three main forms: grease
or speed money to fulfill basic tasks or services; the illegal privatization of state property;
and the selling of state power (Vasavakul, 2008). While all are undoubtedly important, the
first is the most directly observable. About grease money, Vasavakul (2008) writes that,
“A number of studies on informal payments [by individuals] show informal bribery totals
from 100,000 to 2.1 million VND (roughly 5 to 100 USD) [per individual per year]. The key
recipients are the traffic police, land cadres, customs officers, and tax authorities.” These
same offices were highlighted as the most corrupt in an internal study prepared by the Party’s
Internal Affairs Committee (Central Committee of Internal Affairs, 2005). Gueorguiev and
Malesky (2011) document that the same types of bribes are common for firms, finding that
23 percent of businesses paid bribes to expedite business registration, 35 percent paid bribes
when competing for government procurement contracts, and 70 percent paid bribes during
customs procedures.
       An important institutional feature of Vietnam is that corruption is largely subnational.
Via a series of laws in the early 1990s, most business-government interactions were decentral-
  13
    Figure 4 uses provinces’ reports of their GDP, which, when aggregated, give a higher national GDP
and growth rate than the official national statistics, which are likely more accurate. Thus, while the figure
demonstrates the heterogeneity in growth across provinces, the levels shown are likely inaccurately high.



                                                     12
ized to the provincial level. These include business registration, environmental and safety
inspections, labor oversight, local government procurement, and land allocation. In practice,
provincial departments of line ministries are “dual subordinate,” meaning they report both
to the provincial executive (the People’s Committee Chairman, or PCOM), as well as the
relevant national line ministry. In practice, however, appointments of department directors
and budget allocations are set by the PCOM, closely aligning department interests with
those of the province. Moreover, proximity matters. The PCOM interacts with department
directors regularly, while the line ministries are hundreds of kilometers away in Hanoi. As a
result, many studies have documented that the provincial government, more than the central
government, is the relevant level of government when thinking about the institutional cli-
mate facing firms, including the degree of bribe extraction (Meyer and Nguyen, 2005; Cung,
Tuan, Van, and Dapice, 2004; Tran, Grafton, and Kompas, 2009; Malesky, 2008).
   As with all measures of governance in Vietnam, there is a high degree of subnational
variation in firms’ responses about corruption in the data we use.         Figure 5 shows the
distribution across provinces of the average response by firms for two corruption questions
from the PCI survey in 2010, the last year of our sample period. In the worst-scoring
province, 77 percent of private firms reported that firms in their line of business were subject
to bribe requests. In the best-scoring province, a substantially smaller 15 percent claimed
such activities were common. Similarly, high inter-provincial variation is observed for the
share of revenue paid in bribes by firms, the core dependent variable in our analysis. In 2010,
16 percent of firms in the most corrupt province said bribe payments exceeded 10 percent
of their annual revenue, compared to 0 percent in the lowest province. It is this spatial
variation, along with temporal and cross-industry variation, that we seek to explain in our
empirical analysis.


3.2    Description of data
To examine the effect of growth on corruption, we use two firm-level data sets from Vietnam,
the Vietnam PCI Survey (Malesky, 2011), and the annual enterprise survey collected by the
General Statistics Office of Vietnam, henceforth referred to as the PCI and GSO data,
respectively. For each data set, we have five years of repeated cross-sectional firm-level data




                                              13
from 2006 to 2010.14
       The PCI survey is a comprehensive governance survey of formal sector firms across Viet-
nam’s 63 provinces.15 The survey team randomly sampled from a list of at least partly
private companies registered with each province’s tax authority. Stratification was based on
firm size, age, and broad sector (agriculture, services, construction and industry) in order to
accurately reflect the population of firms in each province. The PCI survey contains basic
firm-level information, including the firm’s ISIC 2 digit industry code, location (province),
year of establishment, total assets, and total employment.
       What makes the PCI survey well-suited for our study is that it has a module on corruption
and red tape faced by the firm. The most relevant question that matches our theoretical
predictions is the amount of unofficial payments to public officials the firm makes, expressed
as a percentage of its revenue, which maps almost precisely to b in our model. To the best of
our knowledge, this data set is the only frequently repeated cross-section of firms’ corruption
experiences that is representative at the sub-national level in the developing world.
       Table 1 presents summary statistics for the firms in the PCI data. Note that we merge
the PCI firms with aggregate information from the GSO survey at the industry-province-
year level. For industry, we use the ISIC alphabetical category. Thus, the PCI firms in
our sample are those with non-missing data on industry whose province-industry-year is
represented in the GSO data. Our final analysis data set contains 13,160 firms that meet
this sample inclusion criterion.
       The key dependent variable is constructed from the PCI question that asks the firm its
unofficial payments as a percentage of total revenue, which corresponds to b in our model.
The question is categorical, with the following possible responses: 0, < 1%, 1 − 2%, 2 − 5%,
5 − 10%, 10 − 20%, 20 − 30%, > 30%. We transform this into a scalar variable by assigning
each response the middle of the corresponding bin, using 0.5% for the < 1% category and
35% for the > 30% category. The mean of this variable is 3.8%. While this may seem small,
recall that this is a percent of revenues, not profits. If firms averaged 10% net profit margins,
for example, this would be the same magnitude as a 38% profit tax. (In the empirical section
  14
      The PCI survey is conducted in the early part of each calendar year (March-June). Information about
firm’s business and operations refer to the previous calendar year. For variables regarding bribe payment, it
is reasonable to think that firms are also reporting based on past year’s experiences. We therefore lag the
PCI survey by one year before merging with the GSO data. The 2006 to 2010 timeframe thus corresponds
to the PCI surveys conducted in early 2007 through early 2011.
   15
      In 2008, Ha Tay province was merged with Hanoi, reducing the number of provinces from 64 to 63.



                                                     14
below, we also consider an alternative specification using ordered probit models that allows
the model to determine appropriate breakpoints; results are similar).
   The median firm in our sample has been in business for four years and has 21 employees.
Figure 6 shows the relationship between the bribe rate and firm size in our sample. Larger
firms pay a smaller percentage of their revenues in bribes. Our empirical test of the model
will use industry-province-year variation, but it is reassuring that the basic cross-sectional
pattern in the data matches the model’s prediction that a higher A implies a lower b.
   In addition to corruption activities, the PCI also has variables related to the firm’s
property rights status that we can use as measures of the firm’s mobility, such as whether
the firm owns the land that it occupies and whether the firm has a Land Use Rights Certificate
(LURC). We will discuss these variables in more detail when we discuss the empirical results.
The second proxy for mobility we have in the data is how many provinces the firm operates
in. Most firms are wholly based in one province, but 8.2 percent have operations in provinces
besides their main location.
   Table 1 also summarizes several control variables we use, including the proportion of
registration documents the firm has (a proxy for formality), whether the firm was formerly
a household firm, whether it is a former state-owned enterprise, whether the owner is a
government official, and whether the government has an ownership stake in the firm.
   Our empirical strategy uses aggregate shocks to a firm’s industry size as a predictor of
the firm’s size. Since the PCI is a sample, not a census, to measure the total employment
in an industry in each year, we use the annual GSO census of firms in Vietnam to construct
industry size. The GSO data include all formal sector firms in Vietnam, both private and
state-owned. We restrict our sample to private firms in order to match with the PCI, and
then merge the aggregate industry-province-year GSO measures to the PCI firms, at the
industry-province-year level. We use the ISIC alphabetical industry codes in both data sets
for our analysis. In the final merged data set, we have 18 distinct industry categories (see
Appendix Table 1 for a description of the industries). Mean employment among firms in the
GSO data is 23, similar to the level in the PCI. The main GSO variable we use in the analysis
is the log of aggregate employment in the industry-province-year, which is also summarized
in Table 1.




                                             15
4        Empirical strategy
In the model laid out above, we considered the effect of a shock to A, total factor productivity,
on bribes, or more specifically, bribes as a percentage of the firm’s revenues. The predictions
are that an increase in A should decrease the bribe rate (Bribes), and that this pattern should
be less true when moving costs (M ovingCost) are higher. With data on firms indexed by i
in province p, industry j, and time t, one could in principle translate Propositions 1 and 2
to the data as follows:


         Bribesipjt = α + βAipjt + ipjt                                                             (10)
         Bribesipjt = α + βAipjt + γAipjt × M ovingCostipjt + δM ovingCostipjt + ipjt               (11)


The model’s predictions are that β in Equation (10) is negative, so that on average growth
reduces bribes, and that γ in Equation (11) is positive, so that the reduction in bribes as A
increases is smaller for firms with higher moving costs.
       There are two issues with estimating Equations (10) and (11) directly. The first is a data
problem: we do not directly observe TFP in the data, so, empirically, we use a firm’s total
employment (Employ) as a proxy.16 Under the assumption that factor prices are constant,
changes in employment reflect changes in A, so to the extent we can find a measure of
employment that is exogenous with respect to the bribe rate b, we can replace A with
Employ and test the same predictions.
       Of course, as is clear from Equation (1) in the model, a second issue is that employ-
ment levels are potentially endogenous to the bribe level b. Thus, we use an instrumental
variable (IV) strategy to estimate Equations (10) and (11). The instrumental variable we
use is employment in the firm’s industry in provinces other than its own, controlling for
common national year fixed effects and province-by-industry fixed effects. The IV strategy
is predicated on industry-specific employment (or TFP) shocks in an industry being similar
across provinces (i.e., on there being a strong first stage). The approach is similar to a Bartik
shift-share instrument in that we are assuming that the size of an industry is different across
provinces, but changes in the industry size within a province can be predicted by aggre-
gate growth of the industry in other provinces. (See, for example, Bartik (1991), Blanchard
  16
    The reason we cannot calculate TFP directly is that we do not have measures of revenue, capital stock,
and wages in our data.



                                                   16
and Katz (1992), and Bound and Holzer (2000)).17 The identification assumption is that
industry-specific bribe-setting is determined independently by each province. In particular,
we are ruling out a large-scale national crackdown on corruption specific to an industry in a
given year, which would violate this assumption (note that a national crackdown across all
industries would be absorbed by year effects and would not be a problem for our identifica-
tion strategy; likewise, different average levels of corruption in different regions or industries
would be absorbed in region-by-industry fixed effects and would not be a problem). The
assumption matches the institutional context of corruption in Vietnam as discussed above.
       Our first stage specification is as follows:


                       log Employpjt = α + β log Employp− jt + νpj + µt + pjt .                         (12)


The outcome variable, log Employpjt , is log total employment for industry j in year t in
province p. The variable log Employp− jt is log total employment for firms in industry j
and year t in all provinces other than p. We control for province-industry (pj) and year
(t) fixed effects, so the specification is capturing differential changes in employment across
industries over time, netting out common national time trends and different average levels
by province-by-industry cell.
       To examine the effect of exogenous productivity shocks on bribes, we estimate the reduced
form equation:
                         Bribesipjt = α + β log Employp− jt + νpj + µt + ipjt                           (13)

The dependent variable is the amount that firm i paid in bribes as a percentage of its
revenue in year t. We control for province-industry and year fixed effects, as in the first
stage. The regressor of interest varies at the industry-province-year level but to correct for
possibly correlated errors across time and industry, we cluster standard errors at the province
level. We also estimate the analogous IV regression, instrumenting for log Employpjt with
log Employp− jt .
       To explore heterogenous effects with respect to the firm’s cost of relocating to another
  17
    Unlike in the standard Bartik setup, we do not need to aggregate the industry-level shocks back up to
the region-year level (province-year in our case) since our outcome variable is available at the disaggregated
industry-region-year level (and in fact firm level).




                                                      17
province, we add interaction terms to Equation (13):


              Bribesipjt = α + β log Employp− jt + δM ovingCostipjt
                              +γ log Employp− jt × M ovingCostipjt + νpj + µt + ipjt .                (14)


The prediction from the model is γ > 0, or that the negative effect of firm productivity
(proxied by size) on bribes as a percent of revenue is smaller in magnitude when firms are
more mobile. We test these hypotheses and present the results in the next section.



5        Results
In this section, we present evidence that a positive shock to aggregate productivity decreases
unofficial payments by firms, and the decrease is bigger for firms that are more mobile,
specifically those that have better property rights or have operations in multiple provinces.
These results are consistent with the model’s predictions.


5.1       First stage results
We estimate the first stage regression as specified by Equation (12). To do so, we use the
GSO data and compute total employment at the pjt and p− jt level. Each observation in the
regression is a pjt (province-industry-year) combination.
       As discussed above, the GSO data is a census of all firms in Vietnam in a given year. We
can either run the first stage for all firms, or we can restrict our sample to only private firms.
Since the PCI data only contains private firms, the most appropriate aggregate measures of
firm productivity to predict outcomes in the PCI are based on only using private firms, so
we make this sample restriction in the GSO.
       We report the first stage results from estimating Equation (12) in Table 2. We classify
firms into their alphabetical ISIC code (18 industries in total).18 We report standard errors
clustered at the province level throughout.
       Table 2 shows that the first stage coefficient is positive and significant at the 1 percent
level. The coefficient on log Employp− jt is 0.724. This means that for a 10 percent increase in
  18
    We have an equally strong first stage using the finer two-digit ISIC codes, but the broader alphabetical
codes are more robust to differences in classification across the GSO and PCI data sets.



                                                    18
total employment in other provinces for industry j in year t, there is an 7.24 percent increase
in one’s own province. Theoretically, if the aggregate shock propagates to all regions equally,
we should observe a coefficient of 1; the coefficient of 0.724 suggests that much but not all
of the temporal variation in productivity in Vietnam is aggregate to an industry.
       Ideally, we would have constructed our instrument using the same data set that has our
outcome (bribe) data. However, as discussed above, the PCI data, which has information
on bribes and firm mobility, is a sample, and does not include all firms. As such, while the
PCI is suitable for examining how a typical firm changes, we cannot use it for accurately
calculating aggregate shocks. For example, an increase in prices for goods sold by industry
j (which is equivalent to an increase in A in the model) might lead to entry of firms, so
even though A increased, average firm size might decrease.19 For this reason, we use the
GSO data, which is a census, to construct our instrument. However, before proceeding, it
is important to make sure that the PCI firms are a reasonably representative sample of all
firms in the GSO data, and that the industry codes we merge on are comparable across the
data sets. If not, then the reduced form results from regressing bribes as measured in the
PCI data on the GSO-based instrumental variable could be spurious, or null results could
reflect poorly matched data.
       To cross-validate the two data sets and ensure that we are matching them appropriately,
we compare mean and median firm employment among private firms for each pjt group.
One issue with the PCI data is that employment is coded as a categorical variable: 10 to 50,
50 to 100, etc. To assign cardinal values to these bins, we compute the empirical mean and
median employment for all firms in GSO for each of these PCI bins, and use these values
to create the cardinal employment measure for the PCI firms. We then run the following
  19
    Even if average firm size falls because of entry, an increase in A will generally lead to growth on both
the intensive and extensive margin. However, the instrument would be a weak proxy for an existing firm’s
employment growth if shocks to A only affect the extensive margin. In our setting, there is correlated growth
along both margins: The instrument is highly correlated with both average firm size in the GSO data and
the number of firms. If we regress log mean employment and log total number of firms in province-industry-
year group on the instrument, controlling for province-industry and year fixed effects, the coefficients are
0.397 and 0.328 respectively; both are significant at the 1 percent level. Mathematically, the sum of the
two coefficients equals to the coefficient of regressing the endogenous variable, log total employment in the
province-industry-year group, on the instrument. Hence, the ratio of the two coefficients to their sum tells
us how much of a shock to the instrument affects the intensive and extensive margin. Reassuringly, about
55 percent (=0.397/0.725) is on the intensive margin.




                                                     19
regression, with province-industry and year fixed effects:

                               P CI                   GSO
                     log Employpjt  = α + β log Employpjt + νpj + µt + pjt                 (15)


If the PCI firms are a perfect random sample of GSO firms, stratified by province, industry
and year, we should have β = 1. We report the estimates in Appendix Table 2. We can see
that the changes in mean employment in PCI and mean employment in GSO are positively
correlated: β is about 0.531 and significant at the 1% level. Similarly, the median employ-
ment in PCI and median employment in GSO are positively correlated and the coefficient is
0.478 and highly significant. These results confirm that, while the match between the two
data sets is not perfect, they are indeed comparable, even looking just over time at changes
within a given province-industry cell.


5.2    Effect of employment growth on bribes
Our outcome variable, which measures the degree of corruption firms face, is the unofficial
payments as a percentage of revenue. As discussed above, it is a categorical variable, which
we linearize by using the middle of each category. We estimate two versions of Equation
(13), one using the linearized variable and one using an ordered probit specification that
allows the regression to determine the precise cardinalization of each of the categories.
   The results from estimating Equation (13) are shown in Table 3. Columns 1 and 2 report
the reduced form results, using a linear model and an ordered probit model respectively, and
Column 3 reports the IV estimate. All specifications control for province-industry and year
fixed effects, and standard errors are clustered at the province level.
   The reduced form results in Column 1 show that the coefficient for log Employp− jt is
-1.72, and significant at the 5 percent level. Growth in firm employment leads to a drop in
the rate of bribe extraction from firms. Column 2 reports the results from an ordered probit
specification. The coefficient is again negative and significant at the 5 percent level. The
ordered probit results suggest that the negative relationship shown in column 1 is not merely
driven by the OLS functional form. Column 3 shows the IV coefficient, which suggests that
a 10 percent increase in a firm’s employment level leads to a 0.23 percentage point decline
in the bribe rate.
   To interpret magnitudes, note that column 3 implies that a doubling of total employment


                                              20
in the industry is associated with a 1.6 percentage point reduction in informal payments, or
about 42 percent of the mean level. Translated into an elasticity, this suggests an elasticity
of the informal payment rate (i.e. the share of revenues devoted to informal payments)
with respect to predicted firm size of about -0.6. Since this elasticity is substantially less
than 1 in absolute value, it implies that while the share of firm revenues paid in bribes (i.e.
b in the model) declines as A increases, total unofficial payments, which are b multiplied
by revenues, increase. While of course b is the key parameter that determines aggregate
distortions due to corruption (see Equation (3)), it is worth noting that given this elasticity,
the amount of corruption in absolute dollar terms actually increases even though the rate
does not, consistent with the model’s predictions.


5.3       Heterogeneous effects based on firms’ moving costs
The evidence presented above finds that economic growth (specifically, an increase in firm
employment) reduces the rate of bribe extraction. While this evidence is consistent with
the model, the specific inter-jurisdictional competition idea outlined in our model is not
the only explanation for why an increase in employment reduces bribes. For example, it is
possible that bureaucrats simply have diminishing marginal utility of income relative to the
risk of being caught and going to jail, so that as it becomes easier to extract revenues, they
reduce rates. However, a key prediction of our model, as opposed to potential alternative
explanations, is that the effect of an increase in A on the bribe rate b should be greater in
magnitude when firms are more mobile.
       To examine this prediction, we test for heterogeneous effects based on measures that seem
plausibly correlated with firm mobility. In particular, we examine heterogeneity across firms
with differing property rights over the land they operate on, and across firms that differ in
whether they are based in one province or multiple provinces.


Property rights

In Vietnam, firms can have three types of tenure over the land on which they operate:
renting, owning the land with official land use rights, and owning the land without official
land use rights.20 Specifically, for firms that have purchased their land, they may or may
  20
    Note that while we use the term “own,” the more precise term would be “purchased” since in Vietnam,
firms can purchase land, but in a technical sense, the state still owns all of the land.


                                                  21
not have a land use rights certificate (LURC). Firms, intending to strengthen their property
rights, submit the LURC application and related documents, such as map of the area and
business plan, to the provincial Land Use Right Registration Office (LURRO). The LURRO
does not evaluate the application, but simply checks the completeness of the application and
supporting documents. It is required to inform the firm whether additional information is
needed within three days of the application. After the LURRO inspection, the application
is sent to the Provincial People’s Committee (the local executive office) for evaluation and
verification. While the People’s Committee is legally obligated to respond within 50 days, in
practice, waiting periods are substantially longer – often over a year or more. These waiting
periods pose the largest obstacle to LURC acquisition.21
       Conditional on having purchased land, having an LURC makes it easier for the firm to
move, because the firm can sell or trade its certificate if it decides to relocate to another
province.22 However, if a firm purchased the land it occupies but does not have a land use
rights certificate, it is difficult for the firm to move for two reasons. First, it is costly and
difficult to obtain land in a new province for business operations. More importantly, firms
without LURCs will have difficulty obtaining the true commercial value of their land when
they try to sell. Land without LURCs is known to be less valuable, as it can easily be
expropriated by local authorities (Kim, 2004; Do and Iyer, 2003). Consequently, they will
find it more difficult to relocate.
       It is not ex ante obvious whether firms that rent face higher or lower relocation costs
than those that own. For example, renters cannot recoup the value of any improvements
they made to the property and may be locked into hard-to-renegotiate long-term leases, but
they do not face transaction costs from having to sell property. What is clear though is that
conditional on owning, transaction costs are lower for those with an LURC. We therefore
examine heterogeneity across these different levels of moving costs: firms that rent land
versus purchased land, and conditional on having purchased land, firms that have LURCs
versus those that do not.
       We estimate a model that interacts Employp− jt with these measures of property rights.
In general, since we have a repeated cross-section of firms, not a panel, there is a potential
  21
     Decree No. 88/2009/ND-CP dated 19 October 2009 on grant of certificates of land use rights and house
and land-attached asset ownership; 2003 Land Law, amended and supplemented in 2009.
  22
     Even though LURC trading was possible since 1993, it only became widespread with the 2003 Land
Law. The overtime variation we see in the data comes from firms learning about the process and whether it
benefits them.


                                                   22
endogeneity problem if we use θ at the firm level (e.g., firms could adjust their θ in response
to a shock in A). For the LURC variable, we know the year the firm acquired the certificate,
so we can also use lagged values of LURC ownership to address this concern.23 In addition
to interacting these measures of movings costs with Employp− jt , we also show the results
controlling for the interaction of Employp− jt with average firm size in the industry to isolate
the effects of land ownership status from other general industry characteristics, in case land
ownership and LURC status are correlated with firm size. We also examine a host of other
controls below.
       The first two columns of Table 4 compare firms that own land and have an LURC
against the omitted category of all other firms, both those that are renting and those that
own land without an LURC. The coefficient on the interaction with log employment is -0.29
and significant at the 1 percent level, suggesting that indeed firms with LURCs have the
largest reduction in bribe rates as predicted employment increases. This is consistent with
the prediction of Proposition 2.
       To interpret the magnitudes, recall that the overall average reduced form coefficient of
increasing employment on reduced corruption from Table 3 is -1.7. The results in column 1
suggest that the impact is about 17 (=0.29/1.7) percent larger in magnitude for firms with
a LURC than those without it.
       Columns 3 and 4 examine heterogeneity based on whether the firm owns its land as
opposed to renting it. The coefficient on the interaction term is negative, though not sta-
tistically significant. As mentioned above, it is not theoretically obvious whether firms that
rent or own have more mobility.
       Columns 5 and 6 include both sets of interactions. Here, since we have also included the
interaction between the firm owning land and employment, the coefficient on the interaction
of Firm owns land and has LURC and log(Employ) is now the additional impact of owning
an LURC conditional on owning land, i.e., comparing firms that own land and have a LURC
with those that own land and do not have an LURC. This interaction coefficient is negative
and significant at the 10 percent level.24
  23
     Unfortunately, we do not know the year the firm purchased its land, so we cannot do the analogous
exercise for land ownership. In Appendix Table 4 , we show the results using contemporaneous LURC.
  24
     We have also estimated ordered probit reduced form specifications for the three categories of firms: firms
that rent the land they operate on, firms that own their land but do not have an LURC, and firms that
own their land and have an LURC. Results are presented in Appendix Table 5. The coefficient estimates
are consistent with the findings for the linear model in that the most negative impact of economic shocks on
the bribe rate is observed for firms that own their land and have an LURC. We run separate ordered probit


                                                      23
    Across all six columns in Table 4, the coefficient on the interactions are insensitive to
whether we control for firm size interacted with log employment, suggesting that the land
ownership and LURC variables are really picking up something about the land characteristics
rather than industries with larger or smaller firms.
    Nevertheless, possessing an LURC is not randomly assigned, and could be correlated with
a variety of other firm characteristics. Indeed, Appendix Table 3 shows that posseessing
an LURC is indeed correlated with a variety of other firm characteristics. To examine
whether the heterogeneity in impacts we observed in Table 4 are really attributable to the
LURC rather than these other correlated characteristics, Table 5 presents several additional
robustness checks, controlling for these possible correlates of property rights separately, and
then using a propensity score approach to isolate the role of the LURC.
    First, one concern is that property rights over land are really measuring overall formality
rather than land rights per se. Column 1 of Table 5 controls for a proxy for a firm’s degree of
formality—the share of registration documents it has—and its interaction with log(Employ).
Adjusting for this measure, the interaction coefficient of interest Has LURC×log(Employ)
remains significant at the 1 percent level in Panel A and at the 10 percent level in Panel
C, and in fact increases in magnitude. In addition, in the comparison of land-owning firms
to renting firms in Panel B, the effect of growth on bribes is now statistically significantly
larger in magnitude (more negative) for firms that own land. Columns 2 to 7 control for other
potentially confounding factors such as whether the firm is a former household firm, whether
it is a former state-owned enterprise, whether it is managed by a former government official,
whether the government has an ownership stake, premise size, and years of establishment;
in each case, the variable and its interaction with log(Employ) are added to the regression.
Across the board, the interaction term with having an LURC remains statistically significant
in Panel A. In Panel C the interaction term is remarkably stable in magnitude across the
specifications and is significant at the 10 or 5 percent level in all cases.
    Column 8 of Table 5 aggregates all of these control variables into an index by estimating
a propensity score to have an LURC based on the seven variables used in columns 1 to 7.25
The propensity to have an LURC and its interaction with log(Employ) are controlled for in
this specification. Reassuringly, the finding that the effect of growth on bribes is stronger
for firms with an LURC (better property rights) is robust to this alternative specification
models on the subsamples because the interacted model is computationally infeasible.
 25
    As discussed above, Appendix Table 3 shows the coefficients of the propensity score regressions.


                                                    24
as well. The interaction with LURC is negative and significant at the 1 percent level in
Panel A, when the comparison group is all other firms, and negative and significant at the
5 percent level in Panel C, when the comparison group is firms that own land but do not
possess an LURC.


Firms operating in multiple provinces

The PCI data provide a second proxy for firm mobility that we can use to test for heteroge-
neous effects: having operations in multiple provinces. Of the firms in the sample, 8 percent
have operations in at least two provinces. These firms likely have a more credible threat to
wholly move elsewhere or simply focus their expansion plans elsewhere, making them more
observably mobile to provincial officials.
   Table 6 examines heterogeneity based on multi-province operations. Columns 1 and 2 use
the number of provinces other than where the firm is headquartered that it operates in. The
interaction is negative and significant at the 5 percent level, both with and without controlling
for the industry’s average firm size. Columns 3 and 4 use instead a dummy variable for
operating in at least one other province. The interaction coefficient is -0.36 in column 3
(significant at the 10 percent level) and -0.37 in column 4 (significant at the 5 percent level).
The main effect of log(Employ) in column 3 is -1.85, so the interaction coefficient implies
that having multi-province operations increases the negative effect of growth on the bribe
rate by 20 percent.
   Table 7 presents the battery of robustness checks for the result that growth decreases the
bribe rate for firms with multi-province operations. When including the seven distinct control
variables, the coefficient of interest remains stable in magnitude and remains statistically
significant in six cases. The exception is the share of registration documents the firm has.
The coefficient also loses statistical significance with the propensity-score control variable,
but in both of these cases, the point estimate remains negative.
   To summarize, our empirical analysis suggests, first, that positive economic shocks reduce
corruption, and, second, that corruption falls faster in response to positive economic shocks
when firms are more elastic in their location choices. This second finding is seen both when
using firms’ property rights over their land as a proxy for their relocation costs and when
using multi-province operations as a proxy for the ability to relocate.




                                               25
5.4       Alternative models
Empirical confirmation of several predictions of our model supports the idea that inter-
jurisdictional competition is a mechanism through which economic growth can reduce bribery.
However, there are also other potential models that predict a negative correlation of eco-
nomic growth and the bribe rate. The first and most direct way to distinguish between the
inter-jurisdictional model and these other models is that we find that the relationship be-
tween growth and bribery is diminished for firms that are less likely to relocate outside their
province. This is a direct prediction of inter-jurisdictional competition, but is not predicted
by other models.
       Nonetheless, it is possible that these heterogenous effects are picking up other firm char-
acteristics besides property rights or multiple locations. Thus, it is important to consider
several other possible explanations for the general pattern that economic growth reduces
bribes, and to discuss the degree to which our evidence is, or is not, consistent with them.


Product-market competition

Economic growth could increase competition among firms, and this product market compe-
tition affects the amount of rents bureaucrats can capture. If firms have less market power
and smaller rents, then bureaucrats may be less able to extract bribes from them. Ades and
Di Tella (1999) present empirical evidence that product market competition reduces corrup-
tion, for example. To probe the possibility of this mechanism, we test the starting premise
that the variation in economic growth that we analyze increases market competition. We
regress the Herfindahl index, constructed using employment (our most accurate measure of
firm size) from the GSO data, on our instrument. We find that the instrument leads to less,
not more, competition, suggesting that the main mechanism through which growth reduces
bribery in our context is not increased firm competition (Table 8, column 1).26 However, Bliss
and Di Tella (1997) present a model in which, counterintuitively, less competition among
firms can lead to less bribery; it is possible that this mechanism of reduced competition
among firms (higher rents for firms) leading to a reduction in bribe extraction is at play in
  26
     Another option would be to test for changes in profit margins directly. However, the profit margin data
in the GSO is known to be much less reliable than employment (Tran and Dao, 2013), as firms routinely
underreport profits to avoid taxes. For example, in the GSO data, 38 percent of firms report a profit margin
of less than 1 percent of revenues, with 23 percent of firms reporting 0 profits. Given these reporting issues,
the PCI dataset does not ask about profits.



                                                      26
our setting.


Spurious effect of industry-specific bribe crackdowns

A second possibility we consider is that there are industry-specific crackdowns on bribes. As
discussed earlier, this represents the fundamental identification assumption: There are no
industry-specific crackdowns on bribes. The strongest evidence in support of our assump-
tion is the institutional structure of Vietnam, which we described in Section 3.1. In addition
to this general evidence that bribery is decentralized to the province level in Vietnam, so
national industry-level crackdowns are unlikely (recall that our identifying variation is es-
sentially Vietnam-wide growth for an industry), we also undertook a systematic review of
the national anti-corruption website, which documents major anti-corruption efforts of the
government. Over the study period, only one industry-specific anti-corruption campaign is
documented, a crackdown in the construction industry in 2008. Table 8, column 2 shows
that the main results are essentially unchanged when we re-run our main specification from
column 1 of Table 3, but excluding the construction industry. As the fundamental identifi-
cation assumption, it is difficult to establish empirically that there are no industry-specific
shocks to bribes, but the qualitative evidence points against such an explanation for the
patterns we find.


Fixed cost of anti-corruption enforcement

Another possibility is that there is a layer of oversight over bureaucrats aimed at rooting out
corruption, such as an anti-corruption agency. The overseers face a fixed cost of enforcement,
so as the total scale of bribery (in levels) goes up, it is easier to detect and punish bribery.
Or said differently, it may be easier to detect a larger bribe. If so, then as firms grow,
bureaucrats will adjust the bribe rate down.
   While this explanation may be at work at the cross-country level, it does not seem to
be a key factor explaining the results in this paper. In particular, since most regulatory
activities are at the province level, if fixed costs were the main explanation, then the key
factor determining bribes would be the overall size of economic activity in the province as a
whole, not the size of particular industries.
   To test this, column 3 of Table 8 reruns the main regression, but in addition to including
predicted log employment in a particular industry, we also include predicted log employment


                                                27
in the province as a whole. To do this, we calculate the log of the weighted sum over all
industries of employment in the industry in a given year in all provinces excluding province
p itself (relative to the average over all years), where the weights represent the share of total
employment in province p that comes from industry j. Specifically, define the weights for
each industry j in province p as:

                                         1 X employmentpjt
                                 wpj =                     .                                (16)
                                         T t employmentpt

Then the predicted log employment in province p at time t is:
                                                                                  
                                             X             employmentp− jt     
            predicted log employmentpt = log   wpj                                      (17)
                                                         1P                    
                                                             t employmentp− jt
                                                    j
                                                          T

           1P
where the        employmentp− jt term is a normalization such that the weights to each in-
           T t
dustry are given eactly by wpj . Note that with a single industry j in a province, predicted
log employmentpt reduces exactly to our usual right-hand side variable log Employp− jt .
    Using this approach, the evidence in column 3 suggests that, while the point estimate
on overall province level predicted log employmentpt is negative, the coefficient on industry-
specific log Employp− jt is unchanged when we include this variable. This suggests that the
results are not being driven by aggregate changes in enforcement practices at the province
level.


Diminishing returns to bribes

A final alternative explanation for the main effect we find is that bureaucrats have dimin-
ishing marginal utility of income relative to the risk of being caught and going to jail. Thus,
as it becomes easier to extract a given amount of bribe revenues, they reduce the rate. The
reduced form effect of this mechanism would be similar to a fixed cost of anti-corruption
enforcement within each province: A decline in bribes would be driven by aggregate employ-
ment in the province, not industry specific employment. The results in column 3 of Table 8
suggest that this is not the entire explanation for our results.




                                               28
Summary

In summary, to the extent we can examine quantitative and qualitative predictions of these
alternative models, we do not find that other mechanisms can explain all the facts in the
data. It still may well be that these other mechanisms are in operation and explain some
of the overall effect of growth on bribery. But, the positive evidence in support of inter-
jurisdictional competition and the limited evidence in support of models suggests that the
mechanism we highlight is at least one important factor in why economic growth reduces
corruption in Vietnam.



6     Conclusion
This paper establishes two empirical facts. The first is that economic growth (as measured by
higher employment for a firm or industry) reduces the proportion of firm revenues extracted
by government officials as bribes. The second is that the reduction in corruption caused
by economic growth is larger in magnitude for firms that can more easily relocate due to
stronger property rights over their land. We also find similar evidence of heterogeneous
effects using a second measure of the ability to relocate, namely having operations in more
than one province.
    These two facts map to the two main contributions of the paper. The first is a simple
but important empirical contribution: We provide causal evidence on the effect of economic
growth on the amount of corruption in an economy. Despite much interest in the relationship
between corruption and development, there exists very little credible evidence of a causal
relationship. The challenge is finding a way to separate causation from just correlation.
We provide rigorous evidence by using subnational variation and an often-used identification
strategy based on aggregate-level (national) shocks outside of a subnational region as a source
of plausibly exogenous variation in the region.
    What makes this identification strategy both possible and plausible is the setting: Viet-
nam. We make use of a unique data set that collects data from firms on their bribe payments
to government officials and is available for several years, samples firms from several indus-
tries, and is representative at the province level. In addition, the institutional context of
Vietnam makes our key identifying assumption plausible. A limitation of this general class
of aggregate-shock empirical strategies is that there could be reverse causality bias if there


                                              29
are aggregate shocks to the outcome (bribes), which in turn affect the independent variable
(economic activity). Corruption likely does affect economic activity, but what addresses this
concern in our context is that nationwide, industry specific shocks to corruption are unlikely.
There is a large body of research in political science showing that corruption is decentral-
ized in Vietnam, and provincial governments independently determine the level of bribes
extracted from firms in their jurisdiction. The general framework that we have developed in
this paper can also be applied in other countries where a lot of the corruption activities are
highly localized, such as China.
   Our second contribution is to lay out a mechanism through which economic growth re-
duces corruption. We model provincial governments’ decisions about bribe extraction. Com-
petition among provinces to retain or attract firms is the mechanism that keeps corruption
in check. Not surprisingly, then, if a firm is more able to relocate, a government will be more
cautious about extracting bribes from it. Less obvious is how a change in economic activity
affects corruption. There are offsetting forces. As a firm grows, a given increase in the bribe
rate would translate into a larger increase in bribe revenues extracted from the firm. On the
other hand, the larger a firm is, the more it would benefit from moving to a different region
with a lower bribe rate. We show that under the plausible assumption that a firm’s moving
costs scale up less than one-for-one with its size, economic growth leads to a decline in the
rate of bribe extraction. We also derive the prediction that this effect of economic growth
on bribe extraction is larger in magnitude for firms with lower moving costs. Our second
empirical fact described above—that the effect of growth on corruption is larger for firms
with transferable rights to their land—is consistent with this prediction, suggesting that the
mechanism of inter-provincial competition is indeed important in determining the degree of
corruption in an economy.
   Our results have several implications for understanding the determinants of corruption in
developing countries. The finding that growth reduces corruption suggests that corruption
might decline naturally as a country grows even without explicit anti-corruption efforts.
While the effects we describe here might naturally operate via within-country competition
in relatively large, decentralized countries such as Vietnam, one could imagine similar factors
might also be at play for small countries, where the competition might be between countries
rather than between regions of a given country.
   Moreover, the mechanism of inter-jurisdictional competition offers several ways that na-



                                              30
tional governments might expedite the decline in corruption. One option involves focused
improvements in governance in one region, as suggested by Wei (1999b) and Fisman and
Werker (2010), with the idea being that competitive pressure of the type discussed here would
lead these improvements to spill over to other regions. More directly tied to our empirical
findings, strengthening property rights so that firms can more easily recoup the value of
their land if they move would strengthen the competition among jurisdictions and hence the
corruption-reducing effect of growth. More generally, reducing any barriers to firm mobility,
for example related to business registration, would amplify the negative effect of growth on
corruption. The results also highlight a complex interplay between growth and institutions.
The fact that economic growth is most successful in reducing corruption when coupled with
strong property rights implies a complementarity between policies to strengthen institutions
and to promote growth, and a mechanism through which strengthening institutions can be
self-reinforcing.
   While the focus of this paper is government corruption, it is worth noting the implications
for the parallel case of tax rates. Our model implies that economic growth should lead to a
reduction in tax rates via the same mechanism of inter-jurisdictional competition, especially
for firms that can credibly threaten to relocate. If most firm relocations are within a country,
then the prediction is that sub-national (e.g., state) corporate tax rates should decline with
economic growth. While we do not have explicit data on sub-national corporate tax rates
across countries, it is worth noting that total corpoate taxes are indeed lower as a share of
GDP in rich countries than poor countries (Gordon and Li, 2009).
   Finally, it is important to note that while we have implemented the idea of economic
growth and firm mobility as forces for reducing corruption within a single country, similar
ideas could work across countries as well. For example, multinationals face a choice of which
countries to locate in or to source their products from. As they grow, it becomes more
worthwhile to pay a cost to move to a country with lower corruption, and as long as that
cost is concave in firm size, this will lead countries to reduce bribe rates in an attempt to
prevent too many firms from switching. This effect will be larger in industries with low
switching costs across countries, like textiles, than in industries with high switching costs,
such as mining. We leave exploration of these issues for future work.




                                              31
References
Acemoglu, D., and S. Johnson (2005): “Unbundling Institutions,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 113(5), 949–995.

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2005): “Chapter 6: Institutions as
 a Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth,” vol. 1, Part A of Handbook of Economic
 Growth, pp. 385 – 472. Elsevier.

Ades, A., and R. Di Tella (1999): “Rents, Competition, and Corruption,” American
 Economic Review, 89(4), 982–993.

Bartik, T. (1991): Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?
 W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, Kalamazoo, Michigan.

Blanchard, O. J., and L. F. Katz (1992): “Regional Evolution,” Brookings Papers on
 Economic Activity, 2, 1–75.

Bliss, C., and R. Di Tella (1997): “Does Competition Kill Corruption?,” Journal of
 Political Economy, 105(5), 1001–1023.

Bound, J., and H. Holzer (2000): “Demand Shifts, Population Adjustments, and Labor
 Market Outcomes During the 1980s,” Journal of Labor Economics, 18(1), 20–54.

Burgess, R., M. Hansen, B. A. Olken, P. Potapov, and S. Sieber (2012): “The Po-
 litical Economy of Deforestation in the Tropics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(4),
 1707–1754.

Cremer, H., and V. Fourgeaud (1995): “Mobility and Redistribution: A Survey,”
 Discussion paper, Université Catholique de Louvain, Center for Operations Research and
 Econometrics (CORE).

Cung, N. D., P. A. Tuan, B. Van, and D. Dapice (2004): “History or Policy: Why
 Don’t Northern Provinces Grow Faster?,” Discussion paper, United Nations Development
 Programme.

de Janvry, A., K. Emerick, M. Gonzalez-Navarro, and E. Sadoulet (2012):
  “Certified to Migrate: Property Rights and Migration in Rural Mexico,” Discussion paper,
  Berkeley.

De Long, J. B., and A. Shleifer (1993): “Princes and Merchants: European City
 Growth before the Industrial Revolution,” Journal of Law and Economics, 36(2), 671–
 702.

De Soto, H. (1989): The Other Path: The Invisible Revolution in the Third World. New
 York : Harper & Row.

        (2000): The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails
  Everywhere Else. New York : Basic Books.

                                           32
Di Tella, R., S. Galiant, and E. Schargrodsky (2007): “The Formation of Beliefs:
 Evidence from the Allocation of Land Titles to Squatters,” The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 122(1), 209–241.

Diamond, R. (2012): “Housing Supply Elasticity and Rent Extraction by State and Local
 Governments,” Discussion paper, Stanford University.

Do, Q.-T., and L. Iyer (2003): “Land Rights and Economic Development : Evidence
 from Vietnam,” Discussion Paper 3120, World Bank, Washington DC.

Epple, D., and T. Romer (1991): “Mobility and Redistribution,” Journal of Political
 Economy, pp. 828–858.

Epple, D., and A. Zelenitz (1981): “The Implications of Competition Among Jurisdic-
 tions: Does Tiebout Need Politics?,” Journal of Political Economy, pp. 1197–1217.

Fforde, A., and S. De Vylder (1996): From Plan to Market: The Economic Transition
  in Vietnam. Westview Press Boulder, CO.

Field, E. (2007): “Entitled to Work: Urban Property Rights and Labor Supply in Peru,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4), 1561–1602.

Fisman, R., and E. Werker (2010): “Innovations in Governance,” vol. 11 of Innovation
  Policy and the Economy, pp. 79–102. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Galiani, S., and E. Schargrodsky (2010): “Property Rights for the Poor: Effects of
 Land Titling,” Journal of Public Economics, 94(9), 700–729.

Glaeser, E. L., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de Silanes, and A. Shleifer (2004): “Do
 Institutions Cause Growth?,” Journal of Economic Growth, 9, 271–303.

Goldstein, M., and C. Udry (2008): “The Profits of Power: Land Rights and Agricul-
 tural Investment in Ghana,” Journal of Political Economy, 116(6), 981–1022.

Gordon, R., and W. Li (2009): “Tax Structures in Developing Countries: Many Puzzles
 and a Possible Explanation,” Journal of Public Economics, 93(7–8), 855 – 866.

Gueorguiev, D., and E. Malesky (2011): “Foreign Investment and Bribery: A Firm-
 Level Analysis of Corruption in Vietnam,” Journal of Asian Economics.

Jones, E. (1981): The European Miracle: Environments, Economies and Geopolitics in the
  History of Europe and Asia. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Kim, A. M. (2004): “A Market Without the ‘Right’ Property Rights,” Economics of
 Transition, 12(2), 275–305.

Malesky, E. (2008): “Straight Ahead on Red: How Foreign Direct Investment Empowers
 Subnational Leaders,” The Journal of Politics, 70(1), 97–119.



                                         33
          (2011): “The Vietnam Provincial Competitiveness Index: Measuring Economic
  Governance for Private Sector Development,” Discussion paper, US AIDs Vietnam Com-
  petitiveness Initiative and Vietnam Chamber of Commerce and Industry.

Mauro, P. (1995): “Corruption and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(3),
 681–712.

Menes, R. (2006): “Limiting the Reach of the Grabbing Hand. Graft and Growth in Amer-
 ican Cities, 1880 to 1930,” in Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America’s Economic
 History, pp. 63–94. University of Chicago Press.

Meyer, K. E., and H. V. Nguyen (2005): “Foreign Investment Strategies and
 Sub-national Institutions in Emerging Markets: Evidence from Vietnam,” Journal of
 Management Studies, 42(1), 63–93.

Mocan, N. (2004): “What Determines Corruption? International Evidence From Micro
 Data,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper.

North, D. . (1991): “Institutions,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5(1), 97–112.

Olson, M. (2000): Power and Prosperity:         Outgrowing Capitalist and Communist
 Dictatorships. New York: Basic Books.

Riedel, J., and W. Turley (1999): The Politics and Economics of Transition to an Open
  Market Economy in Viet Nam, no. 152. OECD.

Rose-Ackerman, S. (1978): Corruption: A Study in Political Economy. Academic Press.

Shleifer, A., and R. W. Vishny (1993): “Corruption,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  108(3).

Svensson, J. (2003): “Who Must Pay Bribes and how Much? Evidence from a Cross
  Section of Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1), 207–230.

Tran, A., and N. Dao (2013): “The Darker Side of Private Ownership: Tax Evasion in
 Vietnamese Privatized Firms,” Working paper, Indiana University.

Tran, T. B., R. Q. Grafton, and T. Kompas (2009): “Institutions Matter: The Case
 of Vietnam,” Journal of Socio-Economics, 38(1), 1–12.

Transparency International (2011): “Global Corruption Barometer 2010/2011,” Re-
 port.

Treisman, D. (2000): “The Causes of Corruption: A Cross-National Study,” Journal of
 Public Economics, 76(3), 399 – 457.

Treisman, D. (2007): “What Have We Learned about the Causes of Corruption from Ten
 Years of Cross-National Empirical Research?,” Annual Review of Political Science, 10,
 211–244.


                                           34
Valsecchi, M. (2011): “Land Property Rights and Migration: Evidence from Mexico,”
 Discussion paper, University of Gothenburg.

Vasavakul, T. (2008): “Recrafting State Identity: Corruption and Anti-Corruption in
 Vietnamese State: Implications for Vietnam and the Region,” Discussion paper, Vietnam
 Workshop, City University of Hong Kong, August 21-22.

Wei, S.-J. (1999a): “Corruption in Economic Development: Beneficial Grease, Minor An-
 noyance, or Major Obstacle?,” Policy Research Working Paper 2048, World Bank.

        (1999b): “Special Governance Zone: A Practical Entry-Point for a Winnable Anti-
  Corruption Program.,” Discussion paper, Brookings Institution.

Weingast, B. R. (1995): “The Economic Role of Political Institutions: Market-Preserving
 Federalism and Economic Development,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization,
 pp. 1–31.

Wildasin, D. (2003): “Fiscal Competition in Space and Time,” Journal of Public
 Economics, 87(11), 2571–2588.

Wilson, J. (1986): “A Theory of Interregional Tax Competition,” Journal of Urban
 Economics, 19(3), 296–315.




                                          35
               Figure 1: Cross-Country Relationship Between GDP and Corruption

                    Panel A. Transparency International Corruption Index (2005)


                                     10                             TCD
                                                                  BGD
                                                                    HTI                          TKM GNQ
                                                                      NGA
                                                                     CIV
                                                                           PAK AGO
                                               8
                                                       SOM
                                                     LBR           KENTJK SDN
                                                                          UZB
                                                                        CMR       PRY
                                                     BDI NER SLE      KHM   PNG IDN
                                                                          KGZ
                                                                            COG    IRQAZE
                                                                                   GEO        VENRUS
                                                   ZWE          UGA
                                                              AFGNPL
                                                             ERI ZMB        NICPHL
                                                                           VNM     GUYALB
                                                                                  BOL
                                                                                 HND    ECU
                                                                                        GTM
                                                                                         UKR  KAZ
                                                                                               BLR       LBY
                        Corruption Perceptions


                                                        MWIMOZ
                                                            MDG   GMB            SWZ       MKD
                                                                TZA
                                                               MLI BEN      MDA
                                                                              IND
                                                                              MNG ARM  BIHDZADOMARG
                                                                                              IRNGAB
                                                              RWA SEN           MAR
                                                                                 LKA CHN        LBN
                                                                                                SUR
                                                                         LAO
                                                               BFA LSO GHA         SYR
                                                                                    EGY PER PAN      POL
                                                                                                     HRV SAU
                                                                                                TUR
                                                                                               JAMMEX
                                                                                            BRA
                                                                                            THABLZ
                                                                                              CUB           TTO
                                                                                      FJI COLBGR           SYC
                                       6




                                                                                     NAM SLV MUS   LVASVKCZE
                                                                                                 CRI         GRC
                                                                                           ZAF
                                                                                                    LTU              KWT
                                                                                         TUN           HUN KOR ITA
                                                                                                 MYS
                                                                                     JOR               CYPBHR
                                                                                                URY
                                                                                                 BWA        TWN        QAT
                              4




                                                                                                          SVN         ARE
                                                                                                       OMNISR
                                                                                                      EST
                                                                                                        PRT
                                                                                                        MLT
                                                                                                             BRB
                                                                                                             ESP
                                                                                                  CHL         JPNIRL
                                                                                                               BEL
                                                                                                              FRA USA
                                     2




                                                                                                                CAN     LUX
                                                                                                               GBR
                                                                                                                NLD
                                                                                                                AUT
                                                                                                                 AUSNOR
                                                                                                                 CHE
                                                                                                               SWE
                                                                                                               DNKSGP
                                                                                                             NZL
                                                                                                               FINISL
                                     0




                                                       6                         8                         10                      12

                                                                             Real GDP per Capita (ln)




                                          Panel B. World Bank Control of Corruption (2005)
                                  5




                                                                    SOM
                                                                          AFG HTI           IRQ             GNQ
                                                                  ZWE          TCD
                                                                              BGD  SDN PRY              TKM
                                                                                CIV
                                                                                 NGA AGO             TON
                                                                   LBRCAFGNB KHM TJKUZB
                                                                                  CMR
                                                                                   LAO
                                                                                    KGZ
                                                                                      PNG
                                                                                     COG
                                                                         SLE KEN                      VEN
                                  4




                                                                   BDI               PAK       AZE KAZ
                                                                           GIN
                                                                      NERTGO
                                                                     MWI      BEN
                                                                            COM
                                                                            UGASTP MDA IDN      ECU BLR
                                                                        MOZ   GMB VNM
                                                                            TLS
                                                                             ZMB
                                                                             NPL
                                                                            TZA      DJIPHL
                                                                                      NIC
                                                                                           BOL ALB
                                                                                           HND  GTM
                                                                                              CHN
                                                                                            SYR
                                                                                              ARM    DOM  RUSLBY
                                                                                                        GAB
                                                                          RWA          MNGSWZ
                                                                                            GUYFJIUKR IRN
                                                                                             EGY
                                                                                            GEO   DZAMHL
                                                                                                     PANLBN
                                                                                                      JAM
                                                                           MLI GHA IND MDV      PER    ARG
                                                                                                   MKD MEX
                                                                         ERI    SEN         FSMBIH
                                                                                          LKA     SLV CUB
                                                                                                      BLZ
                                                                           BFALSO MRT MAR           BRA
                                                                                                   COL
                                                                                                    THA
                                                                         MDG                                   SAU
                       Corruption
                                3




                                                                                  SLB                  TUR
                                                                                                 TUN BGR         TTO
                                                                                             NAM
                                                                                             KIRVUTWSMSURPOL
                                                                                                           HRV
                                                                                                                SYC
                                                                                                                    ITA BRN
                                                                                         CPV JOR MUS    MYS
                                                                                                        CRILTU
                                                                                                          LVA     GRC
                                                                                                    ZAF     SVKCZE
                                                                                                                BHR
                                                                                                 DMA         HUN
                                                                                                            GRD KOR
                                                                                                              OMN
                                                                                                            ATG
                                                                                                              CYP
                                                                                          BTN                     TWN KWT
                                                                                                                 ISR        ARE
                                                                                                                             QAT
                                                                                                   VCTURYKNA ESTSVN
                       2




                                                                                                       BWA     MLT
                                                                                                          LCA PRTBRB JPN
                                                                                                         CHL       ESP
                                                                                                                     BHS
                                                                                                                    FRA
                                                                                                                      BEL
                                                                                                                        USA
                                                                                                                        IRL
                                                                                                                       CAN
                                                                                                                      GBR
                                                                                                                       AUS
                                                                                                                       AUT   LUX
                                                                                                                       NLDNOR
                                  1




                                                                                                                     SWE
                                                                                                                       CHE
                                                                                                                   NZL  SGP
                                                                                                                      DNK
                                                                                                                      FIN
                                                                                                                        ISL
                                  0




                                                   4                  6                     8                   10                 12

                                                                             Real GDP per Capita (ln)



 In Panel A, the Corruption Perception Index (CPI) defines corruption as the abuse of public office for private gain. The CPI
Score measures perceptions of the degree of corruption as seen by business people, risk analysts, and the general public and
ranges between 10 (highly corrupt) and 0 (highly clean). In Panel B, Control of Corruption measures perceptions of corruption,
conventionally defined as the exercise of public power for private gain. It ranges between 5 (highly corrupt) and 0 (highly
clean). In both panels, the x-axis is the log of PPP Converted GDP Per Capita (Chain Series), at 2005 constant prices.




                                                                                       36
   Figure 2: Relationship Between GDP and Corruption Using Survey Data from Firms
               % of firms expected to give gifts to public officials




                                                                                         GIN BGD             SYR
                                                                                                     MRT
                                                                                                     COG
                                                             80




                                                                                              KEN



                                                                           ZAR                                     DZA
                                                                                        GNB
                                                                                                    KHM
                                                 60




                                                                                                       UZB
                                                                                 BDI                               ALB
                                                                                  LBR        BEN
                                                                                           UGA    CMR  VNM               AZE
                                                                                           TZA       PAKIND      AGO
                                                                                                     KGZ
                                                                                                 TJK
                                                                                          AFG TCD NGA SWZ                 GAB
                                     40




                                                                                                  GHA LAO                      RUS
                                                                                   NER                                      KAZ
                                                                                                       MDAMNG
                                                                                                                      UKR
                                                                                               LSO                 WSM PAN
                                                                                                                             BLR
                                                                                                                         VEN LBN
                                                                                                                           BGR
                                                                                                                          ROM
                                                                                      MDG                             PER
                                                                                                                       SRB             GRC
                          20




                                                                                         SLE
                                                                                         RWA
                                                                                           MLI
                                                                                            TLS                                          BHS
                                                                                                          PHL  GUY MKD
                                                                                       TGO NPLSEN             JOR
                                                                                                             BOL
                                                                                                              PRYARM ZAF
                                                                                                               EGY
                                                                                                                        JAM  ARG
                                                                                                                           TUR
                                                                                                                                   SVK
                                                                                       MOZ     ZMB           IDN
                                                                                                           MAR  GEO          LVA POL
                                                                                                                                HRV PRT BRB
                                                                                                                                         TTO
                                                                                   ETH                             SLVTON
                                                                                                                   ECUBRA MEX
                                                                                                                NAMBIH               CZE
                                                                                     MWI                       FJI
                                                                                                             BTN     MNE DOM   LTU
                                                                                          BFA         NIC                   URY
                                                                                                                           SUR               IRL
                                                                                                            CPV GTM BWA
                                                                                                            HND           MUS GRDHUN SVN
                                                                                                                               ATG      ESP
                                                                                                                    VUT
                                                                                                                      COLBLZCRI EST
                                                                                     ERI                             DMA     CHL
                                                                                                                             LCA
               0




                                                                       5                      7                          9                         11

                                                                                              Real GDP per Capita (ln)



 This figure plots the percentage of firms who expect to give gifts to public officials to get things done for 122 countries in the
World Bank Enterprise Survey. For each country, we use the year that the country is most recently surveyed. The x-axis is the
log of PPP-adjusted GDP per capita (Chain Series), at 2005 constant prices.




                                                                                                       37
                                              Figure 3: Time Trend in Bribes and GDP in Vietnam
                                            7.2




                                                                                                  5

                                                                                                        Bribe Share of Revenue (Average %)
                 Real GDP per Capita (ln)




                                                                                                  4.5
                                            7
                                            6.8




                                                                                                  4
                                            6.6




                                                                                                  3.5
                                            6.4




                                                                                                  3

                                                  2005   2006   2007        2008    2009   2010

                                                                GDP per Capita (log)
                                                                Bribe Share of Revenue



 This figure plots real GDP per capita and the average amount of bribe as a share of revenue paid by firms in Vietnam from
2005 to 2010. The bribe share variable is averaged across all firms surveyed in the PCI for the corresponding year.




                                                                       38
         Figure 4: Average Annual GDP Growth by Province in Vietnam (2006-2010)
                             40
              Share of Vietnamese Provinces
               10          200       30




                                              0    5                 10            15                  20
                                                  Average Annual GDP Growth (2006−2010)



 This figure plots the distribution of average annual GDP growth across provinces in Vietnam from 2006 to 2010. We have
excluded provinces that reported implausibly high growth rate over this period (over 20 percent) as these numbers are very
much likely overstated.




                                                                39
                                   Figure 5: Variation in Corruption across Provinces in Vietnam
                       20




                                                                                             20
                       15




                                                                                             15
              Share of Provinces




                                                                                    Share of Provinces
                    10




                                                                                          10
                       5




                                                                                             5
                       0




                                                                                             0




                                   0           20         40         60        80                        0   .05            .1           .15
                                       % of Firm Answering Bribes are Common (%)          % of Firm with Bribe Payment Greater than 10% of revenue




 This figure plots the distribution of corruption across provinces in Vietnam, using data from the 2010 PCI survey. The bribe
variables are averages across all firms surveyed within a province. The variable in the left panel is a dummy that equals 1 if the
firm responds “strongly agree” or “agree” to the following statement:“It’s common for firms like mine to pay informal charges.”
The variable in the right panel is a dummy that equals 1 if the firm paid more than 10 percent of revenues as bribes to public
officials.




                                                                                   40
     Figure 6: Cross-Sectional Relationship Between Bribe Rate and Firm Employment
                             4
              Bribes as percent of revenue
                    2        1      3




                                             10 − 49   50 − 199   200 − 299 300 − 499 500 − 1000 over 1000
                                                                       Employment




 This figure plots the mean bribe rate as a percent of revenue for each employment size category as well as the 95 percent
confidence interval.




                                                                            41
                                                        Table 1: Summary Statistics of Firms

                                                                                                 Observations           Median          Mean          Std Dev
     Bribes as percentage of revenue (%)                                                            13160                 1.5              3.8          5.671
     Years since establishment                                                                      12846                   4            5.505          6.317
     Number of employees (PCI)                                                                      12011                  21           94.939        248.869
     Mean employment (GSO, mean for industry-year-province level)                                   13160               23.776          36.753         33.868
     Log total employment (GSO, aggregate for industry-year-province)                               13160                9.091           9.01          1.866
     Log of business premise size (hectare)                                                          6397                6.879           7.073          2.204
     Land ownership (dummy)                                                                         13160                  1              .726          .446
     Land use right certificate (dummy)                                                             12632                  1             .575           .494
     Land ownership without land use right certificate (dummy)                                      12632                  0             .139           .346
     Number of other provinces in which firm operates                                               13063                   0             .387          1.021
     Firm currently operates in more than one province (dummy)                                      13160                  0              .082          .275
     Share of registration documents held                                                           10411                .167            .248           .286
     Former household firm (dummy)                                                                  13158                   1             .579           .494
     Former SOE (dummy)                                                                             13158                   0              .09           .286
42




     Owner is a government official (dummy)                                                         13158                   0             .133            .34
     Government holds positive share (dummy)                                                        13158                   0              .04           .196
       Note: Each observation is a firm, and we pool the sample of firms over all years from 2006 to 2010. The PCI firms in our sample are those with valid
       industry and bribe payment data and whose province-industry-year is represented in the GSO data. The summary statistics reported in this table are
       for the 13,160 firms that meet this sample inclusion criterion. Bribes as percentage of revenue (PCI): This is a 7-point categorical variable drawn from
       question D6 of the annual PCI survey. Respondents answered within ranges: 1) 0%; 2) less than 1%; 3) 1-2%; 4) 2-10%; 5) 10-20%; 6) 20-30%; 7) over
       30%. We recode each category with the corresponding cell mean with over 30% recoded as 35%. Years since establishment (PCI): Continuous variable
       that subtracts year of establishment from the year the firm completed the survey (2006 to 2010). Establishment only captures when the firm began doing
       business and has no legal connotation. A follow-up question asks when a firm registered as a formal business. Number of employees (PCI): This variable
       is categorical in PCI: for example, 10-49, 50-199, etc. We recode each category with the corresponding empirical cell mean in GSO. Mean employment
       (GSO, mean for industry-year-province level): Continuous measure collected in the GSO Enterprise Census. Log total employment (GSO, aggregate for
       industry-year-province): Continuous measure collected in the GSO Enterprise Census. Log of business premise size (hectares) (PCI): Continuous measure
       collected in only the 2009 to 2011 surveys. Land ownership (dummy) (PCI): Dichotomous variable measuring whether a firm purchased (=1) or leases
       (=0) its main business premises. Land use right certificate (LURC, dummy) (PCI): Dichotomous variable measuring whether a firm possesses an LURC
       for its main business premises. Land ownership without land use right certificate (dummy) (PCI): Dichotomous variable, calculated from questions about
       whether a firm owns land and whether it has a LURC for that land. Number of other provinces in which firm operates (PCI): Count variable calculated
       from firm’s response to a question asking it to record all provinces and national-level cities in which it has operations or branch offices, outside of its
       headquarters location. Firm currently operates in more than one province (dummy) (PCI): Dichotomous variable for whether firm listed operations in at
       least one province outside the province with its main headquarters. Share of registration documents held: Based on the following question: “In addition
       to the certificate of business registration, your business may need additional permits or business to be fully legal (e.g. mining licenses....). How many of
       these documents were required for your firm?” Variable defined as the number of registration documents held by the firm divided by the 95% percentile
       of the firm’s industry (a proxy for formality). Former household firm (dummy) (PCI): Dichotomous variable for whether the firm operated as an informal
       business based on household premises before formal registration. Former SOE (dummy) (PCI): Based on questions asking whether the firm is a privatized
       former State Owned Enterprise (SOE). Equals 1 if the firm is either a locally or centrally managed SOE. Owner is a former government official (dummy)
       (PCI): Based on question asking whether the owner of the private enterprise is a former government official, army office, or SOE manager. Government
       holds a positive share (dummy) (PCI): Based on question asking whether shares of the firm are held by local or central government officials.
                                    Table 2: First Stage Results

                                                                      Dep. var.: Log total employment
                                                                     (own-province-industry-year level)
Log total employment                                                              0.724***
(at industry-year level, excluding own province)                                   (0.107)
Observations                                                                        3873

Province–industry and year fixed effects                                                   X
  Note: Each observation is a province-industry-year. The dependent variable is log total employment in the
  province-industry-year. The independent variable is log total employment of the same industry-year in all
  provinces other than own. Both variables are calculated using the GSO Enterprise Survey data. Industry
  refers to an ISIC alphabetical industry code. The regression controls for province-industry and year fixed
  effects. Standard errors are clustered at the province level. *** implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.




                                                       43
                          Table 3: Effect of Economic Performance on Bribes

Dependent variable: Firm’s bribe payment as percentage of revenue
                                                                      (1)                 (2)                      (3)
                                                                   RF: OLS        RF: Ordered Probit               IV
 Log total employment                                              -1.723**            -0.275**
 (at industry-year level, excluding own province)                   (0.764)             (0.131)
 Log total employment                                                                                           -2.302**
 (own-province-industry-year level)                                                                              (1.004)
 Observations                                                        13160                 13160                  13160

 Province–industry and year fixed effects                              X                      X                     X
   Note: The dependent variable is the firm’s bribe payment as percentage of revenue. This is coded as a categorical
   variable in the data: 0%, 0.5%, 1.5%, 7.5%, 15%, 25%, 35%. Industries refer to ISIC alphabetical industry codes. All
   regressions control for province-industry and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the province level. ***
   implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.




                                                             44
                           Table 4: Heterogeneous Effects Based on Firms’ Property Rights
     Dependent variable: Firm’s bribe payment as percentage of revenue
                                                           (1)          (2)        (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)
      Log total employment (at industry-year level,     -1.583*       7.914     -1.626**    6.666    -1.598**    7.730
      excluding own province)                           (0.798)      (5.540)     (0.751)   (4.920)    (0.785)   (5.579)
      Firm owns land and has LURC                      3.891***     3.818***                            2.393    2.349
                                                        (1.426)      (1.417)                          (1.574)   (1.580)
      Firm owns land and has LURC X log(Employ)        -0.291***    -0.286***                         -0.206*   -0.203*
                                                        (0.104)      (0.103)                          (0.115)   (0.116)
      Firm owns its land                                                        2.751*     2.705*      2.518     2.469
45




                                                                                (1.564)    (1.550)    (2.024)   (2.005)
      Firm owns its land X log(Employ)                                           -0.186     -0.183     -0.139    -0.136
                                                                                (0.116)    (0.115)    (0.152)   (0.151)
      Observations                                       11486       11486       13160      13160      11486     11486

      Control for average firm size X log(Employ)         NO          YES         NO        YES        NO        YES
      Province-industry and year fixed effects            X            X          X          X         X          X
        Note: The interaction term is the product of log total employment of the same industry-year group in all
        provinces other than own and firm-level property rights variables. Column (2), (4) and (6) control for average
        firm size in the industry. All regressions control for province-industry and year fixed effects. Standard errors
        are clustered at the province level. *** implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.
                                Table 5: Robustness Check: Heterogeneous Effects Based on Firms’ Property Rights
     Dependent variable: Firm’s bribe payment as percentage of revenue
                                                                 (1)               (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)          (6)            (7)             (8)
                                                        share of Registration    former        former     government     government     premise        years of      propensity
                                                          documents held         HH firm        SOE         official        share         size      establishment       score
      Panel A. LURC
      Log total employment (at industry-year                     7.691             7.733       7.624          8.579         7.851         6.746          9.107          9.732
      level, excluding own province)                            (6.067)           (5.481)     (5.521)        (5.642)       (5.596)       (5.362)        (5.662)        (6.113)
      Firm owns land and has LURC                              4.484***          3.851***     3.980**       3.674***      3.822***      4.613***       4.113**         5.424**
                                                                (1.577)           (1.423)     (1.514)        (1.369)       (1.423)       (1.528)        (1.647)        (2.067)
      Firm owns land and has LURC X log(Employ)               -0.338***         -0.289***    -0.295***     -0.275***      -0.286***     -0.344***      -0.307**       -0.407***
                                                                (0.115)           (0.104)     (0.110)        (0.100)       (0.104)       (0.110)        (0.120)        (0.150)
      Observations                                               9262              11484       11484          11484         11484         10611          11222           8456

      Panel B. Land Ownership
      Log total employment (at industry-year level,              6.981             6.517       6.444         7.121          6.634         6.514          7.455          8.494
      excluding own province)                                   (5.685)           (4.863)     (4.900)       (5.008)        (4.935)       (4.797)        (5.048)        (5.707)
      Firm owns its land                                       3.741**            2.689*      2.756*        2.639*         2.702*        2.949*         3.018*        3.970**
                                                                (1.549)           (1.564)     (1.546)       (1.517)        (1.551)       (1.626)        (1.655)        (1.834)
      Firm owns its land X log(Employ)                         -0.270**            -0.185      -0.187        -0.178         -0.183        -0.198        -0.206*       -0.288**
46




                                                                (0.115)           (0.116)     (0.115)       (0.113)        (0.115)       (0.121)        (0.122)        (0.136)
      Observations                                               10411             13158       13158         13158          13158         12027          12846          9418

      Panel C. Land Ownership and LURC
      Log total employment (at industry-year level,             7.471              7.594       7.474         8.400          7.683         6.634          8.897          9.138
      excluding own province)                                  (6.046)            (5.524)     (5.559)       (5.685)        (5.630)       (5.386)        (5.695)        (6.107)
      Firm owns its land                                        3.371*             2.438       2.449         2.482          2.480         1.953          2.794          2.881
                                                               (1.844)            (2.000)     (1.954)       (1.976)        (2.011)       (2.074)        (2.027)        (2.170)
      Firm owns its land X log(Employ)                          -0.223             -0.137      -0.137        -0.136         -0.137        -0.093         -0.160         -0.188
                                                               (0.138)            (0.150)     (0.147)       (0.148)        (0.151)       (0.156)        (0.152)        (0.162)
      Firm owns land and has LURC                                2.571             2.401       2.507         2.197          2.349       3.425**          2.438         3.887*
                                                               (1.687)            (1.543)     (1.639)       (1.562)        (1.585)       (1.657)        (1.710)        (2.046)
      Firm owns land and has LURC X log(Employ)                -0.211*            -0.206*     -0.211*       -0.192*        -0.202*      -0.285**        -0.210*       -0.306**
                                                               (0.122)            (0.113)     (0.120)       (0.114)        (0.116)       (0.120)        (0.125)        (0.147)
      Observations                                               9262              11484       11484         11484          11484         10611          11222           8456

      Control for average firm size X log(Employ)               YES                YES          YES          YES            YES           YES            YES            YES
      Province-industry and year fixed effects                   X                  X            X            X              X             X              X              X
        Note: Column (1) to (7) controls for the following explanatory variables and their interactions with log total employment of the same industry-year group in all provinces
        other than own: share of registration documents held, former household firm (dummy), former SOE (dummy), owner being a government official (dummy), government
        holding positive share (dummy), log of business premise size, firm’s age. Column (8) controls for the propensity score. All regressions control for province-industry and
        year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the province level. *** implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.
                         Table 6: Heterogeneous Effects Based on Firms’ Operation Locations
     Dependent variable: Firm’s bribe payment as percentage of revenue
                                                                                    (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)
      Log total employment (at industry-year level, excluding own province)      -1.911**     6.952    -1.854**    6.802
                                                                                  (0.768)    (4.846)    (0.759)   (4.862)
      Number of other provinces in which firm operates                            1.306**    1.326**
                                                                                  (0.495)    (0.497)
      Number of other provinces in which firm operates X log(Employ)             -0.083**   -0.085**
                                                                                  (0.037)    (0.037)
      Firm currently operates in more than one province                                                5.438**    5.531**
47




                                                                                                       (2.479)     (2.475)
      Firm currently operates in more than one province X log(Employ)                                  -0.364*    -0.371**
                                                                                                       (0.185)     (0.184)
      Observations                                                                13063      13063      13160       13160

      Control for average firm size X log(Employ)                                  NO        YES         NO         YES
      Province-industry and year fixed effects                                     X          X          X           X
        Note: The interaction term is the product of log total employment of the same industry-year group in all provinces
        other than own and firm-level operation location variables. Column (2) and (4) control for average firm size in
        the industry. All regressions control for province-industry and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at
        the province level. *** implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.
                              Table 7: Robustness Check: Heterogeneous Effects Based on Firms’ Operation Locations
     Dependent variable: Firm’s bribe payment as percentage of revenue
                                                                               (1)              (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)          (6)           (7)             (8)
                                                                      share of registration   former       former     government     government     premise       years of      propensity
                                                                        documents held        HH firm       SOE         official        share         size     establishment       score
      Panel A. Number of Other Provinces the Firm Operates In
      Log total employment (at industry-year level,                           7.338             6.759       6.722        7.354          6.886        6.672         7.569           7.803
      excluding own province)                                                (5.612)           (4.788)     (4.809)      (4.915)        (4.864)      (4.746)       (4.925)         (5.326)
      Number of other provinces in which firm operates                       0.913*           1.348***     1.328**     1.241**        1.312**       1.361**      1.527***           0.809
                                                                             (0.500)           (0.502)     (0.502)      (0.504)        (0.498)      (0.655)       (0.480)         (0.611)
      Number of other provinces in which firm operates X                      -0.055          -0.086**    -0.083**     -0.079**       -0.083**      -0.087*      -0.099***         -0.046
      log(Employ)                                                            (0.038)           (0.038)     (0.037)      (0.037)        (0.037)      (0.048)       (0.036)         (0.046)
      Observations                                                            10332             13061       13061        13061          13061        11930         12763            9350
48




      Panel B. Dummy for Operating in More than One Province
      Log total employment (at industry-year level,                           7.070             6.642       6.557        7.236          6.758        6.631          7.527          7.903
      excluding own province)                                                (5.716)           (4.805)     (4.833)      (4.939)        (4.881)      (4.760)        (4.986)        (5.537)
      Firm currently operates in more than one province                       3.699           5.588**      5.627**      5.239**        5.424**      5.345**        6.191**          3.218
                                                                             (2.650)           (2.471)     (2.500)      (2.447)        (2.466)      (2.578)        (2.518)        (2.668)
      Firm currently operates in more than one province                       -0.241          -0.375**    -0.374**      -0.350*        -0.362*      -0.360*       -0.418**         -0.201
      X log(Employ)                                                          (0.198)           (0.184)     (0.186)      (0.182)        (0.183)      (0.191)        (0.187)        (0.199)
      Observations                                                            10411             13158       13158        13158          13158        12027          12846           9418

      Control for average firm size X log(Employ)                             YES               YES         YES          YES            YES          YES            YES            YES
      Province-industry and year fixed effects                                 X                 X           X            X              X            X              X              X
        Note: Column (1) to (7) controls for the following explanatory variables and their interactions with log total employment of the same industry-year group in all provinces other
        than own: share of registration documents held, former household firm (dummy), former SOE (dummy), owner being a government official (dummy), government holding positive
        share (dummy), log of business premise size, firm’s age. Column (8) controls for the propensity score. All regressions control for province-industry and year fixed effects. Standard
        errors are clustered at the province level. *** implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.
                                                    Table 8: Testing Alternative Models

                                                                     (1)                                 (2)                              (3)
                                                            Herfindahl index for               Bribes as % of revenue           Bribes as % of revenue
                                                        province-industry-year group     (excluding construction inudustry)
     Log total employment                                         0.067***                            -1.728**                         -1.684**
     (at industry-year level, excluding own province)              (0.022)                             (0.844)                          (0.703)
     Log aggregate province-year shock (instrument)                                                                                      -0.892
                                                                                                                                        (3.396)
49




     Observations                                                    3561                               11012                            13160

     Province-industry and year fixed effects                         X                                   X                               X
        Note: The dependent variable for Column (1) is the employment Herfindahl index constructed for each province-industry-year group. The
        index is normalized to be between 0 and 1, where a small index indicates a competitive industry. For this regression, we keep 1 obseration
        per province-industry-year group. Column (2) shows the result for the main reduced form regression but excluding firms in the construction
        industry. For column (3), we construct an instrument for aggregate province-year level shock and include it in the main baseline specification.
        The instrument is log of the weighted sum over all industries of province (excluding own)-industry-year employment, normalized by the average
        over all years of total employment in the industry in other provinces. The weight is the average over all years of industry’s share of employment
        in the province. All regressions control for province-industry and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the province level. ***
        implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.
FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION


Appendix Tables



                      Appendix Table 1: Industry Codes and Descriptions

 ISIC Rev 4 Code         Description
        A                Agriculture, forestry and fishing
        B                Mining and quarrying
        C                Manufacturing
        D                Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply
        E                Water supply; sewerage, waste management and remediation activities
        F                Construction
        G                Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles
        H                Transportation and storage
        I                Accommodation and food service activities
        J                Information and communication
        K                Financial and insurance activities
        L                Real estate activities
       M                 Professional, scientific and technical activities
        N                Administrative and support service activities
        P                Education
        Q                Human health and social work activities
        R                Arts, entertainment and recreation
        S                Other service activities
   The alphabetical industry codes and descriptions are based on International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC)
   of All Economic Activities, Rev.4. The list includes the 18 industries that appear in our analysis sample.




                                                          50
                   Appendix Table 2: Cross-Validation of PCI and GSO Data

                                                                (1)                              (2)
                                                      Log mean Employment              Log median Employment
                                                           in PCI data                      in PCI data
    Log mean Employment in GSO                               0.531***
                                                              (0.041)
   Log median Employment in GSO                                                                   0.478***
                                                                                                   (0.047)
                Observations                                      4607                              4607

Province–industry and year fixed effects                            X                                 X
  Note: Each observation is a province-industry-year. The dependent variable is log mean or log median firm-level
  employment for each province-industry-year group in the PCI data. The independent variable is the corresponding
  variable computed using the GSO data. For both datasets, we keep only private firms. Since the firm employment
  variable in PCI is categorical, we compute the empirical mean and median for each category from the GSO data and
  apply these to the PCI data. All specifications control for province by industry and year fixed effect. Industries refer
  to ISIC 2-digit industry code. Robust standard errors are clustered at the province level and reported. *** implies
  significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.




                                                          51
                  Appendix Table 3: Propensity Score Regressions for LURC and Operation Locations

                                                                   (1)                  (2)                                    (3)
                                                              Firm has       Number of other provinces              Firm currently operates
                                                                LURC          in which firm operates               in more than one province
     Share of registration documents held                     0.784***               0.663***                              0.493***
                                                                (0.092)               (0.156)                                (0.110)
     Former HH firm (dummy)                                    0.453***                0.033                                  0.054
                                                                (0.052)               (0.090)                                (0.060)
     Former SOE (dummy)                                         0.184**              0.453***                               0.239**
                                                                (0.090)               (0.136)                                (0.100)
52




     Owner is government official (dummy)                      0.389**                 0.251                                  0.284
                                                                (0.151)               (0.273)                                (0.184)
     Government holds positive share (dummy)                  -0.360***                0.119                                  0.095
                                                                (0.121)               (0.181)                                (0.131)
     Log of business premise size (hectare)                    0.274***                0.007                                 0.029*
                                                                (0.017)               (0.021)                                (0.015)
     Years since establishment                                 0.059***              0.015***                               0.011***
                                                                (0.005)               (0.005)                                (0.004)
     Observations                                                 8456                 9418                                   9350
       Note: Column (1) shows the logit regression coefficients of LURC (dummy) on various predictors of obtaining the certificate, including share of
       registration documents held, former household firm (dummy), former SOE (dummy), owner being a government official (dummy), government
       holding positive share (dummy), log of business premise size, and firm’s age. Column (2) and (3) show the (ordered) logit regression results for
       firm’s operation location variables on the same set of explanatory variables. *** implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.
     Appendix Table 4: Heterogeneous Effects Based on Firms’ Property Rights (Contemporaneous Measure of LURC)
        Dependent variable: Firm’s bribe payment as percentage of revenue
                                                                                                       (1)          (2)            (3)       (4)
         Log total employment (at industry-year level, excluding own province)                      -1.534**       7.930       -1.570**    7.803
                                                                                                     (0.762)      (5.514)       (0.760)   (5.571)
         Firm owns land and has LURC                                                                3.939**      3.858**         2.448     2.393
                                                                                                     (1.792)      (1.783)       (2.193)   (2.214)
         Firm owns land and has LURC X log(Employ)                                                  -0.290**     -0.284**        -0.213    -0.209
53




                                                                                                     (0.132)      (0.131)       (0.162)   (0.164)
         Firm owns its land                                                                                                       2.235    2.198
                                                                                                                                (2.169)   (2.167)
         Firm owns its land X log(Employ)                                                                                        -0.114    -0.111
                                                                                                                                (0.164)   (0.163)
         Observations                                                                                11486         11486         11486     11486

         Control for average firm size X log(Employ)                                                   NO          YES              NO     YES
         Province-industry and year fixed effects                                                      X            X               X       X
           Note: This table presents results for the same specifications as in Table 4 but using contemporaneous Measure of LURC.
         Appendix Table 5: Heterogeneous Effects Based on Firms’ Property Rights (Ordered Probit)

     Dependent variable: Firm’s bribe payment as percentage of revenue
                                                                            (1)                     (2)                          (3)
                                                                     Firms that rent          Firms that own              Firms that own
                                                                        their land          land without LURC            land with LURC
      Log total employment                                                -0.018                   0.638                       -0.396
54




      (at industry-year level, excluding own province)                   (0.247)                  (0.461)                     (0.257)
      Observations                                                         3610                    1760                         5183

      Province-industry and year fixed effects                                X                         X                          X
        Note: This table reports the reduced form results using the ordered probit model for firms in three categories: (1) firms that rent their
        land; (2) firms that own land without an LURC; (3) firms that own land with an LURC. All regressions control for province-industry and
        year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the province level. *** implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.
Appendix: Mathematical Details of the Model
   This Appendix proves Propositions 1 and 2. One way to prove the results is using standard first
order condition and taking derivative by invoking implicit function theorem. Here we explore an
alternative method. First notice that by replacing K, L, A, θ by rK, wL, rαAwβ , θ(rα wβ )η , we can
assume w = r = 1 without changing the problem. This linear change of variable also preserves the
signs of the derivatives in question. We thus have

                               π1∗ = maxK,L≥0 (1 − b1 )AK α Lβ − K − L

which gives
                                                                    1
                              K1∗ = α((1 − b1 )Aαα β β ) 1−α−β
                                                                    1
                               L∗1 = β((1 − b1 )Aαα β β ) 1−α−β
                                                                                   1
                               π1∗ = (1 − α − β)((1 − b1 )Aαα β β ) 1−α−β

Substituting these into the government’s problem, we are able to calculate the total bribe received
by government in province 1:

                                 B1 = t(1 − λ(R2 − R1 ))(R1α+β − R1 )                                (1)

where
                                                         1
                               R1 = (1 − b1 ) 1−α−β                                                  (2)
                                                         1
                               R2 = (1 − b2 )          1−α−β                                         (3)
                                                 1
                                           A   1−α−β                           1
                                λ =                    (1 − α − β)(αα β β ) 1−α−β                    (4)
                                               θAη
                                                             1
                                 t = (Aαα β β ) 1−α−β                                                (5)

Instead of choosing b1 , b2 ∈ (0, 1), the two provinces could choose R1 , R2 ∈ (0, 1) as well. The FOC
for (1) then yields

                     λ(R1α+β − R1 ) = (1 − λ(R2 − R1 )) ∗ (1 − (α + β)R1α+β−1 )                      (6)
The symmetric equilibrium R1 = R2 = R∗ must then satisfy

                                 λ(R1α+β − R1 ) = 1 − (α + β)R1α+β−1                                 (7)

This gives the equilibrium bribe rate b∗ via (2).
                   db∗                       1                        1                      1
Proposition 1.    dlogA   < 0 if 0 ≤ η <   1−α−β ;     = 0 if η =   1−α−β ;   > 0 if η >   1−α−β .

Proof. : Re-arrange (7) and notice that the ratio

                                                 1 − (α + β)R1α+β−1
                                       φ :=
                                                       (R1α+β − R1 )

is strictly increasing in R, because R1α+β − R1 is concave and hence log-concave in R. Therefore,
(7) has a unique solution for fixed parameters (so fixed λ), and this solution is strictly increasing

                                                         55
in λ. In other words,
                                                       dR∗
                                                           >0                                           (8)
                                                        dλ
                                                ∗
From (2), b∗ = 1 − (R∗ )1−α−β , and so dR
                                       db                       dλ
                                          ∗ < 0. Also from (4), dA is positive when η <
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                               1−α−β   and
negative otherwise. Multiplying the three inequalities, we obtain
                                   db∗                        1
                                              > 0, when η >
                                   dA                       1−α−β
                                   db∗                        1
                                              < 0, when η <
                                   dA                       1−α−β


                                        ∗
Proposition 2. The elasticity − db A
                                dA b∗ is monotonically decreasing in θ when 0 ≤ η <
                                                                                             1
                                                                                           1−α−β .

Proof. : From (2),
                                                         1       b∗
                                            R ∗ =                    b ∗                              (9)
                                                     1 − α − β 1 − b∗
             dR A              db A
where R =   dA R   and b = − dA b . Taking the derivative of (7) with respect to A, we get (omitting
stars)

                                        (α + β)(1 − α − β)Rα+β−1 R − (α + β)Rα+β
                                                                                     
                  1
          λ :=       −η =                                      +                         R           (10)
                1−α−β                      1 − (α + β)Rα+β−1        Rα+β − R

Substitute (9) and (2) into (10), we have

                                                   Rα+β−1 − 1
                                                              
                           λ
                              = (α + β)R  α+β−2
                                                +                φ−1                                   (11)
                           b                     (1 − α − β)R

It is easy to see that b∗ (R∗ ) increases (decreases) with θ, and thus the right hand side increases
with θ. Therefore,
                               db∗                              1
                                    < 0, when λ > 0 ⇔ η <                                      (12)
                                dθ                            1−α−β




                                                          56
