                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  UPSTREAM PRODUCT MARKET REGULATIONS, ICT, R&D AND PRODUCTIVITY

                                            Gilbert Cette
                                            Jimmy Lopez
                                          Jacques Mairesse

                                        Working Paper 19488
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19488


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




The authors wish to thank Giuseppe Nicoletti, Daniel Sichel, Jean Louis Schneider, Francesco Venturini
and Rheinhilde Veugelers for useful comments and participants to seminars and conferences where
preliminary version of the paper was presented. The views presented by the authors do not necessarily
reflect those of Banque de France or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Gilbert Cette, Jimmy Lopez, and Jacques Mairesse. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Upstream Product Market Regulations, ICT, R&D and Productivity
Gilbert Cette, Jimmy Lopez, and Jacques Mairesse
NBER Working Paper No. 19488
October 2013
JEL No. C23,L16,L5,O43,O47

                                              ABSTRACT

Our study aims at assessing the actual importance of the two main channels usually contemplated in
the literature through which upstream sector anticompetitive regulations may impact productivity growth:
business investments in R&D and in ICT. We thus estimate what are the specific impacts of these
two channels and their shares in total impact as against alternative channels of investments in other
forms of intangible capital we cannot explicitly consider for lack of appropriate data such as improvements
in skills, management and organization. For this, we specify an extended production function relating
productivity explicitly to R&D and ICT capital as well as to upstream regulations, and two factor demand
functions relating R&D and ICT capital to upstream regulations. These relations are estimated on the
basis of an unbalanced panel of 15 OECD countries and 13 industries over the period 1987-2007. Our
estimates confirm the results of previous similar studies finding that the impact of upstream regulations
on total factor productivity can be sizeable, and they provide evidence that a good part of the total
impact, though not a predominant one, goes through both investments in ICT and R&D, and particularly
the latter.


Gilbert Cette                                        Jacques Mairesse
Banque de France                                     CREST (ParisTech-ENSAE)
1, rue de la Vrillière                               15, Boulevard Gabriel PERI
75001 Paris, France                                  92245 MALAKOFF CEDEX
and Aix-Marseille School of Economics,               FRANCE
CNRS & EHESS                                         and UNU-MERIT (Maastricht University)
gilbert.cette@banque-france.fr                       and also NBER
                                                     mairesse@ensae.fr
Jimmy Lopez
Université de Bourgogne
UFR Economie et Gestion
4, Boulevard Gabriel
21000 Dijon, FRANCE
Jimmy.Lopez@u-bourgogne.fr




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19488
    I.      Introduction

Competition is an important determinant of productivity growth. Much firm-level
microeconomic research has supported the idea that competitive pressure enhances innovation
and is a driver of productivity (among others, see Geroski, 1995a, 1995b; Nickell, 1996;
Nickell et al., 1997; Blundell et al., 1999; Griffith et al., 2002; Haskel et al., 2007; Aghion et
al., 2004), especially for incumbent firms that are close to the technological frontier (Aghion
et al., 2005; Aghion et al., 2006). Reinforcing evidence has also been found in investigations
at a macroeconomic level, either using country panel data (Conway et al., 2006; Aghion et al.,
2009) or country-industry panel data (Nicoletti and Scarpetta, 2003; Griffith et al., 2010;
Inklaar et al., 2008; Buccirossi et al., 2009). Most of these empirical studies have provided
within country-industry evidence of the link between competitive conditions and productivity
enhancements.

In contrast to these studies who investigated the direct influence of product market regulations
in industries on these industries themselves, our paper focus on the cross-industry influence of
product market regulations in non-manufacturing industries, called “upstream” industries
thereafter, on productivity outcomes in the industries, often called for convenience
“downstream” industries, which are using the intermediate inputs from these upstream
industries.1 Regulations that protect rents in upstream industries can reduce incentives to
search for and implement efficiency improvements in downstream industries, since they will
have to share the expected rents from such improvements with upstream industries.2 This is a
particularly important issue, since mostly due to increasing international competition the
downstream non-manufacturing industries have become more competitive in the last twenty


1        Note that the distinction between upstream and downstream industries is not a priori
         clear-cut, since upstream industries use intermediate inputs from other upstream
         industries. As will become clear in the implementation of our analysis the non-
         manufacturing upstream industries are kept in our study sample. We thus estimate the
         overall average influence of upstream product market regulations (that is precisely the
         average influence of regulations in each upstream industry on all industries excluding that
         upstream industry).
2        A formalization of such links between upstream competition and downstream
         productivity based on an extension of the endogenous growth model of Aghion et al. can
         be found in the working paper version of Bourlès et al. (2010) and in chapter 2 of Lopez
         (2011).

                                                                                                  3
years or so in most OECD countries, while upstream service industry have been generally
sheltered and anticompetitive product market regulations have to a large extent remained
significant in these industries.

Only very few studies have investigated the influence of upstream competition on the
performances of downstream industries. Some of them are panel data analyses for one country
at the industry level, like Allegra et al. (2004) for Italy or at the firm level like Forlani (2010)
on France and Arnold et al. (2011) on the Czech Republic and they use specific indicators of
upstream competition. Other studies like Faini et al. (2006), Bourlès et al. (2010) and Barone
and Cingano (2011) are relying on country-industry panel data analyses and on the OECD
regulation indicators in upstream industries and they are thus similar to what we do ourselves
in this paper but with more or less pronounced differences in terms of sample coverage,
model specification and estimation methods.

The goal of the present investigation is not only to confirm the results of these previous
studies but also to understand better the economic mechanisms at work in an attempt to
characterize the channels through which upstream regulations impact downstream
productivity growth. As it is generally agreed, we consider investments in R&D and
innovation as being a vital channel and we estimate how important it is actually. We consider
jointly investments in ICT, since they are also deemed to be a key channel for
competitiveness.3 In order to implement such investigation, as explained in Section II, we
consider a three equations model that is simple enough to be specified and estimated with the
data available at country-industry level. We thus estimate a relation where the distance of
country-industry multifactor productivity to the corresponding industry multifactor
productivity in the USA (where the USA is taken as the country of reference) depends not
only on the upstream regulatory burden indicator, but also on the distance of country-industry
R&D and ICT capital intensities to that in the USA. In parallel we estimate two factor demand
relations, for R&D and ICT capital respectively, which both include the upstream regulation


3   Investing in training and investing in skilled labor and investing in organization and
    management are also potentially important channels that we could not consider here for
    lack of data or good enough data at the country--industry level. It is likely that these
    channels are to some extent complementary to the ICT and R&D channels, and thus that
    the regulatory impact working through them may be partly taken into account in our
    estimates. Note also that although patents are not as good a predictor of innovation output
    as R&D investment, the numbers of country-industry patents would be a worthwhile
    indicator to consider in the future (see Aghion et al. 2013).

                                                                                                  4
burden indicator. To assess the robustness and validity of our results we consider in fact
different econometric specifications of our model.

Our investigation is performed on a cleaned unbalanced country-industry panel dataset for
fifteen OECD countries and thirteen manufacturing and market service industries over the
twenty one years 1987 to 2007. We consider thirteen industries covering a large part of the
non-agricultural business economy and leaving aside only industries that are (almost) not
investing in both ICT and R&D. Among these thirteen industries we also exclude five of them
to estimate the R&D investment demand equation, since they are almost not investing in
R&D.4

We rely on the same basic upstream regulatory burden indicator than in Bourlès et al., which
is computed from the OECD indicators of anti-competitive regulations on product market in
the six following non-manufacturing industries: energy, transport, communication, retail,
banking and professional services. However, our main variable of multifactor productivity is
defined differently since we have to explicitly include ICT and R&D capital as regressors in
the productivity equation. We explained our data and present a number of descriptive
statistics in section III and Appendix A.

In terms of identification strategy and estimation method, as discussed in Section IV, we
focus on the long-term estimates of our parameters of interest and the discussion of their
robustness In particular we systematically compare the estimation results obtained in two
econometric specifications: the first one in which we interact country and year fixed effects in
each of the three equations of the model, and the second in which we also interact industry
and year fixed effects. We consider likely that the first one provides optimistic or “upper
bound” estimates, while the second provides pessimistic or “lower bound” estimates.

We present our estimation results in Section V, and illustrate them by presenting in Section
VI simulations of what would be the long term multifactor productivity gains if all countries
were to adopt the observed best or lightest anticompetitive upstream regulations. In spite of

4   Note that because of our choice of specification and of Dynamic OLS (DOLS) as our
    preferred method of estimation (as explained in Section II and IV), we actually estimate
    our model on a sample of fourteen countries (the USA being taken as the country of
    reference) over the period 1989 to 2006 (because of the introduction of lags and lead
    when using DOLS), that is a country-industry-year unbalanced data sample of 2612
    observations for the productivity and ICT demand equations and a subsample of 1478
    observations for the R&D demand equation.

                                                                                              5
the substantial differences in sample, model specification and estimation, we find that our
upper and lower bound estimates of the total long term impacts concur to confirm overall the
results of previous showing that upstream anticompetitive regulations can slow down
multifactor productivity importantly. We find for example that the upper and lower bound
estimates of the total productivity impacts of upstream regulations are the highest for Italy and
the Czech Republic, of about 11-12% and 4-5% respectively, and the lowest for the United
Kingdom and the USA, of about 2-3% and 1% respectively. We also find that the indirect
productivity impact for the R&D investment channel is generally higher than the one for ICT
investment, but that the direct productivity impact is also much higher than both of them,
pointing to the fact that the channels through which upstream regulations manifest themselves
must be many and pervasive. In Appendix B we document three informative robustness
checks we did to confirm our main results and present two extensions of our analysis that
thought appropriate to consider but are at the frontier of what we can reasonably do with our
country-industry aggregate data and the OECD regulation indicators in our present
framework.

In Section VII we conclude by indicating the limits of our present findings and sketching what
should and could be done to extend and deepen them, and in particular by stressing the need
to investigate jointly the productivity impacts of product and labor regulations and to rely on
different types of data and levels of analysis from micro to macro.




 II.   Econometric model specification

Our model consists of three simple equations: the productivity equation and two similar factor
demand equations respectively for R&D and ICT. We shall explain now in some details our
choice of specifications for these equations.




Productivity equation

Our productivity equation is based on the assumption of a cointegrated long term relationship
linking the levels of (multi-factor) productivity between countries and industries, which
includes our product market regulation variable of interest or regulatory burden indicator
REG. This equation can be simply written as a relation between the industry productivity in a

                                                                                               6
given country of reference       and all the other countries . Although it is convenient to
interpret this relation as a catch-up relation where the country of reference              can be
considered as a leading country and the other countries            as followers countries, it is
important to realize that such interpretation need not to be taken strictly and can be
misleading. The basic hypothesis, which we actually test in Section IV, is that of cointegration
for the set of country-industry time series that are considered in the analysis. In fact as long as
the equation includes controls for country, industry and year unobserved common factors, we
checked that the choice of the country of reference does not practically affect our results. In
this work, for the sake of simplicity we take the USA as the leading country . 5 We can thus
write our long term productivity relation as the following log linear regression equation:




The variables          and           are respectively the multifactor productivity in logarithms
for year t of industry in country     and in the leading country     (the USA), where



The variable             is the regulatory burden indicator lagged one year for industry         in
country , and      is a parameter of main interest measuring an average long term “direct”
impact of regulation on multifactor productivity, where direct means here that this impact
does not operate through the channels of ICT and R&D investments as made explicit below.6



5   The USA is in fact leading for 85% of the country-industry-year observations of our
    panel. As just mentioned, our estimates remain practically unaffected if we choose the
    leading country-industry-year definition. Note more generally that when we include
    industry*year effects         in the specifications of our productivity and R&D and ICT
    investments equations (see below), these effects will proxy for the evolution of
    productivity and R&D and ICT investments for the country-industry pairs taken as
    reference as long as the reference country for a given industry will not change over time.
    Hence our lower bound estimates based on specifications including such effects are
    strictly identical irrespective of the choice of the country-industry pairs of reference.
6   Note that in equation (1) we impose that the coefficient of            is 1, implying that the
    difference between the multifactor productivity of the follower countries and the leader
    country is bounded in the long term for given common factors            . This is a reasonable
    identification hypothesis generally made in the literature. As shown in Appendix tables
    B2.1 and B2.2, our results remain roughly the same if this hypothesis is relaxed; they are
    strictly identical if we include industry*year effects              as in our lower bound
    specification. We have also considered a variant of equation (1) in which the regulatory
    burden indicator is included in difference to its value for the country-industry of

                                                                                                 7
The term       stands for the error in the equation that can be specified in different ways. In a
panel analysis such as ours, it is generally found appropriate to control for separate country,
industry and year unobserved common factors or effects          ,    and    , in addition to an
idiosyncratic error term      . Here for reasons of econometric identification which we discuss
in Section IV, we privilege two specifications that also include interaction effects: either
country*year effects       or both country*year effects    and industry*year effects    . As we
shall explain, we can consider that the first of these specifications provides an upper bound
estimate of the direct regulatory impact parameter , while the second one provides a lower
bound estimate of .

The major novelty in our approach here with respect to previous similar studies is that we
want to assess to what extent the effects on productivity of anticompetitive regulations (as
measured by REG) work through the two channels of R&D and ICT investments or
otherwise. To do so we have to modify in two ways the “conventional” measure of
multifactor productivity used previously. We have to take into account explicitly the
contribution of ICT capital to productivity and for that to separate ICT capital (D) from the
other forms of physical capital (C) in total capital (CT). We also have to take into account
explicitly the contribution of R&D capital (K), which is ignored in the “conventional”
measure of total capital (CT), since R&D is not yet integrated in official national accounts as
an investment. As explained in Section III, the explicit integration of R&D implies that we
had to correct the measures of industry output and labor from respectively expensing out
R&D intermediate consumption and double counting R&D personnel.

Precisely, using small letters for logarithms (i.e., x    Log X), we have two conventional
measures of multifactor productivity                         and the appropriate measure
to be used in the present analysis, where:

                                             and                                  ,

while

                                                                 .




    reference:                            . This variant provides estimates that are strictly
    identical in the specification with industry*year effects , and very close without them.

                                                                                               8
We can define partial multifactor productivity before taking into account the ICT and R&D
contributions, which will noted mfp for simplicity, as:




and thus rewrite regression equation (1) to include explicitly ICT and R&D contributions as
regression equation (2):




In equation (2), we estimate jointly the productivity elasticities        and      of ICT and R&D
capital stocks and     the parameter of direct regulatory impact on productivity. While we can
estimate the ICT and R&D productivity elasticities, however, in order to measure our
multifactor productivity variable mfp it remains to calibrate the non-ICT capital and labor
elasticities    and . As usually done and explained in Section III and Appendix A, we did in
two ways: first by calibrating     and    respectively by the shares      and     of the user cost of
non-ICT capital and the labor cost in the nominal value-added; second by still calibrating the
elasticity of labor    by the share of labor cost    but calibrating a priori the returns to scale
to be constant, that is                             , and thus implying that     is estimated as well
as     and     . Since trying to assess returns to scale on aggregate industry data such as ours
does not really make sense, and measuring industry shares of user cost of capital not too
reliable, we much preferred the second option. In fact, as documented in Appendix B on
robustness, when we do not impose constant returns to scale and rely on the first option, our
results are practically unaffected with an estimated scale elasticity          that negligibly differs
from 1.

Finally, calibrating      by   and assuming constant returns to scale implies that we normalize
regression (2) with respect to labor and modify slightly the measure of our multifactor
productivity variable mfp. We can express (2) equivalently as:




with                                                and

Or denoting                                     more simply by                 , we can rewrite it as
regression (3):

                                                                                                     9
ICT and R&D capital demand equations

The specifications of our ICT and R&D capital demand are very simple. They are based on
the long term equilibrium relationships derived from of the assumption of firms’
intertemporal maximization of their profit, augmented by the regulatory burden indicator
REG.

Assuming the Cobb-Douglas production function underlying our productivity equation
                         , we can write simply:




where            and             are of the user costs shares of ICT and R&D capitals relative
to the labor cost share. Rewriting these equations in terms of ICT and R&D capital user cost
ratios to average employee cost (or ICT-labor and R&D-labor cost ratios for short) , and
adding errors terms to control for country, industry and year unobserved common factors as in
the productivity equation (and with x    Log X) we obtain the regression equations:




These equations are strictly consistent with the hypothesis of a Cobb-Douglas production
function, implying that the elasticity of substitution between factors are all equal to 1 and that
the price elasticities are constrained to be 1. Since these constraints may be too restrictive and
although they do not lead to significantly different estimates of our two parameters of interest
   and     , we actually prefer to consider equations (4) in which they are not a priori
imposed and can be tested:


                                                                                  (4)


These equations can be viewed as deriving from a CES (Constant Elasticity of Substitution)
production function, and the parameters               interpreted as elasticities of substitution

                                                                                               10
between factors. Note, however, that the CES production function with more than two factors
is also restrictive since it imposes that these elasticities would be the same for all pair of
factors: that is here         (           , which will see is not far from being the case for our
results.




III.       Main Data and Analysis of Variance

We now explain the construction of the central explanatory variable of our analysis: the
upstream regulatory burden indicator REG, while we give details on the measurement of our
multifactor productivity and ICT and R&D capital variables and on our sample in Appendix
A. We also present here important descriptive statistics and an analysis of variance for all the
variables in terms of separate country, industry and year effects, and a relevant sequence of
two-way effects




Regulatory burden indicator

Our empirical analysis focus on the productivity and ICT and R&D impacts of the regulatory
burden indicator REG, which is constructed on the basis the OECD Non-Manufacturing
Regulations (NMR) indicators. These indicators measure “to what extent competition and
firm choices are restricted where there are no a priori reasons for government interference, or
where regulatory goals could plausibly be achieved by less coercive means”, in six non-
manufacturing industries. Referred here as upstream industries they are: energy (gas and
electricity), transport (rail, road and air), communication (post, fixed and cellular
communication), retail distribution, banking services and professional services. Undoubtedly
they constitute the most regulated and sheltered part in OECD countries economies, while few
explicit barriers to competition remain in markets for the products of manufacturing
industries.

The NMR indicators are based on detailed information on laws, rules and market and industry
settings, which are classified in two main areas: state control, covering specific information
on public ownership and public control on business activity, and barriers to entrepreneurship,
covering specific information on legal barriers to entry, market structure and or industry
structure. For a given upstream industry the NMR indicators can take at minimum a value of 0

                                                                                              11
in the absence of all forms of anticompetitive regulations and at maximum a value of 1 in the
presence of all of them, and they thus vary on a scale of 0 and 1 across countries and
industries. They also available for all years of our estimation period in energy, transport and
communication, for 1998, 2003 and 2007 in retail distribution and professional services, and
for 2003 only in banking. More information on the construction of the NMR indicators is
given in Appendix A; and a detailed presentation can be found in Conway and Nicoletti
(2006) for all six non-manufacturing industries except banking, and in De Serres et al. (2006)
for banking.

The NMR indicators have the basic advantage that they establish relatively direct links with
policies that affect competition. Econometric studies using them to measure imperfect
competition are also much less concerned by endogeneity problems that affect studies
depending on traditional indicators of product market competitiveness, as mark-ups or
industry concentration indices (see Boone 2000 for a discussion of endogeneity issues in such
studies).

In a macro-econometric analysis as ours, however, NMR indicators cannot separately be used
in practice to assess the upstream regulatory impacts on productivity as well on ICT and
R&D, and they have to be combined in a meaningful way. We do, as usually done, by
considering that their individual impacts are most likely to vary with the respective
importance of upstream industries as suppliers of intermediate inputs. Our regulatory burden
indicator REG is thus constructed in following way:




where           is the NMR indicator of the upstream industry j for country c in year t, and

   stands for the intensity of use of intermediate inputs from industry j by industry, as
measured from the input–output table for a given country and year as the ratio of the
intermediate inputs from industry j to industry i over the total output of industry i. We prefer
to use a fixed reference input-output table to compute the intensity of use ratios rather than the
different country and year input and output tables, to avoid endogeneity biases that might
arise from potential correlations between such ratios and productivity or R&D and ICT, since
the importance of upstream regulations may well influence the use of domestic regulated
intermediate inputs. We have actually used the 2000 input-output table for the USA, already

                                                                                               12
taken as reference for the productivity gap and R&D and ICT gap variables. For similar
endogeneity as well as measurement error concerns, note also that in estimating REG for the
upstream industries we exclude within-industry intermediate consumption (or              .




                           Insert Graph 1 and Graph 2 about here




Graph 1 shows the country averages of REG for 1987, 1997 and 2007. The relatively
restrictive regulations, which prevailed overall in 1987 in most countries, weakened in the two
following decades in all countries at different paces. The cross-country variability of REG
appears quite important in all three years, with the USA, UK and Sweden remaining the most
pro-competitive countries and Austria and Italy followed by France in 1987 and by Canada in
2007 being the less pro-competitive countries.

Graph 2 shows the six average country NMR components of REG in 2007. Their relative
contributions to REG differ significantly, reflecting country-industry variability, although they
appear roughly proportional to the average country level of REG as could be expected. The
first left bar of the graph correspond to the value of REG for an hypothetical country in which
the six NMR indicators are at their ‘lightest’ levels defined as the country average of their
three lowest values in 2007. We will use this lightest REG value as a target for the
hypothetical long run simulation policies we consider in Section VI to illustrate our estimation
results.




Descriptive statistics and analysis of variance

Table 1 gives the means and medians, first and third quartiles for the eight variables of our
productivity, ICT and R&D regressions, both in levels and annual growth rates. These
statistics are computed for the complete study sample (i.e., 2612 observations for levels and
2430 for growth rates), except for the R&D variables computed for the subsample without
industries with low R&D intensity (i.e., 1478 observations for levels and 1366 for growth
rates). We can see in particular that on average for our sample over the twenty year period
1987-2007 REG has been reduced at a rate of 3.3% per year while the MFP gap with the USA

                                                                                              13
has been slowly decreasing by 0.2% per year. In parallel, ICT capital intensity has been very
rapidly increasing at a rate of 11.3% per year, while its gap with the USA has been slowly
augmenting by 0.3% per year. R&D capital intensity has also been increasing at a rapid rate of
5.8% per year, while its gap with the USA has been widening very significantly by 1.5 % per
year. Similarly we observe that our measures of the ICT and R&D labor cost ratios have
respectively been decreasing at very high rates of about 10% and 5.8% per year, which largely
reflects the actual use of quality-adjusted hedonic prices for ICT and of overall manufacturing
prices for R&D for lack of more appropriate prices.




                                   Insert Table 1 about here




Table 2 summarizes the results of an analysis of variance for all the variables of our analysis
in terms of separate country, industry and year effects     ,   and    , as well as a sequence of
two ways interacted effects        ,                and (                      The first column
documents the variability of the variables lost in terms of “first step” R2 in first step when we
include in the regressions of our model the three one-way effects separately, as a basic control
for the usual sources of specification errors, such as omitted (time invariant) country and
industry characteristics. The three following columns document what is the additional
variability lost in terms of “second step” R2 when we also include interacted two-way effects,
in order to control for other potential sources of specification errors to be discussed in the next
Section on identification and estimation. They are ordered in a sequence going from the most
plausible source of endogeneity (2nd column), to the next plausible source (3rd column) and to
a third one (4th column) that we will argue is very unlikely.

We see that the three country, industry and year effects taken alone already account for large
shares of variability of the eight variables of our model which are ranging from 45-60% for
the MFP, ICT and R&D gap variables of the productivity regression, to 75-85% for the ICT
and R&D capital intensity and labor cost ratio variables, and to nearly 95% for our central
explanatory variable REG. We see that the shares of left variability accounted by interacting
country and year effects alone is at most of 45% (for the ICT-labor cost ratio but much less for
the other variables), and by interacting also industry and year effects at most of 50% ( for
REG and the ICT-labor cost ratio but much less for the other variables). Interacting in addition

                                                                                                14
  the country and industry effects account in total up to a minimum share of 70% for all eight
  variables and of 90-95% for five of them.




                                    Insert Table 2 about here




  Focusing on REG, the share of its variability in total variability, which is left to estimate the
  regulatory impact parameters of interest in the productivity, ICT and R&D regressions,
  decreases from 7.2% with separate country, industry and year effects, to 5.0% adding country-
  year effects, 3.% adding also industry-year effects, and 0.3% adding finally country-industry
  effects. It is good that the absolute total variability of REG is large enough so that even a
  share of a few percent is enough to obtain estimates which are statistically significant as we
  shall see in Section V. It is also fortunate that there are both strong and a priori reasons for
  considering that it is very likely that the country-industry component of the data, contrary to
  the country-year and industry-year components, is indeed an appropriate source of exogenous
  variability for the estimation of our model.




IV.      Identification and estimation

  In order to estimate consistently the long term impacts of REG in the productivity, R&D and
  ICT demand regressions (3) and (4), we have to take into consideration intricately related
  potential sources of specification errors, mainly: (i) inverse causality, when governments
  reacting to economic situations and political pressures implement changes in product market
  regulations; (ii) direct effects of such changes, in so far as they can be correlated over time
  within-country and across-industry as well as within- industry and across-country; (iii)
  omitted variables such as country specific and/or industry specific technical progress and
  changes in international trade, etc… We will explain in a first sub-section how we can take
  care of such specification errors by including country*year and industry*year effects in our
  regressions and thus largely mitigate the biases they potentially generate. We will also argue
  to the contrary that there is no need to control for country*industry effects, and that we can
  rely on the country*industry variability of the explanatory variables in our regressions to
  identify and estimate consistently the upstream regulatory impact parameters of interest.

                                                                                                15
To be fully confident that we are estimating long term parameters, we have also to corroborate
that our regressions are cointegrated. We have also to make sure that short term correlations
between the idiosyncratic errors in the regressions and our variables are not another possible
source of biases for our estimates, in particular those of the elasticities of ICT and R&D
capital intensities and relative user costs. To deal with this issue we implement the Dynamic
OLS (DOLS) estimators proposed by Stock & Watson (1993). In a second sub-section we will
thus briefly report on the cointegration tests we have performed showing that by and large we
can accept that our model is cointegrated, and on the Hausman specification tests of
comparison of the OLS and DOLS estimates showing that the former are biased and the later
are indeed to be preferred.




Specification errors and country, industry and year interacted effects

Firms’ political pressures to change regulations are an important potential source of
econometric specification errors. In particular, if firms respond to negative productivity
shocks by “lobbying” for raising anticompetitive regulations, thereby protecting their rents,
inverse causality would entail negative correlations between productivity and product market
regulation indicators. Therefore, the negative impacts of anticompetitive regulations on
productivity could be overestimated. Obviously, such biases could also arise and eventually
be larger when estimating the regulatory impacts on the demand for R&D and ICT. However,
we can distinguish three cases depending on whether such productivity shocks and lobbying
reactions occur over time at the country level across industries, and/or they occur at the
industry level across countries, and/or they are country and industry specific.

The first case appears the most likely, because of imitation behavior by government and
decisions or recommendations taken at the international level (in particular by the EU, the
OCDE or the World Trade Organization). Including country*year interacted effects in our
regressions will take care of the corresponding endogeneity biases in this case.

The second case is very similar to the first. Although probably less prevalent than the first
case, it may concerns particularly upstream industries as energy, transport, communications
and banking, in which international agreements and regulations are widespread. Likewise,
including industry*year effects in our model will take care of the resulting endogeneity
biases.

                                                                                           16
The last case of potential occurrence of biases arising from lobbying and productivity shocks
at specific country-industry levels would apply if we were concerned by assessing the impacts
of existing regulations in industries on the productivity and ICT and R&D of these industries
themselves, but not in the present analysis in which we focus on estimating the impacts of
regulations in upstream industries on other downstream industries. Actually although we are
estimating average impacts of upstream regulations over all industries by keeping upstream
industries in our sample, we are abstracting from the possible regulatory impacts of upstream
industries on their own productivity and ICT and R&D, by being careful to impute a value of
zero for upstream industries own to intermediate consumption (            in measuring REG in

these industries.7

Besides that they can correct for or at least alleviate potential endogeneity biases, it is also
important to stress that country*year fixed effects and industry*year either alone or taken
together can act as good proxies for a variety of omitted variables. In particular they can take
into account differences between countries and/or industries in technical progress, in the
development of education and skills of labor force, in the evolution of own-industry
regulatory environment, in the change of international trade conditions, etc…

To wrap-up, in view of the inherent difficulties and uncertainties of our study, rather than
choose one preferred model econometric specification, we have thought proper to keep two
that provide a range of plausible consistent estimates. The first one with only interacted
country*year effects takes care of the endogeneity and omitted variables specification errors
that we consider most likely and gives generally higher negative estimates (in absolute values)
of the upstream regulatory impact parameters that can be viewed as “upper bound” estimates.
The second with both interacted country*year and industry*year effects takes care more fully
of such specification errors and give estimates that can be deemed as “lower bound”
estimates.8 In the next two sections we will center the discussion of our estimation results and
simulations on these two types of estimates.


7   It can be noted in this regard that the estimated negative impacts of REG are significantly
    higher in absolute value if we did not take such precaution than when we do, which can
    be taken as a confirmation of an endogeneity bias.
8   As we shall see in a few cases the upper bound estimates will be lower than the lower
    bound estimates, which is actually not surprising since the country*year and
    industry*year effects are expected to take care of a variety of potential specification
    errors.

                                                                                             17
Cointegration and DOLS estimators

To support our long term interpretation of our estimation results and our reliance on the
DOLS estimators, we have to test the cointegration of our model. Precisely, we have to test
that: i) MFP, R&D and ICT capital intensity and relative user cost variables stocks and their
relative costs are integrated of order 1 (I(1)); (ii) MFP is cointegrated with the leading country
We have performed Levin, Lin and Chu (2002) and Im, Pesaran and Shin (2003) panel data
unit-root tests and Pedroni (1999, 2004) panel data cointegration tests. All the unit-root tests
confirm that the MFP, R&D and ICT capital intensities and user costs variables are I(1),
whereas the cointegration tests are somewhat less clear-cut, four out of seven of them
rejecting the no-cointegration null hypothesis. However, it is important to stress that our unit-
root and panel cointegration tests have necessarily a relatively weak power because of the
short time dimension of our panel data sample (maximum 20 years but in average about half
since it is seriously unbalanced).

In principle when non-stationary variables are cointegrated, the Ordinary Least Squares
(OLS) estimators are convergent under the standard assumptions (Engle and Granger, 1987).
However, there are reasons to suspect that the OLS estimates of the elasticities of ICT and
R&D capital intensities and relative user costs (          ) and (            ) in the productivity
regression and the demand regressions may be biased, because of short term correlations
between these variables and regression idiosyncratic errors. The DOLS estimators get rid of
these correlations by including in the regressions leads and lags of the first differences of the
potentially endogenous explanatory variables if they are non-stationary.9 The Hausman
specification tests implemented on the three regressions show that the OLS and DOLS
estimates differ quire significantly, confirming clearly our preference for the latter.




    V.     Main estimation results

We now comment what we consider our upper and lower estimates for the multifactor
productivity regression (3) and the ICT and R&D capital demand regressions (4), presented in

9        Given that the time dimension of our sample is already short, we have only included one
         lead and one lag. Our estimates are practically unaffected when we add one or two more
         leads and lags.

                                                                                                18
a similar format in Tables 3, 4 and 5. In addition to these estimates that are obtained, as we
explained, with the model specifications including country*year effects and both
country*year and industry*year effects, we also show in these Tables for reference the
estimates obtained when only including separate country, industry and year effects in the
regressions, as usually done in country-industry panel data as ours.

We also give for comparison in Table 3 the estimates of overall impact of upstream
regulations on productivity that we would find if we were omitting the ICT and R&D capital
intensity gap variables and not tryingto assess the importance of ICT and R&D channels
through which these regulations affect productivity growth. In Tables 4 and 5, we similarly
give the estimates we would find if we assumed that the ICT and R&D were strictly derived
from a Cobb-Douglas production function.




Multifactor productivity regression

Looking first at the direct upstream regulatory impact parameter       in Table 3 we see that the
upper bound estimate (column 1) is statistically quite significant and of a high order of
magnitude implying that a 0.10 decrease in the level of the regulatory burden indicator REG
would contribute to a long term average increase of 2.3% of multifactor productivity MFP,
that is about as much as 0.2% per year if we assume a long term horizon of some 12 years.
The lower bound estimate (column 3) is not statistically significant and much lower, though
not entirely negligible magnitude implying that a 0.10 decrease in REG would contribute to a
long term average increase in MFP of 0.6% (0.05% per year).




                                  Insert Table 3 about here




It is important to stress that this small lower bound estimate does not mean a small overall
productivity impact of upstream regulations, but only that this impact works through the ICT
and R&D channels, as confirmed by a statistically significant and high estimated        (-0.16 in


                                                                                              19
column 4), if we omit the ICT and R&D capital intensities variables in the regression. It is of
course also important to consider that the interquartile range of the burden regulatory
indicator REG in our sample is of 0.40 (see Table 1) and that a variation of 0.10 of REG is
very small. A decrease of 0.40 of REG is actually the one that would occur if the hypothetic
country with the median REG of 0.65 was able to implement the lightest anticompetitive
regulatory practices of only 0.25 (see Graph 2), and it will imply a long term upper bound
increase of MFP of 11.7% and a lower-bound increase of 3.2%.10

Finally it must kept in mind that we can only estimate on a country-industry panel as ours
average parameters and that in particular the regulatory impact parameters can be quite
heterogeneous across industries. In an attempt to account in part for such heterogeneity, we
have considered a specification of our model in which the impact parameters in the
productivity and ICT regressions could be different in the 8 industries investing both in ICT
and R&D and in the 5 industries not investing significantly in R&D (and hence excluded from
the estimation of the R&D regression). The results of this attempt are recorded in Appendix B
on Robustness analyses. Interestingly, we find that the lower bound estimated      is statistically
significant and high in the non-R&D doing industries and not in the R&D doing industries
(respectively equal to –0.19 and -.04). Together with the corresponding estimates for
   and      this is plausible evidence that in R&D doing industries the R&D and ICT channels
account basically for the overall upstream regulatory impact, while in the non-R&D doing
industries other channels along with the ICT channel play the main role.

Turning now to the ICT and R&D elasticities, we see that they are precisely estimated with
orders of magnitude consistent with the most reliable results in the literature. In spite of being
quite precise, the upper and lower bound estimates are not statistically very different,
respectively 0.05 and 0.07for ICT and 0.08 and 0.07 for R&D.




10 Keep in mind that these two estimates correspond only to direct productivity impacts of
   REG for a hypothetical country and do not include the indirect impacts working through
   ICT and R&D. The first simulation presented in the next Section shows such estimates
   for each of the 15 countries in our sample and compares them to the corresponding
   indirect impacts working through the ICT and R&D channels.

                                                                                                20
ICT and R&D capital demand regressions

The upper and lower bound estimates of the two upstream regulatory impact parameter
   and       (columns 1 and 3) in Tables 4 and 5, are statistically significant and of a high
order of magnitude, particularly for R&D. It can be noted that the estimate we dubbed the
lower bound estimate appears markedly higher than the upper bound estimate, but that
actually the two are not statistically different because of their rather large standard errors.
Taken at face value, we thus find that a 0.10 decrease in the level of the regulatory burden
indicator REG would thus contribute to a long term average increase in a range of 2.6% to
3.4% for ICT capital intensity and in a range of 8.7% to 14.0% for R&D capital intensity.




                               Insert Table 4 and 5 about here




The upper bound and lower estimates of the elasticities of ICT and R&D relative user costs of
capital            are practically equal and quite significantly smaller than 1 in absolute value,
of 0.75 for ICT and 0.60 for R&D. These estimates thus provide strong evidence rejecting the
hypothesis of an underlying Cobb-Douglas production function to derive factor demand
equations in favor of that of CES type production with elasticities of substitution between ICT
and R&D and other factors much smaller than 1.




VI.       Simulations

To illustrate the implications of our results more fully and to put them in perspective, we
propose two simple and tentative simulations. The first one that we shall present in detail can
be considered as a prospective evaluation of what could be at the national level the long term
impact in terms of growth of ICT and R&D capital intensity and multifactor productivity if
countries were implementing the lightest upstream anticompetitive regulatory practices. The
second that we comment briefly is a retrospective evaluation of the regulatory impact on the
growth of national multifactor productivity over the twenty year period 1987-2007 which can
be imputed to the observed reduction in upstream anticompetitive regulations.



                                                                                               21
Prospective evaluation of gains from reductions in upstream regulations

Based on the estimates of the ICT and R&D demand regressions, we can evaluate directly for
each country the gains in ICT and R&D capital intensities that would result in the long term,
say 2020, from a progressive implementation of the lightest upstream regulatory practices
starting from their 2007 level. Using our productivity regression estimates, we can compute
both the corresponding (or indirect) multifactor productivity MFP gains working through the
ICT and R&D channels, and the direct ones working through other channels. The
computations of these gains are performed on the basis of both our lower and upper bound
estimates. Since they are obtained at the country-industry observation level, we have to
aggregate them at the country level. We do by weighting the 13 industries included in our
sample proportionally to their 2007 Value Added to GDP ratios. We thus assume no gains
from the industries excluded from our sample, which amount to some 45 % of country GDP
in average.

In these computations, we think more appropriate to use a slightly modified regulatory burden
indicator (REG-D) based on domestic input-output table, and not on the (REG) indicator
which is based on the USA input-output table. As we have explained, we used REG in
estimation in order to avoid potential endogeneity biases, but we prefer to rely on (REG-D) to
take into account in our evaluation of MFP gains the differences across countries in the
intensity of downstream intermediate consumption of products from regulated upstream
sectors. As documented in Appendix B (Table B3), since the intensity of use of regulated
upstream intermediate consumption is low in the USA, the choice of REG instead of REG-D
will result in underestimation in all countries, ranging from 20% to 45% and of 30% in
average.

Graphs 3 and 4 show the prospective evaluations of the upper and lower bound long term
regulatory impacts on the growth of ICT and R&D capital intensitiesfor the 15 countries of our
sample, if they were implementing the lightest upstream anticompetitive regulatory practices.
These impacts are much larger for R&D than for ICT: in average fourfold for the upper bound
evaluations and threefold for the lower bound ones. They are for example in the case of R&D
highest for Italy and Austria, ranging respectively from about 60% to 90% and from about
50% to 80%, and lowest for the United Kingdom and the USA, ranging from about 15% to


                                                                                           22
20% in both countries. In the case of ICT, the upper bound and lower estimates are close,
highest for Italy and Austria and lowest the United Kingdom and the USA, respectively
around 15-20% and 2-5%. The ranking of the countries from the lowest to highest impacts for
R&D and ICT are almost the same, and reflects closely enough, as could be expected, the
country ranking in terms of the regulatory burden indicator REG-D (and practically also
REG).




                                 Graph 3 and 4 about here




In the same format as the two preceding graphs, Graph 5 presents the prospective evaluations
of the upper and lower bound long term regulatory impacts on the growth of multifactor
productivity MFP for the 15 countries of our sample, under the assumption they have
implemented the lightest upstream anticompetitive regulatory practices. It shows not only the
total impacts but also the corresponding indirect and direct impacts which are respectively
working through the ICT channel, the R&D channel and other channels.




                                     Graph 5 about here




We can see that upper bound evaluations of the total productivity impact are much higher than
the lower bound evaluations: in average of about 6.5% as against 2.5%, that is about 0.5% as
against 0.2% per year if we assume a long term horizon of some 12 years. They are highest
for Italy and the Czech Republic of about11-13% % against 4-5% (roughly 1.0% and 0.4%
per year), and they are lowest for the UK and the USA of about 2-3% against 1% (roughly
0.5% and 0.1% per year). We also observe that the upper bound evaluations of the direct
impacts are much higher, by a factor of about 2.5 in average, than those of indirect impacts of
ICT and R&D together, while the lower bound evaluations of the direct impacts are also
higher, by 25% in average, than those of the indirect impacts. Since the regulatory impacts on
R&D are much larger than on ICT and the productivity elasticities of ICT and R&D capital




                                                                                            23
are not too different, we can finally remark that the indirect productivity impacts for R&D are
more important than for ICT.




Retrospective evaluation of gains from reductions in upstream regulations

As we have noted, the regulatory burden indicator REG has decreased rapidly, at an average
rate of 3.3% per year, over our 1987-2007 study period (see Graph 1 and Table 1). It is thus
interesting to complement our prospective evaluation by a retrospective one, and to assess
especially the regulatory impact on multifactor productivity MFP gains over this twenty year
period. These gains are basically computed in the same way as in the prospective simulation
on the basis of our upper and lower bound estimates. In particular, we use the slightly
modified REG-D indicator based on domestic input-output tables and we use the value added
industry shares in country GDP for the aggregation of the gains simulated at the observation
level at the country level.




                                      Graph 6 about here




Graph 6 shows in the format of adjacent bars measured on the left y-axis as in the previous
graphs, the upper and lower estimates of MFP growth that can be imputed in total (i.e.,
through the ICT, R&D and other channels) to the reduction on upstream anticompetitive
regulations in the 15 countries of our sample over the twenty years 1987-2007. It also shows
as a point of comparison, by small triangles measured on the right y-axis, the overall MFP
growth for the 13 industries covered in our sample.11

We see clearly that the contributions of the reduction in upstream regulations to country MFP
growth over the last two decades are on the whole quite significant both in absolute an
relative terms, but that they vary greatly across countries, largely reflecting the extent of these


11 These estimates of “total MFP” computed on the basis of our sample according our
   definition of MFP (see Section 2) are thus different from the conventional measures of
   multifactor productivity that are based on national accounts and are hardly comparable to
   them.

                                                                                                24
reductions in the different countries (see Graph 1). The average upper and lower bound
estimated contributions to MFP growth are respectively of 7.6% and 3.0% over the whole
period (0.35% and 0.15% per year), to be compared to a doubling of overall MFP growth
(3.6% per year). These contributions are highest for Germany and the Czech Republic ranging
respectively from 4.4% to 11% and from 3.9% to 9.9%, and lowest for the USA and Canada
ranging respectively from 0.8% to 2.0% and from 1.9% to 4.8%. In terms of their shares to
overall MFP growth they are highest for Spain and Japan with shares ranging respectively
from 9.2% to 23.4% and from 6.0% to 14.9%, and lowest for USA and Australia with shares
ranging respectively from 0.9% to 2.3% and from 1.2% to 3.2%.




VII.   Conclusions

In this paper we have investigated empirically through which channels and mechanisms
upstream industry anticompetitive regulations impact productivity. To our knowledge it is the
first attempt to address this important and challenging question. Using a country-industry
unbalanced panel dataset as comprehensive as we could reasonably construct it for estimation
and relying mainly on an upstream regulatory burden indicator built from the OECD Non-
Manufacturing Regulations (NMR) indicators, we have tried to assess the actual importance
of the two main channels usually contemplated in the literature through which upstream sector
anticompetitive regulations may impact productivity growth: business investments in R&D
and in ICT. We have thus estimated the upstream regulatory impacts on productivity working
through these two channels and their shares in total impact as against those working through
alternative channels of investments in other forms of intangible capital such as improvements
in skills, management and organization, which we could not explicitly consider for lack of
appropriate data,. For this, we have specified a simple econometric model consisting of an
extended production function relating productivity explicitly to R&D and ICT capital as well
as to the upstream regulatory indicator, and two factor demand functions relating R&D and
ICT capital to this indicator. In specifying and estimating this model we have been
particularly careful to control for potential econometric specification errors and we have
focused on two sets of long-term estimates that we can consider as providing respectively
optimistic or “upper bound” estimates and pessimistic or “lower bound” estimates.




                                                                                           25
Our results are best illustrated by the prospective evaluations of the upper and lower bound
long term regulatory impacts on the growth of multifactor productivity for the fifteen
countries of our sample, under the assumption they have implemented the lightest upstream
anticompetitive regulatory practices (defined in each upstream industry as the average of the
three lowest levels of regulations observed in 2007 among them). We thus estimate that the
upper bound and lower bound evaluations of these impacts are in average of about
respectively 0.5% and 0.2% per year if we assume a long term horizon of some twelve years.
They are highest for Italy and the Czech Republic of about respectively 1.0% and 0.4% per
year, and lowest for the UK and the USA of about respectively 0.5% and 0.1% per year. We
find that in proportion of these overall upper and lower bound evaluations the average shares
of the productivity impacts working through the ICT and R&D channels are of about 20% and
40% respectively, corresponding to a smaller share for the ICT channel between 5% and 15%
and a larger one for the R&D channel of about 20%.

As usual there are limitations to our study and its findings and many directions in which it
should be extended and improved for a better understanding of the relations between product
market regulations and productivity and for pointed policy implications. In particular it will
be worthwhile, if more comprehensive and detailed data would permit, to assess the
differences in the productivity impacts of upstream regulation for different channels beyond
the ICT and R&D channels we could consider here, for different industries and types of
product market regulation (beyond the two limited attempts presented in Appendix B). It will
be also most important to into account labour market regulations. Several studies (see among
others Aghion et al. 2009) have shown that labour market regulations could impact
productivity either directly or through an interaction with product market regulations, and the
large impacts of the upstream industry regulations on productivity we have found could also
be linked to labour market regulations.

We have nevertheless the feeling that we could not go much further in such directions with
our country-industry aggregate data and in our present framework on the basis of the OECD
product market indicators. Still with the same data and framework, one possibility we may
explore is to confirm and enrich our present findings by relying on the more traditional
accounting measures of product and labor market measures despite the endogeneity issues
that this will raise. To go much beyond such macro-economic study, one will need to appeal
to micro-econometric analyses of firm data for different countries and industries.


                                                                                            26
                    Graphs 1 to 5 and Tables 1 to 5




         Graph 1: Country averages of REG in 1987, 1997 and 2007




Graph 2: Average country contributions of six NMR indicators to REG in 2007




                                                                              27
Graph 3: Simulated long term regulatory impacts on ICT capital




 Graph 4: Simulated long term regulatory impacts on R&D capital




                                                                  28
       Graph 5: Simulated long term regulatory impacts on multifactor productivity




Graph 6: Estimated regulatory impacts on multifactor productivity for 1987-2007




                                                                                     29
Table 1: Simple descriptive statistics

                                      Levels in logs              Annual log growth rate in %
                                     except for REG                      also for REG
                           Q1        Median    Q3      Mean       Q1      Median     Q3       Mean
Regulatory burden        0.40     0.65    0.89     0.65   -4.75    -2.62            -1.17     -3.33
indicator REG
MFP gap                 -0.55    -0.39   -0.25    -0.42   -4.06    -0.20            3.59      -0.20
ICT capital             -1.10    -0.75   -0.27    -0.73   -5.22    -0.13            5.30       0.28
intensity gap
R&D capital             -1.28    -0.54   -0.04    -0.62   -4.94     1.01            7.02      1.55
intensity gap
ICT capital              5.30     5.96    6.74     6.01    5.93    10.39           15.55      11.34
intensity
ICT - labor cost        -0.18     0.18    0.61     0.24  -16.20    -9.11            -2.94     -9.98
ratio
R&D capital              5.63     6.52    7.65     6.54    1.06     5.12           10.22      5.85
intensity
R&D - labor cost        -0.07     0.03    0.18     0.05   -7.18    -3.10            0.73      -3.28
ratio
All statistics are computed for the complete study sample, except for the          R&D variables
computed for the subsample without industries with low R&D intensity.

Table 2: Analysis of variance

                           First step                         Second Step R²
                              R²
                           Separate       Country*year        Country*year       Country*year,
                           country,                                and         industry*year and
                           industry                           industry*year     country*industry
                           and year
                            effects
                              (1)              (2)                 (3)                 (4)
Regulatory burden            0,938            0.196               0.520               0.959
indicator REG
ICT capital                  0,471            0,083               0.235               0.840
intensity gap
R&D capital                  0,458            0,093               0.209               0.915
intensity gap
ICT capital                  0,606            0,017               0,112               0,937
intensity
ICT - labor cost             0,824            0.095              0.1620              0.9120
ratio
R&D capital                  0,837            0.4470              0.507               0.801
intensity
R&D - labor cost             0,790            0,018               0,070              0,9360
ratio
ICT capital                  0,758            0,217               0,265               0,690
intensity gap
See footnote to Table 1.


                                                                                                 30
Table 3: Multifactor productivity regression

Dependent
variable:                  (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)
MFP gap
ICT capital             0.052***             0.074***                0.048***
intensity gap            [0.009]              [0.009]                 [0.008]
R&D capital             0.078***             0.069***                0.083***
intensity gap            [0.007]              [0.007]                 [0.007]
Regulatory            -0.234***   -0.253***    -0.064     -0.155**  -0.226***    -0.212***
burden indicator
REG                      [0.055]    [0.057]   [0.067]      [0.071]    [0.050]      [0.051]
Effects:
Country,
industry, year
separately                  Y          Y          Y           Y          Y            Y
Country*year                Y          Y          Y           Y          N            N
Industry*year               N          N          Y           Y          N            N
Observations              2612       2612       2612        2612       2612         2612
R-squared                 0.565      0.518      0.646       0.596      0.526        0.474
RMSE                     0.1821     0.1911     0.1720      0.1835     0.1818       0.1910
*** significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; *significant at 10% - Standard errors between
brackets. The DOLS estimates are performed with one lag and one lead of the first differences
of the ICT and R&D capital intensity gap variables; the corresponding coefficients are not
presented in the Table.




Table 4: ICT capital demand regression

Dependent variable:
ICT capital                  (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)
intensity
ICT capital user         -0.758***     -1      -0.728***       -1      -0.507***       -1
cost                       [0.041]               [0.045]                 [0.032]
Regulatory burden         -0.263**   -0.166     -0.342**     -0.251      -0.089      -0.059
indicator REG              [0.125]   [0.125]     [0.164]     [0.166]     [0.115]     [0.120]
Effects:
Country, industry,
year separately               Y         Y           Y           Y           Y           Y
Country*year                  Y         Y           Y           Y           N           N
Industry*year                 N         N           Y           Y           N           N
Observations                2612      2612        2612        2612        2612        2612
R-squared                   0.863     0.845       0.871       0.837      0.842        0.824
RMSE                       0.4139    0.4169      0.4220      0.4277      0.4252      0.4450
See footnote to Table 3.



                                                                                            31
Table 5: R&D capital demand regression

Dependent variable:
R&D capital                   (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)
intensity
R&D capital user           -0.628***      -1       -0.619***      -1      -0.607***      -1
cost                         [0.128]                 [0.135]                [0.108]
Regulatory burden          -1.395***   -1.563***    -0.868**   -1.051**    -0.717**   -0.831***
indicator REG                [0.385]     [0.382]     [0.425]    [0.424]     [0.283]     [0.283]
Effects:
Country, industry,
year separately                Y           Y           Y          Y           Y           Y
Country*year                   Y           Y           Y          Y           N           N
Industry*year                  N           N           Y          Y           N           N
Observations                 1478        1478        1478       1478        1478        1478
R-squared                    0.801       0.763       0.810      0.746       0.796       0.787
RMSE                        0.6599      0.6624      0.6776     0.6855      0.6242      0.6273
See footnote to Table 3.




                                                                                               32
REFERENCES

Aghion, Philippe, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, Peter Howitt, and Susanne Prantl,
“Entry and Productivity Growth: Evidence from Microlevel Panel Data” Journal of the
European Economic Association, 2(2-3), April-May (2004), 265-276.

Aghion, Philippe, Nicholas Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, and Peter Howitt
“Competition and Innovation: An Inverted U Relationship”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
May (2005), 701-728.

Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, “Joseph Schumpeter Lecture: Appropriate Policy
Growth: A Unifying Framework”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 4 (2006),
269-314.

Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Askenazy, Gilbert Cette, Nicolas Dromel, and Renaud
Bourlès, “Education, market rigidities and growth”, Economics Letters, 102(1) (2009), 62-65.

Aghion, Philippe, Peter Howitt and Suzanne Prantl, “Patent Rights, Product Market
Reforms”, National Bureau of Economic Research, NBER Working Papers, 18854 (2013)

Allegra, Elisabetta, Mario Forni, Michele Grillo, and Lara Magnani, “Antitrust Policy
and National Growth: Some Evidence from Italy”, Giornale degli Economisti e Annali di
Economia, 63(1) (2004), 69-86.

Arnold, Jens, Beata Javorcik, and Aaditya Mattoo, “Does Services Liberalization Benefit
Manufacturing Firms?”, Journal of International Economics, 85(1), (2011, 136-146.

Barone Guglielmo, and Federico Cingano, “Service regulation and growth: evidence from
OECD countries”, The Economic Journal, 121(555), September (2011), 931-957.

Blundell, Richard, Rachel Griffith, and John Van Reenen, “Market Share, Market Value
and Innovation in a Panel of British Manufacturing Firms”, Review of Economic Studies, 66
(1999), 529-554.

Boone, Jan, “Competition”, Tilburg University, Netherlands, Center Discussion Paper, 104,
October (2000).




                                                                                          33
Bourlès, Renaud, Gilbert Cette, Jimmy Lopez, Jacques Mairesse and Giuseppe Nicoletti,
“Do Product Market Regulations in Upstream sectors Curb Productivity Growth? Panel Data
Evidence for OECD Countries”, National Bureau of Economic Research, NBER Working
Papers, 16520 (2010), forthcoming in Review of Economics and Statistics.

Buccirossi, Paolo, Lorenzo Ciari, Tomaso Duso, Giancarlo Spagnolo and Christiana
Vitale, “Competition Policy and Productivity Growth: An Empirical Assessment”, CEPR
Discussion Papers, 7470 (2009).

Conway, Paul, Donato de Rosa, Giuseppe Nicoletti, and Faye Steiner, “Product Market
Regulation and Productivity Convergence”, OECD Economic Studies, 43 (2006), 39-76.

De Serres, Alain, Shuji Kobayakawa, Torsten Slok, and Laura Vartia, "Regulation of
Financial Systems and Economic Growth in OECD Countries: An Empirical Analysis",
OECD Economic Studies, 43 (2006), 77-113.

Engle, Robert, and Clive W. J. Granger, “Co-integration and Error Correction:
Representation, Estimation, and Testing”, Econometrica, 55(2) (1987), 251-76.

Faini, Riccardo, Jonathan Haskel, Giorgio Barba Navaretti, Carlo Scarpa, and
Christian Wey, “Contrasting Europe’s Decline: Do Product Market Reforms Help?”, in T.
Boeri, M. Castanheira, R. Faini and V. Galasso (eds.) Structural Reforms Without Prejudices,
Oxford University Press, Oxford (2006).

Forlani, Emanuele, “Competition in the Service Sector and the Performances of
Manufacturing Firms: Does Liberalization Matter?”, CESifo Working Paper series, 2942
(2010).

Geroski, Paul, “What do we know about entry?”, International Journal of Industrial
Organization, 13 (1995a), 421-440.

Geroski, Paul, “Market Structure, Corporate Performance and Innovative Activity”, Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press (1995b).

Griffith, Rachel, Stephen Redding and Helen Simpson, “Productivity Convergence and
Foreign Ownership at the Establishment level”, CEPR Discussion Paper, 3765 (2002).




                                                                                          34
Griffith, Rachel and Rupert Harrison, “The Link Between Product Market Reform and
Macro-Economic Performance”, Economic Paper, 209 (2004), European Commission.

Griffith, Rachel, Rupert Harrison, and Helen Simpson, “Product Market Reform and
Innovation in the EU”, The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 112(2), (2010), 389-415.

Haskel, Jonathan, Sonia Pereira and Matthew Slaughter, “Does Inward Foreign Direct
Investment Boost the Productivity of Domestic Firms?”, Review of Economics and Statistics,
89(3) (2007), 482-496.

Im, Kyoung So, M. Hashem Pesaran, and Yongcheol Shin, “Testing for unit roots in
heterogeneous panels”, Journal of Econometrics, 115 (2003), 53–74.

Inklaar, Robert, Marcel Timmer, and Bart van Ark, “Market Services Productivity across
Europe and the US”, Economic Policy, 23(53), January (2008), 139-194.

Levin, Andrew, Chien-Fu Lin, and James Chu, “Unit root tests in panel data: Asymptotic
and finite-sample properties”, Journal of Econometrics, 108 (2002), 1–24.

Nickell, Stephen, “Competition and Corporate Performance”, Journal of Political Economy,
104 (1996), 724-746.

Nickell, Stephen, Daphné Nicolitsas, and Neil Dryden, “What Makes Firms Perform
Well?”, European Economic Review, 41 (1997).

Nicoletti, Giuseppe, and Stefano Scarpetta, “Regulation, Productivity and Growth”,
Economic Policy, 36 (2003), 11-72.

Pedroni, Peter, “Critical Values for Cointegration Tests in Heterogeneous Panels with
Multiple Regressors”, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 61 (1999).

Pedroni, Peter, “Panel Cointegration: Asymptotic and Finite Sample Properties of Pooled
Time Series Tests with an Application to the PPP Hypothesis”, Econometric Theory, 20(3)
(2004).

Stock, James, and Mark Watson, “A Simple Estimator of Cointegrating Vectors in Higher
Order Integrated Systems”, Econometrica, 61(4) (1993).




                                                                                         35
36
                                                   APPENDIX A: DATA

In this Appendix, we first provide additional information on the underlying OECD Non-
Manufacturing Regulation (NMR) indicators for a better understanding of the regulatory
burden indicator REG. We then explain the measurement of the ICT, non-ICT and R&D
capital stocks, and that of our multifactor productivity variable MFP, and we document the
construction of our sample.

(1). Non-manufacturing product market regulation indicators

Diagram A1: Aggregation of the detailed information on regulations



                                                    Aggregated NMR
                                                       indicator




                                                                                Barriers to
                    State control
                                                                             entrepreneurship




                               Public control on         Legal barriers to
    Public ownership                                                         Market structure   Industry structure
                               business activity              entry




        Detailed                      Detailed               Detailed            Detailed            Detailed
      information                   information            information         information         information




The OECD Non-Manufacturing Regulations (NMR) indicators measure to what extent
competition and firm choices are restricted where there are no a priori reasons for government
interference, or where regulatory goals could plausibly be achieved by less coercive means.
They are based on detailed information on laws, rules and market and industry settings. This
information is the raw material allowing calculating the aggregate indicators according to the
Diagram A1. For each NMR indicator, the detailed information is first aggregated into five
sub-level indicators: public ownership, public control on business activity, legal barriers to
entry, market structure and industry structure, or eventually only part of them in some
upstream industries (see Conway and Nicoletti, 2006). These sub-level indicators are then
aggregated into one indicator for each upstream industry. As shown in the diagram they can

                                                                                                                     37
also be aggregated at a step level of ‘state control’ and ‘barriers to entrepreneurship’. We have
considered them in an attempt to differentiate the impacts of both kind of regulations on
which we report briefly in Appendix B.

Table A1 gives the example of the questions and corresponding involved in the construction
of the ‘legal barriers to entry’ sub-level regulation indicator for professional services. The
answers to each question are coded between 0 and 6. These codes are indicated in the Table
under each possible answer, with 0 for the most procompetitive regulation and 6 for the most
anticompetitive one.




Table A1: Construction of the ‘legal barriers to entry’ sub-level regulation indicator for
Professional services

Scale 0-6, 0 for the most pro-competitive regulations
                                          Weights
                                                      Question
                                             by
                                                      weights                 Coding of data
                                           theme
                                                        (ck)
                                             (bj)
Licensing:                                   2/5
How many services does the                                        0           1     2      3         >3
profession have an exclusive or
                                                         1        0       1,5       3     4,5        6
shared exclusive right to provide?

Education requirements
                                           2/5
(only applies if Licensing not 0):
What is the duration of special
                                                                       equals number of years of
education/university/or other higher                   0.33
                                                                         education (max of 6)
degree?
What is the duration of compulsory
                                                                     equals number of years of
practice necessary to become a full                    0.44
                                                                   compulsory practice (max of 6)
member of the profession?
Are there professional exams that                      0.22              no                    Yes
must be passed to become a full
                                                                         0                     6
member of the profession?

Quotas and economic needs tests             1/5
Is the number of foreign                                                 no                    Yes
professionals/firms permitted to
practice restricted by quotas or                         1               0                     6
economic needs tests?
The coding of each question is indicated under each possible answer.




                                                                                                          38
(2). Capital stocks

Data on R&D investments at the country-industry level come from the OECD ANBERD
database whereas physical investments values and prices come from the EU KLEMS
database. To compute investments in constant prices we have used investment deflators at the
national level. Because of the lack of specific price information for R&D, we have used as
proxy the manufacturing production deflator from the OECD STAN database. For the prices
of ICT investments in hardware, software and telecommunications equipment, we have
adopted for all countries the same prices relative to that of GDP than those for the USA. This
is much better for comparability since is the USA is by far the country that rely most
extensively on hedonic methods to measure these prices.

Capital stocks are calculated at the level of the three ICT and the three non-ICT investment
series in constant prices obtained from the EU-KLEMS database, using the so-called
Permanent Inventory Method (PIM) and assuming constant geometric rates of depreciation:
5 % for non-residential structures, 10 % for transport and other non-ICT equipment, 15 % for
communication equipment, 25 % for R&D and 30 % for hardware and software. We then
aggregate them into non-ICT and ICT capital stocks. R&D capital is computed in the same
way using a depreciation rate of 25%. To implement the PIM we need an initial capital stock
estimate. For ICT capital stocks, we simply assumed an initial capital stock of zero in 1971.
Investment series at the industry level are available for non-ICT physical assets since 1970
and for R&D only since 1987. We thus first estimated an R&D capital stock at the aggregate
level which we could do for 1981 and apportioned it to the different industries proportionally
to their shares in total R&D investment in 1987. Note that to estimate the initial capital stocks
   of non-ICT physical capital by industry in 1970 and of aggregate R&D capital in 1981, we
used the formula                     with     the investment in constant price the first year
available,   the depreciation rate and   the value added growth rate over the previous decade.

Chart A2 shows the average R&D and ICT capital intensities (i.e., R&D or ICT capital stocks
per employee) by country relative to the USA (=100%), where these ratios are computed on
the 2001-2005 period, for which our sample is nearly balanced. We observe very important
differences between countries and in their ranking by R&D and ICT capital intensities.




                                                                                              39
       Chart A2: R&D and ICT capital intensity ratios relative to the USA (=100%)
        country average 2001-2005

    120%

    100%

     80%

     60%

     40%

     20%

       0%




                                      R&D ratio    ICT ratio




(3). Multifactor productivity

The measurement of our multifactor productivity MFP requires data at the country-industry
level on value added in constant price and employment in number of persons in addition to
non-ICT capital stocks. These data come from the OECD STAN database, but they need a
number of corrections. Since R&D is not treated as in investment in the national accounts data
gathered by OECD, we had to correct both the industry value added by adding (“expensing
out”) the intermediate consumption of their R&D activities and the industry number of
employees by subtracting the number of R&D personnel (to avoid “double counting”). Note
also that we had also to modify the price index of value added, and hence its value in constant
price, for the “Electrical and optical equipment” industry. This industry includes
communication and computing equipment, for which prices in the USA are extensively based
on the hedonic price method but not in the other countries. It appeared that indeed the
differences in the evolution of the value added price in this industry between the USA and the
other countries, and hence also in the labor productivity growth, were much too large to be
credible. We thus adopted for the other countries in this industry the value added prices


                                                                                            40
(relative to that of GDP) in the USA, as we did for the ICT investment prices.to the domestic
prices in this industry.

To compute MFP, as explained in Section II, we have chosen to calibrate the non-ICT capital
stock elasticities ( ) at the industry level by the average shares of their user cost in total costs
computed for the USA over the whole estimation period. It is important, however, to stress
that our main results remain basically unchanged when instead of calibrating the non-ICT
capital elasticity we estimate it in the productivity equation and do not impose the constant
returns to scale hypothesis (see Appendix Table B1).

Finally, in order to ensure comparability across countries of our measure of MFP, we have
converted the value added and capital stocks level variables into prices denominated in a
common currency using OECD aggregate purchasing power parities. Chart A3 shows the
average country MFP relative to the USA (=100%) for the 2001-2005 period. We see that
MFP in the USA is much greater than all the other countries, with an average MFP ratio
ranging between a low 40% for the Czech republic and a high 80% for Sweden and Canada at
the country-industry-year level the USA MFP is also for 85% of the observations and among
the three highest for the 15% other observations.

        Chart A3: MFP ratio relative to the USA (=100%), country average 2001-2005

     120%


     100%


      80%


      60%


      40%


      20%


       0%




                                                                                                 41
(4). Country-industry panel data sample

On the basis of the OECD STAN data base, we can consider eighteen manufacturing and
service industries, covering the whole business economy, with the exception of 'Agriculture,
hunting, forestry and fishing', 'Mining and quarrying' and 'Real Estate activity'. Table A4 gives
the list of these eighteen industries with the industry averages of the ICT and R&D investment
to value added ratios over the years 2001-2005.

Table A4: Sample composition by industry and ICT and R&D investment to value
added ratios, industry averages on the 2001-2005 period

INDUSTRIES                                          In       ISIC rev. 3      ICT         R&D
                                                  Sample        code          ratio       ratio
                                                                              (%).        (%).
FOOD PRODUCTS, BEVERAGES AND                         I*         15-16          1,6         1,1
TOBACCO
TEXTILES, TEXTILE PRODUCTS, LEATHER                  E          17-19          1,2         1,2
AND FOOTWEAR
WOOD AND PRODUCTS OF WOOD AND CORK                   E           20            1,1         0,4
PULP, PAPER, PAPER PRODUCTS, PRINTING                I*         21-22          2,8         0,6
AND PUBLISHING
CHEMICAL, RUBBER, PLASTICS AND FUEL                   I         23-25          1,8         8,1
PRODUCTS
OTHER NON-METALLIC MINERAL PRODUCTS                   I          26            1,4         1,4
BASIC METALS AND FABRICATED METAL                     I         27-28          1,5         1,3
PRODUCTS
MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT, N.E.C.                       I          29            2,2        5,01
ELECTRICAL AND OPTICAL EQUIPMENT                      I         30-33          4,3        16,0
TRANSPORT EQUIPMENT                                   I         34-35          2,2        10,3
MANUFACTURING NEC; RECYCLING                         E          36-37          1,4         1,4
ELECTRICITY GAS AND WATER SUPPLY                      I         40-41          2,7         0,4
CONSTRUCTION                                         E           45            0,7         0,1
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL TRADE; REPAIRS                  I*         50-52          2,1         0,2
HOTELS AND RESTAURANTS                               E           55            1,0         0,0
TRANSPORT, STORAGE, POST AND                         I*         60-64          6,6         0,5
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION                             I*         65-67         5,7%         0,3
RENTING M&EQ AND OTHER BUSINESS                       I         72-74          4,7         1,9
ACTIVITIES
I: Industries included in the sample; I*: Industries with ICT investment but almost no R&D
investment included in the sample but not used in the estimation of the R&D demand; E:
Industries with almost no ICT and R&D investments excluded from the sample. Upstream
industries are underlined


The five industries (listed with an E in the 2nd column) have very low ICT and R&D to value
added ratios, respectively 1.1% and 0.6% on average, as against 3.1% and 3.6% for the
thirteen other industries. We had to exclude them from our study since we could not measure

                                                                                                 42
reliably enough our ICT and R&D capital stocks variables. Our study sample thus covers the
thirteen other industries (with an I or I* in the 2nd column). Among them, however, there are
still five of them (with an I* in the 2nd column) that are almost not investing in R&D with
very low R&D to value added ratios of 0.6% in average as against 5.5% for the eight others
industries. We had to exclude them when estimating the R&D demand equation.




                                                                                          43
44
                 APPENDIX B: ROBUTNESS AND EXTENSION ANALYSES

This Appendix presents briefly a three robustness ant two extension analyses we thought
important to perform and document. (1) We study how much our main results vary if we
estimate also the non-ICT capital and labor elasticities in the productivity equation and we do
not impose constant returns to scale nor calibrate the non-ICT capital elasticity. (2) We
similarly investigate what differences it makes in our results to specify more symmetrically
the productivity and ICT and R&D demand equations by introducing explicitly a “catch-up”
variable in these equations. (3) We also report the differences it makes in evaluations of the long
term MFP gains by country when we use in our prospective simulation the regulatory burden indicator
REG based on the USA input-output table as we do in estimation. (4) We document how much
the estimated impact of upstream regulations in the productivity and ICT demand equations
differs between industries investing or not on R&D. (5) Similarly we compare the estimated
impact of upstream regulations in the productivity and ICT and R&D demand equations when
we separate the “state control” and “barriers to entrepreneurship” components in our
regulatory burden indicator REG.



(1). Robustness with respect to the hypothesis of constant returns to scale and the choice to calibrate
the non-ICT capital elasticity

In specifying and estimating our productivity equation (relation (3) in Section II), we have
assumed constant return to scale and we have calibrated the non-ICT capital elasticity by its
share on total costs. We show that on the whole our estimation results are robust enough are
if instead we estimate the following productivity equation in terms of labor productivity (LP)
gap, instead of multifactor productivity (MFP) gap:




with:                                                   ,
     ,                           and

We have thus to estimate now two more parameters:               , that is the deviation to 1 of the
elasticity of scale, previously assumed to be null under constant returns to scale, and            the
non-ICT capital elasticity, instead of calibrating it to be industry specific and equal to the


                                                                                                    45
industry average of the share of its user cost in total cost for the USA, that to be in average
about 0.19. We also indirectly estimate the labor elasticity          as previously.

Table B1 recalls the upper and lower bound estimates previously obtained (Table 3 in the
text) in columns (1) and (5) respectively and presents the new ones in columns (4) and (8). In
columns (2) and (6) it gives the corresponding estimates when the hypothesis of constant
returns to scale is relaxed and the non-ICT capital elasticity remains calibrated,, and in
columns (3) and (7) when it is the reverse.

We see that the estimated impacts of the elasticity of scale and non-ICT capital intensity gaps
are close to what we assumed them to be:               is next to zero and     is a little smaller than its
average calibrated value. Our estimates of our main parameter of interest are not too much
changed: the ICT capital elasticity        and the impact of upstream regulations          remain roughly
the same, and the R&D elasticity        is lower but still significantly positive.




Table B1: Robustness to production function constant returns to scale assumption and
non-ICT capital elasticity calibration

Dependent
variable                   MFP gap                  LP gap              MFP gap                  LP gap

                       (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
                                                                                                         -
Gap in labor                    -0.012                   -0.026**              -0.024*               0.043***
                                [0.013]                   [0.013]              [0.013]                [0.013]
Gap in non-ICT                               0.151***    0.161***                         0.145***   0.158***
capital intensity                             [0.012]     [0.013]                          [0.012]    [0.013]
Gap in ICT           0.052***   0.060***     0.046***    0.048***   0.074***   0.079***   0.064***   0.066***
capital intensity     [0.009]    [0.009]      [0.009]     [0.009]    [0.009]    [0.009]    [0.009]    [0.009]
Gap in R&D           0.078***   0.077***     0.040***    0.038***   0.069***   0.068***   0.037***   0.034***
capital intensity     [0.007]    [0.007]      [0.007]     [0.007]   [0.007]    [0.007]    [0.006]    [0.006]
                         -          -            -           -
Regulatory           0.234***   0.240***     0.205***    0.203***   -0.064     -0.078     -0.050     -0.034
burden indicator-1    [0.055]    [0.055]      [0.051]     [0.051]   [0.067]    [0.067]    [0.063]    [0.064]
Fixed effects:
Country,
industry, year          Y          Y            Y            Y         Y          Y          Y            Y
Country*year            Y          Y            Y            Y         Y          Y          Y            Y
Industry*year           N          N            N            N         Y          Y          Y            Y
Observations           2612       2612         2612        2612       2612       2612       2612       2612
R-squared              0.565      0.577        0.627       0.631      0.646      0.653      0.688      0.692
RMSE                  0.1821     0.1797       0.1686      0.1679     0.1720     0.1705     0.1614     0.1607
See footnote to Table 3.



                                                                                                              46
(2). Robustness with respect to “catch-up” hypotheses

The specification of our multifactor productivity equation assumes for given fixed effects a
bounded cointegrated long term relationship between the MFP of the reference or “leader”
country and the MFP of the “follower” countries by imposing a coefficient of 1 for the MFP
of the reference country, or catch-up term, and writing the estimated equation in terms of
MFP gap (see section II). We have specified differently the long term ICT and R&D demand
equations considering that common shocks are already taken into account by the price effects
and the different fixed effects and implicitly assuming a coefficient equal to zero for the
catch-up term. We investigate the influence of these assumptions on our main parameter
estimates and find that overall they are robust

We thus estimate now the following multifactor productivity and ICT and R&D demand
equations:




and




These equations are strictly equivalent to our previous ones, if      ,         and         .

Tables B2.1 and B2.2 recall our previous upper bound estimates for these three equations and
show the new ones. Our lower bound estimates are strictly the same, since the interacted
industry*year effects take fully care of the catch up variables. Although the estimated         of
0.87 is significantly smaller than 1 and the estimated     of 0.25 is significantly higher than 0
(while the estimated       of -0.09 is not), we see that the ICT and R&D capital elasticity as
well as the impact of upstream regulations remain basically unchanged.




                                                                                                47
  Table B2.1: Robustness of the multifactor productivity equation estimates
  with respect to catch-up hypothesis



       Dependent variable                MFP gap                 MFP

                                             (1)                 (2)
    Gap in ICT capital                    0.052***            0.046***
    intensity                              [0.009]             [0.008]
    Gap in R&D capital                    0.078***            0.077***
    intensity                              [0.007]             [0.007]
    Regulatory burden                    -0.234***           -0.180***
    indicator-1                            [0.055]             [0.051]
                                                              0.869***
    MFP USA
                                                               [0.016]
    Fixed effects:
    Country, industry, year                  Y                    Y
    Country*year                             Y                    Y
    Industry*year                            N                    N
    Observations                           2612                 2612
    R-squared                              0.565                0.562
    RMSE                                  0.1821               0.1709
      See footnote to Table 3.


Table B2.2: Robustness of the ICT and R&D demand equation estimates
with respect to catch-up hypothesis


                                                          R&D             R&D
 Dependent variable          ICT capital ICT capital
                                                         capital         capital
                              intensity   intensity
                                                        intensity       intensity
                                 (1)           (2)         (3)             (4)
 ICT or R&D capital          -0.758***    -0.759***    -0.628***       -0.615***
 costs                         [0.041]      [0.042]      [0.128]         [0.128]
 Regulatory burden            -0.263**     -0.278**    -1.395***       -1.383***
 indicator-1                   [0.125]      [0.129]      [0.385]         [0.389]
 ICT or R&D capital                          -0.091                     0.252***
 intensity USA                              [0.073]                      [0.096]
 Fixed effects:
 Country, industry,
 year                             Y            Y           Y               Y
 Country*year                     Y            Y           Y               Y
 Industry*year                    N            N           N               N
 Observations                   2612         2612        1478            1478
 R-squared                      0.863        0.864       0.801           0.802
 RMSE                          0.4139       0.4135      0.6599          0.6585
  See footnote to Table 3.


                                                                                    48
(3). Differences in the prospective simulations of multifactor productivity gains with respect
to the choice of domestic or USA input-output tables

We finally report the differences it makes in evaluations of the long term MFP gains by country, if
instead of using in our prospective simulation the slightly modified regulatory burden indicator
REG-D based on the different country input-output tables, we use in our prospective simulation
the regulatory burden indicator REG based on the USA input-output table as in estimation.

   Table B3: Simulated long term MFP gains from reforms, depending on I-O tables


                                Upper-         Upper-         Lower-          Lower-
         Simulated               bound          bound          bound           bound
         MFP gains             estimate       estimate       estimate        estimate
                                   (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)
                               Domestic          USA         Domestic           USA
                               I-O table      I-O table      I-O table       I-O table
         UK                       2,6%           1,7%           1,0%            0,7%
         USA                      3,1%           3,1%           1,2%            1,2%
         Netherlands              3,4%           2,8%           1,3%            1,1%
         Sweden                   4,1%           3,0%           1,6%            1,2%
         Denmark                  4,3%           3,6%           1,6%            1,4%
         Japan                    4,9%           3,8%           1,9%            1,5%
         Spain                    5,6%           3,8%           2,2%            1,5%
         Germany                  5,9%           4,4%           2,4%            1,7%
         Australia                6,6%           4,6%           2,5%            1,7%
         France                   7,1%           5,7%           2,8%            2,2%
         Canada                   9,2%           7,5%           3,6%            2,9%
         Finland                  9,9%           6,8%           3,9%            2,6%
         Austria                 10,3%           7,6%           4,1%            2,9%
         Czech. Rep.             11,1%           5,9%           4,3%            2,2%
         Italy                   12,9%           7,2%           5,0%            2,8%
         Country
         Average                 6,7%           4,8%            2,6%           1,8%


Table B3 recalls in columns (1) and (3) the prospective evaluations of the upper and lower
bound long term regulatory impacts in total (i.e., through all channels) on the growth of
multifactor productivity MFP for the fifteen countries of our sample, under the assumption
they have implemented the lightest upstream anticompetitive regulatory practices (as shown in
Graph 5 in the text). It compares them to the alternative corresponding evaluations given in
columns (2) and (4). We see that the choice of the input-output table of the USA to compute

                                                                                                49
the regulatory burden indicator of each country would have implied, since the intensity of use
of regulated intermediate inputs is relatively less in this country, much lower simulated
evaluations, by about 20% (for example in the case of Netherlands) to nearly 50% (for the
Czech Republic). It remains, nevertheless, that these evaluations would still appear sizeable,
ranging in average from long term MFP gains between 1.8% and 2.6% as against 4.8% and
6.7%.



(4). Differences in the impacts of upstream regulations between R&D doing and non-R&D
doing industries

As we have explained (see Appendix Table A2), while all thirteen industries in our study
sample are investing on ICT, only eight of them are investing in R&D. Although we cannot
investigate thoroughly the potential differences in the impacts of upstream regulations across
industries with our aggregate country-industry data, it seems appropriate to check whether
these impacts differ significantly between the two groups of R&D and non-R&D doing
industries.

Tables B4.1 and B4.2 recall our previous upper and lower bound estimates for the
productivity and ICT demand equations in columns (1) and (3) and contrast them to the new
ones in columns (2) and (4), our estimates for the R&D demand equation remaining of course
the same (see Table 5 in the text). We see that the upper bound estimates of upstream
regulation impacts show marked differences between the two groups of R&D and non-R&D
doing industries, although they are not statistically significant since they are not too precisely
estimated: about -0.25 as against -0.19 for multifactor productivity and -0.42 as against -0.25
for ICT capital intensity. These differences are wider and statistically significant for our lower
bound estimates: about -0.04 as against -0.19 for multifactor productivity and -0.40 as against
-0.14 for ICT capital intensity.

On total we thus find reasonably strong as well as a priori very plausible evidence that
upstream regulation on productivity works mainly through the R&D and ICT channels in the
R&D doing industries the ICT and other channels in the non R&D channels.




                                                                                               50
Table B4.1: Differences in upstream regulation impacts on multifactor productivity
between R&D and non-R&D doing industries

Dependent variable:
                                 (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)
MFP gap

Gap in ICT capital             0.052***      0.053***        0.074***       0.073***
intensity                       [0.009]       [0.009]         [0.009]        [0.009]
Gap in R&D capital             0.078***      0.077***        0.069***       0.071***
intensity                       [0.007]       [0.008]         [0.008]        [0.008]
                All           -0.234***                        -0.064
Regulatory      industries      [0.054]                       [0.062]
burden          R&D                          -0.250***                        -0.044
indicator-1     industries                     [0.055]                       [0.062]
                no-R&D                       -0.187***                     -0.188***
                industries                     [0.067]                       [0.073]
Fixed effects:
Country, industry, year           Y              Y              Y               Y
Country*year                      Y              Y              Y               Y
Industry*year                     N              N              Y               Y
Reg impact equality test                      0.2037                         0.0029
(p-values)
Observations                    2612           2612            2612           2612
R-squared                       0.565          0.566           0.646          0.647
RMSE                           0.1821         0.1821          0.1720         0.1718
See footnote to Table 3.

Table B4.2 Differences in upstream regulation impacts on ICT capital intensity between
R&D and non-R&D doing industries


Dependent variable:
                                 (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)
ICT capital intensity

Gap in ICT capital            -0.741***      -0.732***      -0.712***      -0.723***
intensity                       [0.041]        [0.042]        [0.044]        [0.045]
Gap in R&D capital             -0.281**                      -0.368**
intensity                       [0.126]                       [0.165]
                All             -0.245*                      -0.398**
Regulatory      industries      [0.128]                       [0.166]
burden          R&D           -0.417***                        -0.144         -0.044
indicator-1     industries      [0.154]                       [0.210]        [0.062]
                no-R&D                                                     -0.188***
                industries        Y               Y             Y            [0.073]
Fixed effects:                    Y               Y             Y                Y
Country, industry, year           N               N             Y                Y
Country*year                                   0.1253                        0.0866
Industry*year                    2612           2612           2612            2612
Reg impact equality test         0.862          0.862          0.870           0.870
Observations                    0.4163         0.4162         0.4237         0.4235
(p-values)
R-squared                     -0.741***      -0.732***      -0.712***      -0.723***
RMSE                            [0.041]        [0.042]        [0.044]        [0.045]
See footnote to Table 3.

                                                                                       51
(5). Differences in the impacts of barriers to entrepreneurship and state control

As explained in Appendix A.1 the OECD non-manufacturing regulation indicators can be
viewed as the sum of two sub-indicators corresponding to two main types of regulations:
barriers to entrepreneurship and state control that take into account legal barriers to entry,
market structures and industry structure for the first and information on public ownership of
leader firms and on public control on business activity (mainly price control) for the second.
This is thus also the case of our regulatory burden indicator REG which we can divide in the
corresponding two components. Since the purpose of state control is largely to internalize
market externalities or provide public services, it may not lead to increase the upstream rents
unlike the barriers to entrepreneurship. It thus seems of particular interest, even at our
aggregate level of analysis, to do the tests of comparison of the estimated impacts of these two
components of REG on multifactor productivity and ICT and R&D capital.

Table B5.1 presents the results of these tests. We can see that the hypothesis of the equality of
the impact coefficients of the two upstream regulation components cannot be rejected, even at
the 10% level of confidence, in the productivity equation and the ICT demand and for both
our upper and lower bound estimates, but that it is on the contrary strongly rejected for the
R&D demand equation and both estimates.

Table B5.1: Tests of equality of the coefficients of the regulatory burden components
for state control and barriers to entrepreneurship

P-values           Productivity equation          ICT demand                R&D demand
                      (1)         (2)            (3)       (4)             (5)      (6)
Equality test        0.825       0.407          0.122     0.186           0.000    0.000
Fixed effects:
(p-value)
Country,             Y            Y            Y            Y               Y            Y
industry, year
Country*year         Y            Y            Y            Y               Y            Y
Industry*year        N            Y            N            Y               N            Y
Observations        2612        2612         1478         1478             2612         2612
Tests based on the DOLS estimates with one lag and one lead



Table B5.2 thus records the estimation results for R&D demand equation only. It recalls for
comparison in columns (1) and (5) our previous upper and lower bound estimates (from Table
5 in the text), the corresponding new estimates with the two REG components in columns (4)
and (8), as well as in the intermediate columns the estimates obtained when only one of these

                                                                                               52
two components are included in the equation. We find that both the upper and lower estimated
impacts of the regulatory burden barriers for the entrepreneurship component are negative and
statistically significant as previously, and possibly stronger, while for the state control
component they are positive and statistically significant. Although these two components
appear negatively correlated, these estimates are not statistically different when one of them is
included alone in the equation. These results contrasting sharply with the ones for
productivity and ICT capital intensity would be worthwhile investigating in their own sake
with more appropriate and richer data. A possible explanation is that firms’ incentives to
invest in R&D and innovate would be higher because state control of upstream firms would
prevent them to appropriate a large part of downstream innovative rents.

Table B5.2: Impact of direct state control on R&D demand


Dependent
variable:
                          (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
ICT capital
intensity
                            -          -          -          -          -          -          -          -
R&D capital costs       0.628***   0.547***   0.618***   0.511***   0.619***   0.547***   0.627***   0.512***
                         [0.128]    [0.126]    [0.125]    [0.129]    [0.135]    [0.133]    [0.132]    [0.135]
Regulatory burden           -
indicator-1             1.395***                                    -0.868**
                         [0.385]                                    [0.425]
Barriers to                            -          -                                -          -
entrepreneurship                   4.156***   3.824***                         3.649***   3.324***
                                   [0.546]    [0.540]                          [0.604]    [0.601]
State control                      2.242***              1.389**               2.535***              1.946***
                                   [0.642]               [0.646]               [0.678]               [0.681]
Fixed effects:
Country, industry,
year                        Y         Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y
Country*year                Y         Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y
Industry*year               N         N          N          N          Y          Y          Y          Y
Observations              1478      1478       1478       1478       1478       1478       1478       1478
R-squared                 0.801     0.808      0.806      0.799      0.810      0.816      0.814      0.810
RMSE                    0.6599      0.6475     0.6504     0.6621     0.6776     0.6661     0.6699     0.6764
 See footnote to Table 3.




                                                                                                         53
