NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ASYMMETRIC INCENTIVES IN SUBSIDIES:
EVIDENCE FROM A LARGE-SCALE ELECTRICITY REBATE PROGRAM
Koichiro Ito
Working Paper 19485
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19485

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013

I am grateful to Severin Borenstein and Michael Hanemann for their support and advice, and to Hunt
Allcott, Michael Anderson, Maximilian Auffhammer, Peter Berck, James Bushnell, Howard Chong,
Lucas Davis, Meredith Fowlie, Michael Greenstone, Catie Hausman, Erin Mansur, Erica Myers, Karen
Notsund, Hideyuki Nakagawa, Carla Peterman, Peter Reiss, Catherine Wolfram and seminar participants
at UC Berkeley, Stanford, NBER Summer Institute, AEA annual meeting, and Kyoto University for
helpful comments. I also thank the California Public Utility Commission, Pacific Gas & Electric, Southern
California Edison, and San Diego Gas & Electric for providing residential electricity data for this study.
Financial support from the Energy Institute at Haas, the Joseph L. Fisher Doctoral Dissertation Fellowship
by Resources for the Future, the California Energy Commission, and Stanford Institute for Economic
Policy Research is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Koichiro Ito. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Asymmetric Incentives in Subsidies: Evidence from a Large-Scale Electricity Rebate Program
Koichiro Ito
NBER Working Paper No. 19485
September 2013
JEL No. L11,L51,L94,L98,Q41,Q48,Q58
ABSTRACT
Many countries use substantial public funds to subsidize reductions in negative externalities. However,
such subsidies create asymmetric incentives because increases in externalities remain unpriced. This
paper examines implications of such asymmetric subsidy incentives by using a regression discontinuity
design in California's electricity rebate program that provided a financial reward for energy conservation.
Using household-level panel data from administrative records, I find precisely-estimated zero causal
effects in coastal areas. In contrast, the incentive produced a 5% consumption reduction in inland areas.
Income and climate conditions significantly drive the heterogeneity. Asymmetric subsidy structures
weaken incentives because consumers far from the rebate target show little response. The overall program
cost is 17.5 cents per kWh reduction and $390 per ton of carbon dioxide reduction, which is unlikely
to be cost-effective for a reasonable range of the social marginal cost of electricity.

Koichiro Ito
Boston University
School of Management
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
ito@bu.edu

1

Introduction

In economic theory, negative externalities can be corrected by Pigouvian taxes that internalize external costs (Pigou, 1924). However, opposition from taxpayers generally makes it
difficult to implement such taxes. As an alternative, many countries use substantial public funds to subsidize economic activities that presumably result in reductions in negative
externalities. For example, while many countries have failed to introduce a carbon tax on
greenhouse gas emissions, they spend substantial public funds to reward energy conservation
and pollution abatement.1 Likewise, regulators often provide subsidies for smoking cessation
and alternative transportation rather than introduce high taxes on smoking and congestion.2
However, such subsidies create asymmetric incentives because increases in externalities
remain unpriced. This asymmetry introduces two inherent problems. First, the subsidies
may not be able to correct all externalities if the marginal decisions of many individuals are
not a↵ected by the subsidy incentive. This contrasts with Pigouvian taxes, which equalize
the private and social marginal costs for all individuals. Second, the subsidies introduce
an “additionality” problem (Joskow and Marron, 1992). Some of the observed behavior are
not “additional” if they would occur in the absence of the subsidy incentive. Therefore, it
is misleading to evaluate the causal e↵ect of such subsidies by simply analyzing those who
received a subsidy, although many previous studies take this approach.3
In this paper, I investigate these problems by applying a regression discontinuity (RD)
design to a large-scale electricity rebate program in California. In the summer of 2005, California residents received a 20% discount on their electricity bills if they could reduce their
1

In the US, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 provided $17 billion for energy conservation programs. US electric utilities spent $26 billion dollars on energy efficiency programs in 1994-2011,
and the annual spending has been continuously increasing since 2003 (U.S. Department of Energy, 2013)
2
Many countries provide subsidies for energy-efficient appliances (Davis, Fuchs and Gertler, 2012;
Boomhower and Davis, 2013), energy-efficient vehicles (Gallagher and Muehlegger, 2011; Sallee, 2011; Mian
and Sufi, 2012; Sallee and Slemrod, 2012), reductions in energy consumption (Reiss and White, 2008; Wolak,
2010; Borenstein, 2013). Carbon o↵set programs such as the clean development mechanism (CDM) by the
United Nations give firms credits if they reduce their pollution relative to a business-as-usual baseline level
(Sutter and Parreño, 2007; Schneider, 2007; Duflo et al., Forthcoming). Financial incentives for smoking
cessation is becoming a key policy instrument (Volpp et al., 2009). Congestion pricing is still rarely implemented in the US highway system and the federal and state government use substantial public funds to
subsidize public transit to address congestion (Anderson, 2013).
3
Joskow and Marron (1992) argue that many policy evaluations of utility conservation programs fail to
take account of the the additionality problem. Boomhower and Davis (2013) studies how this problem a↵ects
the cost-e↵ectiveness of an energy-efficient appliance subsidy program in Mexico.

1

electricity usage by 20% compared to the summer of 2004. The program’s eligibility rule
provides two advantages for my empirical strategy. First, to be eligible for the program in
2005, households had to open their electricity account before a cuto↵ date in 2004. Strategic manipulation of account open date was impossible because the program had not been
announced until the spring of 2005. This rule created a sharp discontinuity in treatment
assignment between households who opened their account before and after the cuto↵ date.
Second, all eligible households automatically participated in the program, which prevents
the self-selection problem that is a major challenge in previous studies.4
My analysis is based on the administrative data on household-level monthly electricity
billing records from the electric utilities that administered the rebate program. Compared
to survey data, the full administrative billing records have advantages in its accuracy in the
measurement and its comprehensive coverage of consumers. The data also include each customer’s nine-digit zip code, with which I match demographic and weather data to investigate
potential heterogeneity in response to the subsidy incentive.
Using the discontinuity in treatment assignment, I apply a sharp RD design to estimate
the local average treatment e↵ect (LATE). I find that the rebate incentive reduced electricity
consumption by 4% to 5% in inland areas in California, where the summer temperature
is persistently high and the income level is relatively low. In contrast, I find precisely
estimated zero treatment e↵ects in coastal areas in California, where the summer temperature
is moderate and the income level is relatively high. To explore what drives the heterogeneity
in the treatment e↵ect, I estimate the interaction e↵ects between the treatment variable and
climate conditions and those between the treatment variable and income levels. Results from
the regressions suggest that the treatment e↵ect increases by a 0.15 percentage point as the
average temperature increases by 1 degree Fahrenheit and decreases by a 0.029 percentage
point as income levels increase by 1%.
The asymmetric subsidy structure creates the possibility that the response to the subsidy
di↵ers between consumers whose consumption is close to the target level of consumption
and consumers whose consumption is far from the target. To test whether the asymmetric
4

In most utility conservation programs, consumers opt-in to the programs (Joskow and Marron, 1992).
This opt-in participation creates self-selection bias because the participants are likely to be di↵erent from
non-participants of the program.

2

incentive creates a “giving-up” e↵ect for consumers far from the target level, I estimate the
quantile treatment e↵ects on the changes in consumption. I find evidence that most of the
treatment e↵ects come from consumers who are closer to the target level of consumption,
and that the treatment e↵ect is not significantly di↵erent from zero for consumers who are
far from the target level. This finding provides evidence that the asymmetry in the subsidy
schedule weakens the incentive for conservation compared to a simple Pigouvian tax.
In general, regression discontinuity designs require relatively weak identification assumptions to estimate local average treatment e↵ects (LATE). However, a disadvantage is that
it gives LATE instead of average treatment e↵ects (ATE) (Angrist and Rokkanen, 2012).
In my research design, the RD estimates come from households that opened their account
about a year before the beginning of the treatment period. An important question is whether
the treatment e↵ect is di↵erent between my RD samples and households that opened their
account earlier.
To address this point, I propose a method that combines the RD design with di↵erencein-di↵erence-in-di↵erences (DDD). This method estimates the ATE with an additional identification assumption. In general, residential electricity consumers have a small positive trend
in their electricity consumption after they open their accounts. This trend is translated into
a small trend in my running variable for the RD design. To estimate the ATE, I assume
that the positive trend in consumption is the same between households that opened their
accounts on a certain date and those that opened their account on the same day in the
previous year. With this assumption, I can di↵erence out the small positive trend from my
RD design and estimate the ATE. I use this method to estimate the ATE for consumers
who opened their account 90 days, 180 days, one year, two years, three years, and four years
before the eligibility cuto↵ date. I find that the di↵erence between the ATE and the LATE
is small and not statistically di↵erent. This finding suggests that the RD estimates are not
significantly di↵erent from the treatment e↵ects for consumers who opened their accounts
earlier than my RD sample.
The findings of this paper provide several important policy implications. First, asymmetric incentives created by subsidy programs are likely to weaken incentives to reduce negative
externalities. The evidence of zero treatment e↵ect in coastal areas is consistent with the
3

theoretical prediction that consumers do not respond to the asymmetric incentive at all if the
price elasticity is below a cuto↵ level. Second, the di↵erence between my RD estimates and
naive estimates of the treatment e↵ect shows that the additionality problem is a central concern in evaluations of subsidy programs (Joskow and Marron, 1992; Boomhower and Davis,
2013). While my RD estimates show precisely-estimated zero causal e↵ects in coastal areas,
naive estimates that ignore the additionality problem indicate that a significant number of
consumers responded to the incentive. This result provides evidence that careful empirical
analysis is critical for evaluations of energy conservation programs (Allcott and Greenstone,
2012). It is particularly important for recent US energy policy because public spending for
energy conservation programs has been growing rapidly. For example, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 provided $17 billion for energy conservation programs.
US electric utilities spent $26 billion dollars on energy efficiency programs in 1994-2011, and
the annual spending has been continuously increasing since 2003 (U.S. Department of Energy, 2013). Finally, I provide cost-e↵ective analysis. The overall program cost is 17.5 cents
per kWh reduction and $390 per ton of carbon dioxide reduction, which is unlikely to be
cost-e↵ective for a reasonable range of the social marginal cost of electricity.

2

Conceptual Framework

2.1

Asymmetric Incentive Structures of Conservation Subsidies

In this section, I use a simple framework to characterize theoretical predictions of consumer
behavior in the presence of conservation subsides. Suppose that consumers have quasilinear utility functions u(yi , ni ) = v(yi ) + ni for electricity consumption yi and a numeraire
consumption good ni . Consumers with income Ii and electricity price p maximize v(yi ) +
Ii

pyi and consume y0 , where v 0 (y0 ) = p.
Suppose that regulators consider that electricity price p does not properly reflect the

social marginal cost of electricity. For example, p may not reflect the environmental externalities from electricity generation, or p may not reflect the higher marginal cost of supplying
electricity when the system faces a supply shortage. The first-best solution is to increase

4

the price by the cost of the externalities ⌧ . That is, increasing the electricity price by ⌧ lets
consumers choose y ⇤ , where v 0 (y ⇤ ) = p + ⌧ .
However, regulators often prefer implementing conservation subsidies instead of introducing a price change. In conservation subsidy programs, regulators first determine “rebate
baseline consumption” bi , which is usually a function of consumer i’s past consumption level.
Then, they o↵er a subsidy schedule that is based on bi and yi . For example, figure 1 illustrates the subsidy schedule of the California 20/20 rebate program. Consumers receive a
20% discount on their summer electricity bills if they consume 20% less than their baseline,
which is their consumption in the previous year’s summer months. This subsidy creates a
notch in the budget constraint because it changes both marginal and infra-marginal prices
if consumers reach 80% of their baseline. In another type of conservation subsidy program,
consumers receive a marginal subsidy for each unit of conservation relative to a certain baseline level. Examples of this type of subsidy schedule include peak-time rebate programs
in dynamic pricing (Wolak, 2006, 2011; Faruqui and Sergici, 2010; Borenstein, 2013). In
these cases, the subsidy schedule creates a kink at the baseline rather than a notch. In both
cases, consumers receive a subsidy for reducing consumption, but do not receive a penalty
for increasing consumption. This asymmetry creates important di↵erences between such
conservation subsidies and the first-best solution.
An inherent feature of such a subsidy schedule is that it creates asymmetry in the incentive
to change consumption. In the case with the first-best solution, consumers have a simple price
increase of ⌧ , which gives all consumers the same change in marginal incentive irrespective
of where they fall in the budget constraint in Figure 1. In contrast, the introduction of
conservation subsidies creates di↵erent incentives for consumers, depending on 1) where they
fall in the budget constraint, 2) how price-elastic they are, and 3) how much uncertainty in
consumption they have.5
5

Borenstein (2013) provides a detailed description of similar problems for peak-time rebate programs in
dynamic electricity pricing.

5

2.2

Theoretical Predictions of Consumer Behavior

I begin with a simple case with two assumptions that may not be realistic in practice: (a)
consumers have no uncertainty in consumption, and (b) their baseline bi is set reasonably
close to y0 , which is their optimal consumption in the absence of the subsidy incentive.
First, consumers do not respond to the subsidy incentive at all if the price elasticity in
absolute value is smaller than a certain cuto↵ level. To illustrate this point, suppose that
y

1+1/e

i
consumers have a quasi-linear and iso-elastic utility function, u(yi , ni ) = ↵i · 1+1/e
+ni , where

↵i is a heterogeneous taste parameter and e  0 is a constant price elasticity. In Figure 1, I
illustrate two indi↵erence curves, A and B, with |eB | > |eA |. With inelastic price elasticity
eA , consumers do not change their consumption at all because the indi↵erence curve does
not reach the notch point. Price elasticity eB is the least elasticity required for consumers
to change their consumption. This prediction implies that the subsidy incentive induces no
change in consumption when the price elasticity is smaller than |eB | in absolute value. This
result contrasts with the result in the first-best solution. When consumers have a simple
price increase of ⌧ , the new budget constraint would have a steeper slope in the figure.
Accordingly, all consumers reduce consumption based on the new slope.
Second, given assumptions (a) and (b), there should be bunching of consumers if the price
elasticity is larger than |eB | in absolute value. In Figure 1, all indi↵erence curves that have
larger price elasticities than |eB | would have the optimal consumption at the notch point in
the presence of the subsidy incentive.
However, in reality, assumptions (a) and (b) are unlikely to hold in residential electricity
demand. Let me begin with assumption (a). Electricity consumers have significant uncertainty for their monthly electricity consumption. When consumers face this uncertainty,
rational consumers do not respond to the exact nonlinear budget constraint (Saez, 1999;
Borenstein, 2009; Ito, Forthcoming). Instead, they incorporate the uncertainty and respond
to the expected price schedule, which is presented as the smoothed dotted line in Figure
1. The response to the smoothed schedule changes the first and second predictions above.
First, the cuto↵ level of the price elasticity has to be even larger than the standard case with
no uncertainty. In the previous example, consumers who have price elasticity eB no longer

6

respond to the subsidy incentive. Second, because the smoothed schedule no longer has a
notch, there can be no bunching of consumers even if the price elasticity is nonzero.
Finally, the subsidy’s incentive can be further weakened if rebate baseline bi is set far
below yi0 , which is consumer i’s optimal consumption in the absence of subsidy incentive.
Conservation subsidy programs usually do not adjust bi for changes in weather or idiosyncratic shocks to each consumer. As a result, if the base year’s weather is more moderate than
the target year’s weather, consumers are more likely to have harder baselines to reach. Furthermore, when consumers experience other negative shocks in consumption in the base year,
their baselines become harder to reach. This endogenous baseline (Wolak, 2010; Borenstein,
2013) can introduce a “giving-up e↵ect” because consumers far above the baseline consider
the subsidy to be out of reach. Conversely, when consumers have the opposite direction of
shocks in consumption, bi can be closer to yi0 . In this case, consumers who would not respond
to the subsidy reduce consumption less than 20% because now they are closer to the cuto↵
point. That is, the endogenous baseline makes the marginal incentive depend on where the
baseline falls in the budget constraint. These predictions contrast with the prediction for
the first-best solution, which produces the same marginal incentive for all consumers.
In the following sections, I empirically test these theoretical predictions by applying a
regression discontinuity design to the California 20/20 rebate program. In the next section,
I describe the research design and data for my empirical analysis.

3

Research Design and Data

This section provides the institutional background and research design of this study. First,
I provide a brief history of the California 20/20 electricity rebate program. Second, I discuss the evidence and challenges in the existing studies. Finally, I describe how I address
these challenges by the regression discontinuity design that exploits a sharp discontinuity in
treatment assignment.

7

3.1

California 20/20 Electricity Rebate Programs

The California 20/20 electricity rebate program originates from the initial rebate program
initiated by California Governor Gray Davis in 2001 during the California electricity crisis.6 The California Public Utility Commission (CPUC) expected the continuous electricity
shortage to cause rolling blackouts. To prevent them in the summer of 2001, the CPUC
ordered the three largest California investor-owned electric utilities, Pacific Gas and Electric
(PG&E), Southern California Edison (SCE) and San Diego Gas & Electric (SDG&E), to
give their customers financial incentives to reduce electricity consumption. In the summers
of 2001 and 2002, customers of the three California investor-owned electric utilities received a
20% discount for their June, July, August, and September bills if their monthly consumption
was at least 20% lower than the same billing month in 2000. The CPUC ordered the same
program in 2005 with a slight change in the scheme. In 2005, the original month-based rule
was replaced by a summer-based rule, where customers received a 20% discount for their
bills over the entire four-month period if they reduced their entire summer consumption by
at least 20% relative to 2004.
This conservation rebate program was the largest in scale that paid households to reduce
their energy consumption. Table 1 shows the scale of the 2005 rebate program for PG&E,
SCE, and SDG&E. In 2005, 8% to 9% of customers received a rebate, and the total rebates
amounted to $25 million. More customers received at least one rebate in 2001 and 2002,
when the program was based on monthly consumption. Reiss and White (2003) report that
about 39% of monthly residential bills in SDG&E qualified for a rebate in June, July, August,
and September 2001. For the same 2001 rebate program, Goldman, Barbose and Eto (2002)
find that about 33% of consumers received a rebate.
Although the CPUC aimed for a substantial reduction in electricity consumption7 , the
e↵ectiveness of the program was highly controversial. Proponents of the program have argued
6

By August of 2000, wholesale energy prices had more than tripled from the end of 1999, which caused
price spikes in retail electricity rates, and financial losses to electric utilities in California. Many cost factors
and demand shocks contributed to this rise, but several studies have also found the market power of suppliers
to be significant throughout this period (Joskow, 2001; Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak, 2002; Borenstein,
2002).
7
For example, in the executive order, CPUC (2001) estimated that the program would help reduce energy
consumption by up to 3,500 gigawatt hours in total and up to 2,200 megawatt hours during critical summer
peak consumption periods.

8

that the simplicity of the program makes it straightforward for customers to understand the
incentive and will likely encourage energy conservation. The rebate program also has been
more politically appealing than alternative pricing policies such as an increase in electricity
price or the introduction of dynamic pricing. In contrast to these alternative policies, the
rebate program does not make customers feel that they bear a large economic burden even
though the program is paid for by ratepayers as an increase in electricity price.
Opponents of the program have questioned its fairness and e↵ectiveness. For example,
Faruqui and George (2006) note that while the program is politically popular, it is unlikely to
be e↵ective for energy conservation. One concern is that the program does not incorporate
weather di↵erences between the base year and the target year. Therefore, if the target
year is cooler than the base year, many households may receive a rebate simply because of
the weather di↵erence. The second concern is that even if there is no significant weather
di↵erence between the two years, many customers will receive a rebate because of random
fluctuations in their electricity consumption. For example, customers that had a friend visit
in the base year or customers that traveled in the target year can reduce their target year’s
consumption by 20% over their base year without conservation e↵orts.
Table 2 shows some evidence for the two concerns. I use household-level electricity
consumption data to calculate what fraction of households reduced their summer electricity
consumption by more than 20% in years when there was no rebate program. I calculate each
household’s change in consumption from 2003 to 2004 and from 1999 to 2000 for Southern
California Edison. Note that the rebate programs was not in e↵ect in any of the four
years. From 2003 to 2004, the median household reduced consumption by 1.7% because the
summer of 2004 was cooler than 2003. More importantly, 14.3% of households reduced their
consumption by more than 20%. This statistic suggests that 14.3% of households would
have received a rebate without a conservation e↵ort if a rebate program had been in e↵ect
in 2004. In contrast, the summer of 2000 was warmer than 1999. As a result, the median
household increased consumption by 7.7%. However, even in this case, 6.8% of households
reduced consumption by 20% or more. Thus, random fluctuations in household electricity
consumption create necessary costs for this rebate program. This issue sometimes leads to a
concern about fairness because the program could induce a simple income transfer from one
9

household to others unrelated to their conservation e↵orts. Moreover, if the rebate expense
for these random fluctuations exceeds the program’s actual benefit, the cost-e↵ectiveness of
the program can be lower than previous estimates.

3.2

Challenges in Estimating the Treatment E↵ect

To examine the cost-e↵ectiveness of the program, we need a reliable estimate of the treatment
e↵ect that is produced solely by the program incentive. The estimation of this treatment
e↵ect is, however, generally challenging with non-experimental data. Obviously, it is misleading to draw a conclusion simply by looking at the total consumption reduction achieved
by the customers that received a rebate. Some of the rebated customers received a rebate
not because of their conservation e↵ort. On the other hand, some un-rebated customers may
have responded to the program incentive but failed to reach the 20% reduction cuto↵ to
receive a rebate. Therefore, comparing rebated and un-rebated customers does not provide
much information about the program’s treatment e↵ect. The second challenge is how to
control for potential di↵erences between the base and target years that are unrelated to the
program but a↵ected electricity consumption. For instance, di↵erences in weather and economic conditions likely a↵ect electricity consumption in the two years. Therefore, changes
in electricity consumption between the two years include the program’s treatment e↵ect and
other confounding factors that are unrelated to the program, and these two e↵ects must be
disentangled by researchers to find the treatment e↵ect.
Previous studies acknowledge that it is difficult to estimate the causal e↵ect of the program. Goldman, Barbose and Eto (2002) is the first study to examine the impact of the
original California 20/20 rebate program in 2001 by using survey data and aggregated load
data. Based on a survey of 400 residential customers, they find that 70% of surveyed customers took some active steps to save electricity in 2001, 40% of surveyed customers knew
about the program, and 57% of those who took active steps knew about the program. They
concludes that the cost of purchasing savings through the 20/20 program was about 9 cents
per kWh given the assumption that their estimated load reductions are solely attributable
to the 20/20 program.
For the same 2001 rebate program, Reiss and White (2008) estimate the treatment e↵ect
10

by using household-level billing data for 70,000 households in SDG&E. The study explores
how household-level electricity consumption changes from the years before the California
electricity crisis in 2001 to the years after the crisis. Based on the average within-household
consumption changes relative to the same month during pre-crisis years, they conclude that
the rebate program lowers consumption by approximately 4% to 6%. However, they also
note that it is difficult to conclude that this estimate solely reflects the program’s treatment
e↵ect because there were other conservation programs and public appeals in this period.
Finally, to my knowledge, Wirtshafter Associates (2006) is only the previous study that
explores the e↵ect of the 2005 California 20/20 program. The study uses some billing data
from the electric utilities and also conduct a survey of 1,177 customers. The study uses the
survey results to make two adjustments for estimation: subtract the reduction achieved by the
rebated customers that was not due to their conservation e↵orts; and add the consumption
reduction achieved by the non-rebated customers who tried but failed to reach the 20%
cuto↵. The study concludes that the cost per kWh savings range from 29 cents to $1 per
kWh because a substantial level of load reductions may or may not be attributable to the
program in their estimation.
A fundamental challenge in these previous studies is that there is no control group. In
the absence of control group, it is difficult to disentangle the causal e↵ect of the program
from confounding factors. For example, researchers have to control for changes in weather,
electricity price, and macroeconomic shocks between the base and target years. Moreover,
Reiss and White (2008) and Goldman, Barbose and Eto (2002) note that it is even more
challenging to control for the e↵ect of other conservation programs that are in e↵ect during
the study period. In the next section, I describe how I address these challenges by using a
regression discontinuity design for the 2005 rebate program.

3.3

A Sharp RD Design for the 2005 Rebate Program

To overcome the challenges described in the previous section, I exploit a discontinuous eligibility rule in the 2005 California 20/20 rebate program. To be eligible for the 2005 rebate
program, customers had to open their electricity account by the program’s eligibility cuto↵
date in 2004. Figure 2 illustrates how this eligibility rule was applied. In SCE, the cuto↵
11

date was June 5, 2004. Therefore, customers that started their electricity service on or before
June 5, 2004 received a notice letter in the spring of 2005 about the 2005 rebate program.
Customers that started their service after the cuto↵ date (e.g. June 6, 2004) were not eligible
for the program in 2005.
The rule includes two additional key components. First, it was impossible for customers
to anticipate the 2005 rebate program when they started their electricity service in 2004,
because the program was announced in the spring of 2005. This means that it was not
possible for customers to strategically choose their start date in favor for the rebate program.
Second, all eligible customers automatically participated in the program, which prevents the
self-selection problem that is a major challenge in previous studies. Finally, the electric
utilities that administered the program strictly enforced these rules without exception.
This quasi-experimental environment provides the following advantages. The discontinuous eligibility rule generated essentially random assignment of the program among households
who started their account near the cuto↵ date. For example, customers that started their
electricity service right before the cuto↵ date and right after the cuto↵ date are likely to have
similar underlying properties for their electricity consumption, but they were assigned into
di↵erent groups in terms of the treatment assignment of the rebate program. Even if there
is a concern that the underlying properties might be correlated with their service start date,
a regression discontinuity design (RDD) can eliminate the bias as long as the correlation
between unobservable factors of electricity consumption and service start dates is continuous
around the cuto↵ date for the rebate program.

3.4

Data

The primary data for this study consist of a panel data set of household-level monthly
electricity billing records from 2004 to 2005 for the three largest investor-owned electric
utilities in California. Under a confidentiality agreement, Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E),
Southern California Edison (SCE) and San Diego Gas & Electric (SDG&E) provided the
complete billing history for essentially all residential customers in their service areas.8 For
8

A very small number of customers are not individually metered in this area. The billing data sets include
only individually-metered customers.

12

the main analysis of this paper, I focus on the data for SCE. I find similar results for PG&E
and SDG&E and show them in the appendix. Each monthly record includes a customer’s
account ID, premise ID, billing start date and end date, monthly consumption, monthly bill,
tari↵ type, climate zone, and nine-digit zip code. Customers’ names and exact addresses are
excluded in the records available for this study. The billing records also include customers’
tari↵ information.
Figure 3 shows the service areas of California’s electric utilities. PG&E provides gas
and electric service for northern California, SCE serves electric customers in most southern
California areas, and SDG&E provides gas and electric service around the greater San Diego
metropolitan area. The 2005 rebate program was applied to customers served by all three
electric utilities. The key variable for the regression discontinuity design of this study is each
customer’s account open date. The billing records include the exact open and close dates
for each customer. Each day in California, about 10,000 customers open an electric account.
For my main estimation, I use customers that open their electricity account within 90 days
before and 90 days after the cuto↵ date.
The billing data do not include customers’ exact address or demographic information.
To obtain demographic information, I match each customer’s nine-digit zip code to a census
block group in the 2000 US Census data. In addition, I collect daily weather data from the
Cooperative Station Dataset published by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA’s) National Climate Data Center (NCDC).9 The data set includes daily
minimum and maximum temperature for 370 weather stations in California. I match households’ zip codes with the nearest weather station by following the matching mechanism in
(Aroonruengsawat and Au↵hammer, 2011; Chong, 2012).

4

Empirical Analysis and Results

In this section, I first use a regression discontinuity design to estimate the program’s local
average treatment e↵ect (LATE). Second, I examine heterogeneity in the treatment e↵ects
by investing how income and weather a↵ect the treatment. Third, I estimate whether the
9

I thank Anin Aroonruengsawat, Maximilian Au↵hammer, and Howard Chong for sharing the data.

13

nonlinearity in the subsidy schedule induces a “giving-up” e↵ect for consumers who are far
from the 20% target level. Fourth, an important question raised from the RD design is
whether the treatment e↵ects are di↵erent from my RD samples and overall population. In
the final part of this section, I propose a way to estimate the average treatment e↵ect (ATE)
by using the RD design with the di↵erence-in-di↵erence-in-di↵erence (DDD) method.

4.1

A Regression Discontinuity Design to Estimate LATE

Consider household i’s electricity consumption yit for billing month t before and during the
California 20/20 program period. Let Di = 1{i 2 treatment group}, Dt = 1{t 2 treatment period},
and Dit = Di · Dt . If the treatment status Di is randomly assigned, one can obtain a consistent estimate of the program’s average treatment e↵ect (ATE) by estimating the fixed e↵ect
estimation,
lnyit = ↵ · Dit + ✓i +

t

+ ⌘ it ,

(1)

by the ordinary least squares (OLS), where ✓i is household fixed e↵ects,

t

is time fixed

e↵ects, and ⌘i is an error term. However, the treatment assignment in the California 20/20
program was not random. Instead, it was assigned by Di = 1{di  c}, where di is household
i’s account open date and c is the eligibility cuto↵ date. I define the account open date
relative to the cuto↵ date by xi = di

c. Therefore, Di = 1{xi  0}. Then, I apply a

sharp regression discontinuity design for the discontinuity in the treatment assignment and
estimate the following equation by OLS:
lnyit = ↵ · Dit + f (xi ) · Dt + ✓i +

t

+ ⌘ it .

(2)

This sharp RD design produces a consistent estimate of the program’s local average treatment
e↵ect (LATE) if E[⌘it · Dit ] = 0. That is, the identification assumption is that the error
term has to be uncorrelated with the treatment conditional on a flexible continuous control
function f (xi ) · Dt and other covariates.
Household fixed e↵ects absorb time-invariant e↵ects of xi on lnyit . Therefore, potential
confounding factors that I need to control for are the time-varying e↵ects of xi on lnyit . Con-

14

git = lnyit ✓¯i . In residential electricity consumption data
sider the demeaned consumption lny
git against xi produces a nearly flat yet very slightly upward-sloping
in general, the plot of lny
relationship. This upward-sloping relation comes from the fact that households tend to increase their consumption gradually after they open their electricity account. Ignoring this
relation creates a bias for the treatment e↵ect. However, because this relation is empirically
smooth in xi , I can control for it by including f (xi ) · Dt .
Imbens and Lemieux (2008) describe two approaches to specifying a smooth control
function ft (xi ). The first approach is to include a flexible parametric function. The second
approach is to use a local linear regression with a triangular kernel to put more weights on
data close to the cuto↵ point. I use the first approach for my main result and show that
the second approach does not change my results. To avoid the mis-specification of ft (xi ) as
much as possible, I focus on the data close to the cuto↵ date. For my main result, I use
households that opened their accounts within 90 days before or after the cuto↵ date. I also
use 60-day and 120-day bandwidths to show that my results are robust to these di↵erent
bandwidths.

4.2

Testing the Validity of the Regression Discontinuity Design

A threat to the validity of RD designs is that the identification assumption is violated if
there is self-selection at the cuto↵, although this is unlikely to be the case for my research
design. In the summer of 2004, no consumers knew that the California 20/20 program would
be implemented in the following summer. Therefore, there was no way for households to
self-select by strategically choosing their account open date.
Still, it can be a concern if there is a discontinuous di↵erence between households around
the cuto↵ date. To assess the validity of the regression discontinuity design, I first plot the
number of new accounts opened per day in Figure 4. The horizontal axis is the account
open date relative to the eligibility cuto↵ date, which is July 5, 2004. Each dot shows the
mean number of new accounts per day over the 15-day bandwidth. Everyday, about 1,500
customers opened an account with SCE. The solid line shows the local linear fit and the
dashed lines are its 95% confidence intervals. Over the 90-day bandwidth, there is a slight
upward trend in the number of new accounts, although the slope is not statistically significant
15

from zero. The figure also shows that there is no discontinuous jump at the cuto↵ date.
Figure 4 also shows the plot of household characteristics against the account open date
relative to the cuto↵ date. I match the nine-digit zip codes in the billing data with the
census block group to obtain demographic and housing characteristics. The figures include
the mean over the 15-day bandwidth, the local linear fit, and its 95% confidence intervals.10
None of the three variables show a statistically significant discrete jump at the cuto↵ date.

4.3

RD Estimates of the E↵ect of the Conservation Subsidy

In RD estimation, graphical analyses are an important part of quantifying the magnitudes
of treatment e↵ects as well as testing the validity of the identification strategy. The nature
of regression discontinuity design suggests that the e↵ect of the treatment of interest can
be measured by the value of the discontinuity in the expected value of the outcome at a
particular point (Imbens and Lemieux, 2008). Therefore, inspecting the estimated version
of this conditional expectation is a simple yet powerful way to visualize the identification
strategy.
Figure 5 presents a graphical analysis of the RD estimation for September billing, which
is the last month of the treatment period. Using the data before and during the treatment
git = lnyit
period, I first estimate lny

git for each
✓¯i . Then, I calculate the local mean of lny

fifteen-day bandwidth over the running variable xi . The local means are presented as as
dots in the figure. Finally, I fit a local linear regression and a quadratic function to estimate
f (xi ) · Dt for each side of the cuto↵ date. The dashed line is the local linear fit and the
solid line is the quadratic fit. On the horizontal axis, the treatment group is on the lefthand side of the cuto↵ date because households that opened accounts before the cuto↵ date
participated in the rebate program. Therefore, if the rebate incentive had an e↵ect, there
should be a discontinuous jump in the outcome variable at the cuto↵ point.
The figures provide a couple of important insights. First, there is a slight upward trend in
git over xi , the account open date relative to the cuto↵ date. This upward trend comes from
lny
a general tendency in residential electricity consumption data; households tend to gradually
10

Because the variables are from the 2000 U.S. Census at the census block group level, I cluster the
standard errors at the census block group level.

16

increase their consumption after they open their electricity account. Because ignoring this
relation creates a bias for the treatment e↵ect, it is important to control for the trend. The
fitted lines of the local linear regression and quadratic regression over xi indicate that the
RD estimates are likely to be robust between the local linear regression and the quadratic
regression.
Second, Panel B shows evidence that the rebate incentive had a significant e↵ect on
electricity consumption in the inland climate zones. There is a clear discontinuous change
in consumption between the treatment and control groups at the cuto↵ point. Visually, the
treatment group’s consumption is about 5% less than the control group’s consumption. In
contrast, Panel A suggests that the rebate incentive did not significantly change consumption
in the coastal climate zones. There is no discontinuous change in consumption between the
treatment and control groups at the cuto↵ point.
Table 3 presents the RD estimates of the e↵ect of subsidy incentives on energy conservation. In columns 1 and 3, I estimate the program’s overall treatment e↵ect during the
entire treatment period. In columns 2 and 4, I allow the treatment e↵ects to di↵er for each
billing month of the treatment period. I report RD estimates with 90-day bandwidths and
quadratic controls for ft (xi ). Using di↵erent bandwidths and the local linear regression does
not change my results, as I present in the next table. To adjust serial correlation in electricity
consumption data, I cluster standard errors at the household level.11
In coastal climate zones, the treatment e↵ects are essentially zero with tight standard
errors. Because of the tightly estimated point estimates, the 95% confidence intervals do not
include 1% treatment e↵ects, suggesting that the program did not have a significant e↵ect
on households in coastal climate zones. In contrast, the subsidy incentive had a significant
e↵ect on electricity consumption in the inland climate zones. The overall treatment e↵ect is
about 4% and the treatment e↵ect of each month ranges from 4% to 5%.
Because I have data for several months before the treatment period, a useful robustness
check is to produce the RD estimates for billing months before the treatment period, which I
examine to determine whether there is a discrete di↵erence in the outcome variable between
the treatment and control groups. Figure 6 presents the RD estimates of the di↵erence in
11

In fact, ignoring the serial correlation produces very small standard errors.

17

log consumption between the treatment and control groups for the January 2005 through
October 2005 billing months. In the coastal climate zones, the RD estimates are essentially
zero both before and during the treatment period. In inland climate zones, the RD estimates
are not statistically significant from zero before the treatment period. In contrast, the
estimates during the treatment period suggest that the households in the treatment group
reduced their consumption by about 5%. This figure provides evidence that the reduction
in consumption is unlikely to come from factors unrelated to the program.
Another important robustness check is to examine how the choice of bandwidths and the
method to control for ft (xi ) a↵ects the estimates. In Table 4, I present RD estimates with 60day and 120-day bandwidths and RD estimates with the local linear regression. Consistent
with the suggestive evidence from Figure 5, the estimates are not sensitive to the choice of
bandwidths and the method to control for ft (xi ). While the standard errors change slightly
between di↵erent bandwidth choices, the RD estimates are fairly stable between di↵erent
bandwidth choices. In addition, using the local linear regression instead of quadratic controls
does not significantly change the estimates.

4.4
4.4.1

Heterogeneity in the Treatment E↵ect
Income and Climate Conditions

In the previous section, I find that the treatment e↵ects are larger in inland areas than
in coastal areas. This section explores what drives the heterogeneous treatment e↵ect of
the 2005 rebate program. In particular, I examine whether climate conditions or income
di↵erences can explain the heterogeneous treatment e↵ects.
One of the significant di↵erences between inland and coastal California is the summer
climate conditions. For example, Figure A.1 illustrates the cooling degree days (CDD) in
California in August 2005 by five-digit zip code areas. Generally, the summer temperature
is persistently high in the inland areas, but quite moderate in the coastal areas. As a
result, inland households typically use air conditioners throughout the summer while coastal
households either use air conditioners very little or do not own them at all. For typical
residential consumers who do not use air conditioners, a 20% reduction in summer electricity

18

consumption is challenging. In contrast, for households that constantly use an air conditioner
during the summer season, a 20% consumption reduction can be achieved by slightly changing
the temperature settings or the length of usage.
Another significant di↵erence between inland and coastal California is their demographic
characteristics. For instance, income levels tend to be higher in coastal areas than inland
areas. In previous studies on residential electricity demand, many studies find slightly larger
price elasticity estimates for low income households (Reiss and White, 2005). Because the
20/20 rebate program is essentially a price-discount rebate program, lower-income households
may be more likely to respond to the incentive if their price elasticity is larger than that of
higher-income households.
To examine how climate conditions and income levels a↵ect the program’s treatment
e↵ects, I pool data from all climate zones and estimate the interaction e↵ects. First, I
calculate the average temperature at the nine-digit zip code level by calculating the mean
of the daily mean temperature of the summer days in 2004 and 2005. Second, I obtain
median per-capita income at the census block group level from the 2000 Census. Column
1 of Table 5 shows the RD estimate of the interaction term between the treatment variable
and the average temperature in Fahrenheit. The estimate implies that the treatment e↵ect
increases by a 0.15 percentage point with an increase in the average temperature by one
degree Fahrenheit. The estimate in Column 2 implies that the the treatment e↵ect decreases
by a 0.029 percentage point with a one-percent increase in income. These two interaction
e↵ects remain the same when both terms are included in the regression in Column 3. The
results indicate that both climate conditions and income levels have a statistically significant
e↵ect on the magnitude of the program’s treatment e↵ect.
4.4.2

Nonlinearity in the Subsidy Schedule

A theoretical prediction in Section 2 implies that the nonlinearity in the subsidy schedule
may induce a “giving-up” e↵ect. Even if a consumer has a large price elasticity, the consumer
may not respond to the incentive at all if she is far from the cuto↵ point of the 20% reduction
in consumption. This implies that the treatment e↵ect may not come from all consumers
equally.
19

Consider

lnyit , the change in log consumption from 2004 to 2005. If there is the giving-

up e↵ect, I expect that the di↵erent parts of the distribution of

lnyit to have di↵erent

treatment e↵ects. In particular, I would expects no change in consumption for higher percentiles in the distribution, because the treatment intervention is likely to have no e↵ect on
these percentiles if there is the giving-up e↵ect.
To test the prediction, I estimate the quantile treatment e↵ects in my RD design (Frandsen, Frölich and Melly, 2012):
lnyit = ↵ · Di + f (xi ) +

t

+ ✏it ,

(3)

where Di = 1{xi  c}. Note that this is a quantile regression on the changes in consumption. It estimates how the treatment intervention changes the distribution of the changes
in consumption. I estimate the equation for the changes in consumption for August and
September for households in inland climate zones.
Table 6 presents the quantile treatment e↵ects for the 5th, 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, 90th,
and 95th percentiles. The treatment e↵ect is larger for the lower tails of the distribution
of the change in consumption. On the other hand, the treatment e↵ect is not statistically
significant from zero in the median and the higher tails of the distribution. This suggests
evidence that the treatment e↵ect mostly comes from the lower tail of the distribution. It
also suggests that households that happen to be relatively far from the 20% reduction target
are likely to give up and do not respond to the incentive. In theory, the rebate incentive
can increase consumption in the left tail of the distribution, because if consumers are sure
to receive a rebate, the rebate program is a decrease in price for these consumers. I find a
positive point estimate for the fifth percentile, but the estimate is too noisy in the tail of the
distribution to be statistically di↵erent from zero.

4.5

An RD-DDD Design to Estimate ATE

In general, regression discontinuity designs require relatively weak identification assumptions
to estimate local average treatment e↵ects (LATE). I can obtain consistent estimates as long
as the conditional expectation of the error term is smooth at the cuto↵ of the running variable
20

xi and the control function ft (xi ) properly controls the smooth relationship.
A disadvantage of RD designs is that it gives the LATE instead of average treatment
e↵ects (ATE). In my research design, my RD estimates come from households that opened
their account about a year before the beginning of the treatment period. An important
question is whether the treatment e↵ect is di↵erent between my RD samples and households
that opened their account earlier. In RD designs, it is generally challenging to estimate the
treatment e↵ect away from the cuto↵ point, although recent papers provide several potential
approaches to address this important question (Angrist and Rokkanen, 2012).
In my research design, there is a way to estimate the ATE by making one additional
identification assumption. I propose a method that combines an RD design with a di↵erencein-di↵erence-in-di↵erences (DDD) method. The idea behind this method is similar to the
approach in Jackson (2010). Recall that there is a slight upward trend of the outcome
variable over the running variable in my RD estimation. This trend comes from a general
tendency in residential electricity consumption data; households tend to gradually increase
their consumption after they open their electricity account. Consider that household i’s
consumption can be modeled as lny it = ✓i +

t

+ g(t

di ) + ✏it , where di is its account open

date. That is, the consumption depends on household fixed e↵ects, time fixed e↵ects, and
the growth of consumption g(t

di ), which is a function of how long household i has been an

electricity customer at the same address. The actual functional form of g(t

di ) is unknown.

Consider households A that opened their accounts on di in a certain year, and households
B that opened their accounts on the exact same date in the year before. The identification
assumption that I make in this section is that g(t

di ) is common to households A and B.

That is, they have a common growth pattern in consumption after they open their accounts.
I make two data sets. My first data set is the electricity consumption data for the summer
of 2005. This is exactly the same data set in the previous section. I define xi = di

c, where

di is the account open date and c is June 5, 2004. That is, xi is the account open date
relative to the cuto↵ date c. I also define the treatment group by Di = 1{xi  0} and the
treatment period by Dt = 1{t 2 treatment period of the rebate program}.
My second data set is the electricity consumption data for the summer of 2004. Imagine
that I make a data set for a placebo test by using data for exactly one year before my
21

main data set. I define every variable to be analogous to the first data set. I define xi =
di

c2003 , where di is the account open date and c2003 is June 5, 2003. Then, I define

a placebo treatment group by Di = 1{xi  0} and a placebo treatment period by Dt =
1{t 2 treatment period of the rebate program - 365}.
Let yits be electricity consumption for household i, billing month t, and data set s = {1, 2}.
Define the treatment group in the first data set by Dits = Dit · 1{s = 1}. Pooling the first
and second data sets, I estimate:
lny its = ↵ · Dits +

· Dit + g(xi ) · Dt + ✓is +

ts

+ ⌘ its .

(4)

↵ is the di↵erence-in-di↵erence-in-di↵erences (DDD) estimate of the program’s average treatment e↵ect (ATE). The basic idea behind this approach is that I can estimate g(xi ) · Dt by
using the assumption that the growth pattern of consumption is common to households that
opened an account on a certain date and those that opened their account on the exactly
same date in the year before.
I begin with estimation of the ATE for households with

180  xi  90. This estimation

includes households whose account open dates fall between 180 days before and 90 days
after the cuto↵ date. For the first data set, this means households whose account open dates
fall between January 5, 2004 and September 5, 2004. For the second data set, this means
households whose account open dates fall between January 5, 2003 and September 5, 2003.
Given my identification assumptions, this estimation provides the rebate program’s ATE
for households whose account open dates fall between January 5, 2004 and September 5,
2004.12 Similarly, I estimate the ATE for households with xi
cuto↵ date), xi

720 (two years), xi

360 (one year before the

1080 (three years), and xi

1440 (four years)

to examine whether the treatment e↵ect di↵ers for households that opened their accounts
12

To understand the intuition behind the estimation, it is useful to think about four groups included in
the estimation: 1) the treatment group, who opened an account between January 5, 2004 and June 5, 2004,
2) the control group, who opened an account between June 6, 2004 and September 5, 2004, 3) the placebo
treatment group, who opened an account between January 5, 2003 and June 5, 2003, 4) the placebo control
group, who opened an account between June 6, 2003 and September 3, 2004. I control for the slope of my
running variable (the growth of consumption after households open their accounts) by using the data of the
placebo groups. I control for shocks specific to households in the main data set by using the data of the
control group. As a result, the estimation provides the ATE for the treatment group given my identification
assumptions

22

earlier than my RD sample.
Table 7 presents the LATE and ATE for inland climate zones. Column 1 shows the LATE
from my RD estimation in the previous section. Column 2 shows the ATE for households
whose account open dates fall between January 5, 2004 and September 5, 2004. The point
estimates of the ATE are very close to those of the LATE, while the standard errors are
tighter with the ATE. This is because the ATE is estimated from the broader range of
samples, while the LATE is estimated essentially from the samples close to the eligibility
cuto↵ date.
In columns 2 through 6, I include increasingly many treatment groups in the regression.
For example, column 6 includes households that have been at the same address for four years
or less. Overall, I find that the point estimates of the ATE are slightly larger in absolute
value by about 0.001 to 0.01 percentage points. However, the di↵erences between the ATE
and LATE are not statistically significant. This means that the program’s treatment e↵ect
is a 4% to 6% reduction in consumption, both for the RD samples and the samples that have
been at the same address longer than the RD samples.

5

13

Policy Implications

5.1

Cost-E↵ectiveness of the Program

In the literature, evaluation of energy conservation programs usually report two cost-e↵ective
measures: 1) program cost per unit of energy saved and and 2) program cost per ton of
emissions abated (Joskow and Marron, 1992; Boomhower and Davis, 2013). Although these
measures are not direct measures of welfare, they provide a valuable starting point and
are widely used in policy discussions. I first provide these measures and discuss welfare
implications in the next section.
In Table 8, I provide the program’s cost-e↵ectiveness based on my RD estimates of the
e↵ect of rebate incentives on energy conservation.14 First, I calculate the direct program
13

I find the same results for households in coastal areas. The ATE does not significantly di↵er from the
LATE.
14
I use the LATE from my RD estimation. Using the ATE from the previous section does not significantly
change the results because my ATE and LATE are not statistically di↵erent.

23

cost for rebate payment, which is the total amount of rebate paid to consumers. Note
that this direct cost does not include indirect costs such as expenses for administration
and advertisement. Second, I calculate the reduction in electricity usage based on my RD
estimates. Third, I translate this reduction into the reduction in carbon emissions by using
the average carbon intensity of electricity consumed in California, which is 0.9 lb. per kWh
in California Air Resources Board (2011). Finally, I obtain the program cost per unit of
electricity saved and the cost per ton of carbon emissions abated.
The results provide important policy implications. First, the cost-e↵ectiveness di↵ers
substantially between the coastal and inland areas. In the coastal areas, the program is
a very expensive way to reduce electricity usage. This is because the program did not
induce significant reductions in usage, although it paid substantial rebates for consumers who
reduced their consumption for reasons unrelated to the program’s incentive. The program
cost, 94.5 cents per kWh is large relative to any reasonable range of the marginal cost of
electricity. This is likely to be true even if I take account of the externality from carbon
emissions. The program cost per ton of carbon emissions abated is $2099. This is quite large
relative to $21, the social cost of carbon dioxide emissions per ton estimated by Greenstone,
Kopits and Wolverton (2011). In contrast, the program cost per kWh reduction is much
smaller in the inland areas. The program spent 2.5 cents to obtain a kWh reduction in
consumption and $55 to obtain a reduction in a ton of carbon emissions.
Second, overall, the program is unlikely to be cost-e↵ective within a reasonable range of
assumptions on the private and social costs of electricity. The overall program cost is 17.5
cents per kWh reduction. The average cost of electricity supplied in SCE is 13.37 cents per
kWh in 2005. To justify the program’s cost-e↵ectiveness only by the externality from carbon
emissions, the social cost of carbon has to be larger than $92 per ton of carbon dioxide,
which is larger than most estimates in the literature. In addition, this calculation does not
include indirect costs such as expenses for administration and advertisement. According to
the interview by Wirtshafter Associates (2006), SCE spent about $4 million for the administration and advertisement of the program. The overall program cost is 24.1 cents per kWh
if I include these indirect costs into my calculation.
One important caveat is that the California 20/20 rebate program provided a rebate for
24

consumers based on their monthly electricity consumption. The marginal cost of electricity
is generally higher in peak hours and lower in o↵-peak hours. If the reductions mostly come
from peak hour usage, the benefit comes not only from reductions in emissions but also
from savings of relatively high marginal cost of electricity. In this case, the cost-e↵ectiveness
would be better than my calculation. On the other hand, if the reduction mostly comes from
o↵-peak usage, the cost-e↵ectiveness would be worse than my calculation. From monthly
billing data, one cannot quantify how many reductions come from peak and o↵-peak hours.

5.2

Implications for Welfare

The high cost-e↵ectiveness ratio found in the previous section does not necessarily mean
that the program is not welfare-improving, because the rebate expense can be thought as
a transfer between consumers. The regulated electric utilities that administered the rebate
program passed through the cost to consumers by increasing electricity price afterwords.15
That is, the rebate expense is a transfer from rebated consumers to all consumers after the
program’s treatment period.
Consider two simple cases. Suppose that consumers pay a linear electricity price that
is lower than the social marginal cost of electricity. In this case, the rebate program can
be welfare-improving even if there is zero treatment e↵ect. The rebate expense slightly
increases electricity price afterwords and it can improve welfare if the new price is closer to
the social marginal cost of electricity. Conversely, if consumers pay a linear electricity price
that is higher than the social marginal cost of electricity, the rebate program is likely to lower
welfare because there is a more price distortion after the rebate expense increases electricity
price.
What complicates the welfare analysis of the California 20/20 program is the increasing
block pricing (Borenstein, 2012; Ito, Forthcoming), where the marginal price of electricity is
an increasing step function of monthly consumption. That is, consumers pay higher marginal
price when they consume more during their billing month. In 2005 and 2006, the marginal
15

Most utility conservation programs in the US recover the cost by increasing electricity price. This is
a notable di↵erence from the energy-efficient appliance replacement program in Mexico (Boomhower and
Davis, 2013), where the cost was paid by the tax revenue

25

prices for the first to fourth tiers were 12, 14, 17, and 20 cents per kWh. The key question
is, what is the social marginal cost of electricity. I have to make two assumptions to provide
an estimate of the social marginal cost. First, suppose that the long-run private marginal
cost of electricity is equal to the average cost of electricity under the existing tari↵ schedule.
Then, the private marginal cost is 13.37 cents per kWh for SCE in 2005. Second, suppose
that the externality from carbon emissions is 0.95 cents per kWh. This estimate comes
from the assumptions that 1) the social marginal cost of ton of carbon emissions equals $21
according to Greenstone, Kopits and Wolverton (2011) and 2) the average carbon intensity of
electricity consumed is 0.9 lb. per kWh according to California Air Resources Board (2011).
Then, the social marginal cost of electricity is 14.32 cents per kWh for SCE in 2005.
In the billing data, about a half of consumers are in the first and second tiers and the other
half of consumers are in the third and fourth tiers. That is, a half of consumer pay slightly
lower marginal prices relative to the social marginal cost, while the other half pay significantly
higher marginal prices relative to the social marginal cost. In theory, there is the possibility
that the rebate program can improve welfare if the cost is recovered from the two lower tiers.
However, in practice, California electric utilities have taken the opposite approach when
they recovered the cost, because of a regulatory constraint. After the California electricity
crisis, regulators and state legislators were concerned about the impact of price increases on
lower income households. As a result, the first two tiers were virtually frozen. In fact, SCE
increased only the third and fourth tier rates in 2006 (from 17 to 23 and from 20 to 32 cents),
while it did not change the first and second tier rates. Therefore, it is hard to argue that it
is welfare-improving unless the externality of electricity is much larger than the one that is
used in my analysis.

6

Conclusion

Many countries use substantial public funds to subsidize reductions in negative externalities.
However, such subsidies create asymmetric incentives because increases in externalities remain unpriced. In this paper, I study implications of such asymmetric subsidy incentives by
applying a regression discontinuity design for the California 20/20 electricity rebate program.
26

Using household-level panel data from administrative records, I find precisely-estimated zero
causal e↵ects in coastal areas. In contrast, the incentive produced a 5% consumption reduction in inland areas. Income and climate conditions significantly drive the heterogeneity.
Asymmetric subsidy structures weaken incentives because consumers far from the rebate
target show little response.
My findings provide several important policy implications. First, the asymmetric incentive structure of subsidy programs is likely to weaken incentives to reduce negative externalities. Second, the di↵erence between my RD estimates and naive estimates of the treatment
e↵ect shows that the additionality problem is important in evaluation of similar subsidy
programs. Finally, the overall program cost is 17.5 cents per kWh reduction and $390 per
ton of carbon dioxide reduction, which is unlikely to be cost-e↵ective for a reasonable range
of the social marginal cost of electricity.
The evidence of the heterogeneity in the treatment e↵ect suggests that one way to improve
the cost-e↵ectiveness is to target lower-income households and households in areas with high
summer temperature, because these households are more likely to respond to the subsidy
incentive. Another point that can be improved is that the program should target only peakhour consumption if the primary goal is to reduce high marginal costs of electricity in peakhours. In 2005, regulators had no choice because California residents had conventional meters
that recorded only monthly consumption. Recently, a growing number of consumers in many
countries gain access to smart meters that record real-time consumption. This technology
makes it possible to target consumption in particular time periods (Wolak, 2010; Ito, Ida and
Tanaka, 2013; Jessoe and Rapson, Forthcoming). However, the fundamental problems that
I find in this paper remain the same if regulators continue to provide asymmetric subsidy
incentives that subsidize reductions in usage but do not tax increases in usage.16

16

Despite this problem, such rebate schemes are still politically favored in the ongoing discussions of
dynamic electricity pricing. There is strong political opposition against critical peak pricing, which increases
prices in peak-hours. In contrast, there is relatively less opposition against peak-time rebate programs, which
is in principle very similar to the California 20/20 rebate program (Borenstein, 2013).

27

References
Allcott, Hunt, and Michael Greenstone. 2012. “Is There an Energy Efficiency Gap?”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(1): 3–28.
Anderson, Michael L. 2013. “Subways, Strikes, and Slowdowns: The Impacts of Public
Transit on Traffic Congestion.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
18757.
Angrist, Joshua, and Miikka Rokkanen. 2012. “Wanna Get Away? RD Identification
Away from the Cuto↵.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18662.
Aroonruengsawat, Anin, and Maximilian Au↵hammer. 2011. “Impacts of Climate
Change on Residential Electricity Consumption: Evidence from Billing Data.” National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc NBER Chapters.
Boomhower, Judson., and Lucas W. Davis. 2013. “Additionality and the High Cost of
Energy- Efficiency Subsidies.” Working Paper.
Borenstein, Severin. 2002. “The Trouble With Electricity Markets: Understanding California’s Restructuring Disaster.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16(1): 191–211.
Borenstein, Severin. 2009. “To What Electricity Price Do Consumers Respond? Residential Demand Elasticity Under Increasing-Block Pricing.” Working Paper.
Borenstein, Severin. 2012. “The Redistributional Impact of Nonlinear Electricity Pricing.”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(3): 56–90.
Borenstein, Severin. 2013. “E↵ective and Equitable Adoption of Opt-In Residential Dynamic Electricity Pricing.” Review of Industrial Organization, 42(2): 127–160.
Borenstein, Severin, James B. Bushnell, and Frank A. Wolak. 2002. “Measuring
market inefficiencies in California’s restructured wholesale electricity market.” American
Economic Review, 1376–1405.
California Air Resources Board. 2011. “California Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory:
2000-2009.”
Chong, Howard. 2012. “Building vintage and electricity use: Old homes use less electricity
in hot weather.” European Economic Review, 56(5): 906–930.
CPUC. 2001. “Resolution E-3733.” California Public Utility Commission.
Davis, Lucas W., Alan Fuchs, and Paul J. Gertler. 2012. “Cash for Coolers.” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, 18044.
Duflo, Esther, Michael Greenstone, Rohini Pande, and Nicholas Ryan. Forthcoming. “Truth-telling by Third-party Auditors and the Response of Polluting Firms:
Experimental Evidence from India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
28

Faruqui, Ahmad, and Sanem Sergici. 2010. “Household response to dynamic pricing of
electricity: a survey of 15 experiments.” Journal of Regulatory Economics, 38(2): 193–225.
Faruqui, Ahmad, and Stephen S. George. 2006.“Pushing the Envelope on Rate Design.”
The Electricity Journal, 19(2): 33–42.
Frandsen, Brigham R., Markus Frölich, and Blaise Melly. 2012. “Quantile treatment
e↵ects in the regression discontinuity design.” Journal of Econometrics, 168(2): 382–395.
Gallagher, Kelly Sims, and Erich Muehlegger. 2011. “Giving green to get green?
Incentives and consumer adoption of hybrid vehicle technology.” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, 61(1): 1–15.
Goldman, Charles A., Galen L. Barbose, and Joseph H. Eto. 2002. “California
Customer Load Reductions during the Electricity Crisis: Did They Help to Keep the
Lights On?” Journal of Industry, Competition and Trade, 2(1): 113–142.
Greenstone, Michael, Elizabeth Kopits, and Ann Wolverton. 2011. “Estimating the
Social Cost of Carbon for Use in U.S. Federal Rulemakings: A Summary and Interpretation.” National Bureau of Economic Research NBER Working Paper 16913.
Imbens, Guido W., and Thomas Lemieux. 2008. “Regression discontinuity designs: A
guide to practice.” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2): 615–635.
Ito, Koichiro. Forthcoming. “Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence from Nonlinear Electricity Pricing.” American Economic Review.
Ito, Koichiro, Takanori Ida, and Makoto Tanaka. 2013. “Using Dynamic Electricity Pricing to Address Energy Crises: Evidence from Randomized Field Experiments.”
Working Paper.
Jackson, Kirabo C. 2010. “Do Students Benefit from Attending Better Schools? Evidence
from Rule-based Student Assignments in Trinidad and Tobago*.” The Economic Journal,
120(549): 1399–1429.
Jessoe, Katrina, and David Rapson. Forthcoming. “Knowledge is (Less) Power: Experimental Evidence from Residential Energy Use.” American Economic Review.
Joskow, Paul L. 2001. “California’s electricity crisis.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy,
17(3): 365.
Joskow, Paul L., and Donald B. Marron. 1992. “What Does a Negawatt Really Cost?
Evidence from Utility Conservation Programs.” The Energy Journal, Volume 13(Number
4): 41–74.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2012. “The E↵ects of Fiscal Stimulus: Evidence from the
2009 ‘Cash for Clunkers’ Program.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Pigou, Arthur Cecil. 1924. The Economics of Welfare. Transaction Publishers.
29

Reiss, Peter C., and Matthew W. White. 2003. “Demand and Pricing in Electricity
Markets: Evidence from San Diego During California’s Energy Crisis.” National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 9986.
Reiss, Peter C., and Matthew W. White. 2005. “Household electricity demand, revisited.” Review of Economic Studies, 72(3): 853–883.
Reiss, Peter C., and Matthew W. White. 2008. “What changes energy consumption?
Prices and public pressures.” RAND Journal of Economics, 39(3): 636–663.
Saez, Emmanuel. 1999. “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 7366.
Sallee, James M. 2011. “The Surprising Incidence of Tax Credits for the Toyota Prius.”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(2): 189–219.
Sallee, James M., and Joel Slemrod. 2012. “Car notches: Strategic automaker responses
to fuel economy policy.” Journal of Public Economics.
Schneider, Lambert. 2007. “Is the CDM fulfilling its environmental and sustainable development objectives? An evaluation of the CDM and options for improvement, Öko-Institut,
Berlin.” Institute for Applied Ecology.
Sutter, Christoph, and Juan Carlos Parreño. 2007. “Does the current Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) deliver its sustainable development claim? An analysis of
officially registered CDM projects.” Climatic Change, 84(1): 75–90.
U.S. Department of Energy. 2013. “Electric Power Annual 2011.” Energy Information
Administration.
Volpp, Kevin G., Andrea B. Troxel, Mark V. Pauly, Henry A. Glick, Andrea
Puig, David A. Asch, Robert Galvin, Jingsan Zhu, Fei Wan, Jill DeGuzman,
Elizabeth Corbett, Janet Weiner, and Janet Audrain-McGovern. 2009. “A Randomized, Controlled Trial of Financial Incentives for Smoking Cessation.” New England
Journal of Medicine, 360(7): 699–709. PMID: 19213683.
Wirtshafter Associates. 2006. “Evaluation of the California Statewide 20/20 Demand
Reduction Programs.”
Wolak, Frank A. 2006. “Residential customer response to real-time pricing: the Anaheim
critical-peak pricing experiment.” Working Paper.
Wolak, Frank A. 2010. “An Experimental Comparison of Critical Peak and Hourly Pricing:
The PowerCentsDC Program.” Working Paper.
Wolak, Frank A. 2011. “Do Residential Customers Respond to Hourly Prices? Evidence
from a Dynamic Pricing Experiment.” The American Economic Review, 101(3): 83–87.

30

Figure 1: Theoretical Predictions

Consumption of
other goods!

B!

A!

Budget constraint
with subsidy!
Budget constraint
with a simple
price increase!
0.8*b!

b!

Electricity
consumption!

Note: This figure illustrates the theoretical predictions of consumer behavior when they are faced with the
conservation subsidy schedule of the California 20/20 rebate program. The subsidy makes a notch in the
budget constraint. If consumers respond to the expected price because of the uncertainty in consumption,
the budget constraint based on the expected price becomes the dotted smooth line.

31

Figure 2: Eligibility Rule of the California 20/20 Rebate Program in 2005

June 5, 2004!
(Cutoff date)!

Notice Letter!
Summer 2005!
Time!

Start Electricity Service!
on or before June 5, 2004!

Treatment!

Start Electricity Service!
after June 5, 2004!

Control!

Note: Consumers who opened their electricity account on or before the cuto↵ date received a notice letter
around April 2005. The letter informed them that they were going to receive a 20% discount on their entire
summer electricity bill if they could reduce electricity consumption by 20% relative to their consumption in
the summer of 2004. Those who opened their account after the cuto↵ date were excluded from the program.
This eligibility rule created a sharp discontinuity in program enrollment because it was strictly enforced by
the power companies.

32

Figure 3: California Electric Utility Service Areas

California
Electric Utility Service Areas
Area served by both
Surprise Valley & PacificCorp
PacifiCorp
Surprise Valley

Trinity
Shelter
Cove

Shasta Lake
Redding

Lassen
Area served by both
Lassen & Plumas-Sierra

PG&E

Plumas - Sierra

Biggs

Truckee-Donner

Gridley
Ukiah

Sierra Pacific
Pittsburg

Healdsburg

Roseville

Hercules
Alameda
Municipal
Power
Oakland
C.C.S.F.
Palo Alto

Mountain Utilities

SMUD
Lodi

MID

Stockton
Area is served by both
MID & PG&E

TID

Valley Electric

Merced
LADWP Owens Valley

Silicon Valley
Power
PG&E

Victorville
Azusa
Pasadena
Lompoc

Glendale
Burbank
LADWP
Vernon
Industry
Cerritos
Anaheim

SCE
Aha Macav
Rancho Cucamonga
Colton

Needles

Bear Valley Electric
Banning
Morongo
Anza Electric

SDG&E

IID

Corona
Riverside
Moreno Valley

Note: This figure shows the service area map of California electric utilities. Source: California Energy
Commission.

33

500

1967

1968

1000

1969

1500

1970

1971

2000

Figure 4: Testing the Validity of the Regression Discontinuity Design

−100

−50
0
50
Account Open Date Relative to Cutoff Date

100

−100

880
860

870

51000

850

50000

840

49000
48000

100

2) Median year structure built

52000

1) Number of new accounts opened per day

−50
0
50
Account Open Date Relative to Cutoff Date

−100

−50
0
50
Account Open Date Relative to Cutoff Date

100

3) Median household income ($)

−100

−50
0
50
Account Open Date Relative to Cutoff Date

100

4) Median rent ($)

Note: The horizontal axis shows the account open date relative to the cuto↵ date of the program eligibility,
which was June 5, 2004. Each dot shows the local mean with a 15-day bandwidth. The solid line shows the
local linear fit and the dashed lines present the 95% confidence intervals. The confidence intervals for the
fitted lines for variables from Census data are adjusted for clustering at the census block group level.

34

Figure 5: RD Estimates of the E↵ect of Subsidy Incentives on Energy Conservation: September
Panel A. Coastal Climate Zones
.1

.05

0

−.05

−.1
−90

−60

−30

0

30

60

90

60

90

Account Open Date Relative to the Eligibility Cutoff Date

Panel B. Inland Climate Zones
.1

.05

0

−.05

−.1
−90

−60

−30

0

30

Account Open Date Relative to the Eligibility Cutoff Date

Note: This figure presents the RD estimates of the e↵ect of subsidy incentives on energy conservation
for billing for September 2005. The horizontal axis shows households’ account open date relative to the
cuto↵ date for program eligibility, which was June 5, 2005. The vertical axis presents the log electricity
consumption in September 2005, in which I subtract household fixed e↵ects by using the consumption data
in billing months before the treatment period. Each dot shows the local mean with a15-day bandwidth. The
solid line shows the local linear fit and the dashed line shows quadratic fit.

35

Figure 6: RD Estimates of the Di↵erence in Log Consumption between Treatment and Control
Panel A. Coastal Climate Zones
.05

0

−.05

−.1
1

2

3

4

5
6
7
Billing Month in 2005

RD Estimates

8

9

10

95% Confidence Intervals

Panel B. Inland Climate Zones
.05

0

−.05

−.1
1

2

3

4

5
6
7
Billing Month in 2005

RD Estimates

8

9

10

95% Confidence Intervals

Note: This figure presents the RD estimates of the di↵erence in log consumption between the treatment
and control groups. Household fixed e↵ects are subtracted by using consumption data before January 2005.
I use a 90-day bandwidth and quadratic controls for the trend of the running variable, which is the same
specification as my main estimation result in Table 3.

36

Table 1: Aggregate Consumption and Rebates in the Summer Billing Months in 2005
Utility
PG&E
SCE
SDG&E

Consumption
(kWh)
10,065,216,512
9,401,883,648
2,284,046,848

Revenue
($)
1,320,995,584
1,257,056,768
363,180,320

Households
Receiving Rebates
8.24%
7.91%
9.07%

Rebate
($)
10,786,594
10,609,540
4,325,000

Note: This table reports the statistics based on the residential billing data for June, July, August, and
September 2005 billing months. I include customers who maintained their account in both the summers
of 2004 and 2005. The rebate expenditure does not include the administrative and advertising costs of the
program. All expenditures are in nominal 2005 dollars.

Table 2: Changes in Summer Electricity Consumption in SCE
Year
From 2003 to 2004
From 1999 to 2000

Changes in
Summer Weather
Cooler in 2004
Hotter in 2000

Median of % Changes
in Consumption
-1.7%
7.7%

% Households with 20%
or More Reduction
14.3%
6.8%

This table reports the statistics for within-household changes in summer electricity consumption for Southern
California Edison (SCE). I first calculate the change in consumption for each household between the two
years. I then calculate the median value of the change and the percentage of households that reduced their
consumption more than 20%. Note that SCE customers did not experience a price spike during the California
electricity crisis in 2000 because their retail rates are capped (Ito, Forthcoming).

37

Table 3: RD Estimates of the E↵ect of Rebate Incentives on Energy Conservation
(1)
Coastal
Treatment Effect

(2)
Coastal

-0.001
(0.002)

(3)
Inland

(4)
Inland

-0.042***
(0.013)

Treatment Effect in May

0.003
(0.003)

-0.034**
(0.015)

Treatment Effect in June

-0.001
(0.003)

-0.055***
(0.017)

Treatment Effect in July

0.004
(0.004)

-0.041**
(0.019)

Treatment Effect in Aug.

-0.003
(0.004)

-0.037**
(0.018)

Treatment Effect in Sep.

-0.004
(0.003)

-0.056***
(0.016)

Observations

2,540,472

2,540,472

208,537

208,537

Note: This table presents the RD estimates of the e↵ect of rebate incentives on energy conservation. The
dependent variable is the log of electricity consumption. I estimate (2) with a 90-day bandwidth and quadratic
controls for the trend in the running variable. Standard errors are clustered at the household level to adjust
for serial correlation. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

38

Table 4: Robustness Checks: Alternative Bandwidths and Specifications
(2)
Coastal

(3)
Coastal

(4)
Inland

(5)
Inland

(6)
Inland

Treatment Effect in May

0.004
(0.004)

0.003
(0.003)

0.005
(0.004)

-0.034**
(0.015)

-0.039***
(0.014)

-0.029*
(0.017)

Treatment Effect in June

-0.002
(0.004)

-0.001
(0.004)

-0.003
(0.004)

-0.055***
(0.017)

-0.059***
(0.016)

-0.050**
(0.019)

Treatment Effect in July

0.004
(0.004)

0.005
(0.004)

0.005
(0.005)

-0.041**
(0.019)

-0.039**
(0.017)

-0.042**
(0.022)

Treatment Effect in Aug.

-0.004
(0.004)

-0.005
(0.004)

-0.003
(0.004)

-0.036**
(0.018)

-0.034**
(0.016)

-0.035*
(0.020)

Treatment Effect in Sep.

-0.005
(0.003)

-0.003
(0.004)

-0.004
(0.004)

-0.056***
(0.016)

-0.053***
(0.015)

-0.052***
(0.018)

local linear
90 days
2,540,472

quadratic
120 days
3,325,388

quradratic
60 days
1,707,589

local linear
90 days
208,537

quadratic
120 days
237,264

quradratic
60 days
162,067

39

(1)
Coastal

Controls for f(x)
Bandwidth
Observations

This table presents RD estimates with di↵erent bandwidth choices and alternative controls for the running variable. The dependent variable is the
log of electricity consumption. Standard errors are clustered at the household level to adjust for serial correlation. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

Table 5: RD Estimates Interacted with Income and Climate

Treatment

Treatment*Ave.Temp.(F)

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.095**

-0.297***

-0.199***

(0.051)

(0.055)

(0.077)

-0.0015**

-0.0016**

(0.0007)

(0.0008)

Treatment*ln(Income)

Observations

2,749,009

0.029***

0.029***

(0.005)

(0.005)

2,749,009

2,749,009

This table presents the RD estimates of the e↵ect of rebate incentives on energy conservation interacted with
income and climate conditions. The dependent variable is the log of electricity consumption. I use a 90-day
bandwidth and quadratic controls for the trend in the running variable. Standard errors are clustered at the
household level to adjust for serial correlation. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels..

Table 6: Quantile Regressions on the Change in Log Consumption for Inland Climate Zones
(1)
p5

(2)
p10

(3)
p25

(4)
p50

(5)
p75

(6)
p90

(7)
p95

Treatment

0.034
(0.056)

-0.099***
(0.035)

-0.078***
(0.018)

-0.007
(0.018)

-0.020
(0.019)

-0.019
(0.033)

-0.025
(0.063)

Observations

37,914

37,914

37,914

37,914

37,914

37,914

37,914

This table presents the quantile RD estimates of the e↵ect of rebate incentives on energy conservation
interacted with income and climate conditions. The dependent variable is the change in the log of electricity
consumption from 2004 to 2005. I use a 90-day bandwidth and quadratic controls for the trend in the running
variable. Standard errors are clustered at the household level to adjust for serial correlation. ***, **, and *
indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

40

Table 7: Average Treatment E↵ects (ATE) for Inland Climate Zones
(1)
LATE
(90 days)

(2)
ATE
(180 days)

(3)
ATE
(1 year)

(4)
ATE
(2 years)

(5)
ATE
(3 years)

(6)
ATE
(4 years)

Treatment Effect in May

-0.034**
(0.015)

-0.039***
(0.009)

-0.040***
(0.008)

-0.039***
(0.006)

-0.043***
(0.006)

-0.040***
(0.005)

Treatment Effect in June

-0.055***
(0.017)

-0.054***
(0.011)

-0.062***
(0.009)

-0.057***
(0.006)

-0.063***
(0.006)

-0.057***
(0.005)

Treatment Effect in July

-0.041**
(0.019)

-0.042***
(0.012)

-0.045***
(0.010)

-0.043***
(0.007)

-0.046***
(0.007)

-0.042***
(0.006)

Treatment Effect in Aug.

-0.037**
(0.018)

-0.040***
(0.011)

-0.042***
(0.009)

-0.043***
(0.007)

-0.041***
(0.007)

-0.040***
(0.006)

Treatment Effect in Sep.

-0.056***
(0.016)

-0.054***
(0.010)

-0.061***
(0.008)

-0.057***
(0.006)

-0.063***
(0.006)

-0.057***
(0.005)

Observations

208,537

258,454

406,924

638,580

830,332

1,001,691

Estimates:
Bandwidth:

41

This table presents the RD-DDD estimates of the e↵ect of rebate incentives on energy conservation for inland climate zones. Given the identification
assumptions described in the main text, this estimation produces the average treatment e↵ect (ATE) for the samples included in each estimation.
***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

Table 8: Program Cost Per Estimated Reductions in Consumption and Carbon Dioxide
Coastal

Inland

Total

3,190,027

299,178

3,489,205

8,247,457,920

1,154,292,248

9,401,750,168

Direct Program Cost for Rebate ($)

9,358,919

1,250,621

10,609,540

Estimated Reduction (kWh)

9,908,840

50,605,714

60,514,555

Estimated Reduction in Carbon Dioxide (ton)

4,459

22,773

27,232

Program Cost Per kWh ($/kWh)

0.945

0.025

0.175

Program Cost Per Carbon Dioxide ($/ton)

2,099

55

390

Number of Customers
Consumption in Summer 2005 (kWh)

Note: This table reports the cost-benefit analysis of the 20/20 program for SCE’s coastal areas, inland areas,
and all service areas. Row 1 shows the number of residential customers who maintained their accounts in
the summer of 2004 and 2005. Row 2 presents the aggregate consumption in the summer months. Raw 3
reports the aggregate amount of rebate paid to customers. Row 4 shows the estimated kWh reduction from
the treatment e↵ect of the program. Row 5 translates this reduction into the reduction in carbon emissions
by using the average carbon intensity of electricity consumed in California, which is 0.9 lb. per kWh in
California Air Resources Board (2011).

42

Online Appendix (Not For Publication)
Figure A.1: Cooling Degree Days in August 2005 in California

Note: This figure shows the cooling degree days (CDD) in August 2005 in California by zip code.

43

Table A.1: RD Estimates of the E↵ect of Rebate Incentives on Energy Conservation in
PG&E and SDG&E
(1)
PG&E
Coastal

(2)
PG&E
Inland

(3)
SDG&E
Coastal

Treatment Effect in May

0.001
(0.003)

-0.031***
(0.010)

0.001
(0.007)

Treatment Effect in June

-0.002
(0.002)

-0.041***
(0.011)

-0.002
(0.007)

Treatment Effect in July

-0.001
(0.003)

-0.043***
(0.010)

-0.001
(0.008)

Treatment Effect in Aug.

0.002
(0.003)

-0.042***
(0.011)

0.002
(0.008)

Treatment Effect in Sep.

0.003
(0.003)

-0.035***
(0.009)

0.003
(0.007)

2,764,960

867,884

1,234,346

Observations

Note: This table presents the RD estimates of the e↵ect of rebate incentives on energy conservation for
samples in PG&E and SDG&E. Note that the program eligibility cuto↵ date is June 1, 2004 for PG&E and
June 30, 2004 for SDG&E. In SDG&E, the vast majority of consumers live in coastal areas. The dependent
variable is log of electricity consumption. I use the 90-day bandwidth and quadratic controls for the trend
in the running variable. Standard errors are clustered at the household level to adjust for serial correlation.
***, **, and * show 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance respectively.

44

